 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (U.S.S.R.) is a
 multinational state in which political power had been highly
 centralized in Moscow in the haids of a one-party
 dictatorship. The year 1990 was a landmark for the
 proliferation of democratic practices throughout most of the
 Soviet political system as well as for continued improvements
 in human rights practices, although President Gorbachev moved
 gradually in the fall to a course emphasizing law and order,
 the preeminence of the central Government over the republics,
 and the assertion of governmental force in support of those
 objectives. The Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU)
 formally relinquished its constitutionally guaranteed monopoly
 on power and lost much of its national authority and some
 control over the levers of power. The U.S.S.R. Supreme
 Soviet (legislature) approved legislation providing a legal
 basis for a multiparty political system, though the emergence
 of numerous, widely varying political movements is hampering
 the formation of a strong non-Communist opposition. The first
 open, contested local elections resulted in the election of
 many non-Communist governments and officials in a number of
 cities, regions, and republics, but in some republics old-line
 Communists continued to dominate. Official and unofficial
 groups in the republics contested control of the reform
 process with the central authorities, and 14 of the 15 Soviet
 republics--some of which were formerly independent countries-
 and many autonomous regions declared sovereignty and, in some
 cases, independence. Ethnic tensions erupted in many places,
 frequently escalating into violence difficult to bring under
 control, even by the power of the central Government.
 These changes were not accomplished without problems. The
 Committee for State Security (KGB), police, armed forces, and
 prosecutors' offices have traditionally enforced compliance
 with government policy decisions, directives, and legislation.
 This role has continued, although more selectively, through
 intimidation more often than arrests and detentions. In 1990
 the existing tools for curtailing dissent were further
 circumscribed. Early in 1990, the KGB announced it had
 abolished its Fifth Directorate, charged with handling
 dissidents. The Supreme Soviet established embryonic
 oversight committees for the KGB, police, and armed forces and
 is drafting legislation prescribing the functions and funding
 of these bodies.
 The decentralization of the economy became the highest
 priority item on the-domestic political agenda. A potentially
 significant development in 1990 was the shift in government
 opinion favoring cautious movement toward-a market-oriented
 system. In this context, draft reforms envisaged measures to
 establish new forms of ownership, including some limited
 private ownership of assets and property. Some local -
 governments moved independently to privatize housing and
 demanded a share of the assets belonging to the CPSU and other
 government sectors. While private enterprise remains limited,
 there were new openings under perestroyka (restructuring) for
 quasi-private activity by independent farmers and
 cooperatives. However, recent presidential decrees nullifying
 economic treaties between republics suggest backtracking on
 decentralization of the economy.
 The year 1990 saw a dramatic growth in the exercise of
 political and civil rights in the Soviet Union. In addition
 to the opening up of the political process, a new press law
 abolished censorship and freedom of expression flourished,
 
 
 1305
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 although the authorities still control the broadcast media,
 printing, and distribution. A new law on religious faiths
 provides for equality regardless of religious conviction and
 permits proselytism and the establishment of schools and
 charitable organizations. Several independent trade unions
 were formed, and strikes, legalized in 1989, occurred in,
 among other places, key mining areas.
 Soviet authorities continued to relax travel restrictions, and
 emigration increased dramatically to record levels, although
 by year's end this progress had not been institutionalized
 through enactment of new emigration legislation. About
 180,000 Jews emigrated to Israel, 150,000 ethnic Germans to
 Germany, and approximately 55,000 Soviet citizens to the
 United States. In January 1991, the Soviet Union and Israel
 formally established relations at the consular level.
 Marring the positive elements of improvement in human rights
 practices were the rise in the number of violent ethnic
 clashes, further grassroots manifestations of anti-Semitism,
 increasing fears that economic decline and political disorder
 could undo the progress achieved, and suggestions in December
 that President Gorbachev would increasingly rely on
 traditional instruments of force (the Army, KGB, Ministry of
 Interior, and party apparatus) rather than persuasion and
 bargaining to impose the central Government's will on the
 republics. In January 1991, dozens of unarmed protesters were
 killed and wounded by Soviet troops taking over government and
 ,Communist Party buildings in the Baltics. Reforms were
 unevenly implemented in the country as a whole, and many of
 them were not secured by law. The judiciary is neither
 independent nor powerful enough to act as a guarantor of human
 rights.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section I Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no confirmed reports of political killings in 1990.
 There have, however, been assertions that some reported
 killings were politically motivated. These include the
 murders of Orthodox priest Aleksandr Men' and another priest
 investigating the Men' murder, as well as cases involving
 political activists and journalists such as Vadim Pergament of
 Moscow and Ivan Fomin of Kaluga.
 b. Disappearance
 There have been no known instances of prolonged or permanent
 disappearance in recent years.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 There were no reports of torture during 1990. However, many
 prisoners suffer from mental and physical abuse and
 mistreatment during interrogation; trial, and confinement,
 according to a wide variety of reliable-sources.
 Prisoners are frequently placed in punishment cells for
 violations of camp rules, sometimes for periods of several
 
 
 1306
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 months. Conditions in punishment cells are excessively
 punitive, and-no administrative process exists to ensure that
 prisoners are not arbitrarily or inappropriately sent to such
 cells.
 Under Article 188 of the Soviet criminal code, prisoners may
 receive an additional 3- to 5-year sentence for "malicious
 disobedience" in labor camps. Whereas in the past Article 188
 was used to extend the sentence of prisoners who had nearly
 completed their sentences, no such reports were heard in
 1990.
 Persons were seriously mistreated by militia and procuracy
 investigators seeking to obtain confessions. Law enforcement
 personnel frequently use excessive force in dispersing
 demonstrations and have beaten political activists. In most
 cases, the victims were from groups openly declaring
 opposition to the Communist Party or charging corruption in
 law enforcement organs. There were no reports of law
 enforcement personnel being punished for use of excessive
 force or of victims being able to seek redress.
 No instances of new long-term hospitalizations of sane persons
 were reported in 1990. Nonetheless, many high-level
 psychiatric officials associated with past abuses remain in
 positions of leadership. The Supreme Soviet published a new
 draft law on psychiatry that includes provisions for
 disciplining doctors who confine healthy people to psychiatric
 institutions and for appealing cases of involuntary
 psychiatric hospitalization to the courts.
 Current law, however, still provides the basis for compulsory
 psychiatric hospitalization without adequate legal protection
 of persons arrested under questionable circumstances and then
 diagnosed as mentally ill. In December, local officials in
 Nikolayev, Ukraine, reportedly threatened Dmitriy Berman with
 a psychiatric examination as part of a reinvestigation of
 charges that were previously dropped for lack of evidence.
 The U.S. Embassy continues to receive other reports of the use
 of psychiatric examinations and the threat of compulsory
 commitment as ways of intimidating persons whose actions have
 irritated local officials.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Persons may still be detained arbitrarily and without arrest
 warrants. The Soviet criminal code states that detainees must
 be charged or released within 4 hours. Once charged, however,
 the criminal code permits holding an accused in pretrial
 detention for up to 18 months, with no requirement for
 judicial approval or preliminary judicial hearing on the
 charges and the continued detention. In several cases,
 persons'were detained for lengthy periods without being
 brought to trial. In criminal cases, detainees may be
 released and restricted to their place of residence pending
 trial.
 Ukrainian People's Deputy Stepan Khmara has been detained in a
 Kiev prison without trial since November 17. Khmara,
 allegedly involved in the beating of a militia colonel during
 a November 7 Revolution Day counterdemonstration, was charged
 with abusing the authority of his office under Article 166 of
 the Ukrainian Criminal Code. By a vote of its majority
 (coinciding with the number .of Communist Party deputies), the
 Ukrainian Supreme Soviet on November 14 deprived Khmara of his
 
 
 1307
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 parliamentary immunity to allow for his arrest. Leaders of
 the Ukrainian National Movement "Rukh" and the democratic
 opposition assert that the prosecution has inconclusive
 evidence of Khmara's complicity in the November 7 incident and
 are pressing to have Khmara released prior to his trial. They
 argue that the arrest was politically motivated.
 Persons participating in antigovernment demonstrations or
 distributing antigovernment printed materials were sometimes
 detained briefly and fined. Demonstrators were charged with
 "organizing an unsanctioned meeting" and usually detained from
 a few hours to 15 days. In Sverdlovsk, Democratic Union
 leader Valeriy Novodvorskaya and other organizers were
 detained and fined for attempting to hold an unsanctioned
 rally and for insulting the dignity of the Soviet President.
 Distributors of unofficial literature were charged with
 "trading in an unauthorized area" and usually fined up to $5
 at the unofficial rate of exchange. (The ruble is not a
 convertible currency, and its official value in terms of the
 U.S. dollar does not represent actual purchasing power for
 purposes of international comparison.)
 Instances of arbitrary detention may decline under the terms
 of a new law signed by President Gorbachev in April that
 allows defense counsel to participate in a case from the
 moment a charge is brought or from the moment a detention
 order is implemented. In the past, the defense counsel had no
 access to the defendant during his detention, during the
 procuracy's pretrial investigation, and until the trial
 began. Soviet legal experts have noted that the new law is
 only slowly being implemented.
 There were no reports in 1990 of persons being punished by
 being sent into internal exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Communist Party's control of society, though diminishing,
 still extends in many areas to the legal and judicial system.
 This works against the objectivity and independence of the
 judicial process. For example, party officials still largely
 control the nomination of judges, although this role is
 gradually being assumed by local governing councils
 (soviets). Unofficial party influences on the judiciary, such
 as the dispensation of privileges, also exist. Consequently,
 the establishment of a truly independent judiciary has
 progressed slowly.
 Nevertheless, the creation of a state based on respect for the
 rule of law has begun, through legal reforms passed by the
 Supreme Soviet in the last 2 years. For example, the Ministry
 of Justice formally has taken control over judges' promotions
 away from the party apparatus, but the new mechanisms for
 installing key judicial leaders are not yet in place.' A law
 on "liability for contempt of court" is aimed at deterring
 party officials from telephoning judges with instructions on
 how to proceed in a case. It carries sentences of up to 3
 years for persons exerting improper pressure on judges.
 Another new law, signed by President Gorbachev in April, gives
 the republics the option to provide for trial by jury in
 crimes punishable by imprisonment of over 10 years or by
 death. A few such jury trials took place in 1990.
 
 
 1308
 
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 Generally, trials are public. They may, however, be closed to
 the public, although no such cases were reported in 1990.
 Defendants have the right to attend the proceedings, confront
 witnesses, and present evidence. The court appoints an
 attorney for defendants who do not have one. Defense lawyers,
 like judges, are subject to a number of state and party
 controls. For example, in prosecutions involving
 participation by the KGB, only those defense lawyers on a list
 kept by the local government may be selected.
 Defendants have a right to appeal, as does the prosecution.
 Recent reports indicate a significant growth in the number of
 cases appealed by defendants and in the percentage of cases
 overturned by the higher courts. In many cases that were not
 overturned on appeal, sentences were reduced. The most
 prominent appellate case of 1990 was that of dissident
 journalist Sergey Kuznetsov, given a 3-year sentence in 1989
 for interfering with police and slandering public officials
 during a 1988 Human Rights Day demonstration. In January
 Kuznetsov was freed when an appellate court reduced the
 sentence to 6 months of correctional labor retroactive to his
 initial detention.
 Judges generally trust the conclusions of the preliminary
 investigation conducted by the procuracy, and many presume
 that the accused is guilty even before the trial begins. One
 1989 study showed that only 1 percent of all criminal cases
 resulted in acquittal. On the other hand, weak cases
 increasingly have been dropped. The procurator general in
 Ukraine recently reported that 15 percent of cases are being
 dropped at the investigative stage, a 50-percent increase over
 the past. A Moscow court official said that in recent years
 several thousand cases were sent back to the procuracy for
 reinvestigation, and 50 percent were dropped. In cases that
 are not dropped, the defendant may continue indefinitely to
 face the possibility of renewed prosecution.
 The Soviet Government has stated that all political prisoners
 were released under a broad amnesty in late 1988. But it
 applies the term primarily to those convicted under Artcile 70
 (anti-Soviet propaganda and agitation) or Article 190-1
 (slandering the Soviet system) and excludes, for example,
 persons convicted under Article 64-(treason).
 No prisoners are known to be currently serving sentences
 solely under the so-called political and religious articles of
 the Soviet criminal code (Articles 70, 142, 227, and the now
 abolished 190-1). Since 1989 the U.S. and Soviet Governments
 have been engaged in a mechanism to review criminal cases with
 possible political motivations. Of the 75 persons whose cases
 were initially raised by the United States, many have been
 confirmed as released from prison, some when their terms
 expired and others ahead of schedule. There are three
 confirmed cases of persons remaining in prison for offenses
 that, in the U.S. view, would not now subject them to
 prosecution.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Government interference with privacy is pervasive. There are
 constitutional provisions for the inviolability of the home,
 and by law no one may enter a home against'the will of the
 resident "without legal grounds." In practice, however, these
 provisions are not enforced. A U.S.S.R: Supreme Soviet decree
 
 
 1309
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 authorizes agents of the Ministry of Internal Affairs to enter
 a private home in pursuit of a suspected criminal.
 According to a new law, a court warrant is required before a
 wiretap may be installed. However, electronic monitoring of
 residences and telephones and interference with mail
 reportedly continue. In 1990 KGB spokesmen announced that the
 Fifth Directorate, which monitored dissidents, had been
 abolished (although some reform leaders charge that the
 function has merely been transferred). Dissident KGB General
 Kalugin was among those who asserted that the KGB continues
 its traditional practices.
 Certain government attitudes may be changing: for example,
 most government agencies now state that they refuse to accept
 anonymous denunciations; foreigners who visit dissidents or
 refuseniks are rarely harassed; and the Government
 infrequently discourages contacts with foreigners, although a
 1984 decree still in effect mandates fines for Soviet citizens
 who provide accommodations or transportation to foreigners.
 Foreign radio broadcasts are not jammed.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian
 Law in Internal Conflicts
 Interethnic violence flared in the Caucasus and Central Asia
 in 1990, resulting in hundreds of deaths. In mid-January, 60
 Armenians were killed by Azerbaydzhanis during rioting in Baku.
 Soviet troops entered the city a week after riots began and
 killed more than 140 persons. Reliable human rights sources,
 who have reviewed the records of the Azerbaydzhan Supreme
 Soviet commission on the January 1990 Baku events, saw
 documentation that troops shot at ambulances, bayoneted
 several people, and ran their tanks over several citizens,
 including children.
 In Nagorno-Karabakh, dozens of Armenians and Azerbaydzhanis
 were killed by Soviet troops and in interethnic clashes.
 During the period from July to November, Soviet troops killed
 14 Armenians. In January 1991, the introduction of Soviet
 troops into Lithuania and Latvia led to more than a dozen
 civilian deaths.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and press in 1990 was tested daily as
 official censorship was abolished and citizens took advantage
 of rising government tolerance of the expression of ideas. In
 Moscow, Leningrad, and the Baltic republics, especially, the
 freedom of expression reached unprecedented levels, while in
 central Asia and provincial areas of the Russian Soviet
 Federated Socialist Republic (R.S.F.S.R.), traditional
 authoritarian practices often continue to prevail.
 Legislatures at all. levels within the Soviet Union are working
 to draft formal laws to enshrine these new freedoms, but the
 process is complicated by local problems and varying concepts
 of what constitutes legitimate free speech.
 Although freedom to criticize the Government expanded
 significantly in 1990, activists regarded as "anti-Socialist"
 were often detained, harassed, or charged with having
 committed common crimes. Several activists were arrested for
 
 
 1310
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 "malicious hooliganism" under Article 206-2 of the Soviet
 criminal code for such activity as placing a barbed-wire
 wreath beneath a monument to Lenin and burning a portrait of
 Lenin.
 Persons expressing criticism of the Government were also
 charged with "slander" (Article 130) or "actively violating
 public order" (Article 190-3). For example, Nikolay Dudnikov
 of Irkutsk, who demonstrated against the electoral candidacy
 of the regional procurator, was arrested for hooliganism in
 March. In June the charges were changed to slander.
 Following psychological examinations, Dudnikov was returned to
 detention pending completion of the investigation of his case.
 Even the security organs were unable to stifle dissent within
 their own, ranks. In the spring, a former KGB major general,
 Oleg Kalugin, publicly charged the KGB with corruption.
 Though stripped of his rank and threatened with prosecution
 for revealing state secrets, Kalugin became a popular public
 figure and later won election to the Congress of People's
 Deputies, giving him immunity from further prosecution. Army
 Major Vladimir Lopatin, a proponent of reform and a People's
 Deputy, was expelled from the CPSU in the spring after
 proposing radical changes in the military services but was
 subsequently reinstated and has assumed a new position in the
 R.S.F.S.R. on defense policy. The continued presence on the
 public scene of personalities such as Kalugin and Lopatin
 helps keep the issue of the freedom to speak out on the public
 agenda.
 However, a government decree approved in 1990 outlawed public
 defamation of the person of the President. Insulting the
 President "in an indecent way" is a crime punishable by up to
 6 years in jail, according to the law "on the protection of
 the honor and dignity of the President." The law states that
 political criticism is not included. However, Democratic
 Union (DU) leader Valeriya Novodvorskaya was arrested under
 this law in September for writing an anti-Gorbachev article
 that was published in the DU's weekly newspaper. She
 underwent 4 days of psychiatric examination, was'judged
 competent to stand trial, and was then confined to her place
 of residence pending the procuracy's completion of its
 investigation. Several other persons were arrested for
 slandering the President, at least one of whom, Gennadiy
 Smirnov, underwent psychiatric examination.
 On April 12, the U.S.S.R. Supreme Soviet passed a law on the
 press and mass media that abolished preliminary censorship and
 established a new basis for media-government relations.
 Before the law went into effect on August 1, editors began to
 exercise wide discretion in handling news stories, using a
 wide range of political comment, and publishing criticism of
 official policies.  I
 Nevertheless, the Government continued attempts to manage the
 news and suppress sensitive stories. -Earlier in the year,
 President Gorbachev withdrew from an attempt to oust the
 editor in chief of the influential weekly Argumenty i Fakty
 (Arguments and Facts) for publishing an opinion poll showing
 decreased popular support for Gorbachev. In late December, a
 popular Leningrad television program, Vzglyad (Viewpoint), was
 taken off the air. Press freedom faces other challenges in
 areas where nationalist groups were brought'to power or where
 they constitute a vocal opposition.
 
 
 1311
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 The law on the press also tended to blur the distinction
 between the official and unofficial press. The latter has
 proliferated under perestroyka and now expresses a wide
 political spectrum. Unofficial publications that registered
 as required by the law have become fully legal; the status of
 the others remains uncertain. Publications regarded as
 "anti-Socialist" have encountered difficulties, including
 inability to obtain paper, harassment of staffers, and damage
 to offices and equipment. Novyy Mir was unable to publish
 several issues in 1990 because it was unable to obtain paper,
 while other publications continued to publish without
 interruption, the paper shortage notwithstanding.
 In January 1991, U.S.S.R. Interior Ministry troops occupied
 the entrance to the House of Print in Riga, Latvia, and Soviet
 troops seized television and radio facilities in Lithuania,
 killing 14 and wounding more than 100 unarmed protesters in
 the process.
 The Government continues to own and control most broadcast and
 printing facilities and property. This control continues to
 restrict freedom of the media. In January 1991, the State
 television and radio entity (Gosteleradio) moved to close the
 independent Soviet news agency Interfax and confiscate its
 equipment, ostensibly because Interfax failed to honor its
 financial commitments to Gosteleradio.
 Working conditions for foreign journalists in the Soviet Union
 continued to improve in 1990. Foreign journalists regularly.
 attended sessions of the Supreme Soviet, received regular
 briefings by various ministries and other institutions,
 interviewed high-ranking officials, and even toured previously
 inaccessible areas such as the KGB's Lefortovo prison.
 Harassment and other incidents interfering with the work of
 foreign journalists were rare.
 Universities and research institutes continue to be operated
 by the State or the CPSU, but Soviet academics are exerting
 pressure to acquire more autonomy from the authorities. Under
 a 1990 presidential decree on university autonomy,
 institutions of higher learning, at least in theory, have more
 control over their budget as well as over the property and
 land on which their institutions are located, decide how many
 instructors to employ and their salaries, and determine how
 many students to admit. Some universities have gained more
 freedom to determine their own curriculums. Access to
 archives is increasing, although not as fast as most Soviet
 scholars believe desirable.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The number of demonstrations, both authorized and
 unauthorized, grew exponentially throughout 1990. In
 September the U.S.S.R. Commission on Constitutional Compliance
 ruled unconstitutional and suspended President Gorbachev's
 decree of April 1990 that transferred authority to approve
 public demonstrations in Moscow from the Moscow City Soviet to
 the U.S.S.R. Council of Ministers.
 The law on demonstrations stipulates that demonstration
 organizers must apply for permission to local officials 10
 days in advance, and officials must respond at least 5 days
 before the demonstration's scheduled date. Civil and criminal
 penalties may be levied against participants in unauthorized
 demonstrations. While many persons have been fined and
 
 
 1312
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 sentenced to jail for up to 15 days, no one is reported to
 have been sentenced under the stiffer criminal penalties.
 Implementation of the law varied widely across the Soviet
 Union. In the Baltic states, almost all the demonstrations
 were organized by Popular Front organizations and therefore
 took place with the full concurrence of local authorities. In
 Moscow and Leningrad, most of the largest demonstrations and
 political gatherings were held with the official sanction of
 local authorities. Four major demonstrations organized by a
 coalition of democratic forces were held in Moscow with the
 official approval of the city council's executive committee.
 Three of the demonstrations drew crowds of well over 100,000.'
 The appearance of small groups of protesters carrying pickets
 has become almost commonplace on Moscow's streets. The
 Democratic Union, a self-proclaimed opposition party, held an
 unauthorized demonstration in central Moscow which, for the
 first time, was not dispersed by security forces. The
 anti-Semitic organizations Pamyat' and the Association of
 United Russian Organizations also conducted unauthorized
 meetings and marches. After the central Government refused to
 allow foreigners to participate in the Second International
 Human Rights Conference scheduled in Vilnius, Lithuania, in
 September, the Leningrad City soviet agreed to allow it to be
 held in Leningrad.
 Outside Moscow, Leningrad, and the Baltic republics, most
 demonstrations in 1990 were not authorized by local or
 republic-level authorities. In Minsk almost daily protests
 were held outside the Belorussian Supreme Soviet building
 during its session. In Ukraine there were many antinuclear
 demonstrations and massive proindependence rallies in Kiev in
 May, September, and October. In Frunze informal groups
 organized large unsanctioned meetings in June, which prompted
 Kirgizia authorities to declare a state of emergency. Despite
 the, state of emergency in Tadzhikistan, the constituent
 congress of the Democratic Party of Tadzhikistan met in August
 without official authorization. In Yerevan over 200,000
 Armenians assembled to mark the 75th anniversary of the
 massacres of Armenians at the hands of the rulers of the
 Ottoman Empire. In Saratov an unofficial demonstration in May
 was dispersed violently by local police. In August there was
 a wave of unauthorized demonstrations in Checheno-Ingushetia
 against the local supreme soviet."
 Local authorities often base their denial of demonstration
 permits on some technical flaw in an application and sometimes
 on the grounds that a demonstration is not necessary because
 the issue at hand is being widely discussed in other public
 forums. Sometimes authorities grant permission in principle
 but effectively prevent the demonstration by demanding that it
 be held at a different location, often far from the city
 center, or in a hall for which the organizers must pay
 rent.
 On October 9, the U.S.S.R. Supreme Soviet passed a law on
 public organizations, which will enter into force on January 1,
 1991. The law legalizes a multiparty system, expressly allows
 the formation of political parties and mass social movements,
 and guarantees such organizations the right to propagate their
 views. The law also allows political parties to field
 candidates in elections, provides that no citizen shall have
 his rights or freedom to participate limited, and declares all
 parties equal before the law. Only organizations advocating
 
 
 1313
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 violent changes in the constitutional order are expressly
 forbidden. All public organizations must register their
 by-laws and the names of their leaders with the U.S.S.R.
 Ministry of Justice or with republic-level justice ministries.
 The law provides for judicial appeal in the event that the
 Justice Ministry refuses to register an organization. In
 addition, the law requires political parties to make public
 information on their finances.
 Although the law declares all political parties equal, several
 provisions reinforce the predominant position of the CPSU.
 This is particularly true of articles that bar parties from
 receiving financial or other support from abroad. While
 allowing military and law enforcement personnel to belong to
 other political parties, the new law lets stand CPSU control
 over these institutions.
 The CPSU's agreement in February to relinquish its
 constitutionally guaranteed monopoly on power, in conjunction
 with the enactment on October 9 of the law legalizing a
 multiparty system, opened the door for the establishment of a
 wide range of new social and political organizations which
 embrace virtually every social, ethnic, and age group in
 Soviet society. Popular fronts now exist in all union
 republics and in the majority of autonomous republics and
 oblasts (regions). Many of the movements representing native
 populations are agitating not only for economic but also for
 political autonomy or independence from Moscow. The goal of
 sovereignty and. even independence gives political
 organizations in-non-Russian republics a base for
 consolidating opposition to the CPSU. In the Baltics,
 Moldova, Armenia, Georgia, and Ukraine, popular fronts have
 become the most powerful political and social organizations.
 An estimated 140 popular fronts have been set up in cities and
 regions in the R.S.F.S.R. alone. A wide range of other
 sociopolitical movements have been formed.
 The new political parties cover the full political spectrum,
 from monarchists, nationalists/Fascists, and Communists to
 various kinds of Socialists, radicals, environmentalists, and
 democrats. Although most of the new political parties were
 formed in the R.S.F.S.R., some were also established in other
 Soviet republics. For example, Kazakhstan has officially
 instituted a multiparty system, and three groups there have
 constituted themselves as political parties. The Georgian
 National Front held unofficial elections in September to elect
 an alternative parliament. Most Georgian parties chose to
 participate in the official Supreme Soviet. Two political
 parties were formed in Uzbekistan, although they were not
 registered by republic authorities.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Although the Constitution guarantees the "right to profess or
 not to profess any religion and to conduct religious worship
 or atheistic propaganda," the rights of religious believers
 have been stifled by the Soviet State's restrictive
 regulations and societal pressures.
 Nevertheless, the trend toward increased government tolerance
 of religion continued in 1990. New legislation, approved on
 October 1, mandates citizens' equality before the law
 regardless of religious conviction and allows religious
 proselytism for the first time in the Soviet era. The law
 provides a legal basis for the charitable works that had been
 
 
 1314
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 undertaken by the Russian Orthodox Church, the Baptists, and,
 to a lesser extent, other organized religions, including the
 formerly banned Seventh-Day Adventists. Organized religions
 now have access to the media, may set up their own schools,
 and enjoy favorable taxation rates.
 The Council on Religious Affairs lost its regulatory powers
 over religious communities. For example, registration of
 religious groups of 10 adults or more is now handled by local
 authorities. Previously, the group itself had to be
 registered in order to function legally. Groups now may
 theoretically remain unregistered but must register to acquire
 the status of a "juridical person" and have access to most of
 the bnefits of the new law. Some groups continue to refuse
 to register officially on the grounds that much of the
 legislation affecting "religious cults" contradicts the tenets
 of their beliefs, but central authorities no longer regard
 this as grounds for legal or extralegal repressive action. In
 most instances, recorded cases of harassment occur in
 provincial areas, where the traditional party-government
 establishment remains deeply hostile toward any assertion of
 rights by believers. For example, obstructionist tactics by
 local authorities have been in large measure responsible for
 complicating the efforts of Pentecostals to emigrate.
 Parishes of the long-banned Ukrainian Catholic (Uniate) Church
 began to be registered following the December 1, 1989, meeting
 between President Gorbachev and Pope John Paul II. Uniate
 demands for the return of their property confiscated after
 they were banned in 1946 has led to some violence in western
 Ukraine, where some churches used by Russian Orthodox
 -bel-ievers -have ,been forcibly taken over by Uniates.
 Nationalist pressures for the establishment of autocephalous
 orthodox churches in Belorussia and.Ukraine, independent of
 the Moscow Patriarchate, forced the latter to confer limited
 ,autonomy on Orthodox churches in both republics. This measure
 did not prevent the-revival in mid-1990 of an Autocephalous
 Ukrainian Orthodox Church, which had been destroyed by Stalin
 in the 1930's but survived outside the U.S.S.R. In October
 the exiled head of the church, Archbishop Mstislav, visited
 Ukraine.
 In central Asia, Muslims continued to open new mosques. They
 recently established a theological school in Dushanbe and will
 soon open another one in Fergana. An active grass-roots
 movement exists to replace government-appointed Islamic
 officials allegedly connected to the KGB.
 Since 1988 customs regulations no longer restrict the
 importation of religious materials because of their religious
 content. Laws agiinst speculation, however, are used to limit
 somewhat the quantity that can be imported. In practice, this
 has meant that registered religious groups were able to import
 many Bibles or Korans, while individuals had such books
 confiscated at the border under suspicion of "speculation."
 Some persons reported that they received small quantities of
 Bibles and other religious books through the mail, although
 many such packages continue to be seized.
 While in some respects conditions for Jews continued to
 improve in 1990, the mood in the Jewish community became more
 pessimistic and an even greater number of sews indicated they
 plan to emigrate. On the one hand, organized Jewish groups
 continued to grow in number as more and-more Jews became
 
 
 1315 .
 
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 interested in their cultural and religious heritage and the
 Government's attitude towards such activities relaxed.
 Several synagogues were returned to Jewish communities, and
 the teaching of Hebrew and Yiddish continued to expand.
 Semiofficial discrimination, such as restrictions on access to
 educational institutions, declined, and permission for Jews to
 emigrate reached a record high figure. At the same time,
 anti-Semitic incidents and the activities of anti-Semitic
 groups, such as Pamyat', also grew (see Section 5).
 The number of clergy and places of worship today is only a
 small fraction of the number that existed before the Communist
 assumption of power, but many churches are being reopened and
 attendance has increased sharply. Soviet officials recognize
 that over 90 million Soviet citizens adhere to some religion.
 Existing seminaries and other institutions of clerical
 education enrolled a larger number of students but still do
 not provide a sufficient body of trained clergy for officially
 registered denominations, especially given the renewed
 interest in participating in religious activities.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Freedom of movement is neither guaranteed by law nor respected
 in practice. An article of the Criminal Code that makes
 leaving the Soviet Union without permission a crime punishable
 by up to 20 years' imprisonment and exile (or even death) is
 still on the books but has not been enforced in recent years.
 Officials have promised a new law on travel and emigration
 that would somewhat improve legal procedures regulating
 freedom of movement abroad, but the draft of that law is still
 pending before the U.S.S.R. Supreme Soviet. Under the draft,
 many of the current regulations on exit visa procedures will
 apply to passport application procedures. For example, the
 draft contains restrictions on emigration for those with
 access to state secrets and draft-age men who have not yet
 completed obligatory military service, among others.
 Improvements over current law consist of removal of the
 requirement for invitations from abroad, better defined and
 more limited restrictions in the state secrecy rules, and
 provisions on adjudication of so-called poor relative cases.
 Although citizens are generally free to move about within the
 country, travel in certain areas (e.g., frontier regions or
 areas of military significance) requires special permission.
 All adults are issued identity documents or internal passports
 which must be carried during travel and used to register
 visits of more than 3 days with the local authorities, a
 requirement for the most part ignored by travelers not staying
 in hotels. Although only about 20 percent of Soviet territory
 is formally closed to travel by foreigners, most territory
 outside of major urban centers is in practice difficult to
 visit or inaccessible.
 The right to choose one's place of residence, though formally
 provided for by law, is subject to restrictions. Everyone is
 required to register his or her place of residence. The
 authorities limit the number of residence permits in an
 increasing number of large cities, including Moscow,
 Leningrad, and Kiev, where housing is at a premium. Soviet
 citizens who request emigration documents from Soviet
 authorities give up their housing and residence permits in
 order to obtain exit visas. Even though as of 1989 emigrants
 do not receive their exit visas until after they have received
 
 
 1316
 
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 permission to enter another country, the requirement to sever
 all ties even at that point can cause great hardship. Many
 seek lodging with family or friends and in some cases are
 forced to live in the street or'in rail or air terminals.
 A group of about 1,400 Armenians from Baku, stranded in Moscow
 for over a year as a result of civil unrest in Azerbaydzhan,
 were in a similar sort of limbo: although these persons were
 granted U.S. refugee status in 1989, it was not until August
 1990 that the Ministry of Internal Affairs' Office of Visas
 and Permits (OVIR) began accepting their applications for exit
 permission. As 1991 began, these cases were still being
 resolved.
 To travel abroad, Soviet citizens must have, in addition to a
 passport, an exit visa, usually valid for 6 months, specifying
 the destination for each trip. In 1989, for the first time
 since the 1917 Revolution, more Soviets traveled abroad than
 did foreigners to the U.S.S.R. In 1990, according to Soviet
 officials, nearly half a million Soviet citizens traveled
 abroad.
 During 1990, many persons without relatives abroad were
 allowed to travel abroad to visit friends. However, Soviet
 citizens usually may travel on private visits to the West only
 if they receive an invitation from a friend or relative who
 accepts financial responsibility for the trip. Routine
 permission to travel abroad is still far from commonplace.
 Lengthy formalities and an unresponsive bureaucracy, as well
 as arbitrary denials citing security reasons, continue to
 discourage many from attempting a private trip.
 During 1990 thousands of Soviet citizens residing abroad
 permanently, as well as former Soviet citizens, were permitted
 to return on short family visits or for other reasons, but
 some were denied entry visas.
 The right to emigrate continues to be restricted despite the
 Soviet Union's obligations under the Helsinki Final Act and
 other international documents in which the right to leave
 one's country and return thereto is iecognized. The Soviet
 system continues to restrict emigration (with some signifiant
 exceptions) to citizens desiring family reunification with
 immediate relatives abroad. Nonetheless, substantial numbers
 of Jews, Germans, Armenians, and Pentecostals emigrated in
 1989-90.
 A frequently used barrier to emigration is the requirement
 that prospective emigrants should have had no access to "state
 secrets." In some cases, persons have been denied exit
 permission although they have had no access to "state secrets"
 for more than 10 years. Another barrier to emigration is the
 requirement that parents or spouses sign a waiver releasing
 the applicant from financial or moral commitments.
 In 1990 approximately 180,000 Soviet.citizens emigrated to
 Israel, almost triple the figure for 1989. Some 150,000
 ethnic Germans were permitted to leave for Germany, and about
 55,000 Soviet citizens emigrated to the United States. These
 figures represent a dramatic increase over previous
 departures. A significant number of divided family cases
 affecting the United States, France, the United Kingdom, and
 Australia were resolved.
 
 
 1317
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 In February the CPSU gave up its constitutionally guaranteed
 role as the "leading and guiding force of Soviet society."
 Although the CPSU is still by far the largest and best
 organized national political organization, its membership is
 dropping, its once sacred privileges are under scrutiny, its
 ideological precepts are in disarray, and a host of prominent
 party members, foremost among them R.S.F.S.R. Chairman Boris
 Yeltsin, have resigned, giving further impetus to the
 emergence of a multiparty system. Party members, however,
 retain a comfortable majority in the U.S.S.R. Supreme Soviet
 and Congress of People's Deputies, as well as in the
 Government. In the republics and at the local level, the
 CPSU's supremacy is under attack by nationalist popular fronts
 and charismatic leaders who increasingly see party affiliation
 as a drawback. At the end of 1990, some of the elements of a
 multiparty system were in place although for the most part--
 except for the CPSU--based-on republic-level and-not all-union
 organizations. The law on social and public organizations
 adopted in October provides a legal basis for the
 establishment and registration of nongovernmental groups,
 including political parties and trade unions. The new law,
 which took effect on, January 1, 1991, presents difficult
 hurdles for organizations, including 5,000-member minimums for
 political parties, mandatory lists of information on all
 5,000, and up to $220 in registration fees. In light of what
 some citizens view as a return in late 199 to the repressive
 policies of the past, some organizations are likely to be
 reluctant to provide the Government with such detailed
 information on their membership. The Soviet Justice Minister
 warned in January 199r that leaders of public organizations
 which refuse to register will be subject ta prosecution.
 However, political pluralism is not yet established. New
 political parties and organizations suffer from lack of
 resources, experience, and a solid legal basis for existence.
 The President has not been elected in a genuine popular vote
 and, under the terms of the Constitution, does not have to
 face election until 1995. The Communist Party still wields
 great influence, especially in the provinces, and is
 safeguarding its privileges.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 In October the first independent, officially registered human
 rights bureau was established in Moscow by a Soviet human
 rights group and the U.S.-based Union of Councils for Soviet
 Jews. Soviet authorities continued in 1990 to display an
 increasingly forthcoming approach to foreign criticism of
 their human rights record, acknowledging problems and stating
 their desire to make their society more "humane." Discussion
 of human rights issues between the United States and the
 U.S.S-R. has become institutionalized in regular contacts with
 the International Humanitarian Cooperation and Human Rights
 Administration of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
 As part of this greater openness, .the Soviet Government has
 begun to permit foreigners, on a limited basis, to investigate
 the status of human rights in the U.S.S.R. Western human
 rights organizations have opened offices in Moscow. In March
 Soviet authorities permitted the director of the U.S. Federal
 
 
 1318
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 Bureau of Prisons to visit a number of labor camps and
 prisons. Staff members from the U.S. Commission on Security
 and Cooperation in Europe were allowed to be present on an
 unofficial basis during republic-level elections throughout
 1990, including elections in Baku and Tbilisi in October, and
 had unhindered access to dissidents, refuseniks,.and local
 political activists. However, Soviet authorities informed the
 Commission that Members of Congress would not be permitted to
 observe the republic-level supreme soviets in Ukraine, Latvia,
 and Estonia. The International Human Rights Conferences in
 Moscow in June and in Leningrad in September included a large
 number of foreign participants, many of whom strongly
 criticized the human rights record of the Soviet Union.
 However, several Soviet emigres invited to participate were
 refused visas. "The Soviets allowed an international team
 investigating the disappearance of Swedish diplomat Raoul
 Wallenberg access to-files from Vladimir Prison and to results
 of previous. Soviet investigations. In the Conference on
 Security an Cooperation in Europe (CSCE), the Soviet Union
 committed itself to permit the Soviet and foreign press and
 public, as well as nongovernmental organizations, access to
 the -official CSCE human rights conference scheduled for Moscow
 in 1991.
 Unofficial Soviet human rights groups complain that
 authorities ignore their inquiries on human rights issues.
 Many unofficial groups report difficulty registering and
 obtaining legal status, and implementing regulations on the
 new organizations make this process a difficult one.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Although the Soviet Constitution provides for the equal status
 of all Soviet citizens regardless of nationality, sex, or
 language, until recently Soviet authorities practiced
 discrimination at various levels. The Soviet federal system,
 which is based on nationality, recognizes more than 100
 nationalities. Many ethnic groups have territorial and
 administrative entities. The 15 Soviet republics, some of
 which were formerly independent countries, represent some of
 the largest and most developed ethnic groups. At least 60
 million Soviet citizens, however, live outside their
 nationality's administrative region or belong to a nationality
 that has none. During 1990, many nationalities began to
 regain language, cultural, religious, and political rights
 which had been lost during Communist rule. As one example of
 this reassertion of language and ethnic rights, the Supreme
 Soviet of the Soviet Socialist Republic of Moldavia voted to
 change the name of the republic to the Republic of Moldova.
 In general, the lot of most ethnic groups improved in most
 republics', although some groups, particularly central Asians,
 still suffer local repression of basic human rights. Most
 republic ethnic groups, except the Turkmen, were allowed to
 form political movements or parties.- As the influence of the
 Communist Party waned in many republics, other political
 groups gained influence. These groups have pushed,
 successfully in many cases, for increased ethnic rights for
 the titular nationalities of the republics. Relatively more
 democratic elections were held in many republics and resulted
 in more nationalist supreme soviets.
 Conflicts between ethnic groups, however,.increased. In the
 Caucasus, the struggle between Armenians and Azerbaydzhanis
 
 
 1319
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 over borders worsened considerably, and in Central Asia,
 Georgia, and Moldova interethnic clashes resulted in deaths.
 The oppression of minorities by titular nationalities fueled
 some of these conflicts. Georgia abolished the South Ossetian
 Autonomous Oblast when the latter declared its sovereignty,
 and Moldova declared states of emergency in its Gagauz and
 Russian areas for the same reason. Although no reliable
 figures are available for 1990, in August the Ministry of
 Internal Affairs announced that over the previous 30 months
 946 people had died and 8,652 had been injured in ethnic
 clashes.
 Unlike in the past, discrimination was also aimed at Russians
 in areas in which they were in the minority. In Tadzhikistan,
 for example, discrimination forced a number of Russians and
 other non-Tadzhik nationalities to leave their homes in the
 republic.
 Developments regarding the rights of national minorities are
 described below by region.
 Western areas -- Ukrainians in Ukraine gained a number of
 ethnic and cultural rights, particularly increased use of the
 Ukrainian language in schools and the designation of Ukrainian
 as the language for official business. These change% were
 codified by the passage of the Ukrainian Sovereignty Decree of
 July 1990 and the Law on Economic Autonomy of August 1990.'
 Russian-speaking areas have been generally unreceptive to the
 changes, and some organizations in these regions have
 advocated autonomy or separation from Ukraine. The Popular
 Front and other nationalist groups were relatively successful
 at safeguarding their recent gains. Nevertheless, Popular
 Front activists are concerned about an apparent campaign to
 oust or discredit Rukh deputies in the Supreme Soviet (e.g.,
 the arrest of Stepan Khmara). The republic government, Rukh,
 and other Popular Front organizations advocate a policy of
 tolerance toward all nationalities in Ukraine. However, some
 extremist groups (the Ukrainian Insurrection Army and the
 Banderovtsy) promote a militant brand of nationalism. Rukh
 has supported resettlement of the Crimean Tatars which local
 government officials oppose.
 Belorussians were also relatively more successful in 1990 in
 pushing for ethnic rights in the republic. After the defeat
 in the March. elections of a number of conservative Communist
 Party leaders, the Belorussian Popular Front was able to
 operate more freely. Belorussians, however, still tend to
 experience more discrimination and have fewer ethnic rights
 compared to Ukrainians and Moldovans.
 In MQldova, assertion of the rights of Moldovans (who consider
 themselves Romanians) increased rapidly as the new, more
 nationalist republic government took power. At the same time,
 the newly elected government moved to restrict the rights of
 minorities in the republic. As in other republics, the number
 of pronationalist demonstrations increased enormously.
 Moldovans, through their new legislature, were able to
 strengthen various language-, cultural, and political rights.
 The Russians and Gagauz residing there, however, took issue
 with the Moldovans' newly gained rights which discriminated
 against residents of non-Moldovan ethnicity. Ethnic
 disagreements sharpened with both Russian- and Gagauz-
 dominated areas declaring their independence from Moldova.
 Violent clashes in October and November resulted in a number
 of fatalities.
 
 
 1320
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 The Caucasus -- Violence escalated in the Caucasus between
 Azerbaydzhanis and Armenians over Nagorno-Karabakh, an enclave
 in Azerbaydzhan inhabited by Armenians which Azerbaydzhanis
 claim is legally and historically' a part of Azerbaydzhan.
 Armenians claim, however, that Azerbaydzhan's refusal to allow
 Nagorno-Karabakh to secede from Azerbaydzhan is a violation of
 the right to self-determination of the Armenians living
 there. The number of deaths, injuries, hostages, bomb
 explosions, and thefts of weapons, continued to.grow, with no
 resolution in sight. -In Baku, the capital of Azerbaydzhan,
 anti-Armenian pogroms in January led to the declaration of
 martial law. Killings.and atrocities were apparently
 committed both by Azerbaydzhani mobs and by Soviet army troopd
 brought in to restore order. Martial law was also declared in
 Nagorno-Karahakh and border areas between Armenia and
 Azerbaydzhan in February. In September a state of -emergency
 -.was declared by-the government of Armenia after a series of
 incidents, including the--shooting of a local member of the
 -Armenian Supreme Soviet, between rival paramilitary bands.
 In Georgia, respect for the rights of Deorgians increased with
 the coming to power of a popularly elected government.
 Violence-among opposing ethnic-based Georgian political groups
 -roszas they tried to assert control over the republic
 government. Bomb-explosions, street snipers, and numerous
 shooting incidents were reported. The rights of non-Georgian
 nationalities such as the Ossetians, Abkhazians, and Meskhetian
 Turks have suffered under thenew government. President Zviad
 Gamsakhurdia has said he believes Ossetians have no rights in
 Georgia. A law on citizenship -and immigration before the
 Georgian Supreme Soviet would discriminate against non-
 Georgians. The.Geoirgiansparliament officially abolished the
 South Ossetian Autonomous Oblast in December. Tensions
 increased between Georgians, Abkhazians, and Ossetians over
 the ethnic -rights of the- republic's minorities. In early
 January 1991, several persons -died as a result of clashes
 between Georgian republic troops and Ossetian groups.
 Central Asia -- Interethnic violence broke out in a'number of
 areas during 1990. In Dushanbe martial law was declared in
 February when Tadzhiks attacked Armenians and other ethnic
 groups, including.Russians, following rumors that Armenian
 refugees fxom Baku would be relocated to Dushanbe. The worst
 violence began in June between Uzbeks and Kirgiz in the city
 of Osh and-spread along the border and to Kirgizia' capital,
 Frunze. Ethnic conflict between Meskheian Turks and Uzbeks
 continued, with Uzbeks launching an attack on some Meskhetians
 in Uzbekistan in February.
 Jews -- Popular expressions of anti-Semitic attitudes continued
 to concern Jews throughout the Soviet Union. The'pAinting of
 swastikas on Moscow cemetery graves, the distribution of
 anti-Semitic leaflets in Novosibirsk and other cities, pogrom
 rumors in Kiev, and the desecration of the Moscow Choral
 Synagogue contributed to this concern. Jews in Moscow,
 -Leningrad, and other Russian-cities report verbal insults and
 anonymous threatening letters. In .July the Communist Party
 newspaper Pravda ran an unprecedented article acknowledging
 anti-Semitism as one of the society's most serious ills.
 Subsequently, Konstantin Smirnov-Ostashvili was convicted on
 charges of "inciting racial hatred" (attacking the Central
 House of Writers in Moscow, shouting anti-Semitic slogans, and
 threatening Jewish writers and their supporters), and received
 a 2-year sentence. Other participants in the crime were
 investigated but not brought to trial. Jews view the
 
 
 1321
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 activities of organizations like Pamyat' as particularly
 dangerous and believe that official criticism of anti-Semitic
 acts is insufficient and ineffective.
 At the same time, Jews found in 1990 that they had increased
 opportunities to take advantage of cultural and religious
 freedom, including the study of Hebrew and Yiddish and
 publication of Jewish periodicals. Several mass-circulation
 proreform periodicals have published strong denunciations of
 anti-Semitism. Outside large cities and the Russian Republic,
 those popular front movements who regard the Jews as allies
 against the central authoritiez were supportive of increased
 opportunities for Jewish religious and cultural activity. The
 Confederation of Jewish Organizations and Communities of the
 U.S.S.R. expressed concern, however-, about anti-Semitic
 arguments for holding Jews responsible for the Soviet Union's
 economic and social problems.
 Women nominally enjoy the same legal: rights as men, including
 the right to participate in all areas of the social,
 political, and economic life of the Soviet Union. An
 extensive system of day care service and maternity leave
 benefits allows women, after they have borne children, to
 retain employment. Virtually all women have no economic
 choice but to work both inside and outside the home. Women
 bear the main brunt of the hardships of Soviet daily life,
 such as waiting in long lines for food products. Women's
 rights activists report that only about 20 percent of the
 demand for contraceptives is satisfied. Over-6 million
 abortions are performed each year with consequent dangers to
 women's health, given the poor hygienic conditions in most
 Soviet medical facilities.
 Women's rights activists report widespread domestic violence
 against women, often involving male alcoholism, throughout the
 U.S.S.R. Wife beating seems to be a particular problem in the
 central Asian, republics. Statistics are as yet unavailable in
 the Soviet Union, although women activists are trying to
 compile them. The Council of Ministers has established a
 special branch, headed by a woman, to study the problems of
 women. In general, no significant improvements in the rights
 or status-of women have been achieved. Virtually every- time a
 women's rights issue is discussed in the U.S.S.R. Congress of
 People's-Deputies or the U-S.S.R. Supreme Soviet, the large
 majority of deputies ignore the speaker, walk out of the hall,
 or ridicule the speaker and dismiss the issue as unimportant.
 Special privileges-shield many members of the Soviet elite
 (the party apparatusnthe military high command, the-
 diplomatic servicee, the scientific-technical intelligentsia,
 and the cultural and sports establishment: to varyinT degrees
 from social and economic hardships. Privileges include access
 to better housing, schools, medical care, and foreign travel,
 as well as to restricted stores with higher quality food and
 imported consumer goods. The system of special privileges,
 already somewhat reduced from earlier levels, came under sharp
 criticism in the Supreme Soviet beginning in 1989. While some
 criticism continued in 1990 and a Supreme Soviet Privileges
 Commission carried out a number of investigations, it is
 unclear what specific action might have been taken to close
 the Ministry of Health's Special -Department for Senior Party
 Officials Without Government Portfolios.
 
 
 1322
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The right of workers to form and join unions of their own
 choosing improved somewhat in the legal sense with the passage
 by the U.S.S.R Supreme Soviet in December of the Law on Trade
 Unions. The law provides for the existence of trade unions as
 independent organizations which are equal before the law with
 official trade unions. However, this law is not expected to
 diminish the status of the official trade unions and their
 hold on union membership because of the inherent advantages
 represented by their close links with enterprise directors and
 their exclusive control over workers' vacations, children's
 camps, recreation facilities and other social benefits. In
 practice, the authorities showed an increasingly liberal
 attitude toward the free association of workers in 1990.
 Approximately 30 functional trade unions had been grouped
 within the officially sponsored All-Union Central Council of
 Trade Unions (AUCCTU) which traditionally served as "the
 transmission belt from the Communist Party to the masses."
 However, the expectation of government reforms, the problem of
 strikes and other manifestations of worker discontent, and the
 emergence of a genuinely-independent grassroots worker
 movemment compelled the AUCCTU to undergo its own form of
 perestroyka. On October 24, the AUCCTU voted to disband
 itself and reorganize as a "voluntary alliance of sovereign
 industrial and regional organizations with their programs and
 rules," with the purported aim of more ably defending worker
 interests, under the new name of the General Confederation of
 Trade Unions (GCTU).
 The independent Soviet workers' movement, which began as a
 mass movement only in the summer of 1989, continued to grow
 impressively. One of the earliest of the independent trade
 unions, the U.S.S.R. Association of Socialist Trade Unions,
 opened chapters in several Russian and Ukrainian industrial
 centers and broke new ground by attempting to organize police
 officers, airline pilots, teachers, physicians, day care
 professionals, and other white-collar workers. The coal
 miners of the Donbass region of eastern Ukraine continued to
 represent one of the largest and most potent centers of
 independent organized labor in the Soviet Union. The Donetsk
 city workers' strike committee emerged as the center of the
 miners' movement in Ukraine. It began to play a truly
 national role in June by organizing the U.S.S.R.'s first
 All-Union Congress of Soviet Miners. The Congress changed the
 terms of political debate in the U.S.S.R. by condemning the
 CPSU and calling for the resignation of the Prime Minister,
 the first time a mass workers' movement had issued such a
 political challenge to the authorities. A new milestone was
 reached at the Second Congress of Miners when it voted to
 establish the first major independent trade union, the
 Independent Union of Mineworkers.
 Meanwhile, the well-organized though somewhat smaller miners'
 movement in the Kuzbass region of western Siberia reached out
 to labor leaders from other industries to found the
 Confederation of Labor (COL). The COL's leaders openly
 describe their organization, which takes the form of a loose
 confederation of independent labor groups, as an attempt to
 replicate the experience of Poland's Solidarity trade union.
 The COL's strategy is to unite the coal miners with activist
 workers from other industries in an alliance for both
 
 
 1323
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 political and economic reform. Generally, it has aligned
 itself openly with the new government of the Russian Republic,
 led by Boris Yeltsin.
 Labor legislation passed by the U.S.S.R. Supreme Soviet in
 October 1989 formally established the right to strike for the
 first time but also provided for a lengthy dispute settlement
 process. The law banned strikes'in the government and
 military services and contained broad, undefined references to
 "essential services" in which strikes could also be
 prevented. Despite this law, the COL and the Donbass miners'
 movement organized a 1-day political strike on July 11 calling
 for the resignation of Prime Minister Ryzhkov's Government.
 The strike involved several hundred mines and factories,
 employing perhaps 2 million workers all across the-U.S.S.R.
 Since the strike, the leaders of the workers' movement
 generally have faced only minor legal harassment. However, a
 few labor leaders faced prosecution by local authorities who
 claimed that they had violated the law by striking.
 The collapse of Communist-dominated trade unions in Eastern
 Europe and the uncertainties created by perestroyka at home
 compelled the Soviet GCTU in November to assume direct control
 over the Communist labor international, the World Federation
 of Trade Unions, which the Soviets previously managed
 indirectly through proxies.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Virtually all Soviet workers had been almost automatically
 made members of an affiliate of the AUCCTU. It is unclear how
 the formal disbanding of the AUCCTU will affect its members.
 The newly formed Independent Union of Mineworkers announced
 its intention to negotiate the terms and conditions of
 employment on behalf of its members. Control by the AUCCTU
 (or its successors) over assets, such as rest houses, hotels,
 pension funds,*and dues, remains a hotly debated- topic.
 Soviet authorities in 1990 continued to show a willingness to
 try to deal with the independent labor movement. Outside the
 mining industry, however, the vast majority of Soviet workers
 must still rely on officials of the AUCCTU and factory and
 enterprise work collective councils to express their
 interests. On the other hand., many workers feel these
 representatives inadequately defend their interests, since
 they tend to side with management. In September the workers'
 movement in the Kuzbass achieved one of its major economic
 goals by convincing the new Russian Republic government to
 agree iri principle to grant their region the status of a free
 economic zone-
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Soviet law contains no prohibition on forced or compulsory
 labor. Convicted criminals, including those confined for
 political offenses, are commonly forced to work, often under
 very difficult conditions, in local projects and to assist in
 the production of primary and manufactured goods. Prisoners
 in theory are paid the same wage as factory workers, but up to
 90 percent of this pay goes to prison authorities, supposedly
 to cover the cost of their maintenance. The International
 Labor Organization's Committee of Experts noted in 1990 that
 penal legislation was under review in the U.S.S.R. and
 expressed the hope that Section 209 of the Russian Republic's
 code and the equivalent legal provisions of the other
 
 
 1324
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 republics concerning persons leading a "parasitic way of life"
 would be repealed.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Soviet law establishes a statutory minimum age for employment
 of 16. No evidence of widespread violation of this law
 exists, although reports have appeared of child labor in
 central Asian republics.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The Soviet Union has no legislated minimum wage although
 reform'plans call for the establishment of minimum wages,
 usually republic by republic. According to official Soviet
 statistics, the average monthly nonfarm wage in mid-1990 was
 $10 at the current unofficial exchange rate. Wages for
 collective farm workers were somewhat lower. (The ruble is
 not a convertible currency, and its official value in terms of
 the U.S. dollar does not represent actual purchasing power for
 purposes of international comparison.) Workers living in the
 harsh climates of Siberia and the far north, as well as those
 facing harsh conditions on the job, such as miners and
 metallurgical workers, receive bonuses that can double or even
 triple their pay.
 The Soviet workweek averages from 40 to 48 hours. Many
 workers, however, work far less than this, since the
 disordered state of the Soviet economy requires them to spend
 many hours a day, much of it during official work time,
 searching for basic necessities for their families. Formerly,
 many workers were required to donate working Saturdays and to
 help at harvest time, but this practice is rapidly falling
 into disuse. Officially, workers receive other benefits in
 addition to their wages, such as heavily subsidized prices for
 basic goods and foodstuffs in state stores. The value of this
 benefit, however, has been significantly eroded by growing
 shortages of basic consumer goods and food. Meanwhile, prices
 for food in free markets have increased significantly. In
 addition, the quality of state-subsidized housing, health
 care, and transportation is often very low.
 Soviet law establishes minimum conditions of workplace safety
 and worker health. These conditions are frequently violated,
 and no effective enforcement mechanism exists. Workplace
 accidents are reportedly common, and the official trade unions
 are ineffectual in achieving redress of workers' complaints.
 For example, 1990 witnessed several serious mining disasters
 in the Donbass, but workers claim no significant safety
 measures were adopted in the aftermath of these incidents.
 
 
 1325
