SOVIET UNION
The Report on the Soviet Union, is a fine example of human rights reporting. It avoids politically-motivated exaggeration, particularly commendable at a time of heightened tension between the U.S.S.R. and the U.S. The State Department has made efforts to improve documentation and upgrade its coverage of Soviet human rights violations, which greatly increased in 1983. These violations include a stepped-up campaign of anti-Semitism; new legislation to further restrict and punish political prisoners? increased obstruction of correspondence between Soviet citizens and Westerners and between Soviet political prisoners and their families; and an increase in the meting out of maximum prison terms. All of these abuses are fully discussed in the Report.
In citing by name more than two dozen individual victims of repression, the Report reveals the personal dimension of state repression and the activists who suffer from it. In substantially increasing its section on economic, social, and cultural conditions, the Report describes problems such as rampant alcoholism that, while difficult to quantify under human rights categories, have human rights implications and convey a sense of what life is like in Soviet society.
The broadening of the concept "invasion of the home" has been particularly effective in the Soviet context. As
-60-
stated in the Country Reports' introduction, this has indeed succeeded in capturing some human rights abuses that previously "slipped through the mesh of [the State Department's] categories." Using this category, the Report describes the Soviet government's practice of monitoring or intercepting citizens' mail (not mentioned last year), and notes that in some instances Soviet postal authorities have reportedly refused to accept packages from abroad addressed to prominent activists and family members. The Report might also have mentioned increased restrictions on materials sent out of the Soviet Union.
The Report's discussion of arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home and correspondence reveals the systematic human rights abuses that affect many ordinary citizens who are not engaged in dissent. These include the Russification of many national languages in the Soviet Union (to the point of removing large amounts of the vocabulary of some languages); the required courses in Marxism-Leninism for university students; the falsifying or tampering with accounts of historical events; the government's view that it is a citizen's duty to inform the State about "unorthodox attitudes" of family members, and so on.
The Department has provided new material about disappearances, torture and cruel and inhumane punishment. The 1983 Report mentions the practices of not notifying next-of-kin when individuals are confined to psychiatric
-61-
facilities; forcing relatives to initiate inquiries about their family members' arrests or transfer to other labor camps; and labor camp authorities' encouraging of criminal inmates to beat political prisoners as a form of harassment.
The lengthy treatment of arbitrary arrests is excellent, particularly the full quotation of the "all-purpose" criminal codes (including new repressive legislation in 1983 for "malicious disobedience" by political prisoners, authorizing additional terms of up to five years' imprisonment). This is a valuable feature of the Report and would be useful in Reports on other countries as well. One minor corrections the original Russian version of Art. 190-1 of the Russian Criminal Code states "dissemination of deliberately false (lozhnykh) fabrications" rather than "deliberately hostile f abrications."
The Report tends to overstate the incidence of imprisonment and psychiatric hospitalization for political reasons. It states that "(i]t is difficult to estimate the number of political prisoners in the U.S.S.R., although 10,000 is generally considered the minimum." It would have been more accurate to state that there are 903 documented cases of political imprisonment and internal exile (including psychiatric detention) and that estimates run as high as 10,000 or more.
The Report also states: "Some sources estimate that up to 1,000 people may at present be confined in psychiatric
-62-
hospitals for political reasons." Amnesty International reports that there are about 200 documented cases of psychiatric confinement for political purposes.
Possibly in response to our Critique of last year's Report, the Report for 1983 has corrected the mis impress ion that the independent peace group in Moscow is a human rights monitoring group and states clearly that the group is concerned strictly with confidence-building measures and disarmament.
Throughout the Report, the human rights provisions of the Helsinki Accords are cited in connection with violations such as the jamming of Western radio stations or implementation such as the issuance of multiple entry-exit visas for journalists. Compliance or non-compliance with the Helsinki Accords is a standard that might be applied usefully to countries such as Yugoslavia and Turkey as well.
As in 1983, there are separate sections on Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania. Although brief, these sections cover major human rights problems, and other issues with human rights implications, such as in-migration by Russians to Baltic states, the erosion of Baltic culture and the shrinking standard of living. This section also highlights significant events such as the Estonian Communist Party chief's public statements linking 1981 strikes in Estonia with events in Poland. Mention of the cases of prominent Baltic activists would be a good addition.
-63-
àetail	ePti0n
and compre.	' the «epòrt
Pr0bJemS * t,at c enSÌVe —tof °n Contai
Chr0ni^-. the	^ «hil. m Seri°-	r " 3
an o,	8 ferali	m°st of th	ri9hts
impiies - sucral rest—For —, thee;s
threat	" acti°ns	basic r-	*ep°rt
,	•	it	ns ar* justlf	ri9*ts, but
by the .	escri£>e	by
the	ntion 9erS" Si"ce J975	ist acts
""•»«M. - °f	- -et I3" the" — J. ^^-
c°mbat th rreSts and prev	- which ,	of
the terrò». •	preventiVe .	n auth0rj,
that thJ <r0rist cha	Ve d^tenti
«•C* ^ r- n>	"'«o
T	" «"loaie „	*"" «h,
r— « -v. „ p »
verriment *	s of wi .
nt force,	desPre^
'.T.:^- -ZT"-
Cou"t Of tp	983 are p	Sri Lanka.s .
the Jas, terr-ist acts	ented onJy	S mi"°rity
5J St years tS —itted by J 3ft- a ,
l983 arp	^ 9oVernm	aS Srave as
t.r	n0ted' they a	ment S°^iers 0 the murder of
iSt	th Prec— ae	Sin9ie <3ay
^ s COUntS - -re iiyin
that widescale -- and random — acts of political violence by government forces are justifiable acts of retaliation. Such an apparent effort to justify mob violence against the Tamil population is particularly inappropriate without mentioning that most Tamils condemn the violent tactics of the Tamil Tigers.
Similarly, while the Report acknowledges that government forces "actively participated in the violence or stood by unable or unwilling to stop it," it presents even this deeply disturbing information in a defensive and misleading manner. The acknowledgement of government responsibility is preceded by the assertion that "[t]here is no evidence to support the claims of some Tamils and critics of the Government that it planned or promoted this violence." It would have been more accurate to state that such allegations were widespread. Additionally, whether or not these claims are true, the Report's assertion diminishes the importance of its subsequent acknowledgement that government forces were responsible for gross human rights violations.
Additionally, accounts of these violations do not adequately reflect their extent. The Report notes, for example, the Sri Lankan government's acknowledgement that during the July violence, "navy personnel in Trincomalee . . . left their barracks, killed at least one person and injured ten, and burned more than 125 shops and houses." The Report should have clearly stated that government officials admitted that 130 sailors participated in this rampage against the Tamil population.
-65-
The Report also suffers from inadequate descriptions of
official actions that curtail basic rights. It acknowledges
that persons detained pursuant to the PTA may be held up to 18
months before being presented to a magistrate and "do not have
the same rights as other prisoners in Sri Lanka regarding
visits by family, access to lawyers, food, and other conditions
of incarceration." It does not make clear that such detainees
may be denied access to lawyers and relatives for the entire
period of their pre-charge detention — up to one and one-half
years. Nor does it note the strong government policy favoring
denial of access to counsel and relatives under the PTA, as
reflected in such official pronouncements as the following:
If the Police are to conduct and complete their investigations successfully, it is important that these detainees should not have access to their lawyers and relations for a certain minimum period, during which time . . . the Police will be able to complete their investigations and obtain the necessary information to the cases in court.
This statement appeared in a government brochure issued in
1981, and was repeated in London in July 1983 by the High
Commissioner of Sri Lanka.
The Report also fails to note, as it should, that numerous persons held under the PTA reportedly have been subjected to brutal forms of torture while held incommunicado. The PTA has been the subject of considerable criticism by international organizations such as Amnesty International and the International Commission of Jurists, and merits more comprehensive treatment than that contained in the 1983 Country Reports.
-66-
The Report contains a similarly scant discussion of an emergency regulation that permits armed forces to dispense with inquests in disposing of bodies. It registers the concern of Amnesty International and a domestic human rights group about this regulation, but fails to indicate the bases for their concern. An adequate treatment of this regulation would have noted that during a six-day period in 1979 when a similar regulation was in force, six Tamils died in police custody. It also would have noted that when the rule was adopted. President Jayawardine explained that it would ensure that security personnel "will in no way be harassed by the law in the event of being impelled to use their fire power."
Finally, in discussing political and civil rights, the Report makes no mention of national laws that effectively discriminate against the Tamil minority. These include a law which has the effect of excluding Tamils from government jobs by making Sinhala, the language of the Sinhalese, the national language and a law adopting a proportional quota system for entry to universities based on race, which has had the effect of limiting Tamil enrollment.
-67-
