 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 The Soviet Union is a one-party, centralized state in which
 the Communist Party attempts to direct and control all politi-
 cal, economic, social, cultural, and other developments.
 Within the Party, the "nomenklatura," or Soviet personnel
 management system in which all senior appointments require
 Central Committee Secretariat approval, allows a smaller group
 of the Party elite to use the Party as an instrument of its
 effective rule of the USSR. Although the Soviet Constitution
 formally provides for all internationally recognized human
 rights, including civil and political rights, in fact there is
 little tolerance of actions and practices incompatible with
 continued Communist Party control. The suppression of consti-
 tutionally guaranteed rights is accomplished under the aus-
 pices of a number of broadly worded provisions stating that
 constitutional rights may not be exercised in a manner con-
 trary to the "interests of society" as defined by the Party.
 Communist party control and suppression of dissent are en-
 forced by the "organs of State Security," which maintain a
 pervasive presence throughout the country. The organs of
 State Security are comprised of the KGB (Committee of State
 Security), which is in charge of covert operations abroad,
 Border Guards, and the most politically sensitive tasks of
 repression internally, and the MVD, which controls the ordi-
 nary police and the forced labor system. The Soviet Govern-
 ment's presumed objectives remain the continued monopoly of
 power by the Communist Party, enhanced national security,
 economic development emphasizing heavy industry, and projec-
 tion abroad of its power. Respect for human rights is subor-
 dinate to these objectives.
 The status of human rights in the Soviet Union continues to
 fall far short of accepted international standards. Although
 capital punishment is imposed only infrequently, the regime's
 standard response to dissent is the incarceration of dissi-
 dents in prison or labor camps. The mistreatment of prisoners
 continues in terms of inadequate food, clothing, and shelter,
 heavy manual labor, unsatisfactory medical care, isolation,
 extended interrogations, and threats against their families.
 Many prisoners are also denied their rights to correspondence
 and to receive family visits. The Soviet Government continues
 to confine some dissidents to special psychiatric hospitals
 and to psychiatric wards in general hospitals, where they
 often are subjected to a variety of cruel and degrading treat-
 ments, including doses of powerful and painful drugs. The
 regime also continues the practices of the internal exile and
 the forced emigration of certain individuals. Political and
 religious offenders uniformly are denied fair and public
 trials.
 The Soviet Constitution of 1977 provides for most commonly
 accepted political liberties, but their exercise must be in
 accordance with the "interests of the people and the strength-
 ening and development of the socialist system." In practice,
 the regime does not tolerate "deviant" behavior and has not
 hesitated to imprison persons for exercising basic human
 rights. The Party and the Government control all Soviet
 media, which are subject to censorship. The regime also
 continues to maintain tight control over the work of foreign
 journalists and the circulation of foreign newspapers in the
 country. Soviet authorities use their control of the mail and
 telephone circuits to foreign countries to restrict, on a
 selective basis, contact between Soviet citizens and persons
 in other countries. The Soviets continue to jam most radio
 broadcasts from abroad that are in Russian and other languages
 
 
 1022
 of the peoples of the USSR, maintain a widespread network of
 informers, and frequently use hidden listening devices to
 garner information. In practice, public associations in the
 USSR are subject to the control of the authorities, who sup-
 press any which appear to challenge the interests of the
 regime. Soviet trade unions are strictly subordinated to the
 Communist Party and act as agents of the Government in imple-
 menting economic policy and ensuring labor discipline, rather
 than as collective bargaining agents for workers. Freedom of
 religion is closely circumscribed, and religious believers are
 subject to many restrictions in the officially "atheist"
 USSR. Freedom of movement is neither guaranteed by law nor
 respected in practice.
 Domestically, there has been an escalation in 1982 of the
 campaign of repression of dissent in the Soviet Union which
 appears to have as its aim the severance of contacts between
 foreigners and Soviet citizens. The regime has intensified
 its harassment of foreign journalists, forced the Moscow
 Helsinki Group to disband, begun threatening leading Jewish
 "refuseniks" with imprisonment if they continue to maintain
 contacts with foreign diplomats, journalists and tourists,
 stepped up its repression of religious dissidents, arrested
 several persons who circulated strictly apolitical samizdat
 texts, and curtailed telephone ties to selected foreign
 countries. At the same time, there have been reports of the
 use of forced labor in at least the preliminary phases of the
 construction of the Yamal gas pipeline from Siberia to Western
 Europe and of the massive importation of Vietnamese laborers
 for work on a variety of infrastructure projects.
 Abroad, the Soviet Union continues its occupation of Afghani-
 stan and its support of the Vietnamese occupation of Kampuchea
 and of the martial-law regime in Poland. There is mounting
 evidence that the Soviet Union is responsible for the use of
 chemical warfare in Afghanistan, Laos, and Kampuchea. The
 USSR also continues to support a number of "client" states
 such as Cuba and Ethiopia which engage in massive violations
 of the human rights of their citizens.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Killing
 Several deaths of religious or political activists (or their
 relatives) have occurred under suspicious circumstances,
 raising the possibility of official involvment. There is,
 however, no firm evidence that Soviet authorities are respon-
 sible for these and other deaths, and the probability of
 obtaining such evidence is low. A sizable number of political
 prisoners and common criminals probably perish each year in
 prison and in forced-labor camps owing to strenuous physical
 labor, a semi-starvation diet, and inadequate clothing for
 extremely cold weather. These deaths, the number of which it
 is impossible to estimate, must be seen as the direct result
 of political or economic decisions taken consciously by the
 most senior Soviet officials.
 Soviet law provides for the imposition of capital punishment
 for a variety of offenses, including some economic crimes such
 as fraud, not generally considered capital crimes outside the
 USSR. The Soviet media only infrequently note the application
 of capital punishment, and then usually only with respect to
 cases involving large-scale economic crime as part of periodic
 anti-corruption campaigns. The regime undoubtedly hopes that
 
 
 1023
 the "demonstration effect" of the use of capital punishment in
 these cases will deter others from similar crimes. The avail-
 able evidence, which cannot necessarily be considered compre-
 hensive, suggests that capital punishment is used sparingly.
 However, statistics on capital punishment, as well as statis-
 tics on crime in general, are not published by the Soviet
 Government.
 b. Disappearance
 There are few known instances of the prolonged or permanent
 involuntary disappearance of persons in the Soviet Union.
 Secret arrests (in the sense that news of them may not reach
 relatives and friends for some time) do occur, but, in most
 cases, the "secrecy" involved seems to be more the result of
 circumstance than of official policy. In arrest cases, Soviet
 authorities eventually allow arrestees to notify family and
 friends of their arrests or confirm it upon being questioned
 by interested parties.
 c. Torture
 Reports from a variety of sources indicate that mistreatment
 of prisoners during interrogation continues to occur. But
 systematic torture and physical abuse of prisoners as a means
 of obtaining confessions have not been prevalent. Prisoners
 have more frequently been subjected to such psychological
 pressure as isolation, extended interrogation, and threats
 against their families. The security organs of the Soviet
 Government are responsible for these abuses.
 d. Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 There are four categories of such punishment:  the treatment
 of prisoners in Soviet labor camps, the use of psychiatric
 treatment against political and religious dissenters, forced
 internal exile, and forced emigration.
 Prison camps: Although article 20 of the Russian Republic
 criminal code states that "punishment does not have the goal
 of causing physical suffering or the destruction of human
 dignity," a number of reliable sources have described the
 stark, primitive conditions in Soviet labor camps. These
 conditions include: isolation; inadequate protection against
 extremely cold weather; a poor diet causing hunger and,
 eventually, medical problems associated with malnutrition;
 compulsory hard labor in difficult conditions; inadequate
 medical care; and frequent, arbitrary deprivation of the
 prisoners' limited rights to receive correspondence and family
 visits. For example, political prisoners Yuriy Orlov and
 Anatoliy Shcharanskiy are in this precise position. On
 September 27, Mr. Shcharanekiy began an indefinite hunger
 strike to protest the refusal of Soviet authorities to allow
 him contact with the outside world. Despite worldwide pro-
 tests and appeals to the Soviets, the position of the
 authorities has not changed as of this writing. Similarly,
 imprisoned Helsinki monitor Tatyana Osipova went on a hunger
 strike in August to protest the Soviet refusal to allow her to
 see her husband, who was incarcerated in a nearby camp. The
 Soviet response was to break Mrs. Osipova's strike and to move
 her husband to a more remote camp. Prisoners are also denied
 the right to practice their religion and may be punished for
 attempts to do so. Political prisoners are sometimes sen-
 tenced to "ordinary-regime" labor camps for common criminals,
 where the danger of theft of food and clothing and physical
 abuse is great. The number of persons in Soviet prisons and
 
 
 1024
 labor camps is estimated at two million, of whom at least
 10,000 are political prisoners.
 Psychiatric treatment: The Soviet Government continues to
 confine political and religious activists to special psychia-
 tric hospitals and to psychiatric wards in general hospitals,
 where they are often subjected to a variety of cruel and
 degrading treatments, including doses of powerful and painful
 drugs such as as sulphazin and insulin. Some sources estimate
 that up to 1,000 persons may be confined in psychiatric hospi-
 tals for political reasons. In 1977, the World Psychiatric
 Association adopted a resolution condemning the political
 abuse of psychiatry and named the Soviet Union as an offender
 in this regard. In May 1981 the Soviet Ministry of Health's
 chief neuro-psychiatrist publicly stated at the seventh
 All-Union Congress of Neuropathologists and Psychiatrists that
 1.2 percent of patients in Moscow psychiatric hospitals had
 been hospitalized "in connection with visits to state agencies
 to present groundless complaints and slanderous statements."
 One recent example of this abuse of psychiatric treatment was
 the confinement of Sergei Batovrin, one of the founders of the
 "Group to Establish Trust between the USSR and the USA," in a
 Moscow psychiatric hospital for several weeks. Batovrin, who
 reportedly was released on September 7, claims that he was
 administered "mind-control" drugs. Among the prominent dissi-
 dents who remain in special psychiatric hospitals for purely
 political reasons are Vera Lipinskaya, Anatoliy Lupynos,
 Aleksey Nikitin, and Algirdas Statkevicius.
 Internal exile: The practice of exiling political dissenters
 to remote areas, which dates back to Tsarist times, continues
 under Soviet rule. Exile often follows imprisonment and in
 practice means confinement in a remote locality in conditions
 of isolation, extreme cold, and a scarcity of amenities and
 basic necessities. These harsh conditions are mitigated only
 by the privilege of receiving food parcels and the freedom to
 move about within a limited area, to find work (although
 frequently far below one's capacity), and to arrange one's own
 accommodations, which often are primitive even by Soviet stan-
 dards. The families of. exiles sometimes are permitted to live
 with them.
 The most notable example of this practice continues to be the
 forced exile of academician Andrei Sakharov to the closed city
 of Gor'kiy. Soviet authorities continue to deny him normal
 contact with scientific colleagues and to subject him to such
 arbitrary treatment as surveillance, searches of his apart-
 ment, interference with his receipt of mail and telephone
 communications, and outright theft of his writings and other
 materials.
 Persons released from exile often are not permitted to return
 to their former residences to live. For example, Ida Nudel
 was denied a permit to reside in Moscow after her return from
 exile in March despite the fact that, as the owner of a
 cooperative apartment there, she has the legal right to reside
 in the city. After being denied a similar permit in Riga,
 Latvia, Nudel finally applied for and received permission to
 reside in the city of Bendery in the Moldavian Republic, far
 from her family and friends.
 Forced emigration: In recent years, the Soviet Government has
 forced a number of Soviet citizens to emigrate from the USSR.
 Such forced emigration often occurs as a choice between
 probable trial and imprisonment and emigration. This past
 summer, for example, five members of the "Group to Establish
 
 
 1025
 Trust between the USSR and the USA" were given permission to
 emigrate under the implied threat of criminal prosecution if
 they refused to do so. Faced with this choice, they emigrated.
 e. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Soviet spokesmen insist that prosecution occurs only in cases
 in which persons commit acts prohibited by law. But the
 provisions of laws under which prosecutions have occurred are
 sufficiently broad that they can be and are used to prosecute
 individuals for the exercise of internationally recognized
 human rights. Among these provisions are:
 -- Article 190-1, "The dissemination of deliberately hostile
 fabrications slandering the Soviet state and social system."
 This article, introduced in 1965 after the trial of Soviet
 writers Sinyavskiy and Daniel, carries a maximum penalty of
 three years' imprisonment;
 -- Article 190-3, "The organization of, or active partici-
 pation in, a group actively violating public order," which
 carries a maximum penalty of three years' imprisonment.
 -- Article 70, "Anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda" which
 carries a maximum penalty of seven years' imprisonment and up
 to an additional five years' internal exile.
 -- Article 227, "The infringement of the person and the rights
 of citizens under the appearance of performing religious
 ceremonies," which carries a maximum penalty of five years'
 imprisonment.
 In addition to these provisions, Soviet authorities have used
 criminal code provisions against "parasitism," "hooliganism,"
 "speculation," and even "treason" to harass persons for poli-
 tical activity.
 According to the Soviet Code of Criminal Procedure, pre-trial
 detention can last as long as nine months, and prisoners are
 not entitled to consult with a lawyer until after the conclu-
 sion of the pre-trial investigation. In 1982, there were no
 reported instances of pre-trial detention exceeding nine
 months, but in recent years such detention on occasion has
 exceeded one year. These instances of detention function, in
 effect, as a form of preventive detention although those
 detained eventually are released or brought to trial. Habeas
 corpus or its equivalent does not exist.
 It is difficult to estimate the number of political prisoners
 in the USSR, although 10,000 is generally considered the mini-
 mum. Large areas of the country are either de jure or de
 facto closed to foreigners, and reports of trials in these and
 other remote regions may not become known to foreign obser-
 vers. An unknown number of political prisoners have been
 convicted of "ordinary" crimes and therefore incarcerated in
 camps for common criminals rather than in the special camps
 reserved for political prisoners. The Moscow Helsinki Group,
 which voluntarily ceased its work on September 8 following the
 indictment of member Sofia Kalistratova, has reported the
 names of more than 700 political prisoners, but believes that
 there are many more.
 f. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Communist Party control of Soviet society extends to the legal
 and judicial system and may be exercised to negate constitu-
 
 
 1026
 tional guarantees of the objectivity and independence of the
 judicial process in political cases. All lawyers in the USSR
 are state employees, and approximately 60 percent of them are
 Party members; other judicial personnel are subject to the
 same Party and governmental constraints as lawyers. Defen-
 dants in "political" cases can choose a lawyer only from among
 those given a special government clearance for "secret" mat-
 ters. Acquittal in a political trial has been almost unknown
 since the Bolshevik Revolution in 1917. It is widely believed
 that the decisions in important political cases are made by
 high Party officials before the trial actually takes place.
 The Soviet Government often has taken actions which tend to
 undermine even the appearance of a fair judicial process.
 Soviet authorities have employed a number of techniques to
 ensure that most political trials in practice have been closed
 to the public, including close relatives of the defendant.
 The location and date of a trial often are announced on short
 notice and may be changed with little warning. Special passes
 often are required for entrance to the trial, and the court-
 rooms frequently are packed with government supporters.
 Observers outside the courtroom sometimes are harassed or
 detained by the police. Defendants have been subjected to
 adverse pre-trial publicity in the government-controlled
 press.
 No trials of civilians by military courts have been reported
 in recent years. Some reports indicate the existence of a
 special system of courts established to handle judicial
 matters concerning the extensive network of secret institutes
 in the country, but no information is available on the proce-
 dures under which these courts function.
 g. Invasion of the Home
 The Soviet Constitution guarantees the inviolability of the
 homes of citizens of the USSR, and, in theory, no one may
 enter a home against the will of the resident "without legal
 grounds." In practice, this provision has little restraining
 effect on Soviet investigatory agencies, and forced entry and
 illegal searches have occurred. Soviet authorities "bug" at
 will the residences and telephones of Soviet citizens and
 foreigners visiting, or resident in, the Soviet Union. The
 regime also occasionally demolishes the residences of Soviet
 citizens. For example, a "dacha" or country house near the
 town of Vladimir constructed by Soviet dissident Anatoliy
 Marchenko and his wife Larisa Bogoraz recently was demolished,
 evidently to prevent them from residing in that area.
 2. Respect for Civil and Political Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Soviet Constitution of 1977 provides for most commonly
 accepted political liberties, including "freedom of speech,
 press, assembly, meetings, street processions, and demonstra-
 tions." But the exercise of these rights must be in accordance
 with the "interests of the people and the strengthening and
 development of the socialist system." The Constitution also
 states that enjoyment by citizens of their rights and freedoms
 must not be to the detriment of "the interests of society or
 the state." In practice, the regime does not tolerate dis-
 sident behavior and has not hesitated to imprison persons for
 exercising basic human rights. In the last two years, many
 Soviet citizens have forced their way into, or surreptitiously
 entered, the U.S. Embassy and other foreign missions to seek
 
 
 1027
 redress of grievances against the Soviet Government for the
 violation of their perceived legal rights. For example, on
 October 6, two women were prevented by the militia from
 entering the U.S. Embassy and were dragged off by the authori-
 ties. Seven days later eight ethnic Germans were barred from
 the Embassy of the Federal Republic of Germany in Moscow.
 All Soviet media are owned and operated by the Party and the
 Government or organizations controlled by them. Publications,
 films, and radio and television scripts are subject to censor-
 ship by the Main Administration for Safeguarding State Secrets
 in the Press. Soviet journalists are subject to the discipline
 of the Communist Party and subordinate to the directives of
 their editorial superiors, themselves trusted members of the
 Party. Therefore, Soviet journalists are executors of the
 official policies of the Soviet Government.
 All Soviet universities and research institutes are operated by
 the State or Party; teaching and research are expected to
 conform to official expectations. In areas such as foreign
 policy and contemporary Soviet history these expectations
 define very tightly the content of research and teaching, to
 the virtual exclusion of independent investigation. In areas
 that are less sensitive politically, independent scholarly
 conclusions may be published within certain broad limits. All
 books in the Soviet Union are published by the State or Party,
 and are subject to pre-publication censorship. There is
 substantially greater freedom of expression in fiction and in
 scholarly books (except on politically sensitive subjects) than
 there is in the media.
 Openly dissident views on important questions of policy do not
 appear in the Soviet media, and no criticism of the Party, the
 Government, and the leadership is permitted, except to correct
 an administrative abuse such as inefficient domestic policy
 implementation, or to discredit an individual responsible for
 violating Party norms. Arguments for and against prospective
 policies do appear before final decisions are taken on them,
 but, once such a decision is taken, dissenting views rarely
 appear in public. Open criticism of officials takes place only
 when decided upon by higher officials. Criticism of higher
 state officials is much more common than criticism of higher
 Party officials. Debate within the leadership is occasionally
 reflected in published tnxts where polemics and criticism,
 expressed in veiled language, allow experienced readers (both
 Soviets and non-Soviets) to identify policy trends and contro-
 versial issues. Such policy debate does not call into question
 the existing political and social system. A limited and inter-
 mittent opportunity for free expression, even to the point of
 attacks on the Government and the system, exists through
 "samizdat" or the circulation of writings in manuscript.
 Conditions confine this opportunity to a limited social
 stratum, and users run the risk of arrest. The authors of
 literary, religious, and political underground materials have
 been subject to such penalties as loss of employment, internal
 exile, confinement in labor camps and prisons, and incarcer-
 ation in mental hospitals.
 The Soviet Government continues to maintain tight control over
 the work of foreign journalists and the circulation of foreign
 newspapers in the USSR. Overt censorship of wire transmissions
 of news stories out of the country is infrequent, but the
 authorities harass selected foreign journalists, and in some
 cases either deny them visas or curtail already issued visas.
 For instance, Newsweek correspondent Andrew Nagorski suffered
 de facto expulsion in August, and his temporary replacement,
 
 
 1028
 Joyce Barnathan, had to endure a long delay in receiving her
 visa. The Soviets have taken some steps to improve the working
 conditions of foreign journalists, such as the issuance of
 multiple entry-exit visas, in connection with Soviet implemen-
 tation of the Helsinki Final Act.
 The Soviet authorities use their control of the mail and the
 telephone circuits to restrict, on a selective basis, contact
 between Soviet citizens and those of other countries. The
 regime often intercepts mail. Last summer it eliminated direct
 dialing, so that operators could screen calls, and cut back the
 number of functioning telephone circuits to certain foreign
 countries. During September, the Soviets also enacted new and
 tougher restrictions on the ability of private citizens to mail
 books abroad, and in October reportedly clamped down on com-
 munications links between Estonia and Finland. The Soviet
 Government continues the jamming of Western radio broadcasts
 directed at the Soviet Union, in clear violation of the provi-
 sions of the Helsinki Final Act.
 The KGB also maintains a network of informers in most apartment
 buildings and workplaces to monitor private activities. The
 organs of State security frequently use listening devices to
 obtain information.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Soviet Constitution grants Soviet citizens the right to
 associate in public organizations "in accordance with the aim
 of building communism." In practice, public associations in
 the USSR are subject to the control of the authorities, who
 suppress any which appear to challenge the interests of the
 regime. For example, most members of the unofficial "Helsinki
 Watch" groups who attempted to monitor the performance of the
 Soviet Government in fulfilling the provisions of the Helsinki
 Final Act, and of the "Psychiatric Watch" group which attempted
 to expose Soviet abuse of psychiatry in connection with the
 confinement of dissidents in mental hospitals, have been tried
 and sentenced to imprisonment or to internal exile.
 When a small group of unofficial peace activists attempted to
 form a "Group for the Establishment of Trust between the USSR
 and the USA" in June, in response to the Soviet "peace" cam-
 paign, its proposals for joint Soviet-US activities and
 dialogue echoed official Soviet proposals on many points. The
 group's independent nature, however, apparently made it ipso
 facto unacceptable to the government. Quick intervention by
 the KGB repressed the group, and many of its activists were put
 in prison or psychiatric wards. Soviet authorities even
 repress independent groups with wholly non-political interests,
 such as the Invalids' Group, which attempted to lobby for
 improved medical and social services for invalids.
 Soviet trade unions are strictly subordinated to and controlled
 by the Communist Party. They act as agents of the Government
 in implementing economic policy and ensuring labor discipline,
 rather than as collective bargaining agents for workers. The
 right to strike is not recognized in the Soviet Constitution.
 Strikes are rare and usually occur over such issues as condi-
 tions of work. In 1982, in large part owing to developments in
 Poland, the Soviet media have continued to devote increased
 attention to the need for Soviet trade unions to play a more
 active role in satisfying workers' needs. The regime has
 continued its policy of repressing any attempts to establish
 independent trade union organizations, and activists in past
 years have been forcibly expelled from the USSR, imprisoned, or
 
 
 1029
 confined in psychiatric hospitals. Soviet trade unions are
 permitted to maintain ties abroad only with a Communist-front
 organization, the World Federation of Trade Unions, head-
 quartered in Prague.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Communist Party, defined in the Soviet Constitution as the
 "leading and guiding force in Soviet society," is, according to
 its rules, an atheistic organization. Membership in the Party,
 considered incompatible with religious belief, is in effect a
 requirement for advancement to most positions of rank. The
 Soviet Constitution guarantees the "right to profess or not to
 profess any religion and to conduct religious worship or
 atheistic propaganda." In practice, however, religious
 believers are subjected to many restrictions. Participation in
 religious ceremonies can cause exclusion from the Communist
 Party and, sometimes, dismissal from employment. Soviet law on
 religious associations requires religious congregations to
 register with the authorities, which in practice is extremely
 difficult to accomplish. The law prohibits religious believers
 from engaging in charitable activity, conducting evangelical
 activity, and providing religious training to their children.
 In some instances, the authorities have removed children from
 families which have permitted or have conducted such instruc-
 tion. The number of functioning seminaries and other institu-
 tions of clerical education, and the numbers of students per-
 mitted to pursue a religious vocation, do not provide a suf-
 ficient body of trained clergy for even the officially regis-
 tered denominations. Unregistered believers, such as some
 Baptists, Jehovah's Witnesses, Seventh Day Adventists, Pente-
 costals, and others, are often subject to a wide variety of
 repressive measures, including harassment at school or place of
 employment, denial of access to housing, dismissal from work,
 and imprisonment for violating Soviet law. A number of Muslim
 religious and quasi-religious traditional practices are heavily
 discouraged as "survivals of the past." The official Soviet
 media feature large amounts of anti-religious propaganda, but
 pro-religious materials are not allowed to appear.
 There have been numerous reports of instances of discrimination
 against Jews, such as denial of access to higher education and
 the professions, and at least 11 cases of the revocation of
 higher degrees of Jews have occurred. Such revocation of
 degrees in practice means the end of one's career, and usually
 the loss of one's job and income. Occasional attacks on
 Zionism in the media appear intended to arouse anti-Semitic
 feelings among the population.
 d. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Freedom of movement is neither guaranteed by law nor respected
 in practice. Although Soviet citizens are generally free to
 move about within the territory of the USSR, travel in certain
 areas, such as frontier regions or areas of military signifi-
 cance, requires special permission. All Soviet adults are
 issued identity documents or internal passports, which must be
 carried on one's person during travel in the USSR and used to
 register visits of more than three days with the local authori-
 ties. In practice, the vast majority of the country remains
 closed to foreigners.
 The right to choose one's place of residence, although formally
 guaranteed by law, in practice is subject to restrictions. All
 persons are required to register at their place of residence.
 
 
 1030
 The authorities limit the issuance of residence permits in some
 large cities, such as Moscow and Leningrad, where housing is at
 a premium and which the regime wants to maintain as free of
 socially undesirable elements as possible, since they are
 "showcases" of the USSR for foreign tourists. Until 1976
 workers on state and collective farms did not receive internal
 passports and could not travel from their homes without permis-
 sion. Although these state and collective farm workers are now
 legally entitled to passports, actual implementation of this
 provision is uncertain. Members of collective farms are often
 prevented from withdrawing by local officials, in violation of
 Soviet law. Former prisoners are prohibited from settling in
 certain areas such as Moscow, even after they have served their
 sentences. Certain national minorities such as the Crimean
 Tatars, Meskhi, and Volga Germans are prevented from returning
 to the areas from which they were deported during World War II
 for being security risks or for allegedly collaborating with
 the Germans.
 The USSR has ratified the UN Charter and other international
 documents, such as the international covenants on civil and.
 political rights and on economic, social, and cultural rights,
 in which the right to leave one's country and return is guaran-
 teed. However, in practice the regime also denies Soviet
 citizens this right. Unauthorized departure from the country is
 a crime under Soviet law. Reunification of divided families is
 the only officially recognized basis for emigration from the
 Soviet Union. In 1975, the Soviets announced measures to
 simplify emigration procedures and reduce emigration fees,
 which they presented as bringing their practices into conform-
 ity with the provisions of the Helsinki Final Act. Laws and
 regulations concerning travel and emigration are not publicly
 disseminated, except for those concerning passport fees.
 Repatriation evidently occurs infrequently, and the regime
 attempts (to the extent circumstances permit) to use these
 isolated instances, such as thd Walter Polovchak case, in its
 propaganda about the superiority of the Soviet system. There
 have been no recent, public cases of large groups seeking
 refuge in the Soviet Union from persecution in their homelands.
 Application for emigration procedures are cumbersome and expen-
 sive. The cost of a passport for emigration to a "capitalist"
 country is approximately $420. Soviet citizens who want to
 emigrate to Israel, who are the majority of all would-be emi-
 grants, must renounce their Soviet citizenship. This procedure
 costs approximately $700.
 Costs and cumbersome procedures aside, emigration from the
 Soviet Union is still extraordinarily difficult. It frequently
 involves a variety of administrative and extra-legal sanctions,
 including loss of employment, harassment, social ostracism, and
 long delays. Many Soviet Jews have waited for more than ten
 years for permission to emigrate.
 There was a continued sharp drop in the number of Jews allowed
 to emigrate in 1982, only 2,688 having been granted exit
 visas, compared to 9,447 during 1981 and 21,471 and 51,320 in
 1980 and 1979, respectively. The emigration level for 1982
 has in effect returned to the levels prevailing before 1971,
 when Soviet authorities first began to permit large scale
 emigration of Soviet Jews. Jewish sources estimate that there
 still are more than 300,000 Soviet Jews who possess the
 letters of invitation from Israel necessary for application to
 emigrate. The number of both ethnic Germans and Armenians
 emigrating from the USSR also declined in the first nine
 months of 1982. Only 1,640 ethnic Germans and 282 Armenians
 
 
 1031
 emigrated during this period, compared to 2,988 and 1,827,
 respectively, during the same months of 1981.
 Currently, approximately 96 Soviet families, numbering some
 295 individuals, are on a United States Government representa-
 tion list of persons who actively seek to join close relatives
 in the United States and who have been refused exit permission
 at least once by the Soviet Government. At least 15 US citi-
 zens living in the Soviet Union have been denied permission to
 leave by the Soviet Government, several for many decades. In
 addition, there are at least 18 outstanding cases in which the
 Soviet Government has denied the Soviet spouse of an American
 citizen permission to emigrate. Many Soviet Christians, such
 as the Vashchenko and Chmykhalov families still resident in
 the US Embassy in Moscow, have unsuccessfully sought
 permission to emigrate because of religious persecution.
 e. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Participation in the Soviet political system is possible only
 through holding office in either of the parallel State and
 Party hierarchies. Politically meaningful offices are open
 only to members of the Communist Party which, according to the
 Soviet Constitution, is the "leading and guiding force of
 Soviet society and the nucleus of its political system, of all
 state organizations and public organizations." No other
 organized party or political group is tolerated. Factional
 groups within the Party itself are also prohibited. In both
 the State and Party hierarchy higher officials are nominally
 elected by lower officials. In fact, lower officials are
 chosen by higher officials, and strict discipline prevails
 except at the very highest level of the State and Party. Of
 the most authoritative decision-making bodies, only the Polit-
 buro (usually comprising 12 to 15 full members) engages in
 genuine debates and has split votes.
 The relationship between Soviet ethnic groups also imposes
 limits on political participation. Discrimination is prohibi-
 ted by the Soviet Constitution, and the Soviet Union is nomin-
 ally a confederation with wide autonomy for the republics of
 the minority nationalities. In fact, the various nationali-
 ties do not enjoy full equality with the dominant Russian
 ethnic group, as formalized expressions such as "great Russian
 people" indicate. The non-Russian republics are controlled
 and dominated to a substantial degree by the center by a
 variety of institutional mechanisms such as Russian Second
 Secretaries. In recent years, there continue to be indica-
 tions of restrictions on the presence of members of some
 ethnic and religious groups, especially Jews and Muslims, in
 various organizations, particularly universities, research
 institutes, the higher Party apparatus, and the officer corps
 of the Armed Forces.
 Women are legally equal to men in the USSR, and they partici-
 pate in all areas of the country's social, political, and
 economic life. An extensive system of day-care service and
 maternity leave benefits, including, in some cases, as much as
 one year's leave from work significantly-enhances the ability
 of women to secure and to retain employment. However, men
 occupy the great majority of the leading positions in most
 professions, especially politics. Since the establishment of
 the Soviet Union, only one woman has been a member of the
 Politburo. Overt economic discrimination against women does
 not exist, but many more women than men hold the less remuner-
 ative positions. In the non-European areas of the USSR cul-
 tural, social, and religious traditions restricting women to
 
 
 1032
 more "traditional" roles are gradually losing their strength
 as more women, especially in urban areas, receive an educa-
 tion. Women enjoy full equality only in their access to jobs
 involving hard physical labor.
 3.   Government Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations of
 Human Rights
 The Soviet Government contends that all internationally recog-
 nized human rights are fully protected in the USSR and asserts
 that only "socialism" can truly guarantee human rights. The
 Soviet Government rejects foreign criticism of its human
 rights record as interference in its internal affairs, despite
 the fact that it is a signatory to numerous international
 documents recognizing that human rights are a valid subject of
 international concern. The Soviet media feature sharp criti-
 cism of supposed violations of human rights in the West,
 especially in the United States.
 The Soviet Union does not permit foreigners to investigate the
 status of human rights in the USSR. International human
 rights organizations such as Amnesty International frequently
 have addressed communications to the Soviet Government con-
 cerning human rights, but it has refused to reply in a
 substantive manner. It also has attempted to suppress the
 Moscow chapter of Amnesty International, and in the recent
 past has published and broadcast attacks.on the organization,
 alleging that it has worked with Western intelligence agencies
 against the Soviet Government. Its secretary, Soviet writer
 Georgiy Vladimov, is currently being subjected to harassment
 and threatened with arrest.
 The Soviet Government has cooperated with the United States
 Government in investigating alleged war crimes during World
 War II by persons who are now citizens or residents of the
 United States. The Soviet Government has permitted the US
 Government to carry out depositions of witnesses in the USSR,
 and has provided documentation for use in US courts.
 When the United Nations Human Rights Commission prepares to
 c6nsider allegations of human rights violations in the USSR,
 Soviet representatives generally attempt to bar discussions of
 the alleged violations on procedural grounds. If such discus-
 sion cannot be avoided, the Soviet representatives deny the
 substance of the allegations.
 A number of private groups or associations of individuals have
 been active in the USSR in recent years in attempting to
 protect individual liberties. All of the Helsinki Monitoring
 Groups have been suppressed or are inactive, and the Working
 Group to Investigate the Use of Psychiatry for Political
 Purposes also has been completely suppressed. Only two
 groups, the "Group in Defense of Invalids' Rights" and the
 "Group to Establish Trust Between the USSR and the USA,"
 appear to remain active, but members of both are being
 harassed by the security organs. In October, Valeriy Fefyolov
 and Ol'ga Zaitseva weie allowed to emigrate, leaving the
 Invalids' Rights group with only two known members still at
 liberty within the USSR. On October 26, Oleg Radzinskiy, a
 prominent member of the "Group to Establish Trust" was arres-
 ted and charged with "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda."
 The modus operandi of these groups has generally beec the
 same. They have attempted to publicize regime violations of
 human rights in specific areas by issuing and publishing
 abroad underground documents and by maintaining contacts with
 
 
 1033
 foreign diplomats, journalists, and tourists.
 4. Economic, Social, and Cultural Situation
 The Soviet Government emphasizes the provision of economic and
 social benefits. The population as a whole is adequately fed,
 clothed, housed, educated, and cared for medically, although
 the quality of such services varies according to the citizen's
 status and location and often is criticized by Soviet citizens
 and the media. Economic freedom of choice is sharply restric-
 ted; shortages exist, and there is great disparity in the
 regional distribution of foodstuffs and consumer goods.
 Income and wealth do not necessarily determine a Soviet citi-
 zen's standard of living. One's rank in the various elites
 such as the Party, the military, the diplomatic corps, the
 scientific-technical intelligentsia, and the cultural and
 sports establishment significantly determine access to major
 benefits. These include foreign travel, automobiles, quality
 consumer goods and foodstuffs, special medical facilities,
 admission into the best educational institutions, country
 houses, and paid vacationsin choice resorts. The allocation
 of privileges is one of the regime's most effective means of
 social control. In addition, most Soviet citizens can only
 obtain many things Westerners would consider everyday neces-
 sities by resorting to the "underground economy," which
 according to many Soviet emigr~s is becoming an increasingly
 large and corrupting force in Soviet life.
 Free, universal health care is guaranteed by the Soviet
 Constitution. In addition, provision is made for the continu-
 ation of income during illness. Medical standards and facili-
 ties are still markedly inferior to those of other European
 countries. Data for 1977 show there were 34.5 physicians and
 120.8 hospital beds per 10,000 persons. However, there is
 considerable disparity in the regional distribution of medical
 facilities, and shortages of medicines and vaccines persist.
 Medical equipment generally is not as good as that elsewhere
 in Europe. Basic medical care facilities are available to
 most Soviet citizens, but sophisticated treatment for compli-
 cated or serious illness is in practice an option only for the
 elite.
 Soviet citizens generally enjoy a diet which is adequate in
 calories. The percentage of. calorie supply available for
 consumption as a percentage of caloric nutritional require-
 ments in 1977 was 135 percent. However, the average Soviet
 diet, particularly in winter, often lacks necessary vitamins,
 minerals, and proteins. The availability of food staples has
 deteriorated in recent years. Different systems of food
 rationing are introduced by local authorities as needed on an
 ad hoc basis. Republic capitals and large metropolitan cities
 enjo-ya privileged level of supply, but shortages are endemic
 in provincial areas, where the diet is often poor and monoto-
 nous. The Soviet citizen can obtain his daily groceries
 usually only by spending two or three hours waiting in a
 queue, or by resorting to the black market.
 The infant mortality rate, estimated to be 30 per 1,000 live
 births in 1980, has been increasing at an alarming rate.
 (Some estimates place the infant mortality rate even higher,
 at 38-45 per 1,000.)
 The Soviet Union has created a massive educational system that
 extends to all citizens. Basic literacy among Soviet citizens
 is practically universal, and the young people of many nation-
 alities can read and write Russian as well. Education is free
 
 
 1034
 at all levels and is compulsory through the tenth year. All
 regular students admitted to institutions of higher learning
 receive stipends indexed to their academic achievements.
 Opportunities for education and professional advancement
 created by national development under the Soviet regime have
 led to greater mobility for a large part of the Soviet popu-
 lation.
 The 1980 Soviet GNP per capita was $4,550. A relatively high
 proportion of the Soviet GNP is devoted to subsidizing the
 basic necessities of life such as staple foodstuffs, housing,
 medical care, education, and public transport. Therefore,
 despite his relatively low average income of 235 rubles (t325)
 a month, according to official Soviet sources, the typical
 Soviet citizen is not poor in the Western sense of the term.
 But as mentioned above, income alone, even wealth, does not
 necessarily guarantee access to many things which, taken
 together, define a high standard of living. The average
 Soviet citizen does not live nearly as well as other Euro-
 peans. The Soviet's diet, housing, and attire are inferior;
 his access to consumer durables such as automobiles is much
 more limited; and the quality of most public services is lower.
 
 
 1035
 U.S.V:RScAS -LOANS AN! ;SA1TS- 0 LIGATI:34S AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U..FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 CUUNTRYT USsq
 I.aCON. ASSIST.-TOTAL ...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .... ..1                         0.0      0.0
 GRANTS,.      ,,             3.        0.0      0.0
 A.AIO  .................          0.5      3.0      0.0
 LOANS .,,......,..1.0                  1.0      0.0
 GRANTS .   ....              0.0       1.0      0.0
 (SEC.SU9P.ASSST.).� 0.3                0.0      3.0
 b.F0O0 FOR P!AC ....,.          0.0       9.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............         0.0       X.O      0.0
 GRANTS .............         0.1       0.0      0.0
 TTLE I-TOTAL .......,,.         0.0       0.0      0.0
 REPAT. IN Z-LOANS .....          J,3      0.u      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR ....          0,0       1.0      0.0
 TITLE II-TOTAL ..)                         0.0      0.0
 =.RELIEF.dC.EV & WF,           0.3       0.0      1.0
 VOL.RELIIF AGENCY .....         0.0       0.0      0.0
 .UTHtR tCUN. ASSIST...           0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS..............         0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............         0.0       0.0      0.0
 PEAC  CORS,,,.,.         30        0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS,..,.             0.0       0.0      3.0
 OTHER ..............       0.0       1.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSlST.-TOTAL,.            0.0      3.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............         0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............      0.0       0.0      1.0
 A.MAP GRANTS     .              0.3       0.0      0.0
 3,CRcJIT  L-F,,,0,0                       0.0      6,0
 C.INTL MILEO.TRNG,.            0.0       0.0.     0.0
 0.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK..          .0.0       0.0      0.0
 E.OT.ER ,RANTS,.,,,             0.0       0.0      0.0
 IIITOTAL ECCN, Z MIL...           3.0      0.0      0.0
 LIAN .......   ....       .. ..0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS. ..............      0.0       0.0      0.0
 OTHER US LOANS.                    0.0      0.0       0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS:::::           0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHE ......L      ........ ..0.3     .0        0.0
 ASSISTANCE F OM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1933     1981      1989    .1946-82
 TOTAL ........      0.0      0.0       0.0      0.1
 IORD                0.0i     1.        0.0      0.0
 IFC                 0.0      0.0       0.0     O.
 IDA                 0.0      0.0       0.0      9.0
 lO                 0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 ADS                 0.0      0,0       0.0      0.0
 AFUS                3.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 UNUP                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 OTHER-UN            0.0      0.0       0.0      0.1
 EEC                 0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 
 
 1036
