 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 The year 1991 witnessed a series of fast-moving events that.
 profoundly altered the entire political and economic landscape
 in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (U.S.S.R.) and that
 by the end of the year concluded with its dissolution. Until
 August, the U.S.S.R. remained a centralized multinational state
 governed and administered largely by a single, if increasingly
 fractious, ruling party--the Communist Party of the Soviet
 Union (CPSU).
 Despite the numerous reforms-initiated'in 1991, antireform
 elements of the Soviet leadership continued efforts to reassert
 central authority. Until August, U.S.S.R. President Mikhail
 Gorbachev continued to bow to growing pressure from his Interior
 and Defense Ministers and State Security chief to reassert the
 authority of the internal Soviet security apparatus. President
 Gorbachev also, however, pressed for a formula to renew the
 U.S.S.R. under the terms of a new union treaty which granted
 enhanced powers to republic governments. Such a formula was
 agreed in principle by Gorbachev and the leaders of nine
 republics ("Nine plus One") at Novo Ogarevo on April 23.
 By August most of the nine republics had agreed to the text of
 a new union treaty. An attempted coup d'etat on August 19
 aborted the signing of the treaty and set in motion fundamental
 political changes that included the liquidationof the CPSU.
 It also radically changed the composition of the Soviet
 leadership and the political scene and powerfully increased
 autonomist sentiment in many Soviet republics. The Baltic
 states declared independence and were admitted to the Conference
 on Security and Cooperation in Europe as independent member
 states on September 10. The Soviet Government recognized their
 independence on September 6.
 By December 1, when Ukraine voted overwhelmingly for
 independence in a republicwide referendum, all of the Soviet,
 republics had declared themselves either independent or
 sovereign. On December 8, the leaders of Russia, Byelarus
 (Byelorussia), and Ukraine declared the U.S.S.R. central
 Government dead and formed a Commonwealth ofIndependent
 States. By year's end. 11 republics had joined the
 Commonwealth and agreed that the U.S.S.R. had ceased to exist.
 Traditionally, the Soviet leadership relied on a massive and
 pervasive security apparatus to enforce compliance with its
 decisions and directives. This apparatus included the Committee
 for State Security (KGB), the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the
 police, armed forces, and the state procurator. Until the
 failed coup, these forces were'heavily involved, in continuing
 human rights abuses, for example, in the Baltic states and in
 Armenian-populated regions of Azerbaijan. In-the wake, of the
 failed coup, profound changes took place in these institutions.
 The new Chairman of the KGB eliminated, a number ofdirectorates
 that monitored the private affairs of citizens and began to
 transfer all armed units of the KGB to the U.S.S.R. armed
 forces.
 In October the'U.S.S.R. State Council (the interim Soviet-
 executive) decided to eliminate the U.S.S.R.'s KGB by breaking
 up the remaining directorates into a foreign intelligence
 service, an interrepublic counterintelligence service, and a
 state committee to protect the frontiers. The Soviet Defense
 Ministry instructed its regional commanders to prevent the
 armed forces from becoming involved in internal conflicts in
 the republics, including in ethnic conflicts. With the formal
 
 
 1268
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 dissolution of the U.S.S.R. and the formation of the
 Commonwealth of Independent States, the internal security
 structure in the former Soviet republics was again in flux.
 The All-Union Interior Ministry axd the last vestiges of the
 All-Union KGB have been dissolved. In December Russian
 President Boris Yeltsin decreed the creation of a combined
 Ministry of Security and Internal Affairs. However, the
 Russian constitutional court, established in October, ruled in
 January 1992 that Yeltsin's order was unconstitutional.
 Internal security and intelligence organizations continued to
 evolve in the other Commonwealth states as well.
 Facing an economy in serious decline, the Soviet Government
 announced its intention to introduce deep, far-reaching
 economic reforms. In April nine republics plus the central
 Government signed an agreement (the "Nine plus One") that
 transferred key. economic powers from Moscow to the republics.
 After the failed coup, 12 republics negotiated and initialed an
 accord laying the foundations of an economic community in which
 the signatories agreed to form a customs and banking union,
 cooperate on fiscal and monetary policy, and repay the foreign
 debt. However, it never went into effect, and the December
 agreement establishing the Commonwealth provided for no economic
 coordinating mechanism. A coherent system of property and
 contract rights, large-scale privatization, price decontrols,
 and competition between producers had not emerged by the end of
 the year.
 The central Government under President Gorbachev and a number
 of republic governments, including particularly Boris Yeltsin's
 government in Russia, continued to implement the human rights
 gains of recent years, albeit slowly and unevenly in the face
 of kaleidoscopic political and economic changes. Freedom of
 speech and press, assembly and association, religion, and
 travel continued to expand. In September the U.S.S.R. Congress
 of People's Deputies adopted the Declaration of Human Rights
 and Freedoms, although its legal effect in the republics was
 unclear. In June the popular election of Boris Yeltsin as
 President of the Russian republic from a field of several
 candidates--the first such election inRussian history--was a
 major democratic milestone.
 The most extensive human rights abuses occurred in the republic
 of Georgia where the popularly elected leader, President Zviad
 Gamsakhurdia, abused his mandate by trying to impose direct rule
 on local governments seeking autonomy and by cutting off dialog
 and compromise with the political opposition. In the process,
 he imprisoned scores of political opponents, eliminated freedom
 of expression, and initiated a virtual civil war, which led to
 hundreds of dead, wounded, and missing. In early January 1992,
 Gamsakhurdia was forcefully ousted by his domestic opponents
 and- fled the country, leaving Georgia in the hands of a
 military council and a civilian government appointed by it.
 Other significant human rights abuses included the killings in
 January of unarmed civilians by Soviet Interior Ministry forces
 in Lithuania and Latvia operating under the orders of hardline
 elements in the central Government; the forced deportation of
 Armenian villagers by the Soviet army and the Azerbaijan
 government; and ethnic-based conflicts in several republics and
 regions, including Moldova, Georgia, Azerbaijan, Chechen-
 Ingushetia, and Ossetia. The defense of human rights remained
 unevenly implemented in the former U.S.S.R. as a whole, and
 many are still not effectively protected by law. The judiciary
 in the Soviet Union and successor states had been neither
 
 
 1269
 
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 independent nor empowered to act as a-guarantor of human rights
 by the end of the year. At times, union and republic leaders
 vied with duelling laws and decrees, as each side argued that
 its authority was supreme. The center became increasingly
 irrelevant, with republics gradually assuming primary
 responsibility for the protection of human rights.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no confirmed reports of political killings in 1991.
 There have been assertions, however, that some reported killings
 were politically motivated. On-July 31, six Lithuanian police
 and customs officials were shot 'to death by assailants at the
 border post of Medininkai. A seventh official wounded in the
 attack is still alive after being shot in the head. This attack
 came after months of violent actions by hard-line Communist
 elements opposed to Baltic independence. The inVestigation by
 the Lithuanian Procurator General's Office concluded that the
 killings were perpetrated by Riga-based "Black Beret" or "OMON"
 forces of the U.S.S.R. Interior Ministry, though the trial is
 still pending and who ordered or authorized-the murders has not
 been established.
 Following the unsolved killings of Father Aleksandr Men' and
 Father Lazar' (a priest investigating the Men' murder) in 1990,
 another Russian Orthodox priest, Father Serafim Shlykov, was
 murdered in Moscow in February.
 In Georgia there were reports that civilian inhabitants of the
 autonomous region of South Ossetia had'been abducted by Georgian
 troops and guerrillas and later killed and their mutilated
 bodies dumped in front of their families' homes. In addition,
 reputable human rights sources reported that the bodies of
 kidnap victims were sometimes sold back to their families for
 ransom. On one occasion, a mass grave containing the bodies of
 40 victims was discovered.
 b. Disappearance
 In Georgia South Ossetians claimed that many Ossetian civilians
 abducted by Georgian troops and guerrillas disappeared for
 periods of up to 3 months. In other cases (see Section l.a.),
 missing persons subsequently were found dead. Ossefians
 estimated over 40 victims were unaccounted for as of'October
 1991.
 In Azerbaijan an international human rights fact-finding group
 heard reports that 100-200 persons'had disappeared after being
 taken into custody by Soviet and Azeri troops.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 In the conflict between the Azerbaijan and Soviet forces on the
 one side and ethnic Armenians on the other, there were credible
 claims that Armenians detained by Azeri interior ministry
 personnel were tortured. Refugees recounted detailed reports
 of torture and beatings. In Georgia, after Gamsakhurdia had
 fled the country, press reports carried pictures of alleged
 torture chambers and devices in the basement of the
 
 
 1270
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 presidential offices where Gamsakhurdia tried to hold out
 against the opposition's assault.
 Soviet detention or incarceration'practices remained harsh.
 Many prisoners suffered from mental and physical abuse and
 mistreatment during interrogation, trial, and confinement,
 according to a wide variety of reliable sources. There were no
 reports of law enforcement personnel being punished for use of
 excessive force or of victims being able to seek redress.
 No instances of long-term hospitalizations of sane persons were
 reported in 1991. Current law, however, still provides the
 basis for compulsory psychiatric hospitalization without
 adequate legal protection of persons arrested under questionable
 circumstances and then diagnosed as mentally ill. Allegations
 persisted of the use of psychiatric examinations and the threat
 of compulsory commitment to intimidate persons whose actions
 irritated local officials. In the Khmara case in Ukraine (see
 Section l.d.), codefendant Oleksandr Kovalchuk was allegedly
 detained in a prison psychiatric ward and injected with
 psychotropic drugs. The Ukrainian prosecutor general denied
 petitions of Kovalchuk's defense attorneys to perform an
 independent medical examination of Kovalchuk. Human rights
 sources, who have for many years followed the issue of
 psychiatric abuse, claim that use of sulfazine as a form of
 punishment continues in the former Soviet Union, especially
 outside of Moscow and St. Petersburg (Leningrad).
 Cruel and degrading treatment of military conscripts, sometimes
 resulting in death, remained a problem in 1991. The Committee
 of Soldiers' Mothers, an organization formed to draw attention
 to this matter, pressed for a halt to the prevalent practice of
 violent hazing of new recruits by their immediate superiors.
 In contrast to his predecessor, the new Minister of Defense
 after the coup attempt called publicly for help to put an end
 to this practice.
 A series of prison riots, strikes, and takeovers occurred
 throughout the year, usually to protest substandard treatment
 and conditions. Prisoners were frequently placed in punishment
 cells for violations of camp rules, sometimes for several
 months. Conditions in punishment cells are excessively
 punitive. For example, at prison camp ug-42/14 in the town of
 Vel'sk in Arkhangel'skaya Oblast, prisoners claimed that camp
 administrators put prisoners wearing only normal prison garb in
 a punishment cell with only a grating for a roof and left them
 there for up to 24 hours in all types of weather, including
 extreme cold. As a result of a similar practice in the Tobol'sk
 prison, one prisoner froze to death. No administrative process
 exists to ensure that prisoners are not arbitrarily or
 inappropriately sent to such cells. Prisoners held in Perm
 labor camp 35, Vel'sk prison camp ug-42/14, and L'viv (L'vov)
 camp v1315/48 during the coup attempt reported that, when news
 of the coup arrived, camp authorities immediately instituted
 harsh regimes and threatened prisoners with extended sentences.
 Under the criminal codes of the republics (e.g., Article 188-3
 of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic (RSFSR)
 criminal code), prisoners may receive an additional 3- to
 5-year sentence for "malicious disobedience" in labor camps.
 Whereas in the past this article was used to extend the
 sentences of prisoners who had nearly completed their sentences,
 there were no reports that this occurred in 1991.
 
 
 1271
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Few concrete improvements in criminal procedures were recorded
 during 1991. Persons may still be detained arbitrarily and
 without arrest warrants. The criminal code of the RSFSR, for
 example, requires that detainees be charged or released within
 72 hours. Once charged, however, the criminal code permits
 holding an accused person in pretrial detention for up to 18
 months at the sole discretion of the procurator's office.
 There is no requirement for judicial approval or a preliminary
 judicial hearing on the charges and the continued detention.
 Similar procedures were generally applicable throughout the
 republics. In criminal cases, detainees may be released and
 restricted to their place of residence pending trial.
 A 1990 law signed by President Gorbachev permitted defense
 counsel to participate in a case from the moment a charge is
 brought or from the moment a detention order is implemented.
 These new procedures were being implemented only slowly.
 Defense lawyers for the accused coup plotters complained that
 they were-denied access to their clients during initial
 interrogations by investigators from the state prosecutor's
 office.
 Radical opposition Democratic Union Party leaders Valeriya
 Novodvorskaya and Vladimir Danilov were arrested on May 13 and
 21, respectively, under Article 70 of the RSFSR criminal code
 (public calls for the violent overthrow or change of the Soviet,
 Government and social order). They had signed a'letter
 analyzing the actions of the Soviet Government in the Caucasus
 and in Lithuania which had said "that in these conditions armed
 counteraction, out of place in other times, becomes a legal
 means of struggle by the people against the authorities whose
 hands are stained with blood." The two were held without trial
 in the KGB's Lefortovo prison in Moscow until their release in
 the immediate aftermath of the attempted coup's failure. The
 charges, however, were not dropped.
 During the spring and early summer, Azerbaijan's police arrested
 over 100 Armenians in Nagorno-Karabakh, a primarily Armenian-
 populated district which was the site of prolonged conflict.
 Azeri officials claimed that the Armenians were, armed bandits;
 Armenian officials maintained the detainees were "hostages"
 taken during the enforced deportations of Armenians from
 Nagorno-Karabakh that began in April. The Azeri police did not
 bring charges against many of the Armenians. Some were held
 for up to 2 months before being released. According to some
 reports, some of the prisoners were subjected to frequent.
 beatings while in captivity.
 In Georgia President Zviad Gamsakhurdia's government arrested
 over 80 members of the opposition to prevent their public
 activities (see Section i.e.).
 There were no reports in 1991 of persons being punished by
 being sent into internal exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Soviet court system is made up of layers of courts, each
 political entity--district, city, oblast, republic, union--
 having its own court, higher courts serving as appellate courts
 to lower ones. Military tribunals served to handle cases of
 military jurisprudence. To a large'degree, the court system at
 all levels remained strongly under the influence of the
 
 
 1272
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 political leadership in 1991. In the republics, local, regional
 and republic-level courts were presided over by judges who are,
 for the most part, poorly trained and lacking a concept of an
 independent judicial function. The U.S.S.R. Supreme Court and
 the U.S.S.R. Procurator General's office remained, until after
 the August coup attempt, organs designed to protect state power
 rather than the rights of individuals. Once formal charges
 were brought, the burden of proof of innocence remained
 squarely on the accused.
 Until August, the CPSU's control of society continued to
 influence the legal and judicial system, thus placing limits on
 the objectivity and independence of the judicial process. With
 the banning of the CPSU following the attempted coup, this
 influence diminished. However, the process of change was
 uneven, and strong authoritarian control by officeholders in
 some republics effectively replaced the party's influence. The
 establishment of an independent judiciary has not yet been
 accomplished.
 Generally, trials are public. Defendants have the right to
 attend proceedings, confront witnesses, and present evidence.
 The court appoints an attorney for defendants who do not have
 one. Defense lawyers, like judges, were subject to numerous
 state controls. For example, lawyers for the accused coup
 plotters cited Soviet legal practice that permits the
 prosecution to discuss the details of an investigation with the
 press but may subject defense attorneys to criminal prosecution
 for similar public disclosures. Under Soviet law, the
 Procurator's office was responsible for conducting all
 preliminary investigations into allegations of criminal
 conduct. During 1991 there was little evidence of change in
 Soviet criminal procedures that permit prosecutors to conduct
 initial interrogations of suspects in criminal cases without
 the presence of defensy lawyers.
 Soviet criminal practice is based on the presumption of guilt
 if, after having investigated an alleged crime, the state
 procurator's office sees fit to press charges. Few criminal
 cases result in acquittal. On the other hand, weak cases
 increasingly were dropped. Defendants have a right to appeal,
 as does the prosecution. This right was exercised by a growing
 number of defendants, and higher courts continued to overturn
 some cases.
 In September the Soviet prosecutor general said there was no
 evidence that prominent exiled writer Alexander Solzhenitsyn
 had committed any crime. Solzhenitsyn's case officially had
 been under investigation since 1974 when it was alleged he was
 in violation of the high treason provisions of Article 64 of
 the RSFSR criminal code.
 No prisoners are known to be currently serving sentences solely
 under the so-called political and religious articles of the
 Soviet and. republic criminal codes (e.g., Articles 70, 142,
 227, and the-now abolished 190-1 of the RSFSR code). Since
 1989 the U.S. and Soviet Governments have reviewed criminal
 cases with possible political motivations. Of the 75 persons
 whose cases-were initially raised by the United States, the
 last 2 persons were released in September after being pardoned
 by republic governments. A commission under the Office of the
 U.S.S.R. Presidency to review the cases of alleged political
 prisoners was established in the fall of 1991 but had not begun
 to consider such cases by the end of the year. Following the
 August coup, the Russian government released a number of
 
 
 1273
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 prisoners whom it considered to have been imprisoned for
 political reasons. In July the Russian parliament passed a law
 creating the Russian republic constitutional court, a first
 step towards creating an independent, third branch of
 government. In the fall, the Parliament confirmed the judges.
 In Georgia local and international human rights groups reported
 that President Zviad Gamsakhurdia's government arrested over 80
 members of the opposition, including former national guard head
 Dzhaba Ioselani, arrested in February, and Torez Kulumbegov,
 chairman of the supreme soviet of the South Ossetian republic,
 who was arrested in January. Kulumbegov was charged with
 inciting interethnic hatred, abusing his official position, and
 exceeding his authority. In September Georgian police arrested
 two leading opposition members, National Democratic Party head
 Georgiy Chanturia and National Congress member Georgiy
 Haindrava. Chanturia was accused of antigovernment activities.
 The government maintained that most of the others were suspected
 of having committed violent crimes, such as robbery or
 possession of illegal weapons. However, critics insisted these
 charges were developed only as a pretext to incarcerate the
 opposition. Many of those arrested are still awaiting trial,
 pending conclusion of police investigations. In early January
 1992, Kulumbegov, Chanturia, and many other political prisoners
 were forcibly freed from prison by opponents to Gamsakhurdia.
 There were numerous reports of instances in which charges were
 trumped up for political reasons. As an example, in the
 republic of Turkmenistan, writer Shirali Nurmuradov remained in
 prison, where he was sentenced in late 1990 to 7 years for
 alleged "swindling" (Article 158 of the Turkmen criminal
 code). Nurmuradov and his defenders, including the
 International PEN Society, claimed the charges were fabricated
 at the behest of Turkmen Communist Party leader Saparmurad
 Niyazov because the writer had criticized him. Niyazov
 reportedly had earlier threatened to have Nurmuradov imprisoned
 for his outspoken opposition.
 In the republic of Kazakhstan, 28-year-old lawyer and Democratic
 Union activist Viktor Leontev was arrested and sentenced to 2
 years of correctional labor in June in the city of
 Petropavlovsk under the 1990 law against insulting the honor
 and dignity of the U.S.S.R. President. Leontev had been
 selling an "anti-Soviet calendar" (sometimes seen being sold
 openly on the streets of Moscow) which portrayed a caricature
 of Gorbachev wearing a hammer and sickle crown. Reportedly, he
 was the 16th person convicted under this law.
 Ukrainian people's deputy Stepan Khmara was detained in a Kiev
 prison without trial from November 1990 through April 1991.
 Khmara and five codefendants were arrested for allegedly
 attacking a militia colonel. The leaders of the Ukrainian
 National Movement "Rukh" and the democratic opposition stated
 that the arrest of Khmara, an outspoken anti-Communist, and his
 codefendants was politically motivated. Khmara is a member of
 the Ukrainian Republican Party. At his trial, which began on
 May 14, the militia periodically denied access to the courtroom
 to his defense attorneys and his close relatives, as well as to
 people's deputies and the press. On July 18, special
 detachments of the Ukrainian militia broke into the Kiev hotel
 room where Khmara was staying, released tear gas, and began
 beating about 40 people's deputies and other Khmara supporters
 who had been staging a vigil inside his room. Khmara himself
 was beaten, dragged out of his room; and taken to Kiev's
 internal security prison.
 
 
 1274
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 On August 25, following the Ukrainian parliament's declaration
 of independence, the parliament's presidium declared amnesty
 for Khmara and his codefendants, who were released the next day.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 During the first two-thirds of 1991, government interference
 with privacy remained pervasive. Constitutional provisions for
 the inviolability of the home provided citizens with little
 real protection from illegal entry and search. Agents of the
 Ministry of Internal Affairs continued to act under the
 provisions of a U.S.S.R. Supreme Soviet decree authorizing them
 to enter private homes in pursuit of suspected criminals.
 According to a law adopted prior to the August coup attempt,
 permission from a procurator is required before a wiretap may
 be installed. The number of KGB personnel engaged in wiretaps
 reportedly was teduced by two-thirds. Electronic monitoring of
 residences and telephones reportedly continue. Foreign radio
 broadcasts were not jammed. Foreigners visiting refuseniks or
 dissidents were not harassed.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian
 Law in Internal Conflicts
 In the first half of 1991, U.S.S.R. security forces provoked
 numerous violent incidents in Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia
 (which were forcibly incorporated by the Soviet Union from 1940
 to September 1991). The situation was particularly acute in
 January, after military units and armed units of the KGB and
 Soviet Interior Ministry were sent into the Baltic states,
 allegedly to enforce the military draft.
 Beginning on January 11, Soviet paratroopers forcibly seized a
 number of buildings in Lithuania. On the night of January
 12-13, 14 unarmed civilians were killed and more than 100 were
 injured when Soviet paratroopers and armored vehicles seized
 the Vilnius television center. On January 20, four people were
 killed when Soviet Interior Ministry special forces, known as
 OMON, took over the Latvian Interior Ministry building in Riga.
 Soviet military and Interior Ministry commanders involved in
 these incidents reportedly acted at the behest of local
 Communist Party organizations loyal to the Moscow-headquartered
 CPSU, masquerading as "Committees for National Salvation." On
 June 3, the U.S.S.R. Procurator General, in a preliminary
 report on the activities of Soviet troops in Vilnius on the
 night of January 12-13, said his office had found no evidence
 that Soviet troops were responsible forthe deaths at the
 television center. The report contradicted the statements of
 numerous eyewitnesses, including foreign journalists, present
 at the television center.
 Interethnic violence in the Caucasus resulted in hundreds of
 deaths during 1991. By the end of December, hundreds of
 persons had been reported dead and hundreds more wounded in
 fighting between Armenians and Azeris throughout the year. In
 April Soviet army and Interior Ministry forces and Azeri OMON
 detachments attacked several Armenian villages in Nagorno-
 Karabakh and forcibly deported over 1,000 residents to Armenia,
 causing death, injuries, and loss of property.  Deportations
 continued until the August coup attempt in Moscow brought Soviet
 army participation to a halt. As Soviet troops began to
 withdraw at the end of 1991, Azeri and Armenian combatants
 
 
 1275
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 increased the level of fighting, and reports of victims
 continued to mount.
 In Georgia politically motivated, interethnic violence resulted
 in numerous deaths as Georgian militia and civilian armed bands
 staged frequent attacks upon South Ossetians. Ossetian
 nationalists estimated that Georgians killed over 300 Ossetians
 in periodic fighting which began in 1989. Ossetians accused
 the Georgian Government of cutting off access to power and
 foodstuffs in the region.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech, press, and expression were exercised to an
 unprecedented degree in 1991, but there were also direct,
 violent assaults on those freedoms. Freedom to criticize the
 Government, for the most part, expanded in 1991. Some anti-
 Soviet political activists, however, were harassed, detained,
 or arrested ostensibly for holding unsanctioned meetings,
 slandering political leaders, conducting acts of malicious
 hooliganism, and espousing violent, anticonstitutional acts.
 In addition to the Novodvorskaya and Leontev cases (Sections
 l.d. and l.e.), Gennadiy Smirnov, charged in 1990 with insulting
 the honor and dignity of the U.S.S.R. President, was sentenced
 to a year in an ordinary prison camp in February. Democratic
 Union member Nasibulla Ratikov was similarly charged in June
 when the prosecutor in Yurga in the Kemerovo region accused
 Ratikov of distributing literature calling Gorbachev a Fascist.
 On November 7, 1990, Valeriy Sedov of Mensk (Minsk) attached to
 a statue of Lenin a symbolic figure of "a prisoner of the gulag"
 during a demonstration. In May Sedov was arrested and held for
 2 months before being released on bail after a 32-day hunger
 strike in protest against prison conditions.
 Although freedom of press, including the broadcast media, became
 more widespread, it also came under savage attack as when in
 January Soviet Interior Ministry special forces occupied the
 entrance to the House of Print in Riga, Latvia, and Soviet
 paratroops seized television and radio facilities in Vilnius,
 Lithuania, with significant casualties.
 While continuing to observe the letter of the U.S.S.R. law on
 the press, the Soviet Government prior to August violated its
 spirit on several occasions, particularly through efforts to
 dictate the editorial leadership of influential media
 organizations and to restrict access to supplies and
 subscribers. The All-Union State Television and Radio Company
 (Gosteleradio) canceled several of its most popular television
 programs, including "Vzglyad" ("Viewpoint") and "TSN" (a
 reform-oriented news program), and restricted broadcasts by
 Radio Rossiya, largely because of pressure from its government-
 appointed director. The Government was also accused of efforts
 to oust the reform-oriented deputy editor in chief of the daily
 newspaper Izvestiya and replace him with officials from the
 state publishing company and the Communist Party's Ideology
 Department. Those efforts failed when the newspaper staff and
 the Moscow Union of Journalists threatened to go on strike in
 protest, but the replacements were still added to the staff as
 additional deputy editors, and the popular editor in chief of
 the Izvestiya supplement Nedelya (The Week) was removed.
 
 
 1276
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 Efforts to restrict freedom of the press included, in Moldova
 and the Caucasus, death threats against journalists for several
 publications and arson attacks by nationalist groups. In some
 cases, journalists' families or the journalists themselves left-
 the area for their own safety.
 The Georgian government, in response to articles it perceived
 as anti-Georgian, prohibited journalists representing several
 national publications from reporting from its territory. A
 stringer for Radio Liberty was ordered to leave a press
 conference by President Gamsakhurdia himself. A local
 newspaper, Molodezh' Gruzii, was shut down by the government
 for reporting that was objectionable to President Gamsakhurdia.
 Georgian journalists who published articles critical of the
 President claimed that government officials harassed their
 families and put their homes under surveillance in an effort to
 persuade them to stop writing. Some claimed they were
 encouraged to leave Georgia. The Georgian government also
 refused to broadcast any programming from Moscow or from the
 Russian republic.
 In Azerbaijan opposition newspapers were required to submit
 their publications to government censors. By the end of the
 year, an opposition newspaper editor reported that the
 government had ceased censorship of his organization's
 publications but continued to threaten other nominally
 independent newspapers with restricted access to printing
 supplies and services in the event of unfavorable reporting.
 One of the chief targets of the August 19 coup d'etat was the
 media. After the collapse of the coup and the victory of the
 supporters of democratic reforms, official and latent
 restrictions on the media were substantially relaxed in nearly
 every region. On the other hand, the Russian government's
 decision to suspend six publications accused of supporting the
 coup and to force other publications to reregister provoked
 concerns that it was also resorting to censorship and to
 government control of the media. One weekly, Glasnost, a
 publication of the Communist Party's Central Committee, was
 closed down by both the coup plotters and the victorious
 reformers. Most of the suspended publications were later
 allowed to resume publication, but those media traditionally
 reliant on funding from the Communist Party suffered a grave
 financial crisis since the party's assets were frozen.
 In the wake of the coup's failure and the backlash against the
 Communist Party and central Government, many republics and
 administrative districts also imposed restrictions on the
 press. In several republics, including Ukraine, Moldova, and
 Georgia, the media that had supported either Communist Party or
 Russian nationalist points of view in the past were banned,
 including, in some regions, Pravda, Trud, and TASS. Republic
 governments reasserted their control of printing plants and
 broadcasting stations in most regions. Chronic paper shortages
 forced the Ukrainian government to cut back newsprint supplies
 to both Communist papers and proreform, independent papers.
 Former Communist papers in the wake of the coup changed their
 names and appear to be transforming themselves into organs of
 the republic government.
 On October 30, the RSFSR Ministry of Press and Mass Information
 reported that official warnings had been issued to two widely
 read independent newspapers, Moscow News and Nezavisimaya
 Gazeta, or their publication of reports that Yeltsin had
 discussed the possibility of a nuclear strike on Ukraine. It
 
 
 1277
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 termed the articles "propagation of war and interethnic
 discord," which were held to be in violation of Part 1, Article
 5, of the U.S.S.R. law on the press and other mass media. In
 December former CPSU daily Pravda came under pressure from the
 Ministry to give up some of its premises to the Russian
 government's press organ, the Russian Information Agency (RIA).
 After the August coup attempt, the rules for foreign journalists
 did not change, but enforcement was increasingly lax. For
 example, the Foreign Ministry continued its liberal policy of
 granting visas to foreign journalists, access to Foreign
 Ministry press briefings was open to all accredited foreign
 journalists, and approval for travel was easier to obtain.
 Travel to closed areas was not routine, but exceptions were
 granted.
 As in other areas, academic freedom was in flux in 1991. The
 banning of CPSU activity nationwide affected all institutions
 of higher learning, with all curriculums coming under wholesale
 review and revision. While access to archives continued to be
 difficult, access to Western-produced books, magazines,
 journals, and other educational materials increased
 dramatically.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Public demonstrations were an intrinsic part of the Soviet
 Union's political landscape in 1991--indeed, their number and
 frequency made them almost commonplace in the larger cities.
 Political rallies were a key part in the June electoral
 campaigns in Russia. Small groups of protesters, picketing on
 such issues as the environment and social benefits, were a
 regular presence before legislative sessions from Tajikistan to
 Byelarus. Massive public outpourings in Moscow and St.
 Petersburg were critical in thwarting the attempted coup d'etat
 of August 18-21.
 The law on demonstrations stipulates that demonstration
 organizers must apply for permission to local officials 10 days
 in advance, and that officials must respond at least 5 days
 before the demonstration's scheduled date. Civil and criminal
 penalties ranging from fines to 15-day jail sentences and
 stiffer punishment may be levied against participants in
 unauthorized demonstrations.
 Communist authorities attempted to prohibit certain
 demonstrations, including a student demonstration demanding
 better university conditions in March and a pro-Yeltsin rally
 in May. In Uzbekistan, people's deputy and opposition activist
 Shovruk Ruzimurodov was arrested in May for participating in an
 unsanctioned rally in protest against price rises. After the
 Uzbek supreme soviet revoked his deputy's immunity, Ruzimurodov
 was charged with a criminal offense and remained in detention
 at the end of the year. Ruling authorities in other republics--
 e.g., in Georgia--attempted to ban protests by political
 opponents.
 The junta also declared public protests illegal during the
 short-lived coup attempt. These demonstrations were, however,
 called--and given legal sanction--by President Yeltsin and the
 Moscow and St. Petersburg mayors. After the failure of the
 coup, there were no reports of local officials in Russia
 denying permission to demonstrate.
 
 
 1278
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 As of January 1, 1991, a new law on public organizations went
 into effect in the Soviet Union. It legalized a multiparty
 political system, allowed the formation of political parties
 and mass social movements, and guaranteed such organizations
 the right to propagate their views. The law also allowed
 political parties to field candidates in elections, provided
 that no citizen had his rights and freedom to participate
 limited, and declared all parties equal before the law. All
 public organizations must register their bylaws and the names
 of their leaders with the U.S.S.R. Ministry of Justice or with
 the republic-level justice ministries. In the case of
 political parties, organizers must also present 4,000 valid
 signatures of party supporters and a 4,000-ruble 'ee to
 register as an all-Union party or 5,000 signatures and 5,000
 rubles to register as a Russian republic party.
 Under the law on public organizations, organizations advocating
 violent changes in the constitutional oder were forbidden. In
 late 1991, the only banned parties in the Russian republic were
 the Communist Party (at the union and republic levels) and the
 Liberal Democratic Party. In each case, they were prohibited
 for their alleged activities in support of the failed coup.
 The new law and the breakup of the CPSU's predominant position
 in the political hierarchy intensified the trend towards
 establishing new social and political organizations,
 representing a broad range of social, ethnic, and age groups
 throughout the Soviet Union. Popular fronts existed in all
 republics and in certain ones--notably, Moldova, Byelarus,
 Georgia, and Ukraine-were powerful political forces.
 Sociopolitical movements seeking greater autonomy for minority
 peoples also sprang up in autonomous regions and oblasts
 throughout the Soviet Union, including an estimated 140 in
 Russia alone.
 These new organizations represented a wide spectrum of
 political viewpoints, including monarchists, anarchists,
 nativists/Fascists, Socialists, and social and liberal
 democrats. In addition, numerous interest groups--
 environmentalists, religious organizations, labor unions--were
 also launched. Moreover, two broad coalitions, Democratic
 Russia (Demrossiya) and the Movement for Democratic Reform,
 were active in banding together proreform groups in Russia.
 In Azerbaijan the state of emergency prevented opposition
 parties from holding public political assemblies throughout
 much of 1991. Azerbaijan's government lifted the state of
 emergency in August.
 In central Asia mass demonstrations occurred in various areas
 in the wake of the August coup attempt. The most serious of
 these occurred in Tajikistan after the Communist-dominated
 parliament deposed the President and reinstituted Communist
 rule. The city government supported the demonstrators who were
 disciplined and peaceful, and there was no attempt made to
 suppress them by force. In Uzbekistan, several attempts to
 hold.mass demonstrations after the August coup were suppressed:
 for example, one in August and another on September 8.
 Multiparty systems were formally introduced in much of Central
 Asia, but pluralism remained in the early stages of development.
 In Kazakhstan, the Communist Party disbanded and reformulated
 itself as Socialist. President Nursultan Nazarbayev refused to
 join. Instead, he addressed the founding session of the
 People's Congress of Kazakhstan, a party uniting opposition
 
 
 1279
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 forces, on October 6. In Uzbekistan, President Islam Karimov
 allowed Erk, a moderate splinter group that broke off from the
 nationalist movement Birlik, to register as a party. Birlik was
 permitted to register as a movement but not as a party entitled
 to enter electoral contests. The Islamic Rebirth Party was
 banned in Uzbekistan, although it does function illegally in
 some areas. In Tajikistan 2 weeks of demonstrations resulted
 in repeal of the law barring registration of the Islamic Revival
 Movement. Multiple parties and candidates participated in
 presidential elections in Tajikistan, while Presidents Askar
 Akayev of Kyrgyzstan and Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan faced no
 opposition in their successful reelection bids.
 Kazakh authorities banned a September 17 ride on horseback by
 Cossacks from the RSFSR into Uralsk, in northern Kazakhstan, to
 mark "400 years of Cossack service to the Tsars." The Kazakh
 Government claimed the march was an incitement to ethnic
 violence. Cossacks ignored the ban, and the demonstration took
 place peacefully.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 In 1991 there was continued progress toward freedom of religion.
 Authorities throughout the Soviet Union displayed a more
 tolerant attitude toward religion, although pockets of
 bureaucratic resistance or even hostility could still be found.
 On January 7, 1992, Orthodox Christmas was observed as an
 official national holiday in Russia for the first time since
 the 1917 Bolshevik Revolution.
 The visibility of religion increased dramatically. Religious
 services were televised, particularly during the Christmas and
 Easter holiday seasons. In addition, Protestant religious
 programming from the United States was broadcast on Sunday
 mornings on Soviet television. Religious groups, official and
 unofficial, continued to be allowed to hold seminars,
 conferences, and revival meetings, frequently in public
 facilities rented for that purpose. It was common to see
 public proselytizing in major cities, including street stands
 with placards calling passersby to rejoin and revitalize the
 Russian Orthodox Church, persons speaking about their
 Protestant faith, and appeals from adherents of such groups as
 the Hare Krishna and the Baha'i faith.
 The press contained extensive coverage of religious issues,
 statements of religious leaders, and complaints about the
 collapse of Christian moral values in the Soviet Union. Visits
 to the Soviet Union by foreign religious figures, including
 representatives of evangelical Protestant ministries from the
 West, were numerous and unimpeded.  Missionaries from almost
 every world religion were present in the Soviet Union, and many
 organizations maintained permanent representatives in the
 country. State academic institutions, including Moscow State
 University, not only renamed their "departments of religion and
 atheism" to focus instead on religious ethics and liberty but
 also hosted Western lecturers on religious ethics and the role
 of religion in public policy.
 Obstacles to complete freedom of religion still existed at the
 local level where remnants of the old state-party bureaucracy
 sometimes hindered or harassed religious believers. A primary
 cause of local problems was the fact that the 1990 legislation
 that granted freedom of religion provided for registration of
 religious groups of 10 adults or mote by local authorities.
 Some groups viewed the registration requirement itself as
 
 
 1280
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 contradicting the tenets of their beliefs and therefore refused
 to register officially. Although failure to register did not
 result in harassment, groups had to register to acquire the
 status of a "juridical person" and to have access to most of
 the benefits of the new law, including access to the media and
 the right to establish schools, own property, and engage in
 social work. The registration process was used for
 obstructionist tactics by some local authorities, i.e., lost
 applications, endless reviews of applications, or denial of
 adequate facilities, especially in the cases of non-Russian
 Orthodox groups, principally Protestant groups, the Ukrainian
 Autocephalous Orthodox Church (UAOC), and the Russian Orthodox
 Free Church (ROFC).
 The ROFC is the new Russian branch of the U.S.-based Free
 Orthodox Church, which earlier broke from the traditional
 Russian Orthodox Church, charging that it was controlled by the
 Communist regime. The ROFC found it especially difficult at
 the local level to register new congregations or to acquire new
 facilities. An additional issue at the local level was
 favoritism toward the traditional Russian Orthodox Church by
 local bureaucracies, resulting in fewer restrictions on the
 Orthodox Church than on other religious groups.
 The importation of religious materials into the Soviet Union
 was largely unrestricted. Bibles and children's Bible stories
 were common items on sale at street kiosks in major cities.
 Korans were imported into the central Asian republics in large
 numbers.
 The number of clergy and places of worship in all parts of the
 Soviet Union are still inadequate for the population, but
 churches, synagogues, and mosques were reopened in many places,
 and seminaries and other institutions of clerical education
 expanded their enrollment.
 As a rule, young men who objected to military duty because of
 their faith continued to be subject to prison terms. In July
 Moldova joined Georgia as the only two republics to pass a law
 providing for alternative forms of service for conscientious
 objectors. In some other republics, legislation providing
 alternatives to military service for conscientious objectors
 was under discussion.
 In Ukraine parishioners of the long-banned Ukrainian Catholic
 (Uniate) church and the UAOC continued to be registered
 throughout Ukraine, a process begun in 1990. Uniate demands
 for the return of their property confiscated after they were
 banned in 1946 led to some violence in western Ukraine, where
 some churches used by Russian Orthodox believers were forcibly
 taken over by Uniates. However, city councils in western
 Ukraine assumed a mediatory role in resolving property
 disputes, often providing land and building materials for
 Russian Orthodox parishes displaced by Uniate congregations.
 The UAOC was granted permission to purchase abandoned church
 buildings or construct new churches in Kiev, Kharkov, Poltava,
 and Dniepropetrovsk.
 Exiled hierarchs of the Ukrainian Catholic church and the UAOC
 were allowed to return to Ukraine in 1991. Ukrainian Catholic
 Cardinal Lubachivskiy (banished from Ukraine for over 40 years)
 established his residence in L'viv. UAOC Patriarch Mstyslav
 (living in the United States for nearly 50 years) was allowed
 to establish a chancery in Kiev and to travel extensively
 throughout the republic.
 
 
 1281
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 Despite strong remaining currents of anti-Semitism among the
 Soviet populace, Jews around the Soviet Union in general
 experienced continuing and increasing freedom to pursue their
 religion (see also Section 5). Synagogues were returned,
 religious schools (yeshivas) opened, and the teaching of Hebrew
 spread. City councils in Kiev and L'viv restored synagogues to
 their respective Jewish communities. Hassidic and Lubavicher
 Jewish communities were allowed to run summer camps for
 children in Kiev and Poltava. A yeshiva was opened in Kiev in
 1990. A U.S. citizen became the Chief Rabbi of Kiev's Jewish
 congregation in 1990.
 The governments of Armenia and Azerbaijan professed to
 guarantee freedom of religion but practiced some restrictions.
 Human rights activists charged that only two Christian churches
 are currently functioning in the ethnic Armenian region of
 Nagorno-Karabakh in predominantly Islamic Azerbaijan. In
 Armenia there were reports of Muslim Kurds experiencing
 discrimination at the hands of Armenian authorities.
 Throughout Central Asia new working mosques continued to open.
 In Tajikistan alone, the number of mosques increased tenfold
 over the last few years, and Islamic authorities completed a
 new building for the theological seminary in Dushanbe.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Although citizens were generally free to move about within the
 country, travel in certain areas, such as frontier regions or
 areas of military significance, required special permission.
 All adults are issued internal passports (identity documents)
 which must be carried during travel and used to register visits
 of more than 3 days with the local authorities, a requirement
 for the most part ignored by-travelers not staying in hotels.
 Although only about 15 percent of Soviet territory was formally
 closed to travel by foreigners, in practice most territory
 outside of major cities was difficult to visit or inaccessible,
 because the closed areas often were transportation hubs.
 The right to choose one's place of residence, though guaranteed
 by law, was restricted in practice. Under the "propiska" (pass)
 system, all citizens must register their place of residence.
 The authorities limited the number of residence permits in an
 increasing number of large cities, including Moscow, St.
 Petersburg, and Kiev, where housing was at a premium. In
 October the USSR Constitutional Oversight Committee abolished
 the "propiska" system and gave authorities until January 1,
 1992, to make the necessary legislative revisions. The effect
 of this decision remains to be seen.
 On May 20, the Soviet Government passed the long-awaited law on
 the procedure for Soviet citizens to exit and enter the U.S.S.R.
 (the emigration law). Since the demise of the Soviet Union,
 Russian government officials have said that the Union's
 practices with regard to exit and entry are being observed in
 Russia. The Soviet rules have remained in effect in other
 republics as well. The law making it a crime to leave the
 U.S.S.R. without permission is still on the books--Article 83
 of the Russian republic criminal code; one couple was arrested
 under this article in 1991. The new emigration bill was not
 scheduled to come into force until January 1, 1993, however,
 and the requirement that Soviet citizens obtain an exit visa
 before traveling abroad remained in effect. Nonetheless, under
 the terms of an implementing resolution, the requirement that
 
 
 1282
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 emigrants have an invitation from a first-degree relative in
 the country to which they are emigrating was dropped. Instead,
 emigrants could submit either an invitation from any relative
 abroad or permission to enter the'country to which they are
 emigrating. The resolution also annulled the 1967 decree under
 which emigrants to Israel were required to give up their Soviet
 citizenship. Corruption in the passport and visa-issuing
 offices--exacerbated by a shortage of new passports--remained a
 major impediment to unrestricted emigration and travel abroad,
 especially in Azerbaijan, where it was reportedly widespread.
 The new emigration law perpetuated the practice of restricting
 the emigration of those with access to state secrets and added
 a new restrictiou on the emigration of draft-age men who have
 not yet completed their obligatory military service. The state
 secrets provisions were more clearly delineated and limited than
 under previous administrative regulations. Under the new law,
 Soviet citizens taking on employment requiring access to state
 secrets will be presented with a document to sign, formally
 accepting restrictions on emigration and travel abroad.
 Further, the law stated that the normal maximum restriction
 would be 5 years. Though the requirement to receive permission
 from close relatives in the Soviet Union before emigrating
 remained, a would-be emigrant under the new law could try to
 settle this problem in the courts, to which there had been no
 recourse in the past. Nevertheless, since the new law comes
 into force in 1993, there were still scores of instances in
 which access to state secrets or inability to obtain the
 permission of relatives blocked emigrants' plans. A commission
 set up under the U.S.S.R. presidency in the fall of 1991 and
 carried over to the Russian presidency in December began to
 review cases of refuseniks who had not worked with secrets in
 more than 5 years. By January 1992, the commission had resolved
 many such cases favorably, i.e., exit restrictions were lifted.
 By the end of the year, the newly independent states continued
 to permit high levels of emigration and appeared to maintain
 the facilitated exit procedures established in the emigration
 law passed by the U.S.S.R. Supreme Soviet. The Russian
 government gave explicit assurances that it would fully
 implement the emigration law by or before the law's original
 deadline of January 1, 1993.
 During 1991 hundreds of thousands of Soviet citizens traveled
 abroad and emigrated, and many former Soviet citizens who now
 reside abroad, including prominent dissidents, were allowed to
 return to the U.S.S.R. to visit.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Throughout 1991 CPSU influence in most sectors of society
 waned. The 1990 decision to strip the CPSU of its
 constitutionally protected leading role accelerated the process
 of democratization in Soviet society. CPSU complicity in the
 use of force against the freely elected Baltic governments in
 January seriously damaged the party's ability to exercise its
 traditional influence. Democratic forces rallied in the spring
 throughout the U.S.S.R.; local and republic elections during
 this time turned power over to the first freely elected
 governments in Soviet history. Boris Yeltsin became the first
 popularly elected President of the Russian republic. The
 elections were carried out by secret ballot and, for the most
 part, featured multiple candidates from a broad political
 spectrum. This was the first practical demonstration of the
 
 
 1283
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 right and ability of citizens peacefully to change their
 governments.
 Despite the strengthening of democratic forces during the year,
 until the failed August coup the CPSU continued to be the single
 most powerful political force in Soviet society. In the wake of
 the failed August coup, however, CPSU activities were suspended
 and later banned in Russia and then in other republics.
 At the republic level, the right of citizens to change their
 government in some cases faced problems. Azerbaijan, for
 example, held presidential elections on September 8 in which -
 the current president ran unopposed. Some opposition
 candidates declined to field candidates; another contender
 withdrew his candidacy a week before the election, saying he
 did not wish to lend it credibility. Opposition leaders
 claimed that the state of emergency, which was lifted only a
 few weeks before the election, prevented them from adequately
 presenting their views to the public. Azerbaijan utilized the
 traditional Communist system of voting, in which voters only
 enter a private polling booth to cast a negative ballot.
 Although suffrage in Azerbaijan was ostensibly universal, the
 republic's traditional Islamic culture discouraged women from
 voting.
 In Georgia President Gamsakhurdia won a landslide victory in a
 popular election held in the spring. His opponents, however,
 charged that Gamsakhurdia, who earlier had been elected
 President by Georgia's parliament, purposely scheduled the
 election quickly in order to ensure that his competition would
 not have time to mount an effective campaign. In January 1992,
 the military council that forcefully ousted Gamsakhurdia
 promised new elections in the near future.
 In Moldovan presidential elections on December 8, President
 Mircea Snegur was the only candidate on the ballot after two
 others dropped out of the race because of a lack of popular
 support. The pan-Romanian nationalist Popular Front
 organization called for a voter boycott of the election in
 protest against Snegur's refusal to commit himself to immediate
 unification with Romania. Voter turnout, however, was high at
 around 80 percent:
 In central Asia, the right to change the government was limited.
 Real political pluralism remained embryonic. The Communist
 Party was suspended in all five republics after the failed
 coup. Elections by secret ballot with universal suffrage were
 held in Kyrgyzstan on October 12, but opposition parties put up
 no candidates. Similarly, in Kazakhstan President Nazarbayev
 ran unchallenged. In Uzbekistan the December 29 elections
 featured two candidates--however, the attempt by the popular
 "Birlik" leader Abdurakhim Pulatov to register as a candidate
 was denied on technical grounds. In Tajikistan elections in
 November involved seven candidates, including one backed by a
 coalition of democratic, nationalist, and Islamic forces,
 including the Islamic Party which until November had been
 banned. However, ex-CPSU First Secretary Rohmon Nabiyev
 emerged victorious amid charges of serious voter fraud.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Major domestic human rights groups include the Moscow Helsinki
 group, which follows the issue of prisoners of conscience; the
 
 
 1284
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 Association of Independent Psychiatrists, which covers the abuse
 of psychiatry; the Soviet-American Bureau for Emigration, Human
 Rights, and Anti-Semitism; the newspaper Ekspress Khronika,
 which follows human and minority iights issues around the
 former Soviet Union; and Memorial, which focuses on
 rehabilitation of past victims of human rights abuses. All
 such organizations were able to operate for the most part
 without government interference or repression. They have
 occasionally experienced difficulties in registering with
 government entities, in gaining the cooperation of typographers
 in what were formerly Communist Party-controlled print
 facilities, and in receiving office space to run their
 activities.
 Soviet and republic authorities generally displayed a
 forthcoming approach to foreign criticism and review of human
 rights practices and permitted several international
 nongovernmental human rights groups to establish offices or
 conduct fact-finding missions. In September-October, Moscow
 hosted the third meeting of the Conference on the Human
 Dimension of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in
 Europe, which was open to Soviet and foreign press and public,
 as well as nongovernmental organizations. The Soviet
 Government facilitated a short-notice visit by a group of
 conference delegates to Perm 35 labor camp where alleged
 political prisoners were held.
 Discussion of human rights issues between the United States and
 the U.S.S.R. remained institutionalized in regular meetings
 with the Foreign Ministry's Administration for International
 Humanitarian Cooperation and Human Rights. Staff members of
 the U.S. Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe were
 permitted to travel to various republics as unofficial
 observers of elections and referendums throughout 1991.
 Azerbaijan's government allowed some international human rights
 organizations, including members of the international Sakharov
 delegation, limited access to conflict-ridden Nagorno-Karabakh,
 but other observers were refused entry. Georgia's government
 claimed to welcome inquiries concerning its human rights
 practices. President Gamsakhurdia personally urged a visiting
 delegation of the U.S. Helsinki Commission to send a
 representative to Georgia on a long-term basis to observe the
 human rights situation at first hand. However, human rights
 activists and U.S. Embassy officials experienced difficulty in
 meeting with imprisoned political activists due to bureaucratic
 restrictions.
 The government of Kazakhstan announced that it would welcome
 the establishment in the republic of permanent representatives
 of international human rights organizations.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 As power in the Soviet Union devolved to more or less sovereign
 republics, the issue of the central authorities' practice of
 discrimination against nationalities disappeared. All 12
 republics declared sovereignty or independence from the former
 Soviet Union. As a result, each republic was free to enjoy
 language, cultural, religious, and political rights according
 to its own wishes. However, each was also freed from central
 government restraint in dealing with internal minorities, and
 the attitude towards and degree of discrimination against
 minorities varied from republic to republic.
 
 
 1285
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 Jews enjoyed increasing cultural and religious freedom but at
 the same time continued to be subjected to public expressions
 of anti-Semitism. On May Day, thousands of demonstrators
 marched in St. Petersburg accusing Soviet leaders of favoring
 Jews at the expense of Russians. Demonstrators carried
 anti-Semitic placards and called RSFSR President Yeltsin "a
 stooge for Jewish international capital," and anti-Semitic
 posters were posted on a main boulevard in St. Petersburg. The
 openly anti-Semitic organization Pamyat' published a paper
 containing excerpts from the long-discredited disinformation
 tract "Protocols of the Elders of Zion." Pamyat' began radio
 broadcasts in September. These expressions of anti-Semitic
 attitudes added to Jews' fear that in times of economic
 hardship and political unrest they would be singled out for
 arbitrary retribution by an increasingly desperate populace.
 Jewish groups' long-standing complaint that the Soviet
 Government did not speak out strongly enough against anti-
 Semitism was assuaged to some extent by the forceful statement
 of President Gorbachev condemning anti-Semitism read at the
 commemorative ceremony at Babi Yar in Ukraine in October. At
 the same ceremony, Ukrainian President Kravchuk apologized for
 injustices perpetrated by Ukrainians against Jews throughout
 history.
 Over 60 million Soviet citizens live outside their nationality's
 administrative region or belong to a nationality that has none.
 For many of these, devolution of power has meant a worsening of
 discriminatory practices. In the worst cases, harsh
 discriminatory treatment of national minorities in Georgia and
 Azerbaijan escalated into conflicts just short of all-out civil
 war and resulted in hundreds of deaths. As 1992 began, these
 conflicts continued to erupt into violence. Developments
 regarding the rights of national minorities are described below
 by region.
 Russia: In the Russian republic, several autonomous republics,
 oblasts, and districts based on national minorities declared
 sovereignty. The results were not always harmonious. In the
 northern Caucasus. for example, territorial disputes flared
 among various ethnic groups. In April, after the U.S.S.R.
 Supreme Soviet annulled deportation decrees from the 1940's,
 Ingush and Ossetian groups clashed in north Ossetia when the
 Ingush attempted to repossess their former homes in the area.
 The Ingush also clashed repeatedly with Cossacks in the region.
 The government of Chechen-Ingushetia was dissolved in November
 when the Chechens declared independence from "Russian
 chauvinism." The Ingush voted to remain inside Russia provided
 that lands expropriated in the 1940's were returned. This
 exacerbated the Ingush territorial dispute with North Ossetia,
 abd Ingush guerrilla attacks were met by crearion of an
 Ossetian national guard. In Tatarstan old-line Communist
 political leaders retained their hold on power. Violent
 demonstrations occurred in Dagestan-when Muslims were unable to
 make the hajj. The cause of many of these problems was the
 release of interethnic tensions built up and suppressed over
 decades of harsh Soviet rule.
 Ukraine: As a consequence of the Ukrainian act of independence
 on August 24, advocates of Ukrainian cultural, linguistic, and
 economic self-determination became a major political force in
 the Ukrainian legislature. At the same time, the government and
 major democratic (non-Communist) political parties appeared to
 be open to all thenic and religious'minority groups in Ukraine.
 For example, in September the Ukrainian parliament appointed
 
 
 1286
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 ethnic Russians to key positions in the Ukrainian government
 (prosecutor general and minister of defense). The Ukrainian
 parliament was expected to amend the Ukrainian citizenship law
 so as to do away with notations ii internal passports
 identifying Ukrainian citizens by nationality or religion.
 Some political organizations in the predominantly Russian-
 speaking areas of southern and eastern Ukraine (particularly
 Crimea) remained opposed to Ukrainian independence. They were
 espacially concerned about increased use of Ukrainian as the
 official language of the republic. The Ukrainian parliament
 conceded to Crimean demands for political, economic, and
 linguistic autonomy on the condition that Crimea remain under
 Ukrainian territorial jurisdiction. The Crimean Tatr community,
 in the process of returning to the region, has expressed
 concern that their rights also to be protected within the
 framework of the yet-to-be-negotiated Crimean constitution.
 The Nationalities Declaration allows national minority groups
 to use their languages in official transactions.
 Moldova: The question of minority rights remained a central
 issue in the Moldovan republic's internal politics. Ethnic
 disagreements with the Russian and Gagauz minorities resulted
 in 1990 in secessionist movements in the geographic areas where
 those groups are in the majority. Both the Russian and Gagauz
 minorities maintained that the government repressed their
 cultures, gave preference to Moldovans in housing and
 employment, and forcibly imposed Romanian as Moldova's official
 language. Moldovans, however, claimed that they were only
 righting old wrongs, especially the imposition of Russian as
 the official language on the majority Romanian-speaking
 population since 1940. Republic officials stated that they
 were committed to meeting the concerns of ethnic minorities.
 Tensions nevertheless continued, reaching a peak in December.
 On December 1, both the secessionist Gagauz and Russian
 trans-Dniester regions held independence referendums and
 presidential elections. The central Moldovan government
 declared the elections illegal and annulled them. Moldovans in
 the trans-Dniester region claimed there were attempts to force
 them to participate in the elections, including threats of job
 loss for those who did not vote. On December 8, Moldova held
 presidential elections. Voting in the trans-Dniester and
 Gagauz areas was obstructed by the local authorities, with
 numerous reports of harassment and intimidation of ethnic
 Moldovan voters and a press and radio campaign discouraging
 participation. Few polls were allowed to open in these areas,
 and attempts were made to close some of those that did open.
 The worst armed clashes of 1991 occurred on December 13 when a
 firefight between Moldovan and trans-Dniester uniformed forces
 in the trans-Dniester city of Dubossary resulted in seven
 deaths and a dozen wounded. Both sides blamed the other for
 the fighting. While negotiations brought a halt to this
 outbreak, sporadic clashes continued in the early days of
 January 1992.
 The Moldovan parliament enacted a series of legal provisions to
 protect minority rights, including the right of parents to
 educate children in their own language and the right of each
 region to preserve its flag and symbol. Schools teaching in
 Bulgarian, Ukrainian, Hebrew, and Gagauz were opened in 1991.
 In addition, all classes in the ethnic-Russian trans-Dniester
 area were taught in Russian. Restrictive language laws were
 eased somewhat, although they still required that persons in
 certain positions, e.g., directors of industrial and research
 
 
 1287
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 facilities, doctors, and high-level government officials, speak
 both Russian and Romanian.
 Tensions between Russians and Moldovans in the trans-Dniester
 region remained high during the year, with sporadic clashes
 occurring and some casualties reported. The Russian trans-
 Dniester leadership expressed support for the attempted August
 coup in Moscow; shortly thereafter, four of its leaders were
 arrested by Moldovan authorities for allegedly attempting to
 set up a new Moldovan government. In response, the trans-
 Dniester leadership imposed a blockade on the principal rail
 artery at Tiraspol, causing substantial economic losses for
 Moldova. On October 3, the two sides reached agreement to end
 the rail blockade and free the four detained trans-Dniester
 leaders. They also set up a commission to resolve Russian-
 Moldovan disputes, called for the disarming of civilian militia
 groups, and agreed that both sides would do everything necessary
 to guarantee peace and order and restore an effective economy
 in Moldova. In September a fact-finding group from the RSFSR
 visited Moldova and publicly acquitted Moldova of human rights
 violations against Russians. Also in September, a Turkish
 delegation visited the Gagauz region at the invitation of the
 Moldovan government to investigate Gagauz complaints. The
 Turkish delegation came'away generally satisfied with Moldovan
 treatment of the Gagauz and would not endorse the Gagauz
 declaration of independence from Moldova.
 Caucasus: As described above (see Section l.f., among others),
 the picture in the republics of Georgia and Azerbaijan is one
 of violent interethnic conflict spurred by harshly
 discriminatory policies of the republic governments. The
 dispute between Armenians and Azerbaijanis worsened
 considerably as Azeibaijan's government deported whole villages
 of Armenians from Nagorno-Karabakh. Other Armenians were jailed
 or killed during the conflict. The few Armenians remaining in
 Baku (primarily spouses of Azeris) complained that they are
 unable to find employment. In Georgia many ethnic groups
 complained of de facto discrimination in housing and employment.
 The Georgian prosecutor called the Armenian group Krunk's plans
 to promote the Armenian language in the Armenian community of
 Abkhazia a rude violation of the republic's language laws. In
 a letter to the chairman of Krunk, the prosecutor threatened to
 ban the organization if it did not correct its ways. Georgian
 militia and armed civilians continued to attack Ossetian
 villages in the former south Ossetian autonomous oblast. An
 economic blockade of the region cut off power and supplies of
 medicines, foodstuffs and other necessities. In Georgia
 citizens were able to worship freely, but some minorities,
 including Jews, claimed they are subject to discrimination in
 housing and employment despite local laws.
 Central Asia: Anti-Russian riots did not occur this year as
 they did last, but fear of ethnic tensions was one factor
 leading thousands of ethnic Russians to move from'Central Asia
 to Russia. The RSFSR has expressed concern over the fate of
 Russians in Kazakhstan (where they number 40 percent of the
 population) and other central Asian republics. The Central
 Asian republics have all adopted language legislation declaring
 the language of the titular nationality to be the official state
 language, while designating Russian as the language of
 interethnic communication. In some of these republics,
 particulary Tajikistan, Kyrgyzstan, and Uzbekistan, this has
 resulted in Russian emigration. Russians report that they
 suffer difficulties now that they dannot speak the state
 language. In Uzbekistan some Russians have reported that when
 
 
 1288
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 they present their ration coupons they are brusquely told to go
 to Russia. Some Jews and Tajiks living in Samarkand have
 expressed fears of growing nationalism among some Uzbek groups.
 Women nominally enjoy the same legal rights as men, including
 the right to participate in all areas of the social, political,
 and economic life of the Soviet Union. An extensive system of
 day-care service and maternity leave benefits allowed women,
 after they have borne children, to retain employment. Women
 are well represented at many levels of the general economy and
 paid the same as men for equal work.
 Despite their nominal legal equality, women bear the brunt of
 many of.the hardships of Soviet daily life. Virtually all
 women have no economic choice but to work both inside and
 outside the home. One report estimated that more than 3
 million Soviet.women worked in conditions harmful to their
 health, and 500,000 women worked at hard, physical labor. In
 the central Asian republics, where women's rights in reality
 most often diverged from those they nominally enjoy,
 traditional national practices often prevented women from
 taking their equal place alongside men in economic life.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The right of workers to form and join unions of their own
 choosing showed little change in 1991. The passage by the
 U.S.S.R. Supreme Soviet in December 1990 of the Law on Trade
 Unions provided for the existence of trade unions as independent
 organizations which are equal before the law with official,
 government-sponsored unions. However, this law did, not diminish
 the role and status of the official trade unions and their hold
 on union membership because it protected their inherent
 advantages arising from close links with enterprise directors
 and exclusive control over workers' vacations, childrens' camps,
 recreation facilities, and other social benefits. The 1990 law
 also continued official union control over the state social
 insurance system.
 The approximately 30 sectoral trade unions of the former
 officially sponsored All-Union Central Council of Trade Unions
 (AUCCTU), which renamed itself in October 1990 the General
 Confederation of Trade Unions (GCTU), continued to perform many
 of its traditional functions as "the transmission belt from the
 Communist Party to the masses." Despite its new name and
 attempts to recast its image, the GCTU retained most of the
 AUCCTU's top leadership and apparatus and continued to enjoy a
 privileged and close relationship with the Government and
 Communist Party, at least until August.
 Independent labor leaders considered the official trade unions'
 control of social functions usually performed by the State as
 the greatest obstacle to the growth of true, independent trade
 unions in the U.S.S.R. Attempts during 1991 by the independent,
 democratic unions to break this monopoly had little effect.
 With the postcoup breakdown of central authority, labor
 activists in some areas were emboldened to wrest for themselves
 a role they were previously denied. Independent labor activists
 reported throughout 1991 that enterprise directors, local
 government officials, and police and judicial authorities
 applied various forms of pressure on workers who attempted to
 exercise their right to form and join unions. Most commonly,
 worker activists faced physical violence or threats of
 
 
 1289
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 violence, illegal arrest or threats of arrest, legal
 harassment, threats of dismissal or the withdrawal of benefits
 controlled by the state, or outright dismissal. Police beat
 several independent labor activists badly in 1991, and at least
 one died as a result of police brutality. Individual
 enterprise directors prohibited independent worker activity in
 some mines.
 Notwithstanding the obstacles, the independent Soviet workers'
 movement, which began as a mass movement only in the summer of
 1989, continued to grow. The 9-week miners' strike in March
 and April found support in some areas of Byelarus long
 considered a bastion of Communist Party stability, bringing
 life close to a standstill for short periods of time. Workers
 in numerous coal-related factories in Ukraine and Siberia also
 joined in support of the miners' demands.
 There were credible reports of groups of workers forming small,
 independent trade unions in various areas of the country. In
 St. Petersburg, public transport workers displayed their
 independence from the State on several occasions. In October
 the Independent Union of Miners (NPG) formally established a
 branch in Byelarus, textile workers formed a free trade union
 in Donetsk in eastern Ukraine,.as did railway workers in
 western Ukraine. The NPG also founded an independent,
 democratic union organization in Russia in November.
 Cooperative employees in Kazakhstan joined together to form a
 union, Birlesu. The independent airline pilots' and air
 traffic controllers' unions grew in membership. Despite the
 Soviet Constitution's prohibition of independent trade unions
 in the armed forces, the clandestine union Shield continued to
 organize.
 The coal miners in the Donbas region of eastern Ukraine and
 Kuzbas region of western Siberia continued to represent the
 largest and most potent centers of independent organized labor
 in the Soviet Union. The miners' strike in the spring, which
 at its height involved dozens of mines and more than 200
 enterprises and caused severe disruptions to production in
 vital coal-related industries, demonstrated the important role
 that independent, democratic labor groups now play nationwide.
 Repeating demands first raised in 1990 for radical changes in
 Soviet political and economic life, including the resignation
 of top Soviet leaders, the miners' strike forced the Government
 to cede power from Moscow to republic-level coal ministries.
 The Government responded to the miners' strike with a series of
 decrees and administrative measures designed to restrict
 further the circumstances under which workers can strike.
 Labor legislation passed by the U.S.S.R. Supreme Soviet in
 October 1989 formally established the right to strike for the
 first time but also provided for a lengthy dispute settlement
 process. The law banned strikes in the Government and military
 services and contained broad, undefined references to
 "essential services" in which strikes could also be prevented.
 In March the Government suspended completely the workers' right
 to strike for 2 months.
 In April the Ukrainian supreme soviet announced a ban on strikes
 on Ukrainian territory. In May the U.S.S.R. Supreme Soviet
 issued a decree providing for administrative and criminal
 prosecution for persons organizing work stoppages in key
 industries. It also amended the 1989 law, announcing that the
 Government may postpone or suspend strikes and that "political"
 sttikes would henceforth be illegal. Despite these decrees,
 
 
 1290
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 several hundred thousand workers remained off the job. Some
 leaders of the workers' movement were prosecuted by local
 authorities for their role in organizing the spring strikes.
 The International Labor Organization's (ILO) Committee of
 Experts noted in 1991 that the 1990 Law on Collective Labor
 Disputes still refers to the enterprise works committees as the
 only competent trade union body for the settlement of labor
 disputes, thus precluding the legal establishment of new
 independent organizations outside the official structure.
 The GCTU continued its control over the Communist labor
 international, the World Federation of Trade Unions, which in
 1991 played a much reduced international role following the
 collapse of Communist-dominated trade unions in central and
 eastern Europe and uncertainties created by the democratic
 reform process.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Virtually all Soviet workers, who almost automatically were
 made members of an affiliate of the AUCCTU, became members of a
 GCTU affiliate when the AUCCTU was disbanded. Outside the
 mining industry and some segments of the air transport
 industry, the vast majority of Soviet workers still have to
 rely on the official unions and factory and enterprise work
 councils to express their interests.
 Soviet authorities revealed a reluctant willingness to deal
 with the independent labor movement. In the wake of the miners'
 strike in July 1990, the central Government conceded one of the
 NPG's major demands, the right to conclude wage agreements with
 the central Government. After repeated attempts to get the
 State to the bargaining table failed, the miners launched their
 9-week strike in March 1991. Following that strike, the
 Government again granted the NPG the right to negotiate on
 behalf of its members the terms and conditions of employment
 with their enterprises, which were supposed to be put on a
 self-financing basis as part of the economic transition
 process. The NPG, however, was frustrated in many attempts to
 conclude collective agreements with individual mines.
 Enterprise directors often refuse to negotiate with NPG
 representatives.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Soviet law contains no prohibition on forced or compulsory
 labor, although the Declaration of Human Rights and Liberties
 adopted by the All-Union Congress of People's Deputies in
 September included language expressly forbidding it, and the
 U.S.S.R. and the Ukrainian and Byelorussian republics have
 ratified one of the ILO's forced labor conventions. Convicted
 criminals, including those in some republics confined for
 political offenses, were commonly forced to work, often under
 very difficult conditions and for minimal wages, in local
 projects and to assist in the production of primary and
 manufactured goods. Inmates at some correctional labor
 colonies struck over harsh work conditions, demanding that camp
 norms be brought into conformity with international standards.
 The Ministry of Internal Affairs discussed using part of the
 large profits derived from the Soviet prison system to finance
 penal reforms. Labor camp prisoners were widely known to be
 the main labor force for the Soviet lumber industry.
 
 
 1291
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The law establishes a statutory minimum age for employment of
 16. However, numerous reports appeared of child labor in the
 Central Asian republics and the Caucasus, particularly in the
 agricultural sector.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The bottom rung of the official pay scales for each industry in
 effect serve as an administrative minimum wage. Reform plans
 call for the establishment of minimum wages, usually republic
 by republic, but by year's end these had not yet been
 legislated. Even official trade union spokesmen estimate that
 well over half of the population do not have an income to
 afford a minimum standard of living.
 The labor code sets a limit of 41 hours of work per week.
 However, in practice, workweeks can range from considerably
 less than this to considerably more, depending on local
 circumstances. Many workers work significantly more hours to
 meet end-of-the-month production goals. Other workers work far
 fewer hours, since the disordered state of the Soviet economy
 requires them to spend many hours a day, much of it during
 official work time, searching for basic necessities for their
 families. Officially, workers receive other benefits in
 addition to their wages, such as heavily subsidized prices for
 basic goods and foodstuffs in state stores. The value of these
 benefits, however, has been significantly eroded by growing
 shortages of basic consumer goods and food in state stores. In
 addition, the quality of state-subsidized housing, health care,
 and transportation, on which the vast majority of the
 population must rely, is generally very low.
 The law establishes minimum conditions of workplace safety and
 worker health. However, these standards are generally ignored,
 and no effective enforcement mechanism exists. The Parliament
 in June heard testimony that in a single year over 14,000 died
 on the job, 20,000 became invalids, and some 700,000 workers
 were injured.
 Workplace safety emerged as a major issue in the miners'
 strikes, among airline pilots and air traffic controllers, and
 in the armed forces. In 1991 there again were numerous mining
 disasters in the Donbas, and workers report that few
 significant safety measures had been adopted in the aftermath
 of these accidents.
 
 
 1292
