 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 The Soviet Union (U.S.S.R.) is a one-party centralized state
 in which the Communist Party attempts to direct all aspects of
 the nation's life, including all economic, social, and
 cultural development. The nomenklatura, or Soviet personnel
 management system, in which all senior party and government
 appointments are essentially decided by the Secretariat and
 Politburo of the Communist Party Central Committee, allows a
 relatively small group of the party elite to use the party as
 its instrument of effective rule.
 The Constitution formally provides for most internationally
 recognized human rights and guarantees the right to education,
 medical care, and work. In fact, however, there is little
 tolerance of actions and attitudes which are not directly
 controlled by party or government agencies. The suppression
 of constitutionally guaranteed rights is justified by broadly
 worded constitutional provisions stating that such rights may
 not be exercised in a manner contrary to the interests of
 society as defined by the party and the Government, and
 limited in practice by a number of vaguely worded laws and
 articles of the Criminal Code.
 Soviet performance in the realm of human rights fails to meet
 accepted international standards. The regime's common
 response to efforts to exercise freedom of expression is to
 incarcerate those concerned in prison, labor camp, or
 psychiatric hospital. Mistreatment of political prisoners has
 a long history and continued in 1984. Inadequate food,
 clothing, and shelter, heavy manual labor, unsatisfactory
 medical care, isolation, extended interrogation, and threats
 against prisoners' families are characteristic abuses. Many
 prisoners are denied the right to correspond with their
 families or to receive family visits. Some are confined to
 special psychiatric hospitals and the psychiatric wards in
 general hospitals where they are often subjected to cruel and
 degrading treatment and administered doses of powerful and
 painful drugs. The regime also continues to exile prisoners
 to remote areas of the Soviet Union or force them to emigrate.
 Through censorship, radio jamming, electronic monitoring,
 police informers, and other devices, the party and Government
 control the amount of information reaching Soviet citizens and
 the outside world.
 Public associations are subject to the control of the
 authorities, who suppress any which try to operate outside the
 confines of direct state supervision. Trade unions are
 strictly subordinated to the Communist Party and act as agents
 of the Government in implementing economic policy and ensuring
 labor discipline. They are not collective bargaining agents
 for workers. Freedom of religion is closely circumscribed,
 and religious believers are subject to many restrictions in
 the officially atheist U.S.S.R. Freedom of movement is
 neither guaranteed by law nor respected in practice.
 Persecution of individuals who attempt to express themselves
 outside the framework of state-controlled organs increased
 during 1984. Human rights monitors, religious believers,
 proponents of greater cultural and political rights for ethnic
 minorities, and peace activists were all subject to arrest and
 imprisonment. Sentences to psychiatric hospitals and labor
 camps contributed to the deaths of several human rights
 activists.
 
 
 1120
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 New regulations went into effect strengthening laws pertaining
 to state security, broadening the definition of treason, and
 establishing sanctions against providing unauthorized
 information or assistance to foreigners.
 Moreover, in 1984 the authorities have further cut back Jewish
 emigration from the Soviet Union, which had been reduced
 steadily in recent years. Some officials have made blatantly
 false statements that all those Jews who wanted to emigrate
 have already left. These statements coincided with a
 significant increase in official expressions of anti-Semitism,
 led by the *Anti-Zionist Committee of the Soviet Public.'
 This could mean there is pressure from some quarters to end
 Jewish emigration completely.
 Abroad, the Soviet Union continues its occupation of
 Afghanistan and its support of the Vietnamese occupation of
 Cambodia. There is evidence that the Soviet Union is
 responsible for the use of chemical warfare in Afghanistan,
 Laos, and Kampuchea.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There are occasional reports of unusual circumstances
 surrounding the deaths of people engaged in religious or
 political dissent, or members of their families. The
 possibility of official involvement in such deaths, however,
 can neither be proved nor investigated. On the other hand, a
 number of political prisoners and common criminals do perish
 each year in prison and in forced labor camps due to the
 severe conditions: strenuous physical labor, a
 semi-starvation diet, extreme cold, and lack of medical care.
 It is impossible to estimate the number of such deaths.
 Reports were received during 1984 of the deaths of three
 prominent Ukraininan human rights activists, Oleksiy Tikhy,
 Yuriy Litvin, and Valeriy Marchenko, who all perished while in
 detention. These deaths, resulting from the brutal conditions
 inherent in the prison camp system, must be seen as the direct
 outcome of government policy.
 Soviet law provides for the imposition of capital punishment
 for a variety of offenses, including some economic crimes
 (e.g. fraud) which are not generally considered capital
 offenses outside the U.S.S.R. Statistics on capital
 punishment, however, as well as statistics on crime in
 general, are not published by the Soviet Government.
 b. Disappearance
 There are no known instances of prolonged or permanent
 disappearance in recent years. However, it is not unusual for
 people to be arrested or confined in psychiatric facilities
 without next of kin being notified. Concerned relatives are
 expected to initiate an inquiry with the authorities to find
 out if and when their family member was arrested, and where he
 or she is being held.
 
 
 1121
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 It is clear that mistreatment of political prisoners during
 incarceration and interrogationdoes occur. Although the
 criminal codes of the Russian and other Soviet Republics
 assert that punishment does not have the goal of causing
 physical suffering or the destruction of human dignity,
 reliable sources have described stark, often inhuman,
 conditions in Soviet labor camps: isolation, extreme cold,
 poor diet and malnutrition, compulsory hard labor in difficult
 conditions, inadequate medical care, and frequent, arbitrary
 deprivation of a prisoner's limited right to receive
 correspondence and visits from his family. Prisoners cannot
 practice their religion and may be punished for attempts to do
 so. They have been beaten by other camp inmates at the
 instigation of camp authorities. Political prisoners have
 then been falsely accused of having created a disturbance and,
 on the basis of the fabricated charges, consigned to the camp
 prison or solitary confinement.
 Among the victims of such abuses in 1984 were Yakov Levin, an
 Odessa refusenik, who sustained life-threatening injuries from
 beatings following his October 16 arrest; Iosif Berenshtein, a
 Kiev Hebrew teacher, who was savagely beaten and blinded while
 imprisoned following his December 12 trial; Aleksandr
 Shatravka and Vladimir Brodskiy, both members of the
 unofficial "Group to Establish Trust between the U.S.S.R. and
 the U.S.A.,' who were both badly beaten; and Anatoliy
 Marchenko, former member of the Helsinki Monitoring Group, who
 was handcuffed and clubbed by camp officials so severely in
 December 1983 that the bruises remained throughout much of
 1984. Prisoners are more frequently subjected to
 psychological pressures such as isolation, extended
 interrogation, and threats against their families. The
 security organs of the Government are responsible for these
 abuses.
 The Government continues to confine political and religious
 activists to psychiatric hospitals where they are often
 subjected to painful drugs not in standard psychiatric use.
 This treatment is, in reality, a form of torture. Some
 sources estimate that up to 1,000 people may at present be
 confined in psychiatric hospitals for political reasons. In
 1981 the Soviet Ministry of Health's chief neuropsychiatrist
 publicly stated at the seventh All-Union Congress of
 Neuropathologists and Psychiatrists that 1.2 percent of
 patients in Moscow psychiatric hospitals were there "in
 connection with visits to state agencies to present groundless
 complaintsand slanderous statements." The Soviet Union
 withdrew from the World Psychiatric Association in February
 1983 rather than face probable censure from that body for its
 abuses of psychiatry.
 Abuses continue to be numerous. On August 31 Catholic
 activist Aleksandr Riga was sentenced by a Moscow court to
 indefinite treatment in a special psychiatric hospital,
 allegedly for promoting religious practices among friends and
 disseminating religious material. Special psychiatric
 hospitals, as contrasted with ordinary psychiatric hospitals,
 are also used for the incarceration of particularly dangerous
 criminals, often including murderers and rapists. Valeriy
 Tyurichev, who wrote a manuscript on socialist economics in
 1979 and, having failed to get it published, applied to
 
 
 1122
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 emigrate in 1980, has spent 3 years in psychiatric hospitals.
 In mid-September he was transferred to a special psychiatric
 hospital in Dnepropetrovsk. Other cases of Soviet psychiatric
 abuse include that of Fyodor Parasenkov, who has been in
 Chernyakhovsk special psychiatric hospital since 1974
 apparently for advocating the introduction of private
 enterprise; and Nikolay Baranov, who refuses to give up his
 demand to emigrate and was recently transferred to Leningrad's
 special psychiatric hospital. Nikolay and Nadezhda Pankov
 were incarcerated in psychiatric hospitals for several months
 during 1984 after appealing to party General Secretary
 Konstantin Chernenko for permission to emigrate. Nadezhda
 Fradkova, a friend and supporter of incarcerated Riga
 refusenik Zakhar Zunshaine, was committed to a Leningrad
 psychiatric hospital on July 19. Psychiatric abuse reached
 its zenith with the death in the spring of 1984 of Alexey
 Nikitin, the Donetsk mining engineer who was forcibly
 imprisoned in a psychiatric hospital after introducing two
 American correspondents to Soviet coalminers in 1980 in order
 to demonstrate their poor living conditions.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Government spokesmen insist that prosecution occurs only in
 cases in which persons commit acts prohibited by law. But the
 provisions of laws under which prosecutions have occurred are
 sufficiently broad that they can be and are used to prosecute
 individuals for the exercise of internationally recognized
 human rights. Among these provisions are:
 -- Article 190-1, 'The dissemination of deliberately
 hostile fabrications slandering the Soviet state and social
 system." This article, introduced in 1965, carries a maximum
 penalty of 3 years' imprisonment;
 -- Article 190-3, "The organization of, or active
 participation in, a group activity violating public order,"
 which carries a maximum penalty of 3 years' imprisonment.
 -- Article 70, *Anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda,*
 which carries a maximum penalty of 7 years' imprisonment and
 up to an additional 5 years in internal exile.
 -- Article 227, "The infringement of the person and the
 rights of citizens under the appearance of performing
 religious ceremonies,' which carries a maximum penalty of 5
 years' imprisonment.
 In addition to these provisions, the authorities continue to
 use criminal code provisions against "parasitism,"
 "nooliganism," and illegal commerce or 'speculation' to harass
 persons for political activity. Dissidents are sometimes
 fired from their jobs, then arrested for parasitism because
 they have no jobs; or they may face fabricated charges for
 common crimes, such as theft of socialist property, or
 possession of drugs or weapons.
 Habeas corpus or its equivalent does not exist. According to
 the code of criminal procedure, pretrial detention can last as
 long as 9 months, and prisoners are not entitled to consult
 with a lawyer until after the conclusion of the pretrial
 investigation. Instances of prolonged detention function, in
 effect, as a form of preventive detention.
 
 
 1123
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 In 1984 the Soviet Government announced changes to existing
 legislation which carry serious negative implications for
 political prisoners and human rights activists. For example,
 in January Soviet authorities formally announced the
 tightening of statutes on so-called state crimes contained in
 the law of December 25, 1958. Specifically, the definition of
 treason in Soviet legislation was broadened to include acts
 which threaten the "state security' of the U.S.S.R. This is a
 concept which has never been clearly defined but which, in
 principle, might embrace any political offender.
 Individuals also often face administrative jailing for periods
 of up to 15 days. In 1984 several Moscow peace activists were
 jailed for 15-day periods allegedly for "hooliganism" or
 resisting the authorities.
 The practice of exiling political dissenters, often to
 isolated Siberian villages or other outlying areas, dates back
 to Tsarist times and continues under Soviet rule. Exile often
 follows prison and, in practice, means confinement in a remote
 village in conditions of extreme cold, isolation, and scarcity
 of fresh food. These conditions are mitigated only by the
 privilege of receiving food parcels from family members,
 moving about within a limited area, finding work (albeit
 frequently far below one's capacity), and arranging one's own
 often primitive accommodations. The families of exiles are
 permitted to live with them.
 Andrey Sakharov's exile in the city of Gor'kiy, an area closed
 to foreigners, is the best-known example of this practice.
 During the first half of 1984 the authorities continued to
 deny him normal contact with scientific colleagues and to
 subject him to surveillance, apartment searches, and
 interference with his mail and telephone communications. His
 situation deteriorated significantly with the May 2 arrest of
 his wife, Yelena Bonner, arrested on trumped-up charges of
 conspiracy with U.S. diplomats to seek asylum in the U.S.
 Embassy to publicize her request for medical treatment
 abroad. Mrs. Bonner was formally accused of anti-Soviet
 slander, and confined to Gor'kiy for pretrial investigation.
 Andrey Sakharov immediately undertook a hunger strike in
 support of his wife's demand for medical treatment abroad, but
 after 5 days was forcibly separated from her and placed under
 medical care. Reports that he was being force-fed and
 administered *mind altering" drugs were countered by official
 and quasi-official assurances that he was "well," including
 one film clip of him eating while being handed a July edition
 of a Western magazine. Subsequent reports indicate that he is
 again living with his wife in their Gor'kiy apartment. But
 family and friends have been unable to establish direct
 contact with the pair since early May. Bonner herself was
 convicted on August 17 of anti-Soviet slander and sentenced to
 5 years of internal exile, presumably in Gor'kiy with her
 husband. Despite numerous expressions of concern around the
 world about the plight of Sakharov and Bonner, the Soviet
 authorities have refused to allow independent western
 observers to meet with them to confirm their condition.
 Reports that Sakharov has been visited by Soviet scientists do
 not mitigate the fact that he and his wife remain effectively
 cut off from contact with family members and the outside world.
 Persons released from exile often are not allowed to return to
 their former places of residence. Some are forced to live in
 other areas of the country, thereby insuring a de facto
 
 
 1124
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 continuation of their exile. Others have nowhere to turn and
 return to their old homes without residence permits, where
 they run the risk of being rearrested for violating residence
 laws.
 In addition to internal exile, exile abroad is also
 occasionally employed against dissidents. The authorities
 force the activist and, in most cases, his immediate family to
 emigrate, then strip them of Soviet citizenship. Peace
 activist Valeriy Godyak was treated in this way in 1984.
 It is difficult to estimate the number of political prisoners
 in the U.S.S.R., although 10,000 is generally considered the
 minimum. Large areas of the country are closed to foreigners,
 and reports of trials in these and other remote regions may
 not become known to foreign observers. An unknown number of
 political prisoners have been convicted of 'ordinary' crimes
 and therefore incarcerated in camps for common criminals
 rather that in special camps reserved for political prisoners.
 e. Denial of Fair PuDlic Trial
 Communist party control of society extends to the legal and
 judicial system and is exercised in political cases to negate
 constitutional guarantees of the objectivity and independence
 of the judicial process. Soviet authorities frequently ensure
 that political trials are closed to the public. They may
 require passes for admission to the trial, pack the courtroom
 with government supporters, and harass or detain observers
 outside the courtroom. The location and date of a trial are
 often announced on short notice and may be changed with little
 warning. Western journalists and diplomats are regularly
 denied access to political trials and permission to visit
 cities outside Moscow where trials are taking place.
 Defense attorneys, like judges, are subject to extra-legal
 regime pressures and constraints. About 60 percent of Soviet
 attorneys are party members; they must, moreover, have special
 clearance to act as defense counsel in a political case.
 Attorneys who overstep their assigned role of providing a pro
 forma defense risk losing their clearance and can jeopardize
 tneir professional standing. In any case, even the most
 honest and vigorous defense is of limited utility since there
 is little doubt that the outcome of political trials is
 determined beforehand by the authorities. There has been no
 known instance of acquittal in a political trial since the
 October 1917 Revolution. The most that a conscientious and
 courageous defense counsel can hope to accomplish, therefore,
 is to provide a defendant moral support and contact with
 family members during pretrial detention, and then conduct the
 defense in such a way as to highlight irregularities in the
 prosecutor's case and in the judgb's conduct of the trial.
 No trials of civilians by military courts have been reported
 in recent years. There may be a special system of courts
 established to handle judicial matters concerning the
 extensive network of secret institutes in the country, but no
 information is available on the procedures under which these
 courts function.
 Psycniatric commitment of dissidents, described earlier, is a
 process which allows the Government to circumvent many of the
 requirements of the legal process and to incarcerate activists
 at the discretion of officials and psychiatrists.
 
 
 1125
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Government interference in personal life is pervasive. The
 authorities maintain a widespread network of informers in
 apartment buildings and in the workplace and regard it as a
 citizen's duty to inform them about unorthodox attitudes of
 family members and friends. They electronically monitor the
 residences and telephones of Soviet citizens and foreigners at
 will. The Constitution guarantees the inviolability of the
 homes of citizens of the U.S.S.R. and, in theory, no one may
 enter a home against the will of the resident 'without legal
 grounds.' In practice this provision has little restraining
 effect on investigative agencies, and well-documented cases of
 forced entry and illegal searches continued in 1984.
 Through their control of mail and telephone circuits, the
 authorities selectively restrict contact between citizens and
 foreigners. They often intercept mail, and many citizens say
 that they have received less mail from abroad in 1984 than in
 previous years. The Soviet Freight Forwarding Company,
 Vneshposyltorg, decided to cease forwarding packages from
 abroad to Soviet recipients as of October 1, 1984. This
 change will make it impossible for persons sending parcels
 from outside the U.S.S.R. to prepay the (often sizable) custom
 duties. For the Soviet recipient, these can reach prohibitive
 levels if paid in Soviet currency. This is another step
 towards reducing the level of contact and material support
 many Soviet citizens (especially dissidents and activists)
 have enjoyed in the past. The Government continues to jam
 Western radio broadcasts, an action clearly inconsistent with
 the provisions of the Helsinki Final Act.
 On July 1 a new decree came into effect under which Soviet
 citizens who render material assistance to foreigners in the
 form of 'housing or means of transportation or.. .other
 services in violation of the established regulations' can be
 administratively fined up to 100 rubles. This new decree
 seriously circumscribes the individual Soviet citizen's right
 to offer nospitality to foreign friends and seems designed to
 put an end to unsanctioned contacts between Soviet citizens
 and foreigners. In conjunction with this, 1984 witnessed an
 unprecedented campaign of harassment, primarily on the part of
 Leningrad authorities, aimed at discouraging such contacts.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution provides for most internationally accepted
 political liberties, but requires that their exercise be in
 accordance with the *interests of the people and the
 strengthening and development of the socialist system.' In
 practice, the Government does not tolerate dissident behavior
 and has not hesitated to imprison persons for exercising
 freedom of expression, even when their actions did not violate
 Soviet law. All information media are controlled by the party
 and the Government; almost all of them are owned or operated
 by the party and the Government. Publications, films, and
 radio and television scripts are subject to censorship by the
 Main Administration for Safeguarding State Secrets in the
 Media. Soviet journalists are subject to the discipline of
 tne Communist Party and subordinated to the directives of
 their editorial superiors, themselves trusted members of the
 
 
 1126
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 party. Therefore, journalists to a greater or lesser degree
 are executors of the official policies of the Government.
 All universities and research institutes are operated by the
 state or party; teaching and research are required to conform
 to official expectations. In areas such as foreign policy and
 contemporary Soviet history, these expectations define very
 tightly the content of research and teaching, to the virtual
 exclusion of independent investigation. In areas that are
 less sensitive politically, independent scholarly conclusions
 may be published within certain broad limits. All books in
 the Soviet Union are published by the state or party, and are
 subject to prepublication censorship. Freedom of expression
 is substantially greater in fiction and scholarship not
 involving politically sensitive subjects. However, the
 Government's range of political sensitivities is broad, and
 censorship standards are often applied in an arbitrary and
 capricious manner.
 Openly dissident views on important questions of policy do not
 appear in the media, and no criticism of the party, the
 Government, or the leadership is permitted except to correct
 an administrative abuse, such as inefficient lower-level
 domestic policy implementation, or to discredit an individual
 responsible for violating party norms. Within narrow limits,
 arguments for and against prospective policies do appear
 before final decisions are taken on them, but once such a
 decision is taken dissenting views rarely appear in public.
 Open criticism of officials takes place only when decided upon
 by higher officials. Debate within the leadership is
 occasionally reflected in published texts where polemics and
 criticism, expressed in veiled language, allow experienced
 readers to identify policy trends and controversial issues.
 Such policy debate does not call into question the existing
 political and social system.
 The authors of literary, religious, and political samizdat
 (self-published) materials have been subject to a wide range
 of harassment, including loss of employment, warnings from the
 Committee for State Security (KGB), apartment searches, and
 ultimately, arrest and conviction, or incarceration in mental
 hospitals. In 1984 for example, Yuriy Shikhanovich and Yelena
 Sannikova were sentenced to labor camp followed by internal
 exile for working on samizdat material. Lina Tumanova,
 another human rights activist, is awaiting trial on similar
 charges.
 The Government continues to maintain tight control over the
 work of foreign journalists and the circulation of foreign
 newspapers. Overt censorship of wire transmissions of news
 stories out of the country is infrequent, but the authorities
 harass selected foreign journalists and, in some cases, either
 delay or deny visas or curtail visas already issued. The
 Government has taken some steps to improve the working
 conditions of foreign journalists, such as the issuance of
 multiple entry-exit visas, in connection with implementation
 of the Helsinki Final Act.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Constitution grants citizens the right to associate in
 public organizations "in accordance with the aim of building
 communism.' In practice, public associations are organized by
 the authorities or are subject to their strict control, and
 
 
 1127
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 the Government suppresses any attempt to function
 independently of its supervision. As a result of a campaign
 during the last few years, all independent human rights or
 peace groups have been suppressed and have ceased
 functioning. These include the Helsinki Watch Groups, which
 attempted to monitor the Government's implementation of the
 Helsinki Final Act, and the Psychiatric Watch Group, which
 monitored Soviet abuses of psychiatry. Members of these
 groups have been imprisoned or exiled, and many still face
 persecution. In October, for example, former Ukrainian
 Helsinki monitors Iosif Zisels and Mykola Horbal were arrested
 for a second time. Zisels, who had previously served a 3-year
 term, was charged with anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda.
 Horbal was arrested for anti-Soviet slander two days before
 his scheduled release from labor camp after serving a 5-year
 sentence on a trumped-up attempted rape charge.
 The authorities have even repressed independent non-political
 associations such as the Invalids' Group, which attempted to
 lobby for improved medical and social services for invalids.
 Trade unions are strictly subordinated to the Communist Party
 and act as agents of the Government in implementing economic
 policy and ensuring labor discipline. They in no respect act
 as collective bargaining agents. The International Labor
 Organization's Committee of Experts recently noted that the
 the Soviet Union had contravened the Convention on Freedom of
 Association and Protection of the Right to Organize by
 imposing a constitutional link between the Communist Party and
 trade unions which restricted the right of the unions to
 organize their own activities and formulate their own
 programs. Workers do enjoy a large measure of job security,
 but labor turnover in some industries is high because many
 workers try to compensate for poor working conditions by
 changing jobs. The right to strike is not recognized in the
 Constitution, and strikes are rare.
 Soviet authorities have continued to suppress all unofficial
 labor or political associations which they believe represent a
 challenge to the monopoly of the state. Vladimir Skvirskiy, a
 member of the "Free Interprofessional Association of Workers*
 (SMOT, in its Russian acronym), which aimed at organizing an
 independent trade union, was sentenced in September for the
 fourth time to labor camp, before his previous sentence had
 expired. Another SMOT member, Vladimir Sytinskiy, was
 arrested in August and is presently awaiting trial in
 Leningrad. The "Group to Establish Trust between the U.S.S.R.
 and the U.S.A.,' an independent peace movement, continued to
 come under intense pressure in 1984 with members forced into
 exile (e.g. Valeriy Godyak), arrested, detained, and beaten.
 In March, group member Ol'ga Medvedkova was tried for
 allegedly disobeying the orders of a militiaman. Five months
 pregnant, she was given a suspended sentence of two and
 one-half years in a labor camp. Group members Nikolay Khramov
 and Aleksandr Rubchenko were each jailed 3 times for 15-day
 periods on charges ranging from hooliganism to disobeying
 Soviet authorities, and Marina Chertakova was also
 incarcerated for 10 days. Group members were repeatedly
 detained at police stations or in their homes for varying
 periods of time on evenings when the group was scheduled to
 meet. On one occasion some 50 persons were reportedly
 prevented by authorities from attending a meeting.
 
 40-387 0 - 85 - 72
 
 
 1128
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Constitution guarantees the 'right to profess or not to
 profess any religion and to conduct religious worship or
 atheistic propaganda.' In practice, however, religious
 believers are subjected to many restrictions. Participation
 in religious ceremonies causes exclusion from the Communist
 Party and, sometimes, dismissal from employment. Soviet law
 requires religious congregations with a minimum of 20 adults
 to register with the authorities. In practice, the
 authorities reserve the right to grant or withhold
 registration. Soviet refusal to grant registration can be
 used to limit the number of congregations, or even to deny
 legal status to an entire religious denomination, as has been
 the case, for example, with the Ukrainian Catholic (Uniate)
 Church. Religious believers, moreover, are prohibited from
 engaging in charitable activity, proselytizing, or providing
 religious training to their children. In some instances, the
 authorities have removed children from families which have
 permitted or have conducted such instruction. The number of
 functioning seminaries and other institutions of clerical
 education, and the numbers of students permitted to pursue a
 religious vocation, do not provide a sufficient body of
 trained clergy for even the officially registered
 denominations. Unregistered believers, such as some Baptists,
 Jehovah's Witnesses, Seventh-Day Adventists, and Pentecostals
 also may be subject to a wide variety of repressive measures,
 including harassment at school or place of employment, denial
 of access to housing, dismissal from work, and even
 imprisonment.
 Examples of such repression of religious freedom were abundant
 in 1984. Pentecostal Bishop Stephan Kosyuk and fellow
 worshipper Robert Zimmermann were convicted in Moscow on
 criminal charges of conducting unauthorized worship services.
 Ivan Luchko, a Pentecostal from Rovno, was sentenced during
 the summer to 2 years' deprivation of freedom and 3 years'
 probation reportedly in connection with his religious
 activism. In September, 55 Pentecostal Christians in the
 Soviet Far East went on a month-long hunger strike to
 dramatize the desire of their small community to emigrate.
 Three leaders were subsequently arrested, and Soviet
 authorities moved to take custody of 78 community children
 after their parents had pulled them out of Soviet schools to
 protect them from beatings and harassment. Moscow
 Pentecostals Il'ya and Lydia Staskevich and family conducted a
 14-day hunger strike in May protesting their inability to
 renounce Soviet citizenship and worship freely.  A Moscow
 Pentecostal deacon who led a small congregation of
 parishioners was sentenced in September to 5 years'
 deprivation of freedom for leading unauthorized worship
 services.
 Religious persecution in the U.S.S.R. is without regard for
 religious denomination. Russian Orthodox activist Sergey
 Markus was sentenced in August to 3 years in a labor camp for
 allegedly circulating religious materials and including too
 many religious references in his privately-organized lectures
 on Russian culture. Russian Orthodox priest Nikolay
 Temirbayev was sentenced in June to 2 years' deprivation of
 freedom on the trumped-up charge of hooliganism for allegedly
 beating his wife and trying to strangle one of his
 parishioners. Also in June, Evangelical Lutheran preacher
 Jakob Rein was sentenced in Kazakhstan to 5 years at hard
 
 
 1129
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 labor for allegedly holding non-registered worship services.
 On June 30 police in Kazakhstan stopped the car in which
 Baptists Eduard Ewert, Ivan Tkachenko and Nikolay Loeven (a
 minister) were traveling and confiscated religious literature
 from them. Two weeks later all three were arrested. On May
 22, youth evangelist Peter Peters was sentenced to 3 years in
 a strict regime labor camp for not being officially employed.
 Vladimir Zinchenko, a Baptist whose wife gained notoriety when
 she unfurled a banner (drawing attention to religious
 persecution) in Moscow's Baptist Church during the visit of
 256 members of the U.S. National Council of Churches in June,
 was sentenced on May 31 to 3 years in a strict regime labor
 camp.
 The Soviet central press announced the arrests during 1984 of
 at least seven unregistered Seventh-Day Adventists in Central
 Asia. These included Vladimir Shelkov, son of Adventist
 Leader Vladimir Andreyevich Shelkov, who died in labor camp in
 1980. Also arrested and tried were Vladimir Vasilchenko,
 Gennady Bedarev, Aleksey and Mikhail Murkin, Ivan Cheremisov
 and R. Chernolokova. Charges were described as related to the
 group's underground existence, which was allegedly anti-Soviet
 in nature.
 Tne second half of 1984 also witnessed the beginning of a new
 crackdown on the Ukrainian Catholic (Uniate) Church. Uniate
 priest Vasily Kobrin was arrested on charges of anti-Soviet
 agitation and propaganda on November 12. His colleagues,
 losif Terelya and Grigory Budzynskiy, have also been detained
 and threatened by Soviet authorities. Other reports indicate
 that Soviet authorities burned a Catholic church to the ground
 near Lvov in June, and have closed two Catholic monasteries.
 These moves followed the appearance earlier in the year of a
 new samizdat journal, "The Chronicle of the Catholic Church in
 the Ukraine," produced by Uniate activists.
 The Jewish community faced an exceptionally difficult year in
 1984, which saw a sharp increase in official anti-Semitic
 propaganda thinly veiled as anti-Zionism. The *Anti-Zionist
 Committee of the Soviet Public," under the chairmanship of
 Col. Gen. D. A. Dragunskiy, staged several press conferences,
 one specifically designed to link Zionists to Nazis. A
 television program aired in Moscow in November repeated this
 theme and accused Jewish leaders of conspiring with the Nazis
 to send Jews to the death camps. The authorities' patently
 false propaganda line, espoused by the Committee, continues to
 assert that the Jewish emigration 'problem' has been solved
 since any Jews who wanted to leave the Soviet Union have
 already done so. The overall atmosphere of anti-Semitism was
 as bad in 1984 as it has been at any time in the past several
 decades.
 There have been numerous reports of discrimination against
 Jews, such as denial of access to higher education and certain
 professions. Such revocation of degrees in practice means the
 end of one's career, and usually the loss of one's job and
 income. Many individual Jewish Irefuseniks' (Jews who have
 been refused permission to emigrate) were arrested and/or put
 on trial in 1984.
 Moshe Abramov of Samarkand was sentenced to 3 years in a labor
 camp for hooliganism when he reportedly refused to withdraw
 his emigration application. Jewish activist Zakhar Zunshaine
 from Riga was sentenced on June 29 to 3 years in a labor camp
 
 
 1130
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 for doing little more than writing letters on behalf of his
 own family's emigration efforts. Accused of evading the draft
 since 1977, Moscow refusenik Aleksandr Yakir was only arrested
 after he had passed his 28th birthday and was no longer
 legally eligible for induction. He was nevertheless sentenced
 to 2 years in a labor camp. Iosif Begun, who was sentenced in
 1983 to 7 years in a labor camp and 5 years of internal exile,
 was placed in special confinement for infringement of camp
 rules in May 1984. Scheduled to remain there for 6 months, he
 began a hunger strike and was hospitalized in June.
 July saw the beginning of a major, sustained crackdown on
 Hebrew teachers and other Jewish cultural activists. By
 year's end, nine activists, including four Hebrew teachers,
 had been arrested and three sentenced to labor camp. The
 arrests were accompanied by a series of searches, beatings,
 and threats which sent shock waves through the Soviet Jewish
 community. Moscow Hebrew teachers Aleksandr Kholmianskiy and
 Yuliy Edelstein were arrested in late summer, respectively,
 for hooliganism and possession of drugs. Police reportedly
 located a pistol in Kholmianskiy's room at his parents'
 apartment and drugs in Edelstein's apartment. Close relatives
 assert that the items were in both cases planted by the
 police. In December, Edelstein was sentenced to 3 years in a
 labor camp. Yakov Levin, a Jewish activist from Odessa, was
 sentenced to 3 years in prison on charges of anti-Soviet
 slander for circulating religious materials. His prospective
 father-in-law, Mark Nepomnyashchiy, was also arrested. Their
 friend, refusenik Yakov Mesh, was arrested in October on
 trumped-up charges of resisting the police. The authorities
 released Mesh and dropped charges against him in December due
 to the severe injuries he sustained from a beating
 administered following his arrest. Iosif Berenshtein, a Kiev
 Hebrew teacher, was sentenced to 3 years in a labor camp in
 December, also for allegedly resisting the police. He too was
 savagely beaten while in custody.
 As is the case with other religions, the Soviet authorities
 severely limit the practice of Islam. They restrict the
 opening of mosques, the number of students at religious
 schools, and the number of believers permitted to go on the
 haj to Mecca. In addition, many Muslim religious practices
 have been criticized in the Soviet media as 'survivals of the
 past," although in practice Muslims are perhaps somewhat less
 harassed than Christians for both domestic and foreign policy
 reasons.
 Beyond the persecution of specific classes of believers, the
 Government exerts wide-ranging pressure to discourage
 religious belief in general among its citizens. This pressure
 has intensified in the course of 1984. The Communist Party,
 defined in the Constitution as the 'leading and guiding force
 in Soviet society,* is, according to its rules, an atheistic
 organization. Membership in the party, considered
 incompatible with religious belief, is, in effect, a
 requirement for advancement to most positions of authority or
 prestige in the country. Thus the Government has structured
 career incentives in such a way as to virtually exclude
 practicing believers from educational opportunities and
 desirable careers.
 The official media feature large amounts of anti-religious
 propaganda, and only a few religious publications of
 controlled content, such as the Vestnik of the Russian
 
 
 1131
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 Orthodox Patriarchate, are allowed to appear. The practice of
 religion is also discouraged by strictly applied limitations
 on the number of sacred books, such as the Bible or the Koran,
 which may be printed and by government prohibitions against
 their importation. Few works are published in Hebrew. The
 number of clergymen and places of worship today is only a
 small fraction of the number which existed before the October
 1917 Revolution.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Freedom of movement is neither guaranteed by law nor respected
 in practice. Although citizens are generally free to move
 about witnin the territory of the U.S.S.R., travel in certain
 areas (e.g., frontier regions or areas of military
 significance) requires special permission. All adults are
 issued identity documents or internal passports which must be
 carried on their person during travel in the U.S.S.R. and used
 to register visits of more than 3 days with the local
 authorities. In practice, vast areas of the country remain
 closed to foreigners.
 The right to choose one's place of residence, although
 formally guaranteed by law, is subject to restrictions.
 Everyone is required to register his place of residence. The
 authorities limit the number of residence permits in.some
 large cities, such as Moscow and Leningrad, where housing is
 at a premium and where the Government attempts to maintain
 showcase conditions for foreign tourists--cities free of
 so-called 'undesirable* elements.
 Mustafa Dzhemilev, a Crimean Tatar who has spent much of his
 adult life in labor camps for proclaiming his people's right
 to return to tneir native homeland, was convicted of
 anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda in a February trial in
 Tashkent.
 The U.S.S.R. has ratified the U.N. Charter and other
 international documents in which the right to leave one's
 country and return thereto is recognized. In reality,
 however, Soviet law does not recognize the right of citizens
 to emigrate by choice, and the only recognized motive for
 emigration is reunification of divided families. On this
 basis, emigration increased significantly during the 1970's,
 especially by Soviet Jews, Armenians, and ethnic Germans.
 However, in late 1979 overall monthly emigration levels began
 to drop as the authorities introduced restrictive practices,
 apparently as part of deliberate emigration policy.
 There was a continued sharp drop in the number of Jews allowed
 to emigrate in 1984: 896 compared to approximately 1,300 in
 1983 and over 51,000 during 1979. Many Jews have waited in
 vain for more than 10 years for permission to emigrate.
 Jewish sources estimate that there still are more than 200,000
 Soviet Jews who possess the letters of invitation (vyzovs)
 from Israel necessary for application to emigrate. The number
 of ethnic Germans and Armenians emigrating from the U.S.S.R.
 also declined in the first 9 months of 1984. Only 655 ethnic
 Germans emigrated during this period, compared to 1,017 during
 the same period in 1983. Only 67 Armenians emigrated from the
 Soviet Union to the United States during the first 9 months of
 1984 as compared with 171 for the same period in 1983 and
 
 
 1132
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 4,334 during the first 9 months of 1980, the peak year of
 Armenian immigration to the U.S.
 Currently, 103 Soviet families, numbering some 391
 individuals, are on a United States Government list of people
 who are actively seeking to join relatives in the United
 States and who have been refused exit permission at least
 twice by the Soviet Government.
 At least 22 U.S. citizens living in the Soviet Union have been
 denied permission to leave by the Government, several for many
 decades. In addition, there are at least 20 outstanding cases
 in which the Government has denied the Soviet citizen spouse
 of an American citizen permission to emigrate.
 For the very few who received exit visas in 1984, emigration
 procedures were cumbersome and expensive. The cost of a
 passport for emigration to a 'capitalist" country is 200
 rubles (approximately $232 at the official rate, one
 ruble--S1.16). The mere attempt to submit an emigration
 application frequently involves a variety of administrative
 and extra-legal sanctions, including loss of employment,
 harassment, social ostracism, and long delays.
 While Soviet emigrants generally retain possession of their
 Soviet foreign travel passports when they leave the U.S.S.R.,
 they are not always permitted to return. Some individuals are
 stripped of their citizenship when they are abroad, thus
 precluding their return. Jewish emigrants departing for
 Israel are required to formally renounce Soviet citizenship
 prior to departure, thus effectively precluding their return
 to the U.S.S.R. as Soviet citizens.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 In the Soviet Union, only office holders in either of the
 parallel state and party hierarchies can influence the
 composition of the Government. The Soviet Union is a
 one-party, centralized state in which the Communist Party
 attempts to direct and control all political, economic,
 social, cultural, and other developments. The nomenklatura
 (Soviet personnel system in which all senior appointments are
 essentially decided by the party) allows a relatively small
 group of the Communist Party elite to use the party as the
 instrument of its effective rule of the U.S.S.R. The
 Constitution provides that the Communist Party is the 'leading
 and guiding force of Soviet society and the nucleus of its
 political system, of all state organizations and public
 organizations.* No other organized party or political group
 is tolerated.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government contends that all internationally recognized
 human rights are fully protected in the U.S.S.R. and asserts
 tnat only "socialism' can truly guarantee human rights. The
 Government rejects foreign criticism of its human rights
 record as interference in its internal affairs, despite the
 fact that it is signatory to numerous international documents
 recognizing that human rights are a valid subject of
 
 
 1133
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 international concern. The Soviet Union has been a member of
 the United Nations Human Rights Commission since 1947.
 The authorities do not permit foreigners to investigate the
 status of human rights in the U.S.S.R. International human
 rights organizations such as Amnesty International have
 frequently addressed communications to the Soviet Government
 concerning human rights, but the authorities have declined to
 reply in a substantive manner. The regime also has attempted
 to suppress the Moscow chapter of Amnesty International and
 has published attacks on the organization alleging that it
 works with Western intelligence agencies against the Soviet
 Government. When the United Nations Human Rights Commission
 considers allegations of human rights violations in the
 U.S.S.R., Soviet representatives generally attempt to bar
 discussion of the alleged violations on procedural grounds.
 If such discussion cannot be avoided, the representatives deny
 the substance of the allegations.
 In its 1984 report, Amnesty International called attention to
 the Soviet Union for its imprisonment of political dissidents,
 its use of psychiatry against dissidents, the harsh conditions
 in Soviet penal institutions, the new law allowing authorities
 to extend the sentences of persons already imprisoned, attacks
 on religious practitioners and members of ethnic minorities,
 and the use of the death penalty. Freedom House rates the
 Soviet Union *not free."
 The Soviet Government has cooperated with the United States
 Government in investigating alleged war crimes committed
 during World War II by people who are now citizens or
 residents of the United States. It has permitted the U.S.
 Government to carry out depositions of witnesses in the
 U.S.S.R. and has provided documentation for use in U.S. courts.
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 The coercive, centrally planned Soviet economy is
 characterized by low productivity and widespread production
 and distribution bottlenecks. Chronic shortages of basic
 commodities and foodstuffs, particularly meat, have made long
 lines and a flourishing black market common features of Soviet
 life. What is available to the average Soviet tends to be
 poor in quality and lacking in variety. Although the average
 calorie consumption per capita exceeds minimum requirements,
 the average diet is poorly balanced. The 1983 gross national
 product per capita was $6,675.
 Housing is subsidized in the U.S.S.R. but is in extremely
 short supply. Young married couples are often forced to live
 with relatives and typically have to wait decades for housing
 of their own. In the early 1980's there were 16 million more
 households than housing units, and on average, more than two
 persons for every room. Alcohol abuse has reached crisis
 proportions. Largely as a result of it, the life expectancy
 of Soviet males has fallen from 65.5 years in the early 1960's
 to 62 years in 1980, the last year for which statistics are
 available.
 The various Soviet elites (the party, the military, the
 diplomatic corps, the scientific-technical intelligentsia, the
 cultural and sports establishments) are largely shielded from
 these social and economic hardships. They have access to such
 special benefits as foreign travel, automobiles, quality
 
 
 1134
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 consumer goods and foodstuffs, special medical facilities,
 admission to the best schools, country houses and paid
 vacations in choice resorts, which are not available to the
 average citizen. This allocation of special benefits and
 privileges to elites in a society claiming to be egalitarian
 and classless is one of the Government's most effective means
 of social control.
 Free, universal health care is guaranteed by the Constitution
 and generally provided for in practice. In addition,
 provision for the continuation of income during illness is
 liberal. As of 1977, there were 34.5 physicians and 120.8
 hospital beds per 10,000 persons. The overall quality of
 medical care, however, is low by comparison with Western
 Europe and the United States. There are chronic shortages of
 essential medicines and vaccines, doctors are relatively
 poorly trained, medical equipment generally is below
 international standards, and poor sanitary conditions often
 breed infection and disease. These problems are contributory
 factors to an increased and high infant mortality rate,
 estimated to be 29 per 1,000 live births in 1984.
 Education in the U.S.S.R. is free at all levels and is
 compulsory through the llth year. Basic literacy among
 citizens under 50 is practically universal; only in certain
 areas of central Asia and the Caucasus were some children
 unable to attend school. Competition for entry into
 universities and the better institutes is intense.
 Discrimination on the basis of race, sex, or other grounds is
 .nominally prohibited by the Constitution. However, regime
 attempts to impose the Russian language on minorities have led
 to demonstrations in Georgia and widespread resistance by
 Ukrainians and other minority groups. In recent years,
 numerous reports and investigations by activists have noted
 restrictions on the presence of Jews and members of other
 ethnic groups in universities, research institutes, and other
 organizations.
 Women in the U.S.S.R. enjoy the same legal status as men, and
 are nominally accorded the right to participate in all areas
 of the country's social, political, and economic life. An
 extensive system of day-care service and maternity leave
 benefits, including in some cases up to 1 year's leave from
 work, significantly enhances the ability of women to secure
 and retain employment.
 Traditionally, men occupy the great majority of the leading
 positions in most professions and politically sensitive
 occupations, especially politics. At present, 9 of the 309
 full members of the Central Committee of the Soviet Communist
 Party are women. In employment, more women than men hold the
 less remunerative positions. In the non-European areas of the
 U.S.S.R., cultural, social, and religious traditions
 restricting women to more 'traditional" roles are gradually
 losing their strength as more women, especially in urban
 areas, receive an education.
 
 
 1135
