Russia
Russian authorities continued the crackdown on civil society and government
critics that began in 2012. Enforcement of the “foreign agents” law led to an
unprecedented, nationwide inspection campaign of hundreds of nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs). Dozens of groups are fighting the prosecutors in
courts, refusing to register as “foreign agents.” Parliament adopted laws
restricting LGBT rights and freedom of expression and infringing on the right to
privacy. Abuses in the North Caucasus continue.
Civil Society
A 2012 law requires NGOs receiving foreign funding and conducting broadly
defined “political activity” to register as “foreign agents,” effectively demonizing
them as foreign spies. Authorities define as “political” such work as urging
reforms, raising awareness, and assisting victims of abuse.
From March to May 2013, authorities subjected hundreds of NGOs to invasive
inspections to intimidate groups and pressure them to register as “foreign
agents.”
At time of writing, the authorities filed administrative lawsuits against at least
nine inspected organizations and five administrative cases against leaders of
these groups for refusing to register. Two groups were forced to close as a
result; at least another three chose to wind up operations to avoid further
repressive legal actions. The Prosecutor’s Office ordered dozens of other
groups to register or warned they might need to do so. Many organizations also
faced sanctions for alleged violations of fire safety, tax and labor regulations,
and sanitary norms.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
In June 2013, parliament unanimously adopted a law banning promotion among
children of “propaganda of nontraditional sexual relationships,” meaning lesbian,
gay, bisexual, or transgender (LGBT) relationships. Violators risk stiff
fines, and in the case of foreigners, up to 15 days’ detention and deportation.
Beginning in 2006, similar laws outlawing “propaganda of homosexuality”
among children were passed in 11 Russian regions.
Also in June, parliament passed a law banning adoption of Russian children by
foreign same-sex couples and by unmarried individuals from countries where
marriage for same-sex couples is legal. In September, several deputies introduced
a bill that would make a parent’s homosexuality legal grounds for denial
of parental rights. It was withdrawn later for revision.
Homophobic rhetoric, including by officials, and rising homophobic violence
accompanied debate about these laws. Three homophobic murders were
reported in various regions of Russia in May 2013.
Vigilante groups, consisting of radical nationalists, and Neo-Nazis, lure men or
boys to meetings, accuse them of being gay, humiliate and beat them, and post
videos of the proceedings on social media. For example, in September 2013 a
video showed the rape of an Uzbek migrant in Russia who was threatened with
a gun and forced to say he was gay. A few investigations were launched, but
have not yet resulted in effective prosecution.
Freedom of Expression
In June 2013, President Vladimir Putin signed a law imposing a maximum threeyear
prison sentence for publicly “insult[ing] the feelings of religious believers.”
The law provides no clear definition of acts or speech considered “insulting.”
The law is yet to be enforced.
At time of writing, parliament was debating a bill to ban criticism challenging
the fairness of Nuremberg Trial judgments or actions of anti-Hitler coalitions,
with a maximum three-year prison sentence. Doing so in the media or while
holding a public office carries a harsher criminal penalty of up to five years in
prison.
Arrests and Harassment of Human Rights Defenders,
Government Opponents, and Other Critics
The authorities continue to prosecute people who participated in a large
demonstration at Moscow’s Bolotnaya Square on the eve of Putin’s May 2012 inauguration, based on disproportionate “mass rioting” charges and alleged
acts of violence against police. At time of writing, two people were sentenced to
two-and-a-half and four-and-a-half years respectively in prison, and one was
sentenced to indefinite compulsory psychiatric treatment. A further 24 were
charged, of whom 14 were held in pretrial detention, some ten of them for more
than a year. Twelve of the twenty-four were on trial.
In July, a court sentenced anti-corruption blogger and opposition leader Alexei
Navalny to five years in prison on politically tainted embezzlement charges and
released him pending appeal. On October 16, an appeals court suspended the
sentence.
Two members of the punk group Pussy Riot, convicted on August 17, 2012, for a
40-second stunt in Moscow’s largest cathedral, were repeatedly denied parole
and continued to serve their two-year prison sentences. In September one of
them, Nadezhda Tolokonnikova, went on a hunger strike protesting alleged
inhuman work conditions, sleep deprivation, and threats by prison staff. She
renewed her hunger strike in October to emphasize the threats against her.
Russian authorities held Tolokonnikova incommunicado for over 26 days during
her transfer to a prison facility in Kransoyarsk.
In July, a court in Nizhny Novgorod rejected a petition by the Prosecutor’s Office
to ban the book International Tribunal for Chechnya as “extremist.” The book
calls for the creation of an international tribunal to investigate alleged war
crimes and crimes against humanity committed during two wars in Chechnya. In
October, an appeals court upheld this decision.
In September, Russian authorites arrested 30 activists with the environmental
organization Greenpeace for staging a protest in the Pechora Sea. Investigative
authorities charged them with piracy, then reclassified the charge to hooliganism.
At time of writing, 29 of the 30 had been granted bail and released.
In November, Mikhail Savva, an NGO leader on trial in Krasnador for allegedly
mismanaging a government grant, stated in court that authorities were planning
to press treason charges against him in an effort to intimidate him. Savva said
the authorities referenced the fact that he had received foreign grants for years
and met with US embassy officials, among other things.
North Caucasus
The Islamist insurgency in the North Caucasus republics continued in 2013, particularly
in Dagestan. According to Caucasian Knot, an independent online
media portal, in the first nine months of 2013, 375 people were killed in the
North Caucasus region, including 68 civilians, and 343 people were wounded,
including 112 civilians. Approximately 64 percent of the killings and 71 percent
of the injuries reported by Caucasian Knot occurred in Dagestan.
According to the Memorial Human Rights Center, one of Russia’s most prominent
independent rights groups, from January to June 2013, eight people suffered
abduction-style detentions by government agencies in Dagestan, with five
still unaccounted for at time of writing. Ramazan Abdulatipov, Dagestan’s new
leader, abandoned the “soft power” counterinsurgency policies of his predecessor,
including a commission for return of insurgents to peaceful life and promoting
dialogue with Salafi Muslims. In 2013, persecution by law enforcement
officials of Salafis increased. Unprosecuted abuses, including torture, abductions,
and attacks against suspected insurgents and their families served to
alienate Salafi communities. To combat “extremists,” the authorities condoned
the rise of people’s militias, which have driven some Salafis to flee their
homes.
In July, unidentified assailants shot dead Akhmednabi Akhmednabiev, an independent
journalist and critic of abuses by law enforcement and security agencies.
The official investigation, ongoing at time of writing, acknowledged that
he was killed because of his journalism. Prior to the murder, Akhmednabiev
reported to the authorities death threats he received, but they did not take adequate
steps to investigate. Akhmednabiev is the second journalist covering
counterinsurgency issues murdered in less than two years in Dagestan. The
2011 killing of Khadzhimurad Kamalov remains unresolved.
Five people suffered abduction-style detentions in Ingushetia between January
and March 2013, and two of them “disappeared,” according to Memorial. In
August, the head of Ingushetia’s Security Council, Akhmet Kotiev, was killed in
an alleged insurgent attack.
According to Memorial, one person “disappeared” after abduction by security
forces in Chechnya in the first six months of 2013. Law enforcement and security agencies under the de facto control of Chechnya’s leader, Ramzan Kadyrov,
continued collective punishment against relatives and suspected supporters of
alleged insurgents. Victims increasingly refuse to speak about violations due to
fear of official retribution. Abuses remain unpunished and largely under-reported.
In September, Russia’s Prosecutor General’s Office berated the Chechen minister
of international affairs for lack of cooperation in investigating cases of disappearances
dating to 1990-2000.
Women are forced to wear headscarves in public buildings, and according to
local women’s rights activists, “honor” killings are on the rise in Chechnya.
Cooperation with the European Court of Human Rights
At time of writing, the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) had issued over
200 judgments holding Russia responsible for grave human rights violations in
Chechnya. At least three pertain to violations that law enforcement officials perpetrated
under Kadyrov’s de facto control.
While Russia continues to pay the required monetary compensation to victims,
it fails to meaningfully implement the core of the judgments by not conducting
effective investigations, and failing to hold perpetrators accountable In
October, when the ECtHR ruled on the case of Abdulkhanov and Others v.
Russia, for the first time in a case concerning the armed conflict in Chechnya,
the Russian government acknowledged that there had been a violation of the
right to life.
In June 2013, the ECtHR ruled that Russia violated the European Convention on
Human Rights during the trial and sentencing, on tax evasion and fraud
charges, of former Yukos oil company owner Mikhail Khodorkovsky in 2005 and
awarded US$13,500 damages to the jailed businessman.
Abuses Linked to Preparations for the 2014 Olympic Games
Authorities continued to intimidate and harass organizations, individuals, and
journalists who criticized the local government in the Black Sea city of Sochi,
including for its preparations for the 2014 Winter Olympic Games.
Some migrant workers involved in building Olympic venues and other infrastructure
continued to report that employers failed to provide contracts or
promised wages. Police detained on false charges at least one worker who tried
to complain about exploitation. Local authorities failed to effectively investigate
workers’ complaints and, in September, initiated large-scale raids to detain and
deport irregular migrants ahead of the games in 2014.
The authorities are resettling more than 2,000 families to obtain land for
Olympic venues and infrastructure. Not all of those evicted have received fair
compensation. The authorities refuse to compensate or resettle other families
whose properties have been severely damaged or altered by Olympic construction.
Palliative Care
Restrictive government policies and limited availability of pain treatment persists
and severely hinders the delivery of palliative care. Each year, tens of
thousands of dying cancer patients are denied their right to adequate pain
relief. In May 2013, a doctor in Krasnoyarsk and another woman were found
guilty and fined on charges of illegal trafficking of controlled substances, after
they helped a man in the final stages of cancer and in debilitating pain obtain
opioid pain medicines. In September, an appeals court sent the case for retrial.
The court hearing the retrial excluded a lead defense lawyer from the case.
A May 2013 government decree somewhat eased patients’ access to narcotic
pain medications. However, implementation is problematic.
Disability Rights
The government has taken several high-profile steps to demonstrate its commitment
to ensuring an accessible environment for its approximately 13 million
citizens with disabilities, including implementing its multibillion-ruble
Accessible Environment Program and its decision to host the Sochi 2014 Winter
Paralympics.
However, for many people living with disabilities in Russia, taking part in the
basic activities of daily life can be extremely difficult or even impossible due to
a range of barriers they encounter. These include the lack of ramps and elevators, leading to isolation in their homes; employers’ unwillingness to hire people
with disabilities; and inadequate visual, auditory, and sensory accommodations
in buses, trains, and train stations. Most people with disabilities interviewed
by Human Rights Watch who submitted written complaints to local government
about inaccessible facilities or services reported that the response
was not timely or effective.
Hundreds of thousands of adults and children with disabilities considered to
need constant care currently live in closed institutions, including many who
would like to and could hold jobs and live independently, with certain social
supports.
Migrant’s Rights
In July 2013, Moscow police launched a discriminatory campaign against irregular
migrants, detaining people based on their non-Slavic appearance with the
stated aim of identifying alleged violations of migration and employment regulations.
Several thousand were allegedly taken into custody. Some were
released and others were expelled. Several hundred were put in a makeshift
tent camp and held in inhumane conditions. The campaign to detain and
deport irregular migrants spread to other regions of Russia with high concentration
of labor migrants, including Sochi.
Key International Actors
International actors raised a range of concerns about developments in Russia,
condemning the anti-LGBT “propaganda” law, the “foreign agents” law and the
burdensome inspections of NGOs that followed its adoption, and the flawed
conduct of high-profile trials against political opponents.
In May 2013, the United Nations special rapporteurs for freedom of association,
human rights defenders, and freedom of expression voiced serious concerns
about the “obstructive, intimidating, and stigmatizing effects” of waves of
inspections of Russian NGOs in connection with the “foreign agents” law.
During its Universal Periodic Review at the Human Rights Council, Russia rejected
key recommendations related to freedom of association, LGBT rights, and
abuses of migrant workers in Sochi. The Council of Europe’s secretary general and its commissioner for human rights urged Russia to reevaluate the NGO law,
as did Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe rapporteurs.
European Union High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy
Catherine Ashton spoke out against several “deeply troubling” trends in Russia,
including the crackdown on civil society and political activists, impunity for
past human rights violations, and discriminatory legislation against LGBT persons.
At the conclusion of the June 2013 EU-Russia summit, European Council
President Herman van Rompuy acknowledged that human rights remain an
“important, although difficult, element of our relations.”
EU governments also publicly criticized the human rights situation in Russia.
Germany and France condemned the “foreign agents” law, particularly after
German and French organizations operating in Moscow were inspected.
Officials of many foreign governments and intergovernmental organizations
also voiced strong concerns about the anti-LGBT “propaganda” law.
Although the International Olympic Committee (IOC) publicly affirmed its commitment
to nondiscrimination regarding LGBT people, it has refused to ask
Russia to repeal the “propaganda” law. Former IOC President Jacques Rogge
went no further than to ask Russia for “assurances” that there will be no discrimination
in Sochi. Current IOC head Thomas Bach declined to condemn the
law and stated that the IOC “cannot claim to rise above sovereign states.”
Relations between the US and Russia were particularly strained in 2013. In
December 2012, the US Congress adopted legislation introducing a visa ban
and asset freeze against Russian government officials involved in the death of
whistleblower tax lawyer Sergei Magnitsky and the torture or killing of other
whistleblowers. The initial list included 18 names, 16 of which were directly
connected to the Magnitsky case. In response, the Duma adopted a law banning
US adoptions of Russian orphans. In January 2013, the US withdrew from
the civil society component of the US-Russian Bilateral Presidential
Commission due to disagreements over the “foreign agents” law.
US President Barack Obama canceled a planned September summit with Putin,
citing lack of progress on the bilateral agenda, including on human rights abuses.
A meeting between US and Russian foreign and defense ministers went ahead, but did not address human rights. Obama later noted that he was personally
“offended” by Russia’s “antigay and lesbian legislation.”
Russia’s Foreign Policy
Russia’s foreign policy impeded accountability for humanitarian law violations
and, for much of the year, humanitarian assistance for all in Syria. In its drive to
ensure no “regime change,” no military intervention, and no singling out of the
Syrian government for abuses, Russia, a close ally and supporter of the Syrian
government, also failed to take actions to end war crimes and crimes against
humanity, hold their perpetrators accountable, and ensure access to humanitarian
assistance for people in all parts of Syria, including rebel-held areas.
Until the chemical weapons attacks of August 21, Russia and China continued
to block meaningful action by the UN Security Council regarding Syria.
Following the attack, Russia supported a council resolution requiring the Syrian
government to eliminate its chemical weapons program. Russia also allowed
the passage of a statement by the council’s president calling for immediate,
safe, and unhindered humanitarian access throughout Syria. Russia continued
to obstruct efforts by some council members to refer the situation in Syria to
the International Criminal Court, which would then have the mandate to examine
serious crimes committed by all parties to the conflict.
In 2013, Russia continued proposals to weaken the autonomy of UN treaty bodies.
These included the “supervision” by member states, allowing states under
review to negotiate questions the particular committee would ask.
Despite the explicit mandate of the UN Human Rights Council to respond to situations
of human rights violations, Russia continued to play a negative role by
questioning the council’s engagement in specific countries where engagement
was needed, including Sri Lanka, Belarus, and Syria, branding the council’s
response politicized.