RLJJ@8
The announcement in September that Prime Minister Vladimir Putin would run
for president in 2012 led most analysts to believe that his election is a foregone
conclusion, and cast a shadow over the prospect of much-needed political
reform. Harassment of human rights defenders continues and the working climate
for civil society organizations and activists remains hostile. Impunity for
past abuses and murders of activists in the North Caucasus is rampant.
Russia’s cooperation with international institutions on human rights appears
perfunctory. Several positive developments pertaining to freedom of expression
were offset by detrimental legislative initiatives in other areas.
Human Rights Defenders
Human rights defenders are vulnerable to harassment and violent attack, and
those working in the North Caucasus are especially at risk.
In Chechnya the 2009 murders of three activists—Natalya Estemirova, Zarema
Saidulaeva, and Alik Dzhabrailov—remain unpunished. Impunity for these murders
has had a chilling effect on Chechen activists. In at least two cases in
2011, activists were subjected to severe harassment by officials, but made no
official complaints for fear of retribution.
One activist who spoke out about threats was Supyan Baskhanov, a Chechen
lawyer who runs the Grozny office of the Committee against Torture, a Russian
NGO. In June 2011 Baskhanov helped organize a small, peaceful, anti-torture
rally in Grozny, the Chechen capital. Police dispersed the demonstration,
detained Baskhanov and his colleague, and threatened them with reprisals if
they persevered in efforts to hold police accountable.
Human Rights Watch documented five incidents in 2010 of law enforcement
physically attacking and harassing Dagestani lawyers. In 2011 the authorities
failed to conduct effective investigations into these attacks, despite pledges to
the contrary. Indeed, instead of holding accountable police who beat human
rights lawyer Sapiyat Magomedova in 2010, the authorities charged
Magomedova with using violence against state officials and insulting police officers on duty. Magomedova’s indictment appears to be in retaliation for her
work.
Activists from other Russian regions also faced serious problems. The day
before a civil society forum held in conjunction with the June 2011 European
Union-Russia summit in Nizhny Novgorod, the conference venue suddenly, and
without proper explanation, refused to host the event. It took place elsewhere.
Before the summit, law enforcement officials warned at least 10 local activists
against holding public rallies.
In June 2011 two unidentified men severely beat Bakhrom Hamroev—Central
Asia expert with Memorial Human Rights Center (Memorial), a leading Russian
human rights group—in his Moscow apartment building. It was the second such
beating he had endured in less than six months. Both attacks remain unpunished.
One positive development was the June 2011 acquittal of Oleg Orlov, head of
Memorial, on criminal slander charges. The case stemmed from Orlov’s 2009
statement suggesting that Chechnya’s leader, Ramzan Kadyrov, was responsible
for the murder of Natalya Estemirova. The court’s decision was appealed a
week later and appeal hearings started in October.
A month before the ruling, President Dmitry Medvedev introduced amendments
to Russia’s criminal code that would decriminalize libel and make it an administrative
offense. The amendments are pending in the Duma and will advance
free speech protections in Russia if passed into law.
Killings of Whistleblowers
There was some progress in the investigation of the 2006 murder of journalist
Anna Politkovskaya. In August 2011 a police official was arrested on suspicion
of organizing the murder. However, there is no official information indicating
who ordered Politkovskaya’s murder. Other investigations into attacks on independent
journalists have been largely ineffective.
In 2011 an ad-hoc working group under Medvedev’s Council on Civil Society
conducted the first independent public inquiry into the death of Sergei Magnitsky. Magnitsky, an anti-corruption lawyer who had alleged wide-scale tax
fraud, was prosecuted on trumped-up charges and died in pre-trial custody in
2009. His death generated massive international attention. The working
group’s report appeared to prod the authorities to reactivate the investigation
into the case, which had previously been closed.
Hate Crimes
In May 2011 two ultra-nationalists, Nikita Tikhonov and Evgenia Khassis, were
convicted and sentenced to life in prison and 18 years respectively for the 2009
murders of human rights lawyer Stanislav Markelov and journalist Anastasiya
Baburova.
This unique example of an effective and prompt investigation into the killing of
civil activists appears to be part of a police campaign against neo-Nazism. In
2010, 329 ultra-nationalists were convicted for hate crimes, twice as many as in
2009. This trend continued in 2011, resulting in a gradual fall in violent hate
crimes, especially murders. However, aggressive racism and xenophobia continue
to rise, as evidenced nationalist riots that took place in the December
2010.
Freedom of Assembly
The right to freedom of assembly remains problematic in Russia, where police
frequently disperse public rallies held by civil society activists and the political
opposition. Police use excessive force and arbitrarily detain peaceful protesters.
Courts fine protesters or sentence them to administrative detention.
While Moscow authorities generally permitted the now-traditional freedom of
assembly rallies on the 31st day of each month that has 31 days, similar demonstrations
were rarely allowed in other cities. For example, the authorities in
Nizhny Novgorod dispersed a peaceful rally on March 31 and detained over 20
activists.
May saw a series of violent attacks by private security agents, at times aided by
unidentified men, against individuals protesting the construction of a highway between Moscow and St. Petersburg through the Khimki forest. Police refused
to investigate the attacks. The protesters informed Human Rights Watch of several
cases of excessive use of force against them by police, including the violent
dispersal of a peaceful rally and a beating in police custody.
In October 2010 the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR), in the Alexeev v.
Russia ruling, found Russia in violation of freedom of assembly for denying
activists the right to hold gay pride marches. Despite this legally binding ruling,
the May 2011 gay pride gathering in central Moscow was once again dispersed.
Police used excessive force and failed to protect peaceful protesters from
homophobic violence. One assailant delivered a heavy blow to the head of
Novaya Gazeta journalist Elena Kostyuchenko. She had to be hospitalized.
Elections
With Russian parliamentary elections scheduled for December 4, 2011, the government’s
refusal to register new political parties became a particular concern.
No independent party founded in 2010—Parnas, Other Russia, RotFront,
Motherland-Common Sense—was granted registration. In April 2011 the ECtHR
ruled that the 2006 de-registration of the Republican Party of Russia violated
the European Convention on Human Rights. The court found party registration
requirements were unmanageable for small parties.
In June 2011, in what appeared to be a sudden move towards liberalization,
Medvedev introduced legislation lowering the threshold of votes that parties
must garner to secure a Duma seat from 7 to 5 percent, starting with the 2016
election. However in 2011, as in previous election periods, pro-government parties
benefitted from disproportionate access to media and abuse of administrative
resources, resulting again in an uncompetitive electoral environment.
The Russian government allowed the Organization for Security and Co-operation
in Europe to carry out only limited-scale monitoring of the vote (200 monitors).
In May 2011 Russia’s Central Election Committee adopted a resolution strictly
limiting the activities of election observers, including forbidding Russian citizens to be members of international monitoring missions. Legislative restrictions
make it nearly impossible for Russian NGOs to observe elections.
North Caucasus
According to official statements, the number of insurgent attacks in the North
Caucasus doubled in 2010 compared to 2009. In 2011 the Islamist insurgency
remained on the rise, especially in the Republic of Dagestan. In January a suicide
bomber from the North Caucasus killed 37 people and wounded over 120
at a Moscow airport. The February killing of three tourists in Kabardino-Balkaria,
allegedly by insurgents, prompted the authorities to close ski resorts there.
The authorities’ use of torture, abduction-style detentions, enforced disappearances,
and extrajudicial killings in the course of their counterinsurgency campaign,
coupled with impunity for these abuses, antagonized the population of
the North Caucasus.
Dagestan’s president appeared to seek social consensus and stability, but the
republic had the highest number of documented abductions, according to
Memorial. Between January and September 2011, 28 people were abducted and
nine subsequently “disappeared.” Salafi Muslims remained especially vulnerable
to persecution.
In Ingushetia, 12 local residents were abducted, seven of whom “disappeared”
between January and September, according to Memorial.
Chechen law enforcement and security agencies under Ramzan Kadyrov’s de
facto control continued to resort to collective punishment against relatives and
suspected supporters of alleged insurgents. Memorial documented 11 abductions
of local residents by security forces between January and September 2011.
Five of the abducted subsequently “disappeared.”
Increasingly, victims refuse to speak about violations due to fear of official retribution.
In a letter to a Russian NGO in March 2011 federal authorities stated that police
in the Chechen Republic sabotaged investigations into abductions of local residents and sometimes covered up for perpetrators. The letter marked the first
public acknowledgement of the impotence of federal investigative authorities in
investigating abuses in Chechnya.
Police in Austria gathered evidence of a link between the 2009 murder of a
Chechen refugee, Umar Israilov, and the Chechen leadership, but in 2011 the
Russian authorities ignored judicial requests to question key witnesses in
Russia, including Kadyrov. Israilov had filed a complaint with the ECtHR in 2006
alleging Kadyrov had tortured him. In June 2011 a court in Vienna handed down
sentences ranging from 16 years to life to three men accused of organizing the
murder.
There were no further reports of attacks on women and girls in Chechnya who
refuse to wear headscarves, although those who do not cannot work in the public
sector or attend schools and universities.
Cooperation with the European Court of Human Rights
In June the Duma received draft legislation to allow Russia’s Constitutional
Court to override certain ECtHR judgements. If adopted, this initiative would
impede implementation of ECtHR rulings, place Russia in violation of its international
legal obligations, and obstruct access to justice for Russians.
At this writing the ECtHR had issued more than 210 judgments holding Russia
responsible for grave human rights violations in Chechnya. Russia continues to
pay the required monetary compensation to victims. But it fails to meaningfully
implement the core of the judgments, chiefly because it does not conduct effective
investigations and hold perpetrators accountable.
Health Issues and Palliative Care
Access to quality healthcare remains a serious problem in Russia. Ill-advised
government policies around drug treatment and HIV prevention continued to
undermine Russia’s battle against the HIV epidemic, leading to significant numbers
of preventable new infections and deaths. Although over 300,000
Russians die of cancer each year, with many facing severe pain, available palliative care services remained limited. As a result, hundreds of thousands of
patients die in avoidable agony each year. In much of the country, the government
does not make oral morphine available through the public healthcare system,
or adequately train healthcare workers on modern pain treatment methods.
Existing drug regulations are excessively restrictive and limit appropriate
morphine use for pain relief.
Migrant Worker Rights
Russia hosts between 4 and 9 million migrant workers who come overwhelmingly
from states of the former Soviet Union. Thousands are employed in building
sports venues and other infrastructure necessary for Russia to host the 2014
Winter Olympic Games in Sochi. Some workers reported employers’ failure to
provide contracts, adequate housing, or payments in full or on time. In October
2010, numerous migrant workers in Sochi protested non-payment of wages;
some employers retaliated against workers with irregular work status by
denouncing them to the authorities. Several of these workers were deported.
Property Expropriation and Evictions before the 2014 Olympics
To make way for venues for the 2014 Winter Olympics, hundreds of families living
in the Adler region of Sochi have lost their property through state expropriations.
The regional government provided most homeowners with compensation,
but in many cases these amounts and expropriation procedures were neither
fair nor transparent.
Key International Actors
The EU’s human rights consultations with Russia continued to be an ineffective
tool for advancing human rights. At the June EU-Russia summit, Herman Van
Rompuy, European Council president, noted “strong concerns” about human
rights and stressed the importance of “respect for the international obligations
and political pluralism” in the context of upcoming elections. Additionally, the
European Parliament adopted three critical resolutions on Russia that have
addressed the human rights situation.
Widespread public outcry, including by German politicians, forced the German
nonprofit group Quadriga to reverse a decision to award a prestigious prize to
Vladimir Putin. The Quadriga Prize invokes the “moral courage of the civil movement”
that brought the fall of the Berlin Wall.
The Civil Society Working Group under the United States-Russia Bilateral
Presidential Commission continued its work and discussed issues such as child
protection, migration, prison reform, and corruption.
In July the US State Department imposed a visa ban on around 60 Russian officials
implicated in the death of Sergei Magnitsky. In July 2011 the Dutch parliament
unanimously endorsed a Magnitsky-like bill, and the European parliament
in December 2010 adopted a resolution recommending similar sanctions to
countries in Europe. In response Medvedev ordered the government to develop
similar measures against US citizens.