 RUSSIA
 In its first year of post-Soviet existence, Russia made substantial progress toward
 democratic change, the reform of its political and economic systems, and the dis-
 mantling of the remnants of the former Soviet state. President Boris Yeltsin, popu-
 larly elected in June 1991,_governs with the Russian Parliament under the amended
 1978 Russian Federation Constitution. Structurally and constitutionally a holdover
 from the Soviet period, the Parliament consists of the Congress of People's Deputies,
 which generally meets twice a year, and the smaller Supreme Soviet, which sits per-
 manently. Conflict between the two branches over economic and constitutional re-
 form, which occurred throughout the year, peaked at the Congress' December ses-
 sion. Nonetheless, at year's end a Yeltsin government, dedicated to the ontinuation
 of reforms, was in place with former Deputy Prime Minister for Fuels and Energy
 Viktor Chernomyrdin as Prime Minister. The Congress agreed to Yeltsin's proposal
 for a referendum in April 1993 to determine the delineation of constitutional pow-
 ers.
 
 
 885
 In January 1992, the Government initiated its deep and far-reaching economic re-
 form intended to transform the Soviet command economy rapidly into a free market.
 The program featured price liberalization a decree on bankruptcy, and by fall a
 large-scale privatization program designed to turn every Russian into an owner of
 shares in enterprises. As a result, the economy has become increasingly "mone-
 tized," shortages have generally eased, and the private sector is growing rapidly.
 Nevertheless, the economy continued its serious decline as industrial production
 plummeted, inflation soared, the value of the ruble dropped precipitously, and tradi-
 tional trade patterns were disrupted. Resistance to the reform package in Par-
 liament increased through the year as the painful process of weaning unprofitable
 state enterprises from government subsidies began to be felt. Attempts to maintain
 an economic community on the basis of the Commonwealth of Independent States
 unraveled as many former republics increasingly went their own way. However, to-
 ward the end of the year, competition between producers and a coherent system of
 property and contract rights began to emerge.
 Russia adopted legislation to end the repressive political activity of the former
 Committee for State Security (KGB) in 1992. The Parliament passed two laws codi-
 fying President Yeltain's 1992 decree dividing the KGB into two separate agencies:
 the Foreign Intelligence Service (SVR) and the Ministry of Security (MBRF). Both
 agencies are banned from monitoring domestic political activity. The 1992 laws re-
 quire both organizations to respect human and civic rights, outline rules and proce-
 dures govermng their activities and investigations, and establish presidential and
 legislative oversight over each agency's activities. Legislative oversight of the secu-
 rity services, however, is still in its infancy and is hampered by close ties between
 the security services and the parliamentarians charged with their supervision. Al-
 though the Russian Government began to plan military spending in a more open
 and democratic fashion, figures for total military expenditures are not yet available.
 As quickly as the Government began to work on the defense budget in this fashion,
 however, it found itself having to reduce military spending. Last May the Govern-
 ment announced plans to decrease expenditures by 12 percent.
 The Russian authorities continued to implement the human rights gains of recent
 years despite the state of flux in the political and economic arena. In April the Con-
 gress further amended the existing 1978 Constitution to strengthen its political and
 human rights provisions, adopting language from international covenants. A new
 constitution is now in preparation but has been stymied by the conflict between Par-
 liament and the President.
 Freedom of speech and press, assembly and association, and religion were largely
 respected. Restrictions on freedom of travel continued, pending the full implementa-
 tion on January 1, 1993, of the 1991 law on exit and entry. In other areas, however,
 the protection of human rights remained unevenly implemented. The judiciary, still
 reflecting its Communist heritage in personnel and practice, is not yet fully inde-
 pendent or empowered to act as a guarantor of human rights in spite of legislation
 to promote its independence. Other human rights problems include harsh prison
 conditions, unofficial discrimination against Jews, pressures exerted against inde-
 pendent labor unions, and continued use of the residence permit system which re-
 stricted freedom of movement.
 The Russian armed forces appear to have used excessive force in North Ossetia
 and Ingushetia. In addition, Russian troops are still in place in most of the republics
 of the former Soviet Union. The troops became embroiled in a number of controver-
 sial conflicts, some involving the Russian minorities in the republics. (See reports
 on Moldova, Georgia, and Tajikistan.) They occasionally acted without the Russian
 Government's approval. In some cases, Russian security forces also assisted the se-
 curity forces of other republics in violating fundamental freedoms.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no confirmed reports of
 political killings by Russian authorities in 1992. (See Section 1.g. concerning re-
 ported deaths of civilians in North Ossetia and Ingushetia.)
 In the northern Caucasus, political rivals at times resorted to violence. In Dage-
 stan for example, a people's deputy representing the Democratic Dagestan move-
 ment was assassinated in February by unidentified assailants. Earlier, unidentified
 persons also attempted to assassinate the chairman of the Dagestan Council of Min-
 isters, the Trade Minister, and other government officials.
 b. Disappearance.-Ingush sources claimed 687 persons were missing in early No-
 vember as a result of fighting in North Ossetia. These sources believed many of
 these persons are probably dead (see Section 1.g.). As of late December, the Russian
 
 
 886
 Ministry of Internal Affairs in Prigorodny district had received requests to search
 for 118 Ossetians and 210 Ingushes.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degradi  Treatment or Punishment.-
 There are no legal prohibitions against torture and other cruel inhuman, or degrad-
 ing treatment or punishment in the amended 1978 Soviet Constitution or in any
 other Russian law.
 In North Ossetia, the Ingush alleged that in subduing Ingush villages Russian
 and Ossetian forces tortured unarmed civilians. There were also reports that thou-
 sands of Ingush taken prisoner by Ossetian irregulars were treated brutally.
 Russian detention or incarceration practices inherited from the Soviet Union re-
 main harsh. In many prisons, conditions threaten the health and the life of pris-
 oners. Many prisoners continue to suffer from mental and physical abuse and mis-
 treatment during interrogation, trial, and confinement, according to a wide variety
 of reliable sources. As in past years, there were no instances in which law enforce-
 ment personnel were punished for using excessive force or in which victims were
 able to seek redress.
 Prisoners are frequently placed in unduly harsh punishment cells for violations
 of rules. No administrative process exists to ensure that prisoners are not arbitrar-
 ily or inappropriately sent to such cells. Changes in procedures instituted in 1992
 limit the time a prisoner may be held in such cells to no more than 60 days during
 a year and a maximum of 15 days at a time. In labor camps, where prisoners live
 in barracks, prisoners may only be placed in cells for a maximum of 6 months a
 year.
 During Soviet rule, Article 188-3 of what is now the Russian Federation's Crimi-
 nal Code was used to extend the sentences of prisoners who had nearly completed
 their sentences. The Article prescribes an additional 3- to 5-year sentence for a pris-
 oner guilty of 'malicious disobedience" in labor camps. Although this law still exists,
 it was not reported to have been used in 1992.
 Eleven corrective institutions for women in Russia also hold hundreds of children,
 who suffer from poor conditions and are allegedly subject to physical abuse. Par-
 liament recently passed amendments entitling pregnant women and mothers to bet-
 ter conditions and food in prison, but few women inmates are believed aware of
 these rights.
 Cruel and degrading treatment of military conscripts, sometimes resulting in
 death, remained a problem in 1992. The Committee of Soldiers' Mothers, an organi-
 zation formed to draw attention to this matter, continued to press for a halt to vio-
 lent hazing of new recruits.
 At times local authorities allegedly still threaten persons with psychiatric exami-
 nations and compulsory commitment; however, no instances of long-term hos-
 pitalization of sane persons were reported in 1992. In June Parliament passed a law
 on psychiatric care that established norms and procedures for subjecting an individ-
 ual to psychiatric care. The law calls for obligator, examinations of patients in insti-
 tutions every 6 months to evaluate their condition and check for wrongful hos-
 pitalization. Potential for abuse exists in provisions that allow the hospitalization
 of a person on the basis of an oral complaint by a common citizen.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Persons may still be detained arbitrarily
 and arrested without warrants. The Criminal Code requires that detainees be
 charged or released within 72 hours. Criminal Code amendments enacted in May
 provide for court review of arrests and.empower judges to order the release of those
 arrested. One of the authors arrested for the alleged publication of state secrets in
 a Moscow News article about chemical weapons obtained his release under provi-
 sions of these amendments. Several of the plotters of the August 1991 coup attempt
 were also released under these provisions of law. The April Criminal Code amend-
 ments also enhanced the right to counsel and implemented certain amendments to
 the 1978 Constitution that further enhanced individual rights in the judicial proc-
 ess. According to press reports from April, there are some 15,000 persons in pretrial
 detention, many of Whom have been held for longer than 18 months due to a serious
 backlog of cases that was exacerbated in 1992 by the rising crime rate and a break-
 down in the system for appointing new "people's assessors" or lay judges.
 In September the Russian general prosecutor's office in Nalchik arrested Yuriy
 Shanibov, President of the Confederation of Caucasian Mountain Peoples, on
 charges of "inflaming ethnic hatred." The arrest was aimed at curtailing his political
 activity. Shanibov has advocated separatism and the creation of an Islamic confed-
 eration in the Northern Caucasus. Shanibov later was released following large popu-
 lar demonstrations supporting him.
 .Internal exile was not known to have been used as punishment in 1992.
 e. Denial of Fair Public TriaL-The courts, which istorically served as tools for
 enforcing state power, are still subject to influence on occasion by the olitical lead-
 
 
 887
 ership at all levels. No trial date has been set for those accused of plotting the Au.
 gust 1991 coup attempt. Six of the accused have been released pending trial- the
 others remain incarcerated. Most judges remain poorly trained and have as yet little
 understanding of the concept of an independent judiciary. In June, however, the Su-
 preme Soviet passed a law strengthening the status of judges. The law, among other
 things, substantially increased judicial salaries and benefits, established profes-
 sional competency requirements for new judges, and mandated lifetime appoint-
 ments for new judges. Russian judges say the new law has raised judicial morale
 and has begun to attract better applicants to the judicial profession. Military tribu-
 nals handle cases of offenses by active duty personnel under the military code.
 Russian state prosecutors continue to exercise powerful influence over the inves-
 tigative process and over courtroom proceedings. They, not the courts, supervise po-
 lice investigators, leaving open the potential for coverup of police abuse and inves-
 tigative errors.
 In April the Russian Parliament passed amendments that declare the accused in-
 nocent until proven guilty. In practice, however, Russian criminal justice is based
 on the presumption of guilt. The acuittal rate is less than 1 percent of the cases.
 Generally, trials are public. Defendants have the right to attend proceedings,
 confront witnesses, and present evidence.
 The court appoints an attorney for defendants who do not have one. Defense at-
 torneys, however, operate within a system that is still biased against their clients.
 They are often not able to work with their clients during the early stages of inves-
 tigations, in spite of efforts to reform the system that included allowing defense at-
 torneys to contact their clients from the onset of an investigation. Court-appointed
 attorneys often appear only at the trial, perhaps months into the proceedings. As
 was the case in the Soviet system, defense attorneys typically approach the court-
 room phase of a case as a last chance to appeal for leniency in sentencing rather
 than as an opportunity to prove their client's innocence.
 The Constitutional Court, created in late 1991, played a powerful role in popular-
 izing the idea of an independent judiciary. Tasked only with review of constitutional
 questions, the Court nevertheless pursued its activist agenda. It demonstrated that
 it can successfully challenge both the executive and Parliament. Lengthy proceed-
 ings on the legality of presidential decrees banning the former Soviet Communist
 party and on the constitutionality of the Communist Party established the Court as
 a symbol of the beginning of an independent judiciary. Its decision, rendered in No-
 vember, upholding the essence of the ban while permitting the grassroots party
 structures to organize, was another step toward judicial independence.
 Former Soviet President Gorbachev's refusal to testify before the Court in October
 was criticized for encouraging a lack of respect for the judiciary, thereby hindering
 the establishment of a fully independent court system and the role of law. Another
 obstacle was the lack of appro riate judicial remedies allowing the court to exercise
 authority. For example, the Court attempted unsuccessfully to force Gorbachev to
 testify by temporarily restricting his travel to the West. Comments about Gorbachev
 by the Chief Justice also cast a shadow on the Court's impartiality.
 Toward the end of 1992, the Supreme Soviet and the Ministry of Justice were
 drafting legislation to reform the Russian criminal and civil codes as well as the
 criminal procedure and civil procedure codes. Additional legislation on the legal sta-
 tus of defense attorneys was also being drafted. Various drafts of legal reform legis-
 lation differ significantly and reflect a continuing battle between conservative adher-
 ence to stale "Soviet" legal norms and creative introduction of more modern Western
 legal criteria. In Soptember President Yeltsin signed a decree ordering the establish-
 ment of a legal reform experiment in several Russian regions, to be conducted in
 1993, that would introduce legal innovations such as the jury system.
 There are no known political prisoners in Russia. However, approximately 40,000
 persons remain incarcerated for violating laws that prohibit a variety of commercial
 activities, some of which are now legal, commonplace, and even officially condoned.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-In 1992
 Russia adopted laws designed to end the repressive activities of the former KGB.
 These laws codified President Yelstin's decree dividing the KGB into two agencies,
 required both to respect human and civic rights, and established executive and leg-
 islative oversight. A law passed in March and made public in May required the se-
 curity services to seek permission from the public prosecutor to open mail, tap tele-
 phones, and enter homes; the authorities, however, may proceed without such per-
 mission if "inaction under the circumstances may result in a terrorist or subversive
 act." Warrants for such actions may be obtained after the fact, within 24 hours.
 In spite of these reforms, electronic monitoring of residences and telephones re-
 portedly continued at reduced levels. Foreign radio broadcasts were not jammed.
 
 
 888
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-Ethnic conflict in Russia's troubled northern Caucasus regions intensified in
 November. The conflict-has its origins in part in the resettlement of the Prigorodny
 region of North Ossetiby the Ingush, who have returned to North Ossetia in re-
 cent years after having been brutally deported by Stalin.
 Declaring a state of emergency, President Yeltsin ordered Russian troops in the
 area to separate the warring factions. What actually ensued remains unclear. How-
 ever, violations of international humanitarian conventions occurred. According to
 the Ingushes, the Russians sided with the Ossetians and together they attacked
 Ingush settlements in the area with artillery and other weapons. Ingush spokesmen
 claim that hundreds of persons, the majority unarmed civilians were killed in the
 November fighting and thousands more were taken hostage. (6ssetians were also
 taken hostage by the Ingush side). In December the Ingush Information Center in
 Moscow cited the number killed and missing at 10,000, a figure much higher than
 earlier claims of more than 300 mostly civilian Ingush killed in the fighting and 687
 missing and presumed dead. According to Russian official figures as of December
 31, 330 persons had been killed, including 14 Russian soldiers, 179 Ingushes, and
 135 Ossetians. Reliable sources in the area confirmed that violations of humani-
 tarian conventions occurred, but noted that while the Russian Government's official
 initial report of 261 fatalities was probably too low, Ingush claims were probably
 exaggerated.
 In -December the Government extended the emergency decree and announced that
 over 60 criminal proceedings connected with these events had been started.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 . a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Freedom of speech and press is widely re-
 spected. Most major newspapers and magazines are now independent of government
 control, and some are privately owned.
 Although restrictions on the media's ability to function independently are pri-
 marily financial (see jbelow), press freedom cannot yet be taken for granted. Some
 government officials have sought to take action against the media. For example,"the
 Supreme Soviet unsuccessfully sought to assert some control over the media by at-
 tempting to establish an "observation council" to supervise state-run broadcast and
 print media.
 In July the Supreme Soviet approved a resolution to gain control over the
 staunchly proreform newspaper Izvestiya. The Government temporarily blocked the
 Supreme Soviet from assuming control of the newspaper's assets by issuing a decree
 on August 27 stating that the newspaper's property belonged to the Government.
 In late October, a parliamentary guard force was deployed to Izvestiya's offices.
 President Yeltsin immediately issued a decree disbanding the guard force. The de-
 bate over how much, if any, control Parliament should have over the mass media
 (either directly or in the form of some type of oversight committee) has become a
 test case for the freedom of the press. The Constitutional Court will ultimately de-
 cide Izvestiya's fate.
 Early in the year, the Minister of Press and Information brought charges against
 the newspaper Sovietskaya Rossiya for allegedly calling for the overthrow of the sys-
 tem. In April the Government forced the state-owned Russian television (Ostankino)
 to cancel a program that criticized a close associate of the President. In November
 Yeltsin, under pressure from regional leaders, fired the head of Ostankino, Yegor
 Yakovlev, because of allegedly "unbalanced" coverage of ethnic fighting in North
 Ossetia.
 In October, in connection with the publication in the newspaper Moscow News of
 an article about the existence of a chemical weapons plant in Moscow, the MBRF
 arrested one of the authors, Vil Mirzayanov, allegedly for revealing state secrets,
 and searched the other's apartment. The authorities also went in force to newspaper
 offices to obtain a photocopy of the article. In an unprecedented development given
 the charge, Mirzayanov was released from detention in November. However, the
 charges have not been dropped, and the investigation continues.
 As they shift to a free market system during a period of economic hardship, many
 publications are suffering from acute financial problems. The Government has cut
 subsidies to most publications. By presidential order, only six "socially significant"
 newspapers receive government subsidies. The Government indirectly subsidizes all
 newspapers by guaranteeing a percentage of newsprint to each at controlled prices.
 Paper and ink remain controlled by monopolies, distribution costs are rapidly in-
 creasing, and many papers are underpriced and have seen their circulations fall.
 Consequently, many publications, including well-known newspapers such as Pravda
 and Komsomolskaya Pravda, are on the brnk of financial collapse. Many publishers
 
 
 889
 ho for renewed government subsidies and intervention to help save the publishing
 indstr.
 The Government sponsors several semiofficial media oranizations using them
 largely as official news organs. It has shown favoritism in allocating office space and
 extending the annual subscription campaign for them alone; on occasion, however,
 these organizations published information unfavorable to the Government.
 Some Russian newspapers have established joint ventures with foreign firms. We/
 Miy is a Hearst/Izvestiya joint venture publishing in both English and Russian. The
 New York Times prints 100,000 copies of a weekly review in Russian with Moscow
 News. Readers Digest publishes a Russian edition with Mezhdunarodnaya Kniga.
 Television is one of the primary sources of information for most Russians. To
 Russian television companies, Ostankino and Russian Television, transmit nation-
 wide and in most of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS). Both are
 owned by the Russian Government. There have been complaints that the Govern-
 ment interferes in the stations' broadcasts, although this interference apparently
 does not take the form of censorship. On occasion government officials have com-
 plained about some broadcasts, leading to a certain amount of self-censorship of fu-
 ture broadcasts, such as the decision by Ostankino to shelve a French film about
 Gorbachev. In addition, opponents of the Yeltsin regime, particularly Russian na-
 tionalists and hardline Communists, have accused both stations of a pro-Yeltsin
 bias.
 Extreme rightwing groups staged protests in June outside Ostankino to demand
 uncensored access to national television broadcasting, which they believed they had
 been denied. The authorities agreed to broadcast a program in July in which rep-
 resentatives of Russian nationalist groups aired their views.
 Television studios at the oblast (province) level that were part of the central sys-
 tem now operate more or less independently of it. They function as affiliates, opting
 to use programs from the national company and producing local news programming
 independently. These affiliates may be subject to pressure by local authorities.
 All broadcasters and cable networks, both public and private, use foreign broad-
 cast material. Indeed, many depend on such material because they lack modern
 equipment. In addition to the Russian broadcasters, several foreign joint venture
 cable companies now offer programming in Moscow.
 The banning of the Communist Party, the failure of the August 1991 coup, and
 the disarray of the new Ministry of Education in the post-Soviet era have resulted
 in a rapidly changing academic environment. The disintegration of the centralized
 academic structure resulted in increased local autonomy for virtually all institutions
 of higher learning (from grade schools to universities to research institutes) as well
 as decreased levels of federal funding and support. Many are operating at a subsist-
 ence level. Russian scholars now enjoy unprecedented academic freedom, as evi-
 denced by the free and open election of umversity rectors and department heads,
 the revamping of social science curriculums and textbooks, and open relationships
 with Western universities.
 Among the entrenched nomenklatura (ruling elite), however, much "old thinking"
 continues to exist. Many of its members have adopted the new common language
 of democracy while still following the Soviet practice of hoarding resources and
 privileges, thereby making life difficult for aspiring, open-minded, and vocal schol-
 ars.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Soviet law on demonstra-
 tions is still in effect, and stipulates that organizers must apply locally for permis-
 sion to demonstrate 10 days in advance, while officials must respond at least 5 days
 before the scheduled event. Civil and criminal penalties, including fines, 15-day jail
 sentences, and even stiffer punishment, may be levied against participants in unau-
 thorized demonstrations.
 Public demonstrations were commonplace during 1992. Small groups of protestors
 and demonstrators routinely gathered without government interference at municipal
 focal points such as Manezh Square in Moscow. Demonstrations were generally
 peaceful and unhindered by-police, even When, as during a neo-Communist protest
 at Ostankino, protestors seemingly tried to provoke violence. In February, however,
 Moscow city government efforts to control a demonstration by supporters of the
 former Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) resulted in minor injuries.
 The Soviet Union's 1991 law on public organizations remained in effect for Russia
 during 1992. That law legalized a multiparty political system, allowed the formation
 of political parties and mass social movements, and guaranteed such organizations
 the right to propagate their views. The law also allowed political parties to field can-
 didates in elections, goaranteed citizens the right to participate, and declared all
 parties equal before the law. All public organizations must register their by-laws
 and the names of their leaders with the Ministry of Justice. Political parties must
 
 
 also present 5,000 signatures and pay 5,000 rubles to register as a Russian Federa-
 tion party.
 Roufly 30 political organizations functioned unhindered in 1992. Many of them
 were ormed in 1991 and represented a wide political spectrum including monar-
 chists, anarchists, nativista~ascists, Socialists, and social democrats. More than 100
 sociopolitical movements seeking greater autonomy for minorities continued to be
 active in autonomous regions and oblasts throughout Russia. The Russian Govern-
 ment facilitated the activities of some of these groups. The Government promoted
 an international onference to discuss the rights of indinous peoples.
 The law on public organizations does, however, ban groups advocating violent
 change in the constitutional s 'stem or groups subordinating the moral order. A Mos-
 cow-based gay and lesbian rights group was denied registration in the fall under
 the latter previsions. President Yetsin s ban of the Communist Party was in part
 upheld and in part overturned b3 the Constitutional Court in November. The Com-
 munist Partys right to exist as  political organization was reaffirmed. The question
 of Commumst Party assets wa referred tolower Russian courts to be decided on
 a case-by-case basis. The Lies Democratic Party, banned for its alleged support
 of the failed August 1991 co p, was permitted to resume political activities. The
 Justice Ministry, however, i  une revoked the party's registration for falsifying its
 registration documents. In ctober President Yeltsin banned the newly established
 National Salvation Front, noting that the group called for the overthrow of the "law-
 ful authorities, including the President."
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Freedom of religion prospered in Russia in 1992. With
 the lifting of legal restrictions on its activities, the Russian Orthodox Church re-
 turned to the mainstream of Russian daily life. On January 7, 1992, Orthodox
 Christmas was observed as a national holiday in Russia for the first time since the
 1917 Bolshevik Revolution. Government leaders, including President Yeltsin at-
 tended services. Legislation passed in September established Russian national holi-
 days, including Orthodox Christmas.
 The visibility of religion increased dramatically. Religious services and other pro-
 grams were televised throughout the year. Official and unofficial religious gr.ups
 held seminars, conferences, and revival meetings, frequently in public facilities.
 Public advertising of religious services and street proselytizing in major cities was
 common. The press extensively covered religious issues, including statements of reli-
 gious leaders and Orthodox Church events. Missionaries from almost every world
 religion are present in Russia, and an increasing number of such groups opened per-
 manent offices.
 Relations between the Russian Orthodox Church and the Russian Government
 were strengthened significantly in 1992. Government officials, including President
 Yeltsin, frequently appeared at Orthodox Church-sponsored events. The Govern-
 ment contributed to the rebuilding or renovating of Orthodox Church buildings and
 monasteries and returned many additional churches and other facilities to the
 Church.
 The Government sometimes limited the activities of Western religious organiza-
 tions at the behest of the Russian Orthodox Church. For example, the Church
 sought to restrict Billy Graham's proselytizing. Some Western groups experienced
 difficulties in purchasing time for television programming or renting prestigious fa-
 cilities for seminars and conferences, although in most cases alternatives were avail-
 able. At the local level, authorities frequently displayed favoritism toward the Rus-
 sian Orthodox Church (ROFC), especially in conflicts with the Russian Orthodox
 Free Church over the use of church buildings.
 Obstacles to complete freedom of religion still exist to some extent on the local
 level, where remnants of the old state and party bureaucracy sometimes hinder or
 harass religious believers. A primary cause of these local problems is the require-
 ment under the 1990 Soviet Law on Religion that religious groups of 10 adults or
 more register with local authorities. Some groups view the requirement itself as con-
 tradicting their beliefs and therefore refuse to reister. Although failure to register
 has not resulted in harassment, groups must register to acquire the status of a "ju-
 ridical person" and to receive benefits, including access to the media and the right
 to establish their own schools, own property, and engage in social work. The re-
 istration process therefore allows for obstructionist tactics by local authorities, suc
 as lost applications, endless reviews of applications, or denial of adequate facilities.
 This problem is most prevalent in cases of non-Russian Orthodox groups, principally
 Protestants and the ROFC.
 The number of clergy and places of worship in Russia is still inadequate for the
 population, but churches were opened in 1992 in increasing numbers. Seminaries
 and other institutions of clerical education continued to expand their enrollment,
 limited only bv their financial resources. Bibles and children's Bible stories were
 
 
 891
 common items on sale at street kiosks in major cities. There are no restrictions on
 the importation of religious materials.
 Young men who object to military duty because of their faith continue to be sub-
 ject to prison terms. Legislation providing alternatives to military service for con-
 scientious objectors is still beinff discussed.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 atriation.-Citizens were generally free to travel within the ountry. All adults are
 issued internal passports which must be carried during travel. Internal passports
 are also used to register visits of more than 3 days with local authorities, although
 this requirement is generally i gored by travelers not staying in hotels.
 Nevertheless, the right to choose one's place of residence, though guaranteed by
 law, continued to be restricted in practice. Under the "propiska" (pass) system, all
 citizens must register their place of residence. However, Russian authorities en-
 forced provisions of the propiska law selectively. For example, while many persons
 who did not register were not punished, numerous Chechens were rounded up from
 Moscow hotels in September because they were in the city illegally.
 The authorities also continue to apply restrictions on travel abroad. In April the
 Government began to require a new invitation form designed to limit the number
 of exit visa solicitations. Corruption in the passport and visa-issuing offices, exacer-
 bated by a shortage of new passports, remained a major impediment to unrestricted
 emigration and travel abroad.
 Nonetheless, thousands of Russians traveled abroad and emigrated during 1992,
 and many former Russian citizens who now reside abroad were allowed to return
 to visit.
 A Russian citizen leaving the country continues to need an exit visa, as well as
 a passport valid for foreign travel, and permission to enter the country of destina-
 tion. Prospective travelers must obtain passports and exit visas in their places of
 residence. Local Offices of Visas and Permits were sometimes closed because of in-
 stability, thereby restricting the issuance of passports and exit visas. Numerous per-
 sons wishing to emigrate were also denied permission on secrecy grounds.
 A new emigration bill, passed by the Soviet Union's Parliament in May 1991, is
 scheduled to come fully into force in Russia on January 1, 1993. This law eliminates
 the requirement to obtain exit visas before traveling abroad. According to the imple-
 menting resolution, an invitation from a first-degree relative in the country to which
 a person is emigrating will no longer be required. Instead, emigrants may submit
 either an invitation from any relative abroad or permission to enter the country to
 which they are emigrating. The resolution also annulled the 1967 decree under
 which emigrants to Israel were required to give up their Soviet citizenship.
 The May 1991 law, however, perpetuates the practice of restricting the emigration
 of those with access to state secrets. Under this law, Russians taking a position re-
 quiring access to state secrets will now have the opportunity to acknowledge for-
 mally their acceptance of restrictions on emigration and travel abroad. Further, the
 normal maximum restriction is 5 years. The law also retains the requirement to re-
 ceive permission from close relatives in Russia before emigrating. Would-be emi-
 grants, however, will be able to settle this problem in the courts, if they are unable
 to secure the permission of close relatives. The law also added a new emigration re-
 striction on draft-age men who have not yet completed their obligatory military
 service.
 Nevertheless, because the law is not in effect, there were many instances in which
 access to state secrets or inability to obtain the permission of relatives blocked emi-
 grants' ability to leave. A presidential commission was set up in the fall of 1991 to
 review cases of refuseniks who had not worked with secrets for more than 5 years.
 By January the commission had lifted exit restrictions in many such cases. How-
 ever, the commission later became bogged down with the question of the citizenship
 of Russians returning from thetrepublics of the former Soviet Union.
 Russian parliamentarians prepared their own version of an emigration law in
 1992. The Russian draft law is similar to the Soviet law and also contains a provi-
 sion on secrecy. According to"press reports, however, the Russian parliament in De-
 cember voted to uphold the Soviet emigration law. It was also agreed to establish
 a new parliamentary commission with the participation of the Ministry of Internal
 Affairs to review cases of persons refused permission to leave the country because
 of their access to industrial secrets.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The amended 1978 Russian Federation Constitution, which remains in effect, in
 principle allows the Russian people the right to change their government. President
 Yeltsin was elected to a 5-year term in 1991 with approximately 60 percent of the
 
 
 892
 vote. The Russian Parliament, however, has yet to be elected in a free and fair elec-
 tion, and it is still not certain, therefore, that the Russian people have the ability
 to change their government peacefully and democratically. The Russian Parliament
 was elected under the Soviet system in 1990. While the election was relatively
 democratic by Soviet standards (and included secret balloting and some competi-
 tion), the Communist Party was able to ensure its continued dominant role. Hence,
 the current parliament is dominated by ex-Communists, who have increasingly op-
 osed Yeltsin's brand of radical reform. A constitutional crisis occurred in December,
 rought on by Parliament's efforts to curb the President's powers to carry out his
 reform agenda. President Yeltsin called for a referendum to decide the basic prin-
 ciples of a new constitution, including the delineation of powers of the three
 branches of government.
 President Yeltsin has advocated the ratification of a new constitution and, with
 it, early parliamentary elections (due in 1995), by the end of 1993. The 1978 Con-
 stitution establishes the Congress of People's Deputies (parliament), as the highest
 organ of state power. The Presidency was created only in 1991, and its power rel-
 ative to that of Parliament was never fully resolved. The current Parliament is un-
 willing to cede additional power to the Presidency. The proposed April referendum
 Sdineation of the separation of consitutiona powers is intende  to help break
 the impasse between the two branches of government. The Constitutional Court is
 beginning to emerge as an independent part of the government structure and may
 play'a crucial role in resolving the dispute.
 The amended 1978 Constitution provides equal political rights for men and
 women, but women do not occupy many leading positions in politics and govern-
 ment. Members of Russia's ethnc and religious minorities face no legal limitations
 on political participation.
 Section 4. Governmental Attid  Regrnitrnapional and Nongovernmental In-
 vest igat ion of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are numerous domestic and international human rights groups active in
 Russia. They have easy access to the local press and world media. A new human
 rights center opened, providing offices for domestic groups that previously had dif-
 ficulties in securing such space. Financing remained a problem for many groups but
 was mainly a reflection of Russia's difficult economic situation and not of govern-
 ment interference. Russian authorities encouraged international investigation of al-
 leged violations of human rights.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Language, or Social Status
 The 1978 Constitution was amended in 1992 to include verbatim language from
 international human rights documents to protect the rights of all persons in ussia.
 Ethnic Russians make up 81 per cent of the population of the country. Members
 of ethnic minorities occupy high office in the Russian Government. In a number of
 cases, titular minorities govern autonomous republics.
 During the year, the Government sought to distance itself further from Soviet-era
 anti-Semitism. Jews enjoyed increasing cultural and religious freedom. Some syna-
 gogues were returned to congregations, and in other cases congregations made ar-
 rangements to use the facilities without forcing the present occupants to leave.
 Anti-Semitism continues to exist among the population, however, and was evident
 in political expression. Anti-government demonstrators advocating a return to So-
 yet-era policies and practices often used anti-Semitic imagery, brandishingplacards
 calling President Yeltsin a Jew and effigies decorated with the Star of David or
 swastikas. The openly nationalist organization Pamyat continued to propagate anti-
 Semitic ideas in its own newspaper, one of 30 Russian publications containingFas-
 cist and anti-Semitic material. In early October, members of Pamyat raided the of-
 fices of the newsppser Moskovskiy omsomons ts, demanding that the paper stop
 embarrassing the Russian people and hand over the names of authors who had pub-
 lished articles about Pamyat. Members of the organization paraded frew  in  os-
 cow.
 Public expressions of anti-Semitic feelings added to Jews' fear that in times of eco-
 nomic hardship and political unrst they would be singled out for arbitrary retribu-
 tion. In March, when openly anti-Semitic groups sponsored a rally in downtwn
 Moscow, some Jewish families kept their children home from school for fear they
 would be harmed while out in public.
 At the risk of being charged with violating press freedoms, the General Prosecutor
 in August initiated criminal proceedings against a number of openly anti-smitic
 newspapers. The publisher and editor-in-chief of Russkoye Voskreseniye, a news-
 naer whose masth ead features a "raving Fuehrer" and swastikas, was arrested.
 
 
 893
 Earlier, human rights groups had charged that the prosecutor's Moscow office was
 lax in pursuing such cases.
 Women are entitled to the same legal rights as men, including the right to partici-
 pate in all areas of the social, political, and economic life of Russia. An extensive
 system of day-care and maternity leave allows women to retain employment after
 having children. Women are well represented at many levels of the general economy
 but generally not paid the same as men for equal work. Positions of influence and
 prestige, mreover, are still disproportionately occupied by men.
 As Russia's economic situation has deteriorated, women have often been the first
 to he laid off, a reflection of the resurfacing of the society's traditional view of the
 male as breadwinner. Violence against women certainly occurs but its extent is un-
 known. It is known, however, that police often do not take an interest in cases of
 violence against women. Interest in women's issues in Russia is only now beginning
 to grow and is focused primarily on economic factors.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Mssociation.--On paper, the right of workers to form and join
 unions of their own choosing improved in  99. The Russian Government eased
 trade union registration requirements and issued a decree requiring the old Com-
 munist trade union center, the Federation of Independent Russian Trade Unions
 (FNPR), to offer workers who had formery been compelled to belong to the FNPR
 the freedom to reregister with a union of their choice without fear of retribution.
 In September the Laior Code was amended to reflect some elements of the Govern-
 ment's reform agenda.
 These decrees, however, had little practical effect in diminishing the role and sta-
 tus of the FNPR and its hold on worker membership. The FNPR retains its inherent
 advantages arising from close traditional links with enterprise directors and near
 monopoly control over key social security benefits such as workers' vacations, chil-
 drn's summer camps, and sick and pregnanicy pay. In September the Supreme So-
 viet bowed to stongpressure from the        and blocked a government attempt
 to transfer the vast FNPR 'ntrolled social security funds to a neutral body. The
 FNPR also did not implement the union rrgstration deree, as rereid, and the
 Government did little to enforce it.
 The FNPR, the Russian successor organization to the former official Soviet All-
 Union Central Council of Trade Unions (AUCCTU), sought to redefine its former
 role as a "transmission belt from the Communist Party to the masses" by attacking
 the Government's economic reform policies. FNPR attempts to recast its image into
 that of a democratic trade union center largely failed, as holdovers from the
 AUCCTU continued to control the FNPR apparatus and a majority of its branch and
 rgional affiliates.
 Democratic labor leaders consider the FNPR's control of social security functions
 usually performed by the State or privately by individuas as the gre atest obstacle
 to the growth of indpendent democratic trade unions in Russia. Vigrous and sue
 tained attempts throughout the year to break this virtual monopoly had little prac-
 tical effect. The strong FNPR lobby in Parliament provided legislative cover, and the
 Government seemed unwilling to confront the FNPR head-on.
 An economy in deep crisis further limited the establishment of independent labor
 groups. With the prospect of widespread unemployment looming, many workers
 were reluctant to exercise their right to form and join free trade unions because
 independent labor activists were often the first to be laid off or lose access to social
 benefits provided by their enterrises or the FNPR. Enterprise directors, local
 FNPR leaders, local government officials, and police and judicial authoties applied
 various forms of direct and indirect pressure on workers who attempted to form free
 unions. Democratic worker activists faced legal harassment and physical violence.
 Several prominent democratic labor leadeer were assaulted in circumstances they
 believe were connected with their labor activities.
 Notwithstanding these obstacles, the democratic workers' movement, which began
 i     o in in   the summerof 1989, continued to grow. There now may beseveral
 hundred non-FNPR, unionlike organiations across Russia. Most are small, how-
 ever, and may serve more as workers' associations, for they do not seem to carry
 out traditional union activities. Enterprise directors routinely inore them.
 The coal mining areas of Kuzbas in western Siberia and Vorkuta above the Arctic
 Circle continued to represent the largest and most potent centers of independent
 democratic organized labor in Russia. The Independent Miners Union (No s) and
 workers and strike committees in these areas have inspired new democratic labor
 activity far beyond these regions.
 During the first half of 1992, strikes became workers' preferred means of resolv-
 ing labor disputes, as alternative institutions to resolve such conflicts were weak or
 
 
 894
 nonexistent. After the "social partnership" mechanism failed to stop frequent resort
 to strikes, the Government sought to restrict the right to strike to maintain labor
 peace. In May the Government declared that it would enforce a Soviet law dating
 from 1989 which requires a lengthy dispute settlement process, bans strikes in the
 Government and military services, and contains broad, undefined references to "es-
 sential services." The Government demonstrated this tougher, antistrike policy
 against one union in particular, the Independent Air Traffic Controllers Union,
 which faced a severe government crackdown following an August strike.
 The FNPR's former parent organization, the AUCCTU (renamed the General Con-
 federation of the Trade Unions--GCTU), lost its official standing in the Inter-
 national Labor Organization (ILO) when the Soviet Union dissolved. The GCTU has
 requested the status of a nongovernmental organization in the ILO. The Russian
 Government has designated for purposes of representing Russian workers in the
 ILO. However, two members of an altei .ative union, SOTSPROF, were included as
 technical advisors in the Russian delegation to the 1992 ILO conference. Democratic
 leaders were rarely included in government delegations or at ILO conferences but
 have been able to maintain extensive contact with other national trade union cen-
 ters.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Almost all Russian workers
 in the state sector are virtually automatically mem rs of an FNPR affiliate. Out-
 side the mining industry and some segments of the air transport industry, the vast
 majority of Russian workers must still rely upon the FNPR and enterprise work
 councils to represent their interests.
 Russian government authorities in 1992 demonstrated greater willingness to deal
 with democratic labor leaders, inviting them to become members of consultative bod-
 ies and concluding separate wage agreements with their unions. Enterprise direc-
 tors, however, dealt only with those democratic unions that were powerful enough
 to strike and were generally hostile toward or ignored other non-FNPR worker
 groups that arose in their midst. Even in those enterprises in which strong demo-
 cratic unions existed, management often resisted concluding collective bargaining
 arrangements with them.
 There are no export processing zones in Russia.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Russian Labor Code was
 amended in September to prohibit compulsory labor.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Uhildren.-The Labor Code was amended in
 September to regulate the working conditions for minors aged 14 to 16. However,
 with the loosening of central government economic controls, children beneath that
 age began to enter the work force in noticeable numbers for the first time.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The bottom rung of the official pay scales for
 each industry in effect serves as an administrative minimum wage. Reform plans
 call for the establishment of minimum wages but do not stipulate how they should
 function in a highly inflationary environment. Although wages rose considerably
 during the year, severe shortages of cash throughout the country prevented many
 workers from being paid for significant periods of time. A maj  of the population
 fell below the Government's minimum standard of living, and the minimum wage
 was inadequate to provide a worker and family a decent living standard. The
 amended Labor Code reduced the workweek to 40 hours; however, in practice, work-
 weeks can vary considerably. As enterprises faced the discipline of the market for
 the first time, many workers were required to work significantly more hours or
 under particularly dangerous conditions. Other workers worked far fewer hours be-
 cause the disordered state of the Russian economy required them to spend many
 hours a day searching for basic necessities for their families.
 Workers received other benefits in addition to their wages, such as subsidized
 prices for basic goods and foodstuffs in state stores and at their enterprises, but the
 value of these benefits declined as many prices began to approach market prices.
 In addition, the quality of state-subsidized housing, health care, and transportation,
 on which the vast majority of the population must rely, continued to be very low.
 Russian law establishes minimum conditions of workplace safety and worker
 health, but these standards were generally ignored. Furthermore, no effective en-
 forcement mechanism exists. In 1992, as in previous years, thousands of Russian
 workers died on the job, were injured or became invalids. Workplace safety contin-
 ued to be a major issue for many new unions, including miners, air traffic control-
 lers, pilots, locomotive drivers, and armed forces members. In 1992, there again
 were numerous mine disasters in Russia. Miners report that these accidents will
 continue as long as wages are tied directly to productivity. Few significant safety
 measures were adopted in the aftermath of these accidents.
 
 
