Russia
The State Department has never before prepared a human rights report on Russia, although certainly the Russian Soviet Federated Socialist Republic predominated in earlier human rights reports on the Soviet Union. The report on the first full year of existence of the Russian Federation manages a substantially more balanced and accurate assessment of human rights conditions than did last year's report on the Soviet Union. The 1991 report, arguably because of President Bush's support for Mikhail Gorbachev, tended to gloss over or omit pertinent information and conclusions relating to human rights violations perpetrated by the central government.
The report justifiably applauds Russia for substantial progress in three main areas: i) democratic change; ii) reform of the political and economic systems; and iii) the dismantling of the remnants of the former Soviet state. This critique will alter somewhat the focus on related but somewhat different human rights issues facing Russia: i) the struggle to establish the rule of law; ii) the controversy over which regions will be a part of that state; and iii) the ability of that state to foster human rights amid economic chaos.
Russia's citizenry and its political, judicial and social institutions are coping with changes beyond comprehension by most Western observers. While the State Department's report is factually accurate and for the most part complete, it does not fully convey the complexity of interrelations within the government and between the government and society in Russia. The struggle to create a rule-of-
law state officially began in the Gorbachev era, but the Gorbachev reforms developed more or less systematically within the political context of reform communism. The human rights situation faced by Russia today depends entirely upon the development of true rule-of-law attitudes from a tradition little exposed to such ideas.
Two Russian Federation documents not covered by the State Department report or the critique for 1991, largely because of the subordinate role of the Russian Federation itself within the former Soviet Union, may play a seminal role in the direction of rule-of-law reforms. Given the inability of the Russian Federation to adopt a new constitution in 1991, human rights advocates within the Supreme Soviet managed to convince President Yeltsin to undertake preliminary protections by proposing an instrument called the "Declaration of the Rights and Freedoms of the Individual and Citizen." After some debate, the Declaration was adopted by the Supreme Soviet of the Russian Federation on November 27, 1991. It recognizes significant individual rights and freedoms, modeled as it is on portions of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The Declaration was adopted as law, almost in its entirety, in constitutional amendments passed in April 1992.
The second document, the "Conception of Judicial Reform," may have a genuine influence on the course of judicial reform as well as on more general reforms in the legal process in Russia. It has received the support of President
321
Russia
Yeltsin and was adopted by resolution of the RSFSR Supreme Soviet on October 24, 1991. Besides providing a blueprint for legal reform, the Conception criticizes the current state of the judicial system in Russia, arguing that it i) serves only the interests of a totalitarian state; ii) does not enjoy the trust or respect of the people; in) is ineffective even in bringing criminals to trial; iv) is fraught with an accusatorial/prosecutorial bias; v) is losing personnel at a staggering rate; vi) produces and utilizes distorted statistics; and vii) is functioning in deplorable working conditions.
Together, the Declaration of Rights and Freedoms and the Conception of Judicial Reform may provide the basis for fundamental changes in human rights and in encouraging the acceptance of the principle of the rule-of-law among the Russian people. In any case, not nearly enough progress has been made in implementing through actual legislation the framework created by the Declaration and the Conception, even though more than a year has passed since their adoption by the Supreme Soviet.
As mentioned above, one of the greatest disappointments of 1992 was the inability of the Russian Federation to adopt a new constitution. The report, while indicating the lack of a new constitution, does not emphasize enough the psychological and practical damage done by the failure to agree to a new, progressive constitution. The minor changes made to the 1978 Constitution are not sufficient to address the radically changed political, economic and legal circumstances in the country. The adoption of a new constitution would move the Russian
Federation towards the rule-of-law and should resolve many of the political struggles that have distracted Russia from enacting needed economic and social reform legislation.
On the tentatively positive side, the assertion of authority by the Constitutional Court provided one of the most interesting, yet most complicated, developments of 1992. The Court ruled on three matters of critical importance to the country and to the advancement of rule-of-law attitudes in government and among the people. The State Department report mentions that the court has begun to play an independent role in the government structure, but it highlights the role that may cause the most ambivalence among human rights advocates: the Constitutional Court as power broker. Instead, the Court's judicial review function should have been emphasized.
In 1992, the Constitutional Court established in practice rather than merely in theory its ability to review executive actions. In January, it nullified a decree issued by President Yeltsin on the merger of the KGB and the MVD (the Ministry of Internal Affairs). Then, in November, the Court upheld in part and voided in part the Yeltsin decrees banning the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and confiscating its property. The fact that the Congress of People's Deputies, the Supreme Soviet and the President himself acquiesced to the Court's decisions established the practical power of the Court as an effective third branch of government.
The Court's third critical decision failed to translate into similar authority.
322
Russia
In March, it ruled against Tatarstan's decision to hold a referendum on its right to sovereignty and self-determination within the Russian Federation. Notwithstanding this ruling, Tatarstan held the referendum in March, and has declared itself independent.
Notwithstanding the Court's failure on the Tatarstan issue, which could in any case hardly be viewed outside of the political context of the right to self-determination, it has begun to establish itself as an independent judicial body. The reservations noted above about the Court's role as power broker arise in the context of efforts by Chief Justice Valery Zorkin during December 1992 to fashion political compromises between President Yeltsin and the Parliament. Such efforts, aside from involving the Court in an area where it may not have competence or statutory mandate, call into question the impartiality of the judges as an independent third branch of government.
Passing to more specific matters related to the establishment of the true rule of law in government and society, the State Department gives a good summary of circumstances relating to torture and other punishment arising from incarceration, but it incorrectly states that there are no Russian legal prohibitions against torture and other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment. In fact. Article 39 of the amended Constitution specifically prohibits torture or other cruel or inhuman punishment.
The State Department does not mention developments regarding capital punishment in Russia. While the death penalty still exists, its use was limited to vio-
lent crimes in 1991 by the Soviet Parliament. In January 1992, President Yeltsin created a clemency commission to review all pending death sentences. And in April 1992, the Constitution was amended so that Article 38 now states that the Russian state aspires to the abolition of the death penalty, and that until such time, it may only be used as punishment for violent crimes against the person and on the basis of a court's verdict. Since January 1992, only one execution has been carried out. According to Amnesty International, there were 308 death penalty cases being considered by the clemency commission as of May 1, 1992. While the implementation of death sentences in Russia has decreased, the imposition of death sentences has increased. In the first six months of 1992, 95 persons were sentenced to death compared with 59 over the same period in 1991.
The use of psychiatry for political purposes by the government has not continued under the Russian Federation, as the report states. The legislation on psychiatric care mentioned in the report, the "Law on Psychiatric Care and the Guarantee of Civil Rights During its Application," was adopted by the Supreme Soviet on July 2. In addition to setting minimum standards of patient care, the legislation also restricts incarceration without access to legal counsel, provides the right of correspondence, allows for visits and requires informed consent. The American Psychiatric Association has reportedly noted improvement in the attitude of former Soviet psychiatrists toward patients.
The State Department report correctly cites one source of continued potential
323
Russia
abuse of psychiatric laws: provisions that allow the "hospitalization of a person on the basis of an oral complaint by a common citizen." There is also fear that provisions granting ministries and agencies the authority to adopt their own psychiatric standards will lead to abuse. Finally, the existence of a register listing individuals who have been released from mental facilities is a cause for concern and should have been mentioned in the report. This list is reportedly used to deprive listed individuals of rights such as driving a car, traveling abroad and holding specific jobs. While it is known that the register contains fewer names than it did during the Soviet era, there is no current information on the number of individuals still on the register.
While the State Department accurately reports on several changes in the criminal justice system, it generally underem-phasizes the impact of the severe deterioration of the legal system on mere access to justice. As noted in the report, many steps remain to be taken to provide adequate legal safeguards for defendants in criminal trials. The April 1992 constitutional amendments and'May changes to the Criminal Procedure Code moved in that direction, and the report notes that additional changes were under consideration at the end of the year. For example, defense attorneys now have improved access to an accused person and an individual who is arrested has the right to request a court evaluation of the legality of detention. If the court finds the detention illegal, the judge has the power to order an immediate release. In addition, as the report describes, a law adopted on June 26 improves the status of judges, aiming through numerous provi-
sions to augment judicial independence. The new law on the status of judges also grants the judiciary some checks against the powerful procuracy.
The report does not, however, give adequate coverage to the adoption in January 1992 of a disappointing new law on the procuracy, enacted after the adoption of the Declaration of Human Rights and the Conception of Judicial Reform. Although it replaces the former Soviet-era law on the procuracy and makes some minor positive changes, the new law scarcely modifies the old conception of human rights and the legal system. The law does not mention the Declaration, the Conception of Judicial Reform, or internationally recognized human rights principles, and it is silent on the protection of citizens' rights or on the right to appeal illegal acts of the procuracy. Rather, the clear focus of the law is to protect the procuracy's prerogatives and power.
While the law does decrease procuracy control over the work of the courts and preliminary investigations, it does not sharply reduce its role to that of state accuser only, as the Conception of Judicial Reform recommends. Under the law, the procuracy retains control over decisions for detention and custody. Furthermore, the procuracy retains its powers of general supervision over legal compliance by local legislative and executive organs of power; public and private institutions; criminal investigations; preliminary detention; military institutions; and court proceedings. Despite minor changes, the law fails to limit adequately the powers of the procuracy.
The State Department provides an
324
Russia
accurate and thorough account of developments in freedoms of the press, assembly and religion. A few minor clarifications, however, are necessary.
First, many acts of violence against journalists and editorial offices were reported during 1992. News correspondents have also reported that government officials refused to give information or interviews without being paid. Both of these developments illustrate some of the practical difficulties (in addition to those mentioned in the report) of carrying on objective and independent journalism in Russia.
In the area of freedom of assembly, the State Department plays down the actions of Moscow Police and internal security troops against protestors, and against pro-communist demonstrators in particular. In February, riot police reportedly beat unarmed communist protestors entering Red Square. An unauthorized demonstration by between 1,000 and 5,000 pro-communists held in front of Ostankino Television on June 22 also ended in violence. Seventy-six people, including 23 policemen, were injured in the incident, according to Krimpress-TASS. Finally, riot police reportedly severely beat African demonstrators in August who were protesting the killing of a Zimbabwean student by a Moscow police officer.
The foregoing comments can be viewed mainly in the context establishing the rule of law among the people and government representatives in Russia. Russia must continue to replace the old Soviet-era codes and practices with new laws and procedures, and it must resolve
the grave constitutional difficulties which retard not only efficient government but respect for law as well. Constitutional questions are also implicated in another major challenge faced by the government: agreement on the composition and on the nature of the Russian Federation itself.
Fundamental questions relating to the federation also have serious human rights consequences. The right to self-determination of peoples is a internationally recognized fundamental human right, but one which remains extremely ill-defined. In the Russian context, a rapid move toward self-determination may result in widespread violence and civil unrest. Commentators often evoke comparisons to events in the former Yugoslavia. As a means to reach some agreement on federation questions in the absence of a new constitution, the Russian government successfully concluded in March a Federation Treaty with 18 of the 20 major autonomous regions. Only Tatarstan and the Chechen Republic refused to sign the treaty, which was adopted by the Sixth Russian Congress of People's Deputies in April.
As noted above, Tatarstan held a referendum on self-determination during 1992, defying the Constitutional Court's decision against it, and ultimately opted for sovereignty. Tatarstan maintains it intends not to secede from the Russian Federation, but to sign a bilateral treaty as a co-equal with Russia.
With respect to the Chechen Republic (formerly Chechen-Ingushetia) in the northern Caucasus, events have taken a different and unfortunate turn. As the report notes, excessive force was used in
325
Russia
North Ossetia, which borders on the Chechen Republic, but clarification on this point would be useful. Contested borders caused the violence in the area between the Ossetians and the Ingush. The Pri-gorodny District, now within North Ossetia but once a part of the Chechen-Ingushetia Autonomous Republic before Stalin forced the relocation of the Chechens and the Ingush during World War II, has been the source of the problem. Ingush have tried to reinstate the original ethnic character of the area and redraw the boundaries. Their efforts have met with brutal retaliation by the North Ossetians, culminating in battles that lasted from October 31 to November 2. Russian military units (reportedly internal security troops) were dispatched by President Yeltsin with the support of the Supreme Soviet. The Russian units and their Ossetian allies engaged in brutal repression of Ingush civilians that some journalists referred to as the "first ethnic-cleansing operation in the Russian Federation."
Dagestan is another area of unrest, although it is not mentioned by the report, except in the context of a political assassination. Dagestan imposed a state of emergency in response to a hostage taking by the Shamil Popular Front in May 1992. Finally, in the Chechen Republic itself, armed opponents of Chechen separatism took over the radio and television headquarters in the capital to protest Chechen President Dudaev's pro-separatist stance. Casualties were suffered on both sides when forces loyal to Dudaev ousted the protestors in late March.
In addition to Tatarstan, the Chechen Republic, North Ossetia and Dagestan, Russia faces other significant ethnic and
territorial problems throughout the country, including Sakaa (former Yakutia), Bashkiria, and other parts of Siberia. There are also border tensions between the Chechen Republic and Dagestan and ethnic tensions reported between the Kumyks and Laks.
Apart from inter-regional rivalries, inter-ethnic tensions have multiplied as well. The report does well to note the rise in anti-Semitism in Russia. Yet, it does not adequately report on discriminatory actions against other minorities. In April, for instance, the leader of Cossack regiments in the Krasnodar region in southern Russia sent an ultimatum to the regional government demanding the deportation of all non-Slavs, including Armenians, Kurds and Meskhetian Turks. Cossack bands reportedly have also pressured individual families of Armenians to leave their homes in that area.
In other parts of Russia, there have been a number of attacks against Azeris and other Caucasians. Examples of such violence include the vandalism of market stalls used by Caucasians, the beating of Caucasian tradesmen and an anti-Azeri attack on a workers' dormitory. In St. Petersburg in September, nationalists reportedly set up crime fighting "worker squads" which target Caucasians.
Some of the attacks on Azeris in the St. Petersburg market may have been organized by internal security units to avenge the deaths of policemen apparently killed by Azeris. The same group raided a hotel where many Chechens lived, allegedly to verify residence permits and arrest racketeers. It was reported that OMON forces beat a number of Chechens
326
Russia
whom they had detained; some of them required hospitalization. In response, the government's Human Rights Committee and the Law and Order Committee of the Russian Parliament began investigations into the beatings that took place during the raid. The manner in which these ethnic and border tensions are resolved by the Russian Federation undoubtedly presents the greatest human rights challenge in the coming years to the country and to its government.
During 1992, Russia made a number of international commitments in the area of human rights. It was admitted to the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) and, as part of its admission, made a binding pledge to respect CSCE human rights standards. Russia aiso acceded to the 1951 Convention on the Status of Refugees and the 1967 Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees. While these actions show an intention to move toward a stable and fair human rights situation, to be entirely convincing, Russia must enact and enforce laws that assure the existence of real human rights for its citizens.
The State Department mentions the condition of the economy in various contexts throughout the report, but the relationship of the economy to the rule of law and to the resolution of the federation questions never really emerges. President Yeltsin's attempts to reform the economy have had severely mixed results. The constant wrangling and jockeying among the President, the Parliament, special interest groups, the Central Bank, the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the G-7 countries have created a chaotic, unpredictable and unstable
situation that, as it slowly continues to deteriorate, will make progress on human rights issues more daunting. Severe economic dislocation could overwhelm any humanitarian impulses of the government and its leaders.
327
