 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 
 The Soviet Union (U.S.S.R.) is a one-party centralized state
 in which the Communist Party attempts to direct all aspects of
 the nation's life, including all economic, social, and
 cultural development. The nomenklatura, or Soviet personnel
 management system, in which all senior party and government
 appointments are essentially decided by the Central Committee
 Secretariat and Politburo, allows a relatively small group of
 the party elite to use the party as its instrument of
 effective rule,
 The Constitution formally provides for most internationally
 recognized human rights and guarantees the right to education,
 medical care, and work. In fact, however, there is little
 tolerance of actions and attitudes which are not directly
 controlled by party or government agencies. The suppression
 of constitutionally guaranteed rights is justified by broadly
 worded constitutional provisions stating that such rights may
 not be exercised in a manner contrary to the interests of
 society as defined by the party and the Government, and
 limited in practice by a number of vaguely worded laws and
 articles of the Criminal Code.
 Soviet performance in the realm of human rights fails to meet
 accepted international standards. The regime's common
 response to efforts to exercise freedom of expression is to
 incarcerate those concerned in prison or labor camp.
 Mistreatment of political prisoners has a long history and
 continued in 1983. Inadequate food, clothing and shelter,
 heavy manual labor, unsatisfactory medical care, isolation,
 extended interrogation, and threats against prisoners'
 families are characteristic abuses. Many prisoners are denied
 the right to correspond with their families or to receive
 family visits. Some are confined to special psychiatric
 hospitals and to psychiatric wards in general hospitals where
 they are often subjected to cruel and degrading treatments end
 administered doses of powerful and painful drugs. The regime
 also continues to exile prisoners to remote areas of the
 Soviet Union or force them to emigrate.
 The party and Government control all Soviet information media,
 which are subject to heavy censorship. They also continue to
 maintain tight control over the work of foreign media
 correspondents. Soviet authorities use their control of the
 mail and telephone circuits to restrict, on a selective basis,
 contact between Soviet citizens and people abroad, and
 likewise restrict the circulation of foreign newspapers in the
 country. The Soviets continue to jam most Russian-language
 radio broadcasts from the West, maintain a widespread network
 of police informers, and frequently use electronic monitoring
 devices to gather information on the activities of private
 Soviet citizens.
 Public associations in the U.S.S.R. are subject tolthe control
 of the authorities, who suppress any which try to operate
 outside the confines of direct state supervision. Trade
 unions are strictly subordinated to the Communist Party and
 act as agents of the Government in implementing economic
 policy and ensuring labor discipline. They are not collective
 bargaining agents for workers. Freedom of religion is closely
 circumscribed, and religious believers arn subject to many
 restrictions in the officially atheist U.S.S.R. Freedom of
 
 (1123)
 
 
 1124
 movement is neither guaranteed by law nor respected in
 practice.
 In September of this year the Soviet Union agreed to the
 Concluding Document of the Madrid meeting of representatives
 of the participating states of the Conference on Security and
 Cooperation in Europe. A follow-up to the Helsinki Accords of
 1975, the Madrid Concluding Document is a reconfirmation of
 the participating nations' political commitment to respect
 "the universal significance of human rights and fundamental
 freedoms" and to "encourage the effective exercise of human
 rights and fundamental freedoms." Suppression of human rights
 continues in the Soviet Union despite this latest public
 commitment. In the short time since the Madrid meeting
 adjourned, at least six political prisoners are known to have
 been tried and sentenced to lengthy terms in labor camps:
 Iosif Begun, Sergey Grigoryants, Oleg Radzinskiy, Sergey
 Khodorovich, Vladimir Al'brekht, and Tat'yana Trusova.
 Despite-the Madrid Concluding Document's stipulation that all
 signatories "stress their determination to develop their laws
 and regulations in the field of civil, political, economic,
 social, cultural and other human rights and fundamental
 freedoms," new regulations went into effect in the Soviet
 Union on October 1 which allow the resentencing of prison
 camp inmates. At the same time, the authorities have further
 cut back emigration from the Soviet Union. Jewish emigration
 in 1983 was 51 percent below 1982 and 98 percent below the
 peak year of 1979. While emigration has been drastically
 reduced for several years, statements by some official circles
 that all those Jews who want to emigrate have left were a
 major new development. Such statements appear to express a
 determination in some quarters to end emigration permanently.
 This development coincided with a significant increase in
 official expressions of anti-Semitism, led by the formation of
 an "Anti-Zionist Committee of the Soviet Public.
 Viewed as a whole, the past year has witnessed an escalation
 of efforts to eliminate free expression. Christians, Jews,
 free trade union organizers, and independent peace activists
 all have suffered intensified repression for having
 independently promoted cultural, political, or economic ideas,
 even those (e.g. peace and disarmament) which in principle are
 fully compatible with official Soviet policy.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Unlawful or Arbitrary Deprivation of Life
 There are occasional reports of unusual circumstances
 surrounding the deaths of people engaged in religious or
 political dissent, or members of their families. The
 possibility of official involvement in such deaths, however,
 can neither be proved nor investigated. On the other hand, a
 number of political prisoners and common criminals probably do
 perish each year in prison and in forced labor camps due to
 the severe conditions: strenuous physical labor, a
 semi-starvation diet, extreme cold, lack of medical care.
 
 
 1125
 
 These deaths, resulting from conditions inherent in the prison
 camp system, must be seen as the direct result of government
 policy. It is impossible to estimate the number of such
 deaths.
 Soviet law provides for the imposition of capital punishment
 for a variety of offenses, including some economic crimes
 (e.g. fraud) which are not generally considered capital
 offenses outside the U.S.S.R. The Soviet media note the
 application of capital punishment only occasionally to
 emphasize the implacability of Soviet justice in rooting out
 "enemies of socialism", such as war criminals, traitors, or
 those involved in large scale economic crime. Statistics on
 capital punishment, however, as well as statistics on crime in
 general, are not published by the Soviet Government.
 b. Disappearance
 There are no known instances of prolonged or permanent
 disappearance in recent years. However, it is not unusual for
 people to be arrested or confined in psychiatric facilities
 without next of kin being notified. Concerned relatives are
 expected to initiate an inquiry with the authorities to find
 out if and when their family member was arrested, and where he
 or she is being held.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 The Constitution does not specifically prohibit torture or
 cruel and unusual punishment. Reports from a variety of
 sources indicate that mistreatment of political prisoners
 during pre-trial incarceration and interrogation does occur.
 In 1983 there were reports of increased incidence of such
 mistreatment in the Moscow region. Among the victims of such
 abuses are former chairman of the Solzhenitsyn Fund Sergey
 1hodorovich, who was beaten so severely that he was consigned
 to the prison infirmary; Aleksey Smirnov, who was reportedly
 beaten in prison on 30 occasions; and dissident psychiatrist
 Anatoliy Koryagin, who was also beaten severely. Prisoners
 are more frequently subjected to psychological pressures such
 as isolation, extended interrogation, and threats against
 their families. The security organs of the Government are
 responsible for these abuses, either directly or, by
 encouraging certain prisoners to assault others, indirectly.
 Although the Russian Republic Criminal Code states that
 "punishment does not have the goal of causing physical
 suffering or the destruction of human dignity," a number of
 reliable sources have described stark, often inhuman
 conditions in Soviet labor campsz isolation, extreme cold,
 poor diet and malnutrition, compulsory hard labor in difficult
 conditions, inadequate medical care, and frequent, arbitrary
 deprivation of a prisoner's limited right to receive
 correspondence and visits from his family. Prisoners cannot
 practice their religion and may be punished for attempts to do
 so. There have been instances in which political prisoners
 have been beaten by other camp inmates at the instigation of
 camp authorities. The political prisoners have then been
 falsely accused of having created a disturbance and, on the
 basis of the fabricated charges, consigned to the camp prison
 
 
 1126
 or solitary confinement. Yuriy Orlov, founder of the group
 which tried to monitor Soviet compliance with the human rights
 provisions of the Helsinki Accords, has been subjected to
 precisely this type of punishment.
 The Government continues to confine political and religious
 activists to psychiatric hospitals where they are often
 subjected to painful drugs not in standard psychiatric use.
 This form of treatment is, in reality, a form of torture.
 Some sources estimate that up to 1,000 people may at
 present be confined in psychiatric hospitals for political
 reasons. In 1981 the Soviet Ministry of Health's chief
 neuro-psychiatrist publicly stated at the Seventh All-Union
 Congress of Neuropathologists and Psychiatrists that 1.2
 percent of patients in Moscow psychiatric hospitals were there
 "in connection with visits to state agencies to present
 groundless complaints and slanderous statements." The World
 Psychiatric Association was scheduled to vote at its July 1983
 International Convention on whether to suspend or expel the
 Soviet Union from its ranks, but the Soviets preempted the
 possibility of an embarrassing public rebuke by voluntarily
 withdrawing from the Association in February. Abuses
 continue, however, and as recently as October, Nikolay Pankov
 was brought to a psychiatric ward for a day of testing when he
 wrote a letter of protest to the Communist Party newspaper,
 Pravda, after the downing of Korean Air Lines flight 007 in
 September. Authorities told him at that time that his desire
 to emigrate from the Soviet Union manifested a "sick tendency
 of mind." Dr. Anatoliy Koryagin, mentioned earlier in
 reference to increased incidence of physical abuse in prisons,
 is among those currently serving time as a result of efforts
 to expose Soviet psychiatric abuse.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Government spokesmen insist that prosecution occurs only in
 cases in which persons commit acts prohibited by law. But the
 provisions of laws under which prosecutions have occurred are
 sufficiently broad that they can be and are used to prosecute
 individuals for the exercise of internationally recognized
 human rights. Among these provisions are:
 -- Article 190-1, "The dissemination of deliberately
 hostile fabrications slandering the Soviet state and social
 system." This article, introduced in 1965 after the trial of
 Soviet writers Sinyavskiy and Daniel, carries a maximum
 penalty of three years' imprisonment;
 -- Article 190-3, "The organization of, or active
 participation in, a group activity violating public order,"
 which carries a maximum penalty of three years' imprisonment.
 -- Article 70, "Anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda,"
 which carries a maximum penalty of seven years' imprisonment
 and up to an additional five years of internal exile.
 -- Article 227, "The infringement of the person and the
 rights of citizens under the appearance of performing
 religious ceremonies," which carries a maximum penalty of five
 years' imprisonment.
 
 
 1127
 In addition to these provisions, the authorities continue
 to use criminal code provisions against "parasitism,"
 "hooliganism," and illegal commerce or "speculation" to harass
 persons for political activity. Dissidents are sometimes
 fired from their jobs, then arrested for parasitism because
 they have no jobs, or they may face fabricated charges for
 common crimes, such as theft of socialist property, or
 possession of drugs or weapons.
 According to the code of criminal procedure, pretrial
 detention can last as long as nine months, and prisoners are
 not entitled to consult with a lawyer until after the
 conclusion of the pretrial investigation. However, Jewish
 cultural activist Iosif Begun was arrested in November 1982
 and was not tried until October 1983, a direct violation of
 Soviet regulations. The Begun case is not unique, and these
 instances of prolonged detention function, in effect, as a
 form of preventive detention. Habeas corpus or its equivalent
 does not exist.
 The Government published two new articles of the Criminal Code
 (188.3 and 198.2) soon after the close of the Madrid
 Conference which have serious negative implications for
 political prisoners. The first provides that "malicious
 disobedience" to the directives of the administration of a
 labor camp by any camp inmate whose activity within the course
 of the previous year has resulted in his solitary confinement
 or in prison confinement is punishable by "deprivation of
 freedom" for a term of up to three years. For "especially
 dangerous criminals", the additional term is one to five years.
 The second new law states that any former prisoner under
 "administrative supervision" (e.g., who must periodically
 report his whereabouts to appropriate criminal authorities)
 who willfully leaves his place of residence to avoid such
 supervision, or who fails to appear at his place of residence
 within the time set upon his release from confinement, is
 sentenced to "deprivation of freedom" for one to three years.
 Political prisoners charged under the "political" or
 "religious" articles of the Criminal Code are officially
 defined as "especially dangerous state criminals", which
 disqualifies them from consideration for amnesty, parole, or
 transfer to the "unconfined forced labor" category. In labor
 camps, they are routinely singled out for especially harsh
 treatment, including solitary confinement and imprisonment on
 various fabricated charges. Under the provisions of the first
 new regulation, authorities may now indict, try, and sentence
 prisoners who are still completing current sentences. The
 second regulation provides the Government with a general
 pretext to rearrest previous offenders.
 The practice of exiling political dissenters, often to
 isolated Siberian villages or other outlying areas, dates back
 to Tsarist times and continues under Soviet rule. Exile often
 follows prison and, in practice, means confinement in a remote
 village in conditions of extreme cold, isolation, and scarcity
 of fresh food. These conditions are mitigated only by the
 privilege of receiving food parcels, moving about within a
 limited area, finding work (albeit frequently far below one's
 capacity), and arranging one's own often primitive
 
 30-231 0 - 84 - 72
 
 
 1128
 accommodations. The families of exiles are permitted to live
 with them.
 Andrey Sakharov's exile in the city of Gor'kiy, an area closed
 to foreigners, is the best-known example of this practice.
 The authorities continue to deny him normal contact with
 scientific colleagues and to subject him to surveillance,
 apartment searches, and interference with his mail and
 telephone communications. Authorities refuse to allow
 Sakharov and his wife to receive medical treatment in Moscow's
 U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences Hospital, despite the fact that
 Sakharov is still a member of the Academy and Academy doctors
 have determined that he requires hospitalization for treatment
 of a heart condition. Soviet doctors determined that
 Sakharov's wife, Elena Bonner, suffered a heart attack in
 April. In addition, the authorities have publicly stated
 that, despite a number of invitations from foreign
 universities, Sakharov will not be allowed to travel abroad.
 Persons released from exile often are not allowed to return to
 their former places of residence. Some, like Ida Nudel, a
 former resident of Moscow, are forced to live in other areas
 of the country, thereby insuring a de facto continuation of
 their exile. Others have nowhere to turn and return to their
 old homes without residence permits. They run the risk of
 being rearrested for violating residence laws.
 In addition to internal exile, exile abroad is also
 occasionally employed against dissidents. The authorities
 force or permit the activist and, in most cases, his immediate
 family to emigrate, then strip them of their citizenship.
 Peace activist Sergey Batovrin and author Georgiy Vladimov
 were punished in this way in 1983.
 It is difficult to estimate the number of political prisoners
 in the U.S.S.R., although 10,0000 is generally considered the
 minimum. Large areas of the country are either de jure or de
 facto closed to foreigners, and reports of trials in these and
 other remote regions may not become known to foreign
 observers. An unknown number of political prisoners have been
 convicted of "ordinary" crimes and therefore incarcerated in
 camps for common criminals rather than in special camps
 reserved for political prisoners.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Communist Party control of society extends to the legal and
 judicial system and may be exercised in political cases to
 negate constitutional guarantees of the objectivity and
 independence of the judicial process. All lawyers in the
 U.S.S.R. are state employees, and approximately 60 percent of
 them are party members; other judicial personnel are subject
 to the same party and governmental constraints as lawyers.
 Defendants in "political" cases can choose a lawyer only from
 among those given a special government clearance for "secret"
 matters. Even the most honest and vigorous defense, however,
 is of limited utility in a Soviet political trial. There has
 been no known instance of acquittal in a political trial since
 the Bolshevik revolution in 1917. It is widely believed that
 the decisions in important political cases are made by high
 party officials before the trial actually takes place.
 
 
 1129
 The Government often has taken actions which tend to undermine
 even the appearance of a fair judicial process. Defendants
 have been subjected to adverse pretrial publicity in the
 government-controlled press. In addition, Soviet authorities
 have employed a number of techniques to ensure that most
 political trials have in practice been closed to the public,
 including close relatives of the defendant. The location and
 date of a trial often are announced on short notice and may be
 changed with little warning. Special passes often are
 required for entrance to the trial, and the courtrooms
 frequently are packed with government supporters. Observers
 outside the courtroom sometimes are harassed or detained by
 the police. Western journalists and diplomats are regularly
 denied access to political trials and denied permission to
 visit cities outside Moscow where trials are taking place.
 No trials of civilians by military courts have been reported
 in recent years. There may be a special system of courts
 established to handle judicial matters concerning the
 extensive network of secret institutes in the country, but no
 information is available on the procedures under which these
 courts function.
 Psychiatric commitment of dissidents is a process which allows
 the Government to circumvent many of the requirements of the
 legal process and to incarcerate activists at the discretion
 of officials and psychiatrists.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The original intent of the Bolshevik revolution was to remold
 society to accord with a vision of man elaborated in earlier
 Marxist philosophic thinking. Accordingly, the Government
 assigned to itself a responsibility not only to change
 specific elements in social and personal life, but to
 determine its overall character. This project was reinforced
 by the implications of the Soviet economic system, in which
 virtually everything was owned and operated by the state,
 including all media, publishing houses, and organizations
 managing cultural events. The pervasive control implied by
 this political project became greatly weakened with time;
 there emerged dissident and nationalist subcultures, as well
 as different tendencies in officially sponsored culture,
 including criticism of some aspects of government and society.
 Nevertheless, there remains a substantial degree of government
 interference with personal life. Adherence to one philosophic
 world view is required, at least formally, in all scholarly,
 literary, or cultural works. Courses in Marxism-Leninism are
 required for all university students. Literature and culture
 are still in principle supposed to teach salutary personal
 attitudes, as determined by the Government. Accordingly, the
 traditional culture and folklore of the peoples of the Soviet
 Union continue to be sanitized of elements regarded as
 incompatible with the official ideology. This process extends
 as far as the removal of large elements of the vocabulary of
 some of the national languages. Accounts of earlier history,
 especially those which have a mass circulation, are required
 to present a standard version which is often at variance with
 the facts as known and documented outside the Soviet Union. A
 
 
 1130
 number of other aspects of interference with privacy and
 family appear in other sections of the report.
 The Government maintains a widespread network of informers in
 apartment buildings and in the workplace. The authorities
 still, in principle, regard it as a citizen's duty to inform
 the Government about unorthodox attitudes of family members
 and friends. The authorities electronically monitor the
 residences and telephones of Soviet citizens and foreigners at
 will.
 The Government uses its control of the mail and telephone
 circuits to restrict, on a selective basis, contact between
 citizens and foreigners. The authorities often intercept
 mail, and many citizens say that they have received less mail
 from abroad in 1983 than in previous years. In some
 instances, Soviet postal authorities have reportedly refused
 to accept packages from abroad addressed to prominent
 activists and members of their families. The Government
 continues to jam Western radio broadcasts, an action clearly
 inconsistent with the provisions of the Helsinki Final Act,
 and to maintain the cutback in telephone service to and from
 the West instituted in 1982.
 The Constitution guarantees the inviolability of the homes of
 citizens of the U.S.S.R. and, in theory, no one may enter a
 home against the will of the resident "without legal
 grounds.' In practice this provision has little restraining
 effect on investigative agencies, and well-documented cases of
 forced entry and illegal searches continued in 1983.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution provides for most internationally accepted
 political liberties, but the exercise of freedom of speech
 must be in accordance with the "interests of the people and
 the strengthening and development of the socialist system."
 In practice, the Government does not tolerate deviant behavior
 and has not hesitated to imprison persons for exercising
 freedom of speech, even when their actions did not violate
 Soviet law. All information media are controlled by the party
 and the Government; almost all of them are owned or operated
 by the party and Government. Publications, films, and radio
 and television scripts are subject to censorship by the Main
 Administration for Safeguarding State Secrets in the Media.
 Soviet journalists are subject to the discipline of the
 Communist Party and subordinated to the directives of their
 editorial superiors, themselves trusted members of the party.
 Therefore, journalists to a greater or lesser degree are
 executors of the official policies of the Government. Victor
 Danchev, an announcer for Radio Moscow's Overseas English
 Language Service, lost his job when he referred to "Soviet
 aggression" in Afghanistan. Radio Moscow removed Danchev
 despite official statements that he had merely made an error
 in English.
 All universities and research institutes are operated by the
 state or party; teaching and research are expected to conform
 to official expectations. In areas such as foreign policy and
 
 
 1131
 contemporary Soviet history, these expectations define very
 tightly the content of research and teaching, to the virtual
 exclusion of independent investigation. In areas that are
 less sensitive politically, independent scholarly conclusions
 may be published within certain broad limits. All books in
 the Soviet Union are published by the state or party, and are
 subject to prepublication censorship. Freedom of expression
 is substantially greater in fiction and scholarship not
 involving politically sensitive subjects. However, the
 Government's range of political sensitivities is broad, while
 censorship standards are often applied in an arbitrary and
 capricious manner.
 Openly dissident views on important questions of policy do not
 appear in the media, and no criticism of the party, the
 Government, and the leadership is permitted except to correct
 an administrative abuse, such as-inefficient lower-level
 domestic policy implementation, or to discredit an individual
 responsible for violating party norms. Arguments for and
 against prospective policies do appear before final decisions
 are taken on them, but once such a decision is taken
 dissenting views rarely appear in public. Open criticism of
 officials takes place only when decided upon by higher
 officials. Criticism of higher state officials is more common
 than criticism of higher party officials. Debate within the
 leadership is occasionally reflected in published texts where
 polemics and criticism, expressed in veiled language, allow
 experienced readers (both Soviets and non-Soviets) to identify
 policy trends and controversial issues. Such policy debate
 does not call into question the existing political and social
 system. A limited and intermittent opportunity for free
 expression, even to the point of attacks on the Government and
 the system, exists through samizdat" or the circulation of
 writings in manuscript. Conditions confine this opportunity
 to a limited social stratum, and users run the risk of
 arrest. The authors of literary, religious, and political
 samizdat materials have been subject to a wide range of
 harassments, including loss of employment, warnings from the
 Committee for State Security (KGB), apartment searches, and,
 ultimately, arrest, conviction, or incarceration in mental
 hospitals.
 The Government continues to maintain tight control over the
 work of foreign journalists and the circulation of foreign
 newspapers in the U.S.S.R. Overt censorship of wire
 transmissions of news stories out of the country is
 infrequent, but the authorities harass selected foreign
 journalists and, in some cases, either delay or deny visas or
 curtail visas already issued. The Government has taken some
 steps to improve the working conditions of foreign
 journalists, such as the issuance of multiple entry-exit
 visas, in connection with implementation of the Helsinki Final
 Act.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Constitution grants citizens the right to associate in
 public organizations "in accordance with the aim of building
 communism." In practice, public associations are organized
 by the authorities or are subject to their strict control,
 and the Government suppresses any attempt to function
 
 
 1132
 independently of its supervision. As a result of a campaign
 during the last few years, all independent human rights or
 peace groups have been virtually suppressed. Members of the
 Helsinki Watch Group (private citizens such as Anatoliy
 Shcharanskiy and Yuriy Orlov who attempted to monitor the
 Government's implementation of the Helsinki Final Act) and the
 Psychiatric Watch Group (monitors of Soviet abuses of
 psychiatry) have been arrested or exiled, and these groups had
 virtually ceased functioning by 1983. Valeriy Senderov, a
 member of the Council of Representatives of the "Free
 Interprofessional Association of Workers" (SMOT, in its
 Russian acronym), which aimed at organizing an independent
 trade union, was sentenced in February 1983 to seven years in
 a strict-regime labor camp and five years of internal exile.
 In addition to Valeriy Senderov, others associated with the
 free trade union who were sent to labor camps in 1983 included
 Rostislav Yevdokimov, Vyacheslav Dolinin, and Irina
 Ratushinskaya. The "Committee to Establish Trust between the
 U.S.S.R. and U.S.A.," an independent peace movement, also came
 under intense pressure in 1983, with members forced into exile
 (e.g. Sergey Batovrin) or arrested. Oleg Radzinskiy, a member
 of the Committee, was sentenced in October to one year in a
 labor camp and five years of internal exile. The authorities
 have even repressed independent groups with wholly non-
 political interests, such as the Invalids' Group, which
 attempted to lobby for improved medical and social services
 for invalids.
 Trade unions are strictly subordinated to the Communist Party
 and act as agents of the Government in implementing economic
 policy and ensuring labor discipline. They in no respect act
 as collective bargaining agents. Workers enjoy a large
 measure of job security, but labor turnover in some industries
 is high because many workers try to compensate for poor
 working conditions by changing jobs. The right to strike is
 not recognized in the Constitution, and strikes are rare.
 Largely owing to events in Poland, the media have attempted to
 portray the official trade unions in a more positive light,
 but the changes have been largely cosmetic.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Constitution guarantees the "right to profess or not to
 profess any religion and to conduct religious worship or
 atheistic propaganda." In practice, however, religious
 believers are subjected to many restrictions. Participation
 in religious ceremonies can cause exclusion from the Communist
 Party and, sometimes, dismissal from employment. Soviet law
 requires religious congregations with a minimum of 20 adults
 to register with the authorities, and prohibits religious
 believers from engaging in charitable activity, proselytizing,
 or providing religious training to their children. In some
 instances, the authorities have removed children from families
 which have permitted or have conducted such instruction. The
 number of functioning seminaries and other institutions of
 clerical education, and the numbers of students permitted to
 pursue a religious vocation, do not provide a sufficient body
 of trained clergy for even the officially registered
 denominations. Unregistered believers, such as some Baptists,
 Jehovah's Witnesses, Seventh Day Adventists, and Pentecostals
 also may be subject to a wide variety of repressive measures,
 
 
 1133
 including harassment at school or place of employment, denial
 of access to housing, dismissal from work, and even
 imprisonment. In September 1983 in the Soviet Far East, for
 example, a group of more than 50 Pentecostal Christians went
 on a hunger strike for up to 10 days (less for women and
 children) to dramatize their desire to emigrate. The
 Government did allow the two Pentecostal families who sought
 refuge in the U.S. Embassy for nearly five years to emigrate
 in 1983. A number of Muslim religious and quasi-religious
 traditional practices are criticized in the media as
 "survivals of the past", although in practice Muslims are
 perhaps somewhat less harassed than Christians for both
 domestic and external considerations.
 Beyond -the persecution of specific classes of believers, the
 Government exerts wide-ranging pressure to discourage any
 religious belief among its citizens, in accordance with its
 atheist principles. The Communist Party, defined in the
 Constitution as the "leading and guiding force in Soviet
 society," is, according to its rules, an atheistic
 organization. Membership in the party, considered
 incompatible with religious belief, is, in effect, a
 requirement for advancement to most positions of authority or
 prestige in the country. Thus the Government has structured
 career incentives in such a way as to virtually exclude
 practicing believers from educational opportunities and
 desirable careers.
 The official media feature large amounts of anti-religious
 propaganda, but among religious materials only a few
 publications of controlled content, such as the Vestnik of the
 Patriarchate, are allowed to appear. The practice of religion
 is also discouraged by strict low limits on the number of
 sacred books, such as the Bible or the Koran, which are
 printed, and by government unwillingness to allow the
 importation of those books. No works are published in
 Hebrew. Government action has reduced numbers of clergy to a
 small fraction of those available before the revolution, and
 the same is true of places of worship.
 The Government is always sensitive to manifestations of
 independence of thought among religious believers, whether
 they be Uniates in the Ukraine, Muslims in Central Asia, or
 Orthodox Christians and Jews in Moscow. Independent religious
 thinking, which was earlier allowed to proceed in samizdat if
 it was non-political, came under increasing pressure during
 1983. Among Orthodox Christians, for example, Zoya
 Krakhmal'nikova was sentenced in April to one year in prison
 and five years internal exile for "slandering the Soviet
 state." Krakhmal'nikova's "crime" was to edit an unofficial
 religious journal entitled Hope. Orthodox deacon Vladimir
 Rusak conveyed an open letter to the Sixth General Assembly of
 the World Council of Churches in Vancouver, Canada in August
 1983. He recounted his de facto removal from church
 activities for conducting independent research into the
 postrevolutionary history of the church and preaching sermons
 unacceptable to state authorities. He described KGB
 surveillance, confiscation of the results of his research
 (January 1983), and loss of the right to preach in church.
 The Jewish community faced a particularly difficult year in
 
 
 1134
 1983, which saw a sharp increase in official anti-Semitic
 propaganda thinly veiled as anti-Zionism. In April, the
 "Anti-Zionist Committee of Soviet Citizens" was established
 under the chairmanship of Col. Gen. D. A. Dragunskiy, the
 commander of a military school whose students include PLO
 officers. The authorities' new propaganda line, espoused by
 the Committee, asserts that the Jewish emigration "problem"
 has been solved since any Jews who wanted to leave the Soviet
 Union have already done so; that unofficial Hebrew teaching is
 a disloyal act; and that so-called international Zionism makes
 common cause with the world's most reactionary political
 movements, including fascism, in a mortal struggle against the
 Soviet Union. There has been talk in the press of increasing
 the Anti-Zionist Committee's role and influence by forming
 regional sub-committees.
 There have been numerous reports of discrimination against
 Jews, such as denial of access to higher education and certain
 professions, and in at least 11 cases the authorities have
 revoked higher degrees of Jews who have applied to emigrate.
 Such revocation of degrees in practice means the end of one's
 career, and usually the loss of one's job and income.
 Many individual Jewish "refuseniks" (Jews who have been
 refused permission to emigrate) were arrested and/or put on
 trial in 1983. Best known, perhaps, was the case of Iosif
 Begun, a Jewish cultural activist who was sentenced in October
 to seven years in a labor camp and five years of internal
 exile for "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda." Begun has
 served two previous sentences for his cultural activities.
 Chemist Yuriy Tarnopol'skiy, another refusenik, was sentenced
 in June to three years in a labor camp for "slandering the
 Soviet state." Lev Elbert, a mathematician from Kiev, is also
 a refusenik. He had already served a compulsory tour in the
 Soviet military, but refused to appear for an additional
 callup when the authorities refused to offer assurances that
 the additional service would not be considered confidential
 activity, which could make him ineligible for emigration for
 five years. He is now serving a one year labor camp term.
 The overall atmosphere of anti-Semitism in 1983 was as bad as
 it has been at any time in the past several decades.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel,
 Emigration, and Repatriation
 Freedom of movement is neither guaranteed by law nor respected
 in practice. Although citizens are generally free to move
 about within the territory of the U.S.S.R., travel in certain
 areas (e.g., frontier regions or areas of military
 significance) requires special permission. All adults are
 issued identity documents or internal passports which must be
 carried on their person during travel in the U.S.S.R. and used
 to register visits of more than three days with the local
 authorities. In practice, vast areas of the country remain
 closed to foreigners.
 The right to choose one's place of residence, although
 formally guaranteed by law, is subject to restrictions.
 Everyone is required to register his place of residence. The
 authorities limit the number of residence permits in some
 large cities, such as Moscow and Leningrad, where housing is
 
 
 1135
 at a premium and where the Government attempts to maintain
 showcase conditions for foreign tourists--cities free of
 so-called "undesirable" elements. Until 1976, workers on
 state and collective farms did not receive internal passports
 and could not travel from their local areas without
 permission. Although they are now legally entitled to
 passports, it is unclear how thoroughly the new regulations
 have been implemented. Certain national minorities such as
 the Crimean Tatars, Meskhi, and Volga Germans were deported
 from their homelands during World War II on charges of being
 security risks and collaborating with the Germans. Although
 the Government has since acknowledged that these charges were
 spurious, the people have not been allowed to return and in
 effect remain in exile.
 The U.S.S.R. has ratified the U.N. Charter and other
 international documents in which the right to leave one's
 country and return thereto is enumerated. In 1975, the
 Government announced measures to simplify emigration
 procedures and reduce emigration fees, which they presented as
 bringing their practices into conformity with the provisions
 of the Helsinki Final Act. In reality, however. Soviet law
 does not recognize the right of citizens to emigrate by
 choice. Reunification of divided families is the'only
 recognized basis for emigration from the Soviet Union. During
 the 1970s, emigration increased significantly, but it was
 limited primarily to three groups (Soviet Jews, Armenians, and
 ethnic Germans) and the formal grounds (reunification of
 families) remained unchanged.
 In late 1979 monthly emigration levels began to drop, and
 emigration applicants reported a variety of increasingly
 restrictive practices by emigration authorities which had the
 effect of increasing the difficulty of submitting applications
 and reducing the number of applicants who received exit
 visas. The formal basis for the restrictive practices,
 however, remained unknown. Authorities process applications
 for emigration and travel abroad and render decisions on the
 basis of administrative regulations and instructions which --
 except for passport fees -- are not publicly disseminated.
 The overwhelming, albeit circumstantial, evidence is that the
 precipitous drop in emigration was in fact the result of a
 deliberately restrictive emigration policy, and not, as recent
 spokesmen would have it, because all those who wished to leave
 have already done so.
 For the very few who received exit visas in 1983, emigration
 procedures were cumbersome and expensive. The cost of a
 passport for emigration to a "capitalist" country is 200
 rubles (approximately $260 at the official rate, one ruble -
 $1.30) compared to 800 rubles in 1976. The mere attempt to
 submit an emigration application frequently involves a variety
 of administrative and extra-legal sanctions, including loss of
 employment, harassment, social ostracism, and long delays.
 Many Jews have waited for more than ten-years for permission
 to emigrate.
 There was a continued sharp drop in the number of Jews allowed
 to emigrate in 1983, only 1,315 having left in that year
 compared to 2,688 in 1982 and 51,320 in 1979, the peak year
 for Jewish emigration from the U.S.S.R. Jewish sources
 
 
 1136
 estimate that there still are more than 200,000 Jews who
 possess the letters of invitation (vyzovs) from Israel
 necessary for application to emigrate. Although final figures
 for Armenian and ethnic German emigration in 1983 were not yet
 available when this report was issued, figures for the first
 nine months of 1983 likewise show a decline. Only 1,017
 ethnic Germans emigrated during this period, compared to 1,640
 during the same months of 1982. Only 171 Armenians emigrated
 from the Soviet Union to the United States during the first
 nine months of 1983 as compared with 282 for the same period
 in 1982 and 4,334 during the first nine months of 1980, the
 peak year of Armenian immigration to the U.S.
 Currently, approximately 64 families, numbering some 320
 individuals, are on a U.S. Government representation list of
 people who actively seek to join close relatives in the United
 States and who have been refused exit permission at least once
 by the Soviet Government.
 At least 14 U.S. citizens living in the Soviet Union have been
 denied permission to leave by the Government, several for many
 decades. In addition, there are at least 17 outstanding cases
 in which the Government has denied the Soviet citizen spouse
 of an American citizen permission to emigrate.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to
 Change their Government
 In the Soviet Union, only office holders in either of the
 parallel state and party hierarchies can have an influence on
 the composition of the Government. The Soviet Union is a
 one-party, centralized state in which the Communist Party
 attempts to direct and to control all political, economic,
 social, cultural, and other developments. In reality, the
 nomenklatura (Soviet personnel system in which all senior
 appointments are essentially decided by the Secretariat and
 Politburo allows a relatively small group of the Communist
 Party elite to use the party as the instrument of its
 effective rule of the U.S.S.R. The Constitution provides that
 the Communist Party is the "leading and guiding force of
 Soviet society and the nucleus of its political system, of all
 .state organizations and public organizations." No other
 organized party or political group is tolerated. Factional
 groups within the party itself are also prohibited. In both
 the state and the party hierarchy, higher officials are
 nominally elected by lower officials. In fact, lower
 officials are chosen by higher officials, and strict
 discipline prevails except at the very highest level of the
 state and party.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government contends that all internationally recognized
 human rights are fully protected in the U.S.S.R. and asserts
 that only "socialism" can truly guarantee human rights. The
 Government rejects foreign criticism of its human rights
 record as interference in its internal affairs, despite the
 fact that it is signatory to numerous international documents
 recognizing that human rights are a valid subject of
 
 
 1137
 international concern. The media feature sharp criticism of
 supposed violations of human rights in the West, especially in
 the United States.
 The Soviet Union does not permit foreigners to investigate the
 status of human rights in the U.S.S.R. International human
 rights organizations such as Amnesty International have
 frequently addressed communications to the Soviet Government
 concerning human rights, but the authorities have declined to
 reply in a substantive manner. The regime also has attempted
 to suppress the Moscow chapter of Amnesty International and
 has published attacks on the organization alleging that it
 works with Western intelligence agencies against the Soviet
 Government. Amnesty chairman Georgiy Vladimov was exiled from
 the Soviet Union in May 1983. In September 1983 a group of
 eight women incarcerated in Soviet labor camps drafted a
 public appeal asserting that the Soviet people "have no rights
 before the Soviet totalitarian machine", and declared that
 they are prepared to present concrete testimony before any
 international commission to back up this charge. The Soviet
 Union withdrew from the World Psychiatric Association in
 January 1983, in anticipation that a motion to expel it for
 psychiatric abuse would be passed at the international
 conference in July. The conference passed a resolution
 calling on the Soviet Union to demonstrate "an amelioration of
 the-political abuse of psychiatry" before it could be
 readmitted.
 When the United Nations Human Rights Commission prepares to
 consider allegations of human rights violations in the
 U.S.S.R., Soviet representatives generally attempt to bar
 discussion of the alleged violations on procedural grounds.
 If such discussion cannot be avoided, the representatives deny
 the substance of the allegations.
 In its 1983 report, Amnesty International called attention to
 the Soviet Union for its imprisonment of political dissidents,
 for using psychiatry against dissidents, for the harsh
 conditions in Soviet penal institutions, for attacks on
 religious practitioners, for imprisoning members of ethnic
 minorities who object to "Russification," for arresting
 members of an unofficial trade union, as well as members of
 the unofficial Moscow group monitoring Soviet compliance with
 the Helsinki Accords, and for the use of the death penalty.
 Freedom House rates the Soviet Union "not free."
 The Government has cooperated with the United States
 Government in investigating alleged war crimes committed
 during World War II by people who are now citizens or
 residents of the United States. The Government has permitted
 the U.S. Government to carry out depositions of witnesses in
 the U.S.S.R., and has provided documentation for use in U.S.
 courts.
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Discrimination on the basis of race, sex, or other grounds is
 prohibited by the Constitution. However, regime attempts to
 impose the Russian language on minorities have led to
 demonstrations in Georgia, dissatisfaction among Ukrainian
 intellectuals, and protests by other minority groups. In
 
 
 1138
 recent years, numerous reports and investigations by activists
 have noted restrictions on the presence of members of some
 ethnic groups, especially Jews. in various organizations,
 especially universities and research institutes.
 Women enjoy the same legal status as men in the U.S.S.R., and
 are accorded the right to participate in all areas of the
 country's social, political, and economic life. An extensive
 system of day-care service and maternity leave benefits,
 including in some cases as much as one year's leave from work,
 significantly enhances the ability of women to secure and
 retain employment. Even so, the population is growing slowly,
 at an annual rate of 0.8 percent.
 Traditionally, men occupy the great majority of the leading
 positions in most professions and politically sensitive
 occupations, especially politics. Since the establishment of
 the Soviet Union, only one woman has been a member of the
 Politburo. At present, only seven of the 313 full members of
 the Central Committee of the Soviet Communist Party are
 women. Overt economic discrimination against women does not
 exist, but many more women than men hold the less remunerative
 positions. In the non-European areas of the U.S.S.R.,
 cultural, social, and religious traditions restricting women
 to more "traditional* roles are gradually losing their
 strength as more women, especially in urban areas, receive an
 education.
 The population of 272.3 million people (1983) is on the whole
 adequately fed, clothed, housed, educated, and cared for
 medically. The quality of such services varies according to
 the citizen's status and place of residence and is often
 criticized by citizens and the media. Economic freedom of
 choice is sharply restricted, and there is great disparity in
 the regional distribution of foodstuffs and consumer goods.
 Income and wealth do not necessarily determine a Soviet
 citizen's standard of living, since one's rank in the various
 elites (the party, the military, the diplomatic corps, the
 scientific-technical intelligentsia, the cultural and sports
 establishments) significantly determines access to such
 benefits as foreign travel, automobiles, quality consumer
 goods and foodstuffs, special medical facilities, admission to
 the best educational institutions, country houses, and paid
 vacations in choice resorts. The allocation of privileges is
 one of the Government's most effective means of social control.
 Free, universal health care is guaranteed by the Constitution
 and generally provided for in practice. In addition,
 provision for the continuation of income during illness is
 quite liberal. Medical standards and facilities have improved
 substantially under Soviet rule. As of 1977, there were 34.5
 physicians and 120.8 hospital beds per 10,000 persons.
 However, there is considerable disparity in the regional
 distribution of medical facilities, shortages of medicines and
 vaccines persist, and medical equipment generally is below
 international standards.
 Citizens generally enjoy a diet adequate in calories. For
 instance, the calorie supply available for consumpton as a
 percentage of caloric nutritional requirements in 1977 was 135
 percent.
 
 
 1139
 The overly starchy diet, the lack of adequate recreational
 facilities for the general public, increasing air, water and
 noise pollution, widespread smoking, and increasing alcoholism
 (particularly among women and adolescents) appear to have
 intensified some negative trends in public health. The infant
 mortality rate, estimated to be 30 per 1,000 live births in
 1980, has been increasing at an alarming rate, the incidence
 of cardio-vascular disease is growing, and male longevity is
 decreasing (the average life expectancy is now 71.3 years).
 Great improvements in the quantity and availability of
 education in the Soviet Union have occurred in the past
 sixty-five years. Basic literacy among citizens is
 practically universal, although press comments in 1983
 indicate that the authorities are still far from their
 longstanding goal of making Russian a de facto second language
 among minority nationalities. Education is free at all levels
 and is compulsory through the tenth year; late in 1983 a
 program extending compulsory eduction to an eleventh year was
 announced. In 1979, nearly 100 percent of all children of
 primary school age were students; only in certain areas of
 Central Asia and the Caucasus were some children unable to
 attend school. All regular students admitted to institutions
 of higher learning receive stipends indexed to their academic
 achievements. The people have great respect for education,
 and competition for scarce seats in the universities and the
 better institutes is keen. Opportunities for education and
 professional advancement created by national development under
 the Government have led to greater mobility for a large part
 of the population.
 The 1981 gross national product (GNP) per capita was $5,930.
 A relatively high proportion of GNP is devoted to subsidizing
 the basic necessities of life such as staple foodstuffs,
 housing, medical care, education, and public transport.
 Therefore, despite his relatively low average income of 235
 rubles a month (approximately $305), according to official
 Soviet sources, the typical citizen is not poor in the Western
 sense of the term. His income alone, even wealth, does not
 necessarily guarantee access to many things which, taken
 together, define a high standard of living. The standard of
 living is not as high as in Western Europe or North America,
 but absolute poverty in the sense of widespread hunger and
 exposure to the elements does not exist.
 
 
 1140
 U.S.GvERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: USSR
 1981     1982     1983
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.AID  .. ....................  0.0    0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............O.. .  0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............O.. .  0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 HT F  I TOT ::AL . .:.                   : :
 REPAY.  It; $-LOANS .....      0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN  FOR. CURR .....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  I -TOTAL .........      0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV A WFP.         0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF  AGENCY .....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............O.. .  0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE  CORPS ......       0.0      0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .............. ..  . 0.0     0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............     0.0     0.0      0.0
 A.MAP  GRANTS ..........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL  MIL.ED.TRNG  ....      0.0      0.0      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER  GRANTS ........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ........ ......     0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 ---.-----.-..----.-.--..--------.--.---.--------.----.-.--
 OTHER  US  LOANS ..........      0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM  BANK  LOANS .......      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL  OTHER ..................  0.0      0.0      0.0
 ..........................................................
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1981     1982     1983     1946-83
 ------.----.---.----------...------.-------...--....--.-.
 TOTAL ........     0.0      0.0      0.0      0.1
 IBRD               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IFC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFDB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNDP               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0      0.0      0.1
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
