SOVIET UNION
The State Department maintains a generally high standard of reporting on human rights conditions in the Soviet Union. It has avoided both politically-motivated exaggeration and understatement at a time when Soviet-American relations experience alternating improvements and setbacks. This year's Report contains changes in a number of sections, some apparently made in response to our 1985 critique. Nevertheless, there are still some sections that require criticism or clarification.
The State Department is to be commended for its full coverage of Soviet human rights abuse, including the details of individual cases, at a time when Soviet oppression has sharply reduced the flow of information from human rights monitors. All the major developments of 1985 are discussed: deaths of political prisoners in labor camp after years of mistreatment; beatings of activists on the street, in police custody, in pre-trial detention and labor camp; continued misuse of psychiatric detention for political reasons; the halt in Jewish, Armenian and German emigration; jailing of Jewish cultural leaders; and trials of activists on the evidence of their intercepted correspondence or works published abroad.
A few positive signs -- doubtlessly attributable to the November summit -- have also been dealt with in the report, in a balanced manner that does not misrepresent small concessions as trends of improvement. The concessions include the granting of temporary medical leave to the West for Elena Bonner, wife of Andrei Sakharov and the granting of exit visas to fourteen Soviet citizens married to Americans. (The dramatic release of Anatoly Shcharansky in connection with an East-West prisoner exchange occurred in February 1986 after the end of the Department's reporting period.)
94
Last year, we commented that the mistreatment of political prisoners had not been covered adequately in the Report. Noting the fact that prison wardens often beat prisoners and that Soviet prisoners are now subject to repeat sentencing, we observed: "This has had the effect of threatening all dissenters with the possibility of becoming 'eternal prisoners' as in Stalin's day." Although this year's Report continues to neglect the fact that prison officials themselves perform beatings, the practice of re-sentencing has been given more prominence in the Report: "The specter of indefinite detention, a commonplace of the Stalin era, has reappeared in the 1980s."
The section on arbitrary arrest contains an omission: the Soviet criminal code provides up to nine months for pre-trial detention which is later counted as part of the sentence. In practice, prisoners have been held even longer. Yury Orlov was held for 15 months in 1978; Feliks Svetov, mentioned in the Report, was held for 11 months. In 1985, however, the reverse was true. Some dissenters were being tried within alarmingly short periods without sufficient time to prepare a defense. For example, peace activist Vladimir Brodsky was arrested in July 1985 and tried in August 1985; and Vladlimir Lifshitz, a Jewish refusenik activist of Leningrad, was arrested in January and tried in March 1986.
This section should also note that although the Soviet criminal code provides for fifteen-day arrests as a form of punishment, there is no article legitimizing house arrest — an extra-judicial method frequently used against activists.
For some reason, the Report has yet to correct a small error we pointed out in past years, namely that the proper translation of Art. 190-1 from the Russian is "dissemination of deliberately false [lozhnykh] fabrications" not "deliberately hostile fabrications." This distinction is important because the chief defense used by dissidents on trial under Art. 190-1 is that the information they distribute is true and therefore the article is inapplicable, even if the state views their activity as hostile. State prosecutors have yet to demonstrate in a court of law that information distributed by persons charged under Art. 190-1 was indeed false.
95
The section on denial of a fair public trial accurately notes how psychiatric commitment of dissidents allows the government to circumvent due process and arbitrarily and indefinitely detain dissenters. In 1985, there were also reports that Soviet officials were using venereal disease clinics, sanatoria and "labor therapy clinics" for alcoholics, and "sobering-up stations" as facilities for jailing normal, healthy dissenters. The current government anti-alcoholism campaign has created a climate in which dissenters can be discredited and controlled by putting them in facilities for alcoholics.
The section on religious persecution continues to be excellent. Last year, we had urged that Hare Krishna and other sects be included in the reporting, since membership and ensuing persecution has grown. We also commented that coverage of the persecution of Muslims was underplayed and mention had not been made of young people jailed for distributing the Koran. This year, the Report has been corrected to include mention of Hare Krishna and Muslim samizdat activists. The Department removed the misleading statement that "in practice Muslims are perhaps somewhat less harassed than Christians" and included new material on attacks and arrest of clergy and the insufficient number of mosques.
But the Report only mentions five members of Hare Krishna tried in Kurdzhinovo; in fact, the current known total of such cases for the entire Soviet Union is twenty.
Although the Report briefly mentions the suppression of free expression, it neglects the case of Lev Timofeyev, an economist sentenced in September 1985 to six years of labor camp and five years of exile for articles published abroad in Russian emigre journals that were critical of the Soviet economy. The Timofeyev case is symbolic of the harsh punishment that continues to be meted out for unofficial publishing at home and abroad. The section on freedom of the press could have benefited from inclusion of the following points, as well as more research on the status of academic freedom:
96
—	State secrets controlled by the censors are very loosely defined; virtually any information from a workplace can constitute a "secret" when a foreigner is involved;
--Many research or academic institutions require that meetings with foreigners be reported, and that persons who hold meetings with foreign colleagues without the knowledge of their employer can be subject to reprimand or dismissal;
—	Many research and academic institutions as well as public libraries have closed stacks of books and periodicals (the so-called spetskhran). Access to this restricted material is only obtained with special permission granted to poltically-reliable researchers who can provide specific outlines of their research topics and the consent of academic officials;
—	Except very sporadically in hotels for foreigners. Western newspapers are not available to the Soviet public;
—	The new campaign of glasnost' [openness] in the press, launched before the 27th Party Congress, has led to greater revelations of official corruption, mismanagement, and abuse of privileges;
—	The press has stepped up attacks on foreign journalists, attempting to rebut their stories. Gary Thatcher of the Christian Science Monitor was detained and interrogated in August 1985 upon entering the Soviet Union after a meeting in Finland connected with the 10th anniversary of the Helsinki accords. Materials on human rights were confiscated from him, but later returned after a protest was lodged. On December 10, 1985, U.S. cameramen were prevented from filming the annual human rights demonstration -- and in fact most efforts by foreign camera crews to film trials or demonstrations are thwarted.
—	Officials denied visas to a publisher and staff members of the Association for American Publishers to attend the Fifth International Moscow Book Fair, and subjected the exhibits to censorship.
97
The statement that the Meskhetians ("Meskhetroms" is a typographical error), a native group forcibly resettled under Stalin, were permitted to return to their homeland, ought to be substantiated by providing a source and some statistics, since this is a very important development in Soviet minority policy. In general, the Report continues to be negligent in covering ethnic minorities and movements for national self-determination. Although separate Country Reports are provided for the Baltic republics, the description of nationalist activity and discrimination against Ukrainians and Georgians, for example, is limited to a brief paragraph about Russification under the section on economy and culture. Furthermore, the plight of the Crimean Tatars, a Muslim minority, is dealt with only briefly and is relegated to the section on freedom of movement. Discrimination against the Crimean Tatars is not limited to restrictions on their freedom of movement, for the Soviet regime has destroyed their mosques, cultural monuments and books, has prevented education and publishing in the Crimean Tatar language, and is attempting to assimiliate the Crimean Tatars into other ethnic groups and regions in the USSR's Central Asian republics. As one of the largest independent movements in the last 25 years in the Soviet Union, the Crimean Tatars deserve more coverage.
The Report would benefit by providing concrete figures in dealing with topics such as: numbers of Armenians and Germans who have emigrated and the number who remain who would like to emigrate; the numbers of Helsinki monitors in custody; a total of reported political arrests and trials for each year, with comparisons to previous years; the method used to calculate the number of political prisoners.
Legislation stipulating fines for unauthorized hospitality to foreigners was mentioned in 1984, but the Report does not follow up on enforcement of the law in 1985. New legislation making it a crime to divulge work-related secrets is also neglected, although Soviet officials referred to prosecution of such cases at a press
98
conference during the Party congress. No cases are known to Helsinki Watch.
The Report continues to make the entirely misleading statement
that:
Soviet citizens who have even chance encounters with foreign tourists are often questioned, and receiving a foreign guest at home can result in extended interrogation. Foreigners are frequently questioned and intimidated after visiting Soviet citizens and, in some cases during 1985, were even expelled.
The year 1985 saw a tremendous upsurge in travel and contacts in the Soviet Union. The experiences of numerous academic and tour groups and citizens' diplomacy organizations completely contradict this statement. While Soviet authorities maintain tight control over foreigners' movements and itineraries, and often arrange meetings with carefully prepared "citizens," thousands of Americans have had the experience of making their own acquaintances and speaking to Soviet citiznes without restriction or reprisals to either party. Although the Soviets do question citizens who "have even chance encounters," this is not the norm. The statement concerning intimidation and expulsion after visiting Soviet citizens must be qualified to explain that these incidents mainly involve foreigners who have visited Jewish refuseniks — especially in Leningrad and Kiev -- or other activists, and is aimed at breaking connections between Soviet and Western Jewish communities and other groups. Tourists who keep to official itineraries and fraternize with ordinary citizens who are not involved in unofficial activity are, as a rule, not harassed.
In its description of trade unions and strikes, the Report may create a misperception with the statement that "strikes which do occur are ruthlessly put down by the security forces." While this is true in many cases, there have also been reports received in the West of work stoppages that resulted in workers' demands for bonus
99
payments, food, etc., being met rapidly by authorities in order to prevent unrest.
It is important to emphasize that although Western radio stations are jammed, broadcasts can be heard by persistent listeners, especially at night. This is particularly true of Voice of America.
The Report continues to state, incorrectly, that "all human rights or peace groups have been suppressed and have ceased function" in the section on the freedom of peaceful assembly. This contradicts other sections of the Report that detail the harassment of such individuals or groups, from which one can surmise that they remain active. Indeed, people still risk imprisonment in order to send out human rights reports to the West; without such courageous activity, the State Deparmtent Report would not be as full and descriptive as it is.
Correcting an omission noted by us last year, the Report, states that foreign travel is a privilege for the elite, and not a right; this should be stated under the section on freedom of movement, not in the section on the social situation. The Report also included a point noted by us last year that Soviet law only recognizes family reunification as a basis for emigration. The Report states that Soviet emigrants generally retain possession of their Soviet passports when they leave the USSR, but this is true only of a minority of emigrants, mainly those who are not Jews. Since Jews make up the majority of the emigrants, the Report's generalization is incorrect. And although most emigrants who have been stripped of their citizenship or required to renounce their citizenship (Jews and others) are not permitted to return, each year a small number of emigrants, mainly those married to foreign spouses, or those with American citizenship, are permitted to return to the USSR for brief periods.
Several features of the Sakharovs case deserve to be emphasized:
—	Andrei Sakharov was banished without benefit of trial or sentence;
—	Despite Soviet law that a term of exile cannot exceed five years, Andrei Sakharov is now in his seventh year of exile;
100
—	According to new information that came to light after the reporting period, Sakharov was subjected to beating, and painful and torturous force-feeding, as well as intense psychological stress while hospitalized in Gorky in 1985 — all general practices described in the Report.
—	The period that Mrs. Elena Bonner was granted medical leave in the West will be added on to her five-year exile sentence.
The section on disappearances should note that relatives often must initiate inquiries to locate family members held in detention facilities other than psychiatric hospitals. For example there were reports that next of kin were not notified in cases of twenty-four-hour and fifteen-day detentions. It is also important to emphasize that political prisoners and exiled persons, notably Andrei Sakharov, are frequently kept in isolation for prolonged periods, so that no news on their status is received by the outside world.
101
