 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 The Soviet Union is a one-party centralized state in which the
 Communist Party attempts to direct all significant political,
 economic, social, and cultural developments. Although the
 Soviet constitution formally provides for internationally
 recognized human rights, both civil and political, and social
 and economic (including the right to work, education, and
 medical care), there is in fact little tolerance for beliefs
 and practices which are incompatible with Communist Party
 control. Suppression of constitutionally guaranteed rights is
 made possible by a number of broadly-worded provisions stating
 that constitutional rights may not be exercised in a manner
 contrary to the interests of society as defined by the party.
 Apart from control, the Soviet Government's main objectives
 continue to be security, national development (with an emphasis
 on heavy industry) and projection abroad of its superpower
 status.
 The Soviet government's intolerance for activity deemed
 incompatible with Communist Party control and national security
 was particularly evident during 1980. Most prominent among the
 Soviet government's actions was the continued Soviet occupation
 of Afghanistan. Soviet practices in Afghanistan which violated
 human rights have included the reported use of lethal chemical
 weapons, "trick" explosives, and indiscriminate bombing and
 terrorizing of the Afghan population.
 In addition to their continuing violation of basic human and
 national rights in Afghanistan, Soviet authorities have also
 stepped up repression at home in a crackdown on human rights
 activists as severe as any since the beginning of the
 human rights movement over a decade ago. The exile of Dr.
 Andrey Sakharov to the closed city of Gorkiy, in part for his
 speaking out against the invasion, linked these spheres of
 repression. As many as a hundred other human rights activists
 were reported arrested or tried. Domestic repressive
 activities included: the stiff prison sentences meted out to
 human rights activists Tat'yana Velikhanova and Father Gleb
 Yakunin, the expulsion from the country of free trade union
 activist Vladimir Borisov, the forced emigration of several
 feminist activists from Leningrad before the Olympic Games, the
 continuing use of psychiatric treatment as a means for
 suppressing dissent, and the continuing restrictions placed on
 emigration leading to the reduction of Jewish emigration by
 more than half. The only major bright spot in an otherwise
 bleak picture has been the continued growth of Armenian
 emigration. The renewed jamming of Voice of America on August
 20 for the first time in seven years was a disturbing
 development. Jamming also was resumed on BBC and Deutsche
 Welle broadcasting frequencies. These actions make it clear
 that the Soviets regard the limited dissent, and the more
 generalized pressure for greater respect for human rights and
 for Soviet law which have appeared in Soviet society in recent
 years, as a serious threat to the regime.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom
 from:
 a.   Torture
 
 
 895
 Reports from a variety of sources indicated that mistreatment
 of prisoners during interrogation continues to occur, but
 systematic torture and physical abuse of prisoners as a means
 of obtaining confessions evidently has not been prevalent.
 Prisoners have been subjected more frequently to psychological
 pressure in the form of isolation, extended interrogation, or
 threats against their families. Agents of the Soviet
 government are responsible for such actions.
 b.   Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 These violations manifest themselves primarily in the areas
 of: treatment of prisoners in Soviet labor camps, use of
 psychiatric treatment against political dissenters, and
 internal exile.
 Prison Camps: Although Article 20 of the Russian Republic
 Criminal Code states that *punishment does not have the goal of
 causing physical suffering or the destruction of human
 dignity", a number of sources have described stark, often
 inhuman conditions in Soviet labor camps. Such accounts
 describe isolation, exposure to cold, deliberate malnutrition
 leading to chronic hunger and medical problems, compulsory
 labor under difficult conditions, inadequate medical attention,
 and arbitrary deprivation of the prisoners' limited rights to
 receive correspondence and family visits. Religious believers
 are denied the right to practice their beliefs and may be
 punished for attempts to do so. There are also reports that
 prisoners of Ukrainian nationality, and of other nationalities,
 have complained of discrimination in labor camps in that they
 are forbidden to correspond, to have access to reading matter,
 or to converse with visitors in any language other than
 Russian. Professor Yuriy Orlov, leader of the Moscow Helsinki
 Monitoring Group which was established in 1976 by Soviet
 citizens to monitor Soviet compliance with the human rights
 provisions of the Helsinki Final Act, has twice been subjected
 to solitary confinement. He was thus confined once for sending
 out a scientific article he composed while in camp and again
 for trying to defend his and other prisoners' rights. An
 Amnesty International Report on Prisoners of Conscience in the
 USSR, which was published in revised form in 1980, details
 S-6-iet treatment of prisoners.
 Psychiatric Treatment: The Soviet government continues to
 confine political activists to special psychiatric hospitals
 where they are subjected to a variety of cruel and degrading
 treatments, including doses of powerful and painful drugs.
 Some sources estimate that up to 1,000 persons may be confined
 in psychiatric hospitals for political reasons. In 1977 the
 World Congress of Psychiatry adopted a resolution condemning
 political abuse of psychiatry and named the Soviet Union as an
 offender in this regard. Psychiatric incarceration was still
 applied against human rights activists in several cases in
 1980. Authorities continued to repress critics of psychiatric
 abuse such as Vyacheslav Bakhamin and Leonard Ternovskiy,
 members of the Working Commission on the Use of Psychiatry for
 Political Purposes, and their associate Aleksandr Lavut, who
 were sentenced to long terms of imprisonment.
 Internal Exile: The practice of exiling political dissenters
 to isolated Siberian villages dates far back in Russian
 history, and it continues to be a frequent Soviet practice. A
 term of exile often succeeds a labor camp sentence, and means
 
 
 896
 that a prisoner will be confined in a remote village where the
 cold is extreme, where books and cultural amenities are scarce,
 and where fresh foods are unavailable. Sometimes first
 offenders are sentenced directly to a term of exile without a
 labor camp term. The harsh conditions of exile are mitigated
 only by the privilege of receiving food parcels and the
 comparative freedom to move about a limited area, to find work,
 and to arrange one's own accommodations. Such human rights
 activists as Ida Nudel and Vladimir Slepak remain in exile.
 Malva Landa, a member of the Moscow Helsinki Monitoring Group
 was sent into exile in March 1980. She was reported arrested
 again in July while serving her term of exile.
 A special case of the practice of internal exile during 1980
 was the forced removal of academician Andrei Sakharov from
 Moscow to virtual house arrest in the city of Gorkiy, which is
 closed to foreigners. This Soviet action was unique by recent
 standards in that it was not taken in connection with any known
 judicial proceedings, but was apparently based on a formal
 (albeit secret) decision of the Soviet government, a result
 akin to a bill of attainder. Since his exile, Sakharov has
 been denied normal contacts with scientific colleagues and has
 been subjected to arbitrary treatment by the Soviet authorities
 in the form of surveillance, searches of his apartment, and
 limitations on his right to receive mail, visitors, and
 telephone communications. No term has been specified for Dr.
 Sakharov's exile; all his attempts to contest this extra-legal
 action against him have been blocked.
 Death Penalty.- The Soviet criminal code authorizes the death
 penalty for a variety of offenses, including some which are not
 generally considered capital crimes elsewhere in the world,
 namely economic crimes such as large-scale fraud. The Soviet
 press occasionally reports imposition of the death penalty, as
 it did in several instances during 1980. However, statistics
 on capital punishment--like other crime statistics--are not
 published by the Soviet government. According to earlier
 reports, death sentences against two persons allegedly involved
 in a large scale plot to produce and sell textiles illegally in
 Azerbaidzhan were commuted to sentences of 15 years
 imprisonment. This is the second most severe penalty provided
 by laws, barring the death penalty. Death sentences of two
 other defendants in that case were reportedly reaffirmed on
 appeal. An unconfirmed news report indicated one of these
 latter defendants may have been executed during the summer.
 c.   Disappearances
 Disappearances of persons, as opposed to arrests, have not
 characterized the Soviet human rights situation in recent
 years. Individuals no longer "disappear" for protracted
 periods in the U.S.S.R., although dissidents will sometimes be
 picked up and held several days without any charges being
 brought against them. According to the Soviet Code of Criminal
 Procedure, pre-trial detention can last as long as nine months,
 unless provisions for extending that term are applied. In 1980
 human rights activists were held in lengthy pre-trial detention
 under these regulations, including in some cases somewhat more
 than nine months. In previous years such detention has
 extended beyond one year, as in the case of Moscow Monitoring
 Group member Anatoliy Shcharanskiy. Prisoners are not entitled
 to consult with a lawyer until after the conclusion of the
 pre-trial investigation.
 
 
 897
 d.   Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Legal basis for Prosecution: Soviet spokesmen insist that
 prosecution occurs only in cases where persons commit acts
 prohibited by law. While this is technically correct, it is
 also true that some criminal code provisions under which
 prosecutions have taken place have been designed and used to
 convict individuals for the exercise of internationally
 recognized human rights. The criminal codes of the several
 republics of the U.S.S.R. vary primarily in enumeration of
 articles. They all contain the following provisions, however,
 which reflect the enumeration of the criminal code of the
 Russian Soviet Federated Socialist Republic:
 --   Article 190-1 "Dissemination of deliberately false
 fabrications slandering the Soviet state and social system."
 (This article, which was introduced in 1966 after the trial of
 Soviet writers Andrey Sinyavsky and Yuliy Daniel, carries a
 maximum penalty of three years deprivation of liberty.);
 --   Article 190-3 "Organization or active participation in
 group activities, violating public order."  (Maximum penalty of
 three years deprivation of liberty.);
 --   Article 70 "Anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda."
 (Maximum penalty of seven years deprivation of liberty and up
 to an additional five years internal exile.);
 --   Article 227 "Infringement of person and rights of
 citizens under appearance of performing religious ceremonies."
 (Maximum penalty of five years deprivation of liberty.)
 --   Article 64 "Treason," which includes unlawful attempts
 to leave the country.  (The maximum penalty is death, but a
 sentence of up to 15 years deprivation of liberty plus five
 years exile is often imposed.) Yuriy Fedorov, Oleksiy
 Murzhenko, and Iosif Mendelevich, the remaining imprisoned
 members of the group convicted in Leningrad in 1970 for trying
 to seize an empty airline on the ground to fly out of the
 U.S.S.R., were convicted in part under Article 64.
 In addition to such provisions as those outlined above, Soviet
 authorities sometimes have used criminal code provisions
 against "parasitism", "hooliganism", and illegal commerce
 ("speculation") and others, including attempted rape, in order
 to prosecute persons for political activity. The practice of
 subjecting imprisoned human rights activists to arrest and
 prosecution on new charges before the expiration of their
 original term appears to have become more frequent in 1980.
 Reported examples of such arrests of persons already in exile
 include Aleksandr Podrabinek, author of a book on Soviet abuse
 of psychiatry for political purposes, and Mark Morozov, a
 member of the unofficial trade union, SMOT. Reports indicate
 two activists prosecuted under ordinary criminal charges may
 have won early release from labor camp under a 1980 amnesty
 covering certain categories of non-political offenders.
 In connection with Soviet preparations for the 1980 Olympics, a
 number of human rights activists were informed that it would be
 better that they not be in Moscow during the time of the
 olympics. The "advice" carried with it the implied threat of
 arrest and imprisonment if the individuals chose to ignore it.
 As a result of this pressure, many dissidents and refuseniks
 absented themselves during the Olympic period from the cities
 where the games were to be held. It was also in this
 connection that Moscow Helsinki Monitoring Group member Yuriy
 
 
 898
 Yarym-Agayev and three Leningrad Feminists -- Nataliya
 Malakhovskaya, Tatlyana Goricheva and Tat'yana Mamonova -- were
 forced to emigrate.
 Political Prisoners: It is difficult to estimate the total
 number of political prisoners in the U.S.S.R. Large areas of
 the country are closed to foreigners and reports of trials in
 these and other remote regions may not come to the attention of
 foreign observers. An unknown number of political prisoners
 and religious believers have been convicted and sentenced under
 ostensibly non-political articles of the criminal code and
 therefore might not be incarcerated in any of the special camps
 where political offenders are held. Based on available
 reports, however, the total number of political prisoners may
 range from 2,000 to 10,000. The Moscow Helsinki Monitoring
 Group has reported the names of 700 political prisoners, but
 believes the total number to be far greater.
 e.   Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Communist Party control of Soviet society extends to the legal
 and judicial system. This control can be exercised to nullify
 constitutional guarantees of the objectivity and independence
 of the judicial process in political cases. All lawyers in the
 U.S.S.R. are state employees and approximately 60 percent of
 them are party members; judicial personnel are subject to the
 same party and governmental constraints as lawyers. Defendants
 in "political" cases can choose a lawyer only from among those
 given a special government clearance for "secret" matters.
 Even the most honest and vigorous defense is of limited utility
 in a Soviet political trial under these circumstances.
 The Soviet government has often taken actions which tend to
 undermine even the appearance of a fair judicial process.
 Defendants have been subjected to adverse pre-trial publicity
 in the government-controlled press; there were several
 instances of this practice in 1980. In addition, the
 authorities have employed a number of techniques to ensure that
 most political trials in actuality have been closed to the
 public, including in some cases close relatives of the
 defendant. Defendants' right of calling witnesses is reported
 limited. The locations of trials often are announced on short
 notice and may be transferred with little warning. Special
 passes often are required for entrance to the trial, and the
 courtrooms frequently are packed in advance by government
 supporters. Observers outside the courtroom may be harassed or
 detained by the police.
 No trials of civilians by military courts have been reported in
 recent years. There may be a special system of courts
 established to handle judicial matters concerning the extensive
 network of secret institutions in the country, but no
 information is available on the procedures under which these
 courts may operate.
 f.   Invasion of the Home
 Citizens of the U.S.S.R. are guaranteed inviolability of the
 home under Article 55 of the Soviet constitution, and in theory
 no one may enter a home against the will of the resident
 without legal grounds.* In practice, this provision has
 little restraining effect on Soviet investigatory agencies, and
 illegal searches of residences are frequently reported.
 
 
 899
 2. Government    Policies Relating to the Fulfillment of Such
 Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care and Education
 The Soviet state places considerable emphasis on economic and
 social rights. While the population as a whole is normally
 able to obtain essential food, clothing, shelter, education and
 medical care, the quality and availability of such goods and
 services vary greatly, especially outside the large cities. The
 quality-and availability of consumer goods and services often
 are criticized by Soviet citizens and the official media.
 Freedom of individual economic choice is subject to substantial
 restrictions. Shortages still exist, and there is often wide
 disparity in regional distribution of foodstuffs and consumer
 goods. Money alone will not provide access to such things as
 foreign travel, private auto transportation, high-quality
 consumer goods, special medical facilities and vacation areas.
 Access to these benefits is determined in significant measure
 by rank within the various elites (party, military, diplomatic,
 cultural and sports) of Soviet society. Control over access to
 goods, services, and privileges not generally available
 provides the Soviet government with one of its most effective
 means of social control.
 Since its recovery by the early 1950's from the damage of World
 War, the centralized Soviet economy has experienced impressive
 overall growth. In the last 15 years, however, the rate of
 growth has been decelerating noticeably--from 4 to 5 percent
 per year average during the 1960's to less than three percent
 in the late 1970's. The difficulties are caused by declining
 rate of growth of the labor force, low labor productivity,
 increasing costs of investments, inefficient use of raw
 materials, difficulties in applying new technology, and,
 particularly, unstable agricultural production. These
 declining growth rates have sharpened the dilemma of a
 government committed to increased investment for consumer needs
 in housing, agriculture, health care, and education and at the
 same time continuing to devote the greater share of national
 resources to further development of heavy industry and defense.
 Housing
 The effort devoted to this sector is reflected in the rapid
 growth of large suburban apartment complexes around cities and
 towns and a highly visible interest in restoring older city
 dwellings. Many major cities have impressive long-term plans
 for coordinated regional development including housing,
 transportation, and consumer services. In the cases of Moscow
 and Leningrad, these plans are calculated as separate items in
 the government's overall economic plans.
 Nevertheless, housing shortages and overcrowding continue to
 exist in the major cities accessible to foreign observers.
 This is due to the long relative neglect of housing during the
 Stalin period, the late start by Khrushchev in programs to meet
 the need, and the continued substantial migration from rural to
 urban areas which increases the populations of already crowded
 cities. Planned housing construction for the entire tenth
 five-year plan (1976-80) is 545-550 million square meters, or
 enough for up to 60 million persons by Soviet standards. In
 1976-78 performance was roughly on target, but construction
 fell behind plan in 1979. Statistics for 1980 are not yet
 available.
 
 
 900
 The general norm for housing in the Russian Soviet Federated
 Socialist Republic remains a crowded nine square meters per
 person. In Leningrad, considered by the authorities to be a
 "model city," official Soviet sources indicate that 40 percent
 of the population still live in communal apartments. In such
 an apartment, a family might have one or two rooms, but still
 must share kitchen and bathroom facilities with other families
 in the same apartment. One aim of the government is to provide
 private apartments for everyone, but the waiting list for such
 apartments is long. A popular option of the last few years for
 those who can afford it is the purchase of a cooperative
 apartment.
 Health Care
 Free universal health care is guaranteed by the Soviet
 constitution. In addition, provision for the continuation of
 citizens' income during periods of illness is quite liberal.
 Medical standards and the availability of personnel and
 facilities have improved substantially under Soviet rule. As
 of 1977 there were 34.5 physicians and 120.8 hospital beds per
 10,000 people. There is, however, considerable disparity in
 the regional distribution of medical facilities. Low pay for
 doctors and other medical personnel remains a problem.
 Shortages of medicines and vaccines persist, and medical
 equipment is generally not up to Western standards. The
 general level of medical care available to the population is
 lower than that available in the industrialized countries and
 lower than the standard of care enjoyed by the elite.
 Education
 Enormous strides have been made in the quality and availability
 of education in the Soviet Union. Literacy in native languages
 is nearly universal. Younger people of most nationalities,
 with a few notable exceptions, also can read and write Russian,
 which is a required subject in the school curriculum. Despite
 certain deficiencies in availability in Central Asia and the
 Caucasus region, education is free at all levels and is
 compulsory through the tenth year. During the 1979-80 academic
 year, there were approximately 43 million students in grades
 1-10, divided about evenly between urban and rural locations,
 and about 9.8 million students in higher and specialized
 secondary educational institutions. All regular students
 admitted to institutions of higher learning receive stipends
 indexed to their academic achievement. There is great respect
 for education, and competition for scarce seats in the
 universities and better institutes is keen. There are reports
 that children of political dissidents, some religious
 believers, and minority groups, such as Jews, are subject to
 discrimination in access to higher education.
 Opportunities for education and professional advancement made
 possible by national development under the Soviet regime have
 led to greater mobility for a large part of the Soviet
 population.
 Tax Policy
 The Soviet income tax system is mildly progressive. However, a
 large share of tax receipts is obtained through what amounts to
 a value-added tax ("turn-over" tax), whereby goods, especially
 consumer items, are sold by the government at prices
 
901
 considerably higher than their apparent cost of production
 The size of this tax is unknown, and its existence is seldom
 mentioned in the Soviet press. Offsetting its regressive
 character, however, is the fact that the tax enhances the
 government's ability to subsidize housing and consumer
 necessities at the expense of luxury items.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a.   Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 The Soviet constitution of 1977 provides for most commonly
 accepted political liberties, including, according to Article
 50, "freedom of speech, of the press, and of assembly,
 meetings, street processions, and demonstrations," but the
 exercise of these rights must be "in accordance with the
 interests of the people and in order to strengthen and develop
 the socialist system." Article 39 of the Soviet constitution
 also states that " Citizens' exercise of their rights and
 freedoms must not harm the interests of society or of the
 state, or the rights of other citizens.' In practice, this
 means that the regime will not tolerate any political behavior
 it chooses to regard as deviant. The Soviet authorities have
 not hesitated to imprison persons for exercising basic human
 rights.
 All Soviet media, whether organs of the Soviet government, the
 Communist party, labor unions, professional organizations,
 educational or cultural organizations, are dominated and
 controlled by the party and the government. All books and
 other publications, films, and radio and television scripts are
 subject to pre-release censorship by the Main Administration
 for Safeguarding State Secrets in the Press. Soviet
 journalists are bound by the discipline of the Communist party
 and subordinate to the directives of their editorial superiors,
 who are themselves trusted members of the party. This means
 that Soviet journalists are to a great extent collaborators in,
 and executors of, official policies of the Soviet government.
 Openly dissenting or opposition views on important questions of
 policy are not permitted in Soviet media. No criticism of the
 government, the party, or the leadership is tolerated except at
 the behest of the leadership in order to call for, or to
 illustrate a corrective action of some abuse, such as
 inefficient lower-level policy implementation, or to discredit
 an individual. Authors of unpublished literary or political
 material, which circulates privately, usually in typescript
 (samizdat), have been subject to such varied penalties as loss
 of employment, exile to remote regions of the U.S.S.R.,
 sentences to labor camps and prisons, and ihcarceration in
 Soviet mental hospitals. In 1980, for example, the criminal
 prosecutions against dissidents Tat'yana Velikhanova and
 Vyacheslav Bakhmin were based on their dissemination of
 statements allegedly "slandering" the Soviet government in the
 Chronicle of Current Events. The Chronicle is an unofficial
 information bulletin on the Soviet Union's human rights record,
 which over the last 13 years has succeeded in publishing 56
 issues despite more than two dozen arrests of persons allegedly
 involved with its preparation and circulation.
 In October Yuriy Grimm, Valeriy Abramkin, and Viktor Sokirko
 were tried for editing an underground journal called Poiski
 (Searches). In a manner recalling the suppression of the
 
 
 902
 unofficial, and uncensored, literary anthology Metropol in
 1979, a group of seven writers who applied to authorities in
 November for permission to establish a literary club to publish
 uncensored literature were also reported subject to official
 harassment. The Soviet government continues to maintain tight
 control over the work of foreign journalists and the
 circulation of foreign newspapers and magazines in the Soviet
 Union. While overt censorship of wire transmissions of news
 stories out of the country by foreign journalists is
 infrequent, Soviet authorities harass some foreign journalists
 and in some cases curtail, or deny them Soviet visas. The
 Soviets have taken some steps to improve the working conditions
 of foreign journalists -- especially by granting them the
 privilege of multiple entry-exit visas -- in connection with
 Soviet undertakings under the Helsinki Final Act.
 The Soviet authorities use their control over the mails and
 telephone circuits to restrict, on a selective basis, contact
 between Soviet dissidents and refuseniks and persons outside
 the U.S.S.R. Beginning August 20, 1980, the Soviet government
 intensified its efforts to control the information available to
 Soviet citizens by jamming Voice of America and other Western
 radio broadcasts directed at the Soviet Union, in clear
 contradiction of the Helsinki Final Act, for the first time
 since 1973. Jamming of Radio Liberty and other foreign
 broadcasts continues.
 Article 52 of the Soviet constitution guarantees the "right to
 profess or not to profess any religion and to conduct religious
 worship or atheistic propaganda." In practice, however,
 religious believers are subjected to many restrictions on their
 activities. Soviet law on religious associations requires
 religious groups of more than 20 persons to register with the
 authorities. Soviet law prohibits religious believers from
 engaging in charitable activity, conducting evangelical
 activity, and providing religious training to children. There
 have been reports that the authorities have taken away children
 from families which have permitted, or conducted such
 instruction. Religious believers, especially those who belong
 to an unregistered group, such as some Baptist groups,
 Pentecostalists, Jehovah's Witnesses, Seventh Day Adventists
 and others, also may be subjected to a wide variety of
 repressive measures by the authorities, including harassment at
 school or place of employment, denial of access to housing,
 dismissal from work, or imprisonment for violation of Soviet
 law on religion. Such conditions underlie the desire of many
 Soviet Pentecostalists to emigrate, including the Vashchenko
 and Chmykalova families now living in refuge in the U.S.
 Embassy in Moscow.
 While the official Soviet communications media transmit large
 amounts of anti-religious material, pro-religious material is
 not permitted to appear in any official media. The Communist
 Party, which the Soviet constitution defines as the "leading
 and guiding force in Soviet society" is, according to its
 rules, an atheistic organization. Membership in the party,
 which is considered incompatible with religious beliefs, is an
 informal requirement for advancement to most leading positions
 in the country. Young people known to be religious believers
 are reported often to encounter discrimination in seeking
 admission to higher education.
 The regime shows particular sensitivity to religion when it is
 
 
 903
 perceived as linked to actual or potential political dissent,
 as in the case of Roman Catholicism in Lithuania, Islam in
 Central Asia, and Judaism.- There have been continuing reports
 of anti-Semitism as reflected in discrimination against Jews in
 access to higher education and the professions.
 Officially-condoned, published attacks on Zionism, which appear
 only thinly to veil anti-Semitic feelings, also have aroused
 concern. Jews have been subjected to imprisonment for teaching
 Hebrew. During 1980 religious rights activists including
 Father Gleb Yakunin, Aleksandr Ogorodnikov, Nikolay Goretoy,
 Mikhail Khorev and others have been tried and given severe
 sentences, or subjected to psychiatric incarceration as in the
 case of Vladimir Xhailo.
 Article 51 of the Soviet constitution grants citizens the right
 to associate in public organizations, but only "in accordance
 with the aim of building communism." In practice, all public
 associations in the U.S.S.R. are subject to the control of the
 authorities, and any associations which appear to challenge the
 interests of the regime are suppressed. For example, members
 of the Helsinki Monitoring Groups have been subjected to severe
 repression, and in many cases imprisonment. During 1980, the
 Soviet campaign against the monitoring groups was particularly
 severe. Arrests and trials removed such members as Viktor
 Nekipelov and Tat'yana Osipova of the Moscow Group; Zinoviy
 Krasivsky, Vasyl Lisoviy and Vasyl Stus of the Kiev Group, and
 others.
 b.   Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration and Repatriation.
 Freedom of movement is neither guaranteed by law nor respected
 in practice. Although Soviet citizens are generally free to
 move about within the territory of the U.S.S.R., travel to
 certain areas, such as some border regions or areas of military
 significance, requires special permission. All adult Soviet
 citizens are issued identity documents ("Passports") which must
 be carried for internal travel and used to register local stays
 of longer than three days with the authorities. The greater
 part of the country remains closed to foreigners.
 The right to choose one's place of residence, although formally
 guaranteed by law, is subject to restrictions in practice. All
 persons are required to register at their place of residence.
 The authorities limit the issuance of residence permits in some
 large cities, such as Moscow and Leningrad, where housing is at
 a premium and in frontier districts and other areas such as the
 Crimea. Until 1976, workers on state and collective farms did
 not receive internal passports and could not travel from their
 homes without permission. Although these state and collective
 farm workers are now legally entitled to passports, actual
 implementation of this provision is uncertain. Former
 prisoners are prohibited from settling in certain areas, even
 after they have served their sentences. Certain national
 minorities, such as the Crimean Tartars, Meskhi and Volga
 Germans, are prevented from freely resettling in the native
 areas from which they were deported during World War II for
 being security risks or for allegedly collaborating with the
 Germans. These charges have been officially acknowledged as
 spurious. Nonetheless, activists on behalf of the rights of
 such groups, such as Dr. Rollan Kadiyev of the Crimean Tartars,
 have been subject to harassment and arrest.
 The U.S.S.R. has ratified international agreements such as the
 International Covenants on Civil and Political Rights and on
 Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights, and the International
 Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Racial
 
 
 904
 Discrimination, in which the right to leave one's country and
 return thereto is enumerated. But this right is restricted in
 practice beyond what is permissible by these documents.
 Reunification of divided families and marriage to a foreign
 national are the only officially recognized grounds for
 emigration from the Soviet Union. Soviet authorities adamantly
 refuse to recognize the- right of emigration but attempt to
 obscure this fact by arguing -- as a high Soviet official in
 charge of emigration did on the eve of the Madrid CSCE Meeting
 -- that the U.S.S.R. "lacks objective conditions-for the
 development of emigration as a social phenomenon.
 In 1976, the Soviets announced measures to simplify emigration
 procedures and reduce emigration fees, which they presented as
 bringing their practice into conformity with the Helsinki Final
 Act. In 1977, passport and visa fees were again lowered. Laws
 and regulations which govern travel and emigration abroad are
 not publicly available, however, except for those concerning
 passport fees.
 Application procedures for emigration are cumbersome and
 expensive. The cost of an emigration passport to a
 "capitalist" country is 200 rubles (approximately $310.00, down
 from 400 rubles as of 1976 and from 300 rubles as of 1977). In
 addition, those seeking to emigrate to Israel -- the bulk of
 all emigrants -- are required to give up their Soviet
 citizenship, an act which costs 500 rubles (approximately
 $775.00). This is a reduction from 800 rubles as of 1976.
 Costs and cumbersome procedures aside, emigration from the
 Soviet Union is still not easy. It frequently involves a
 variety of administrative and extra-legal sanctions, including
 loss of job, harassment,.and social ostracism. Delay is often
 used against potential emigrants; many Soviet Jews have waited
 unsuccessfully more than eight years for permission to leave.
 Because in most cases those who apply to emigrate lose their
 jobs, they are exposed to the danger of being prosecuted as
 "parasites".
 There was a sharp drop in the numbers of Jews allowed to
 emigrate in 1980, with 21,000 Jews being allowed to leave, as
 compared with a record 51,000 for 1979. The decline became
 noticeable, however, late in 1979. A small portion of this
 decrease can be attributed to disruptions in'processing of
 emigrants caused by the Olympics. According to Jewish sources
 in the Soviet Union, the drop may be explained by the
 deterioration in East-West relations and Soviet fears of a
 Jewish "brain drain." Jewish sources estimate that there are
 still over 200,000 Jews holding letters of invitation (vyzovs)
 from Israel, which are needed to apply to emigrate. The only
 area where emigration increased significantly was in Soviet
 Armenia, with over 6,000 Armenians departing in 1980, mostly to
 the United States. Currently, approximately 100 Soviet
 families, consisting of approximately 300 individuals, are
 included on a United States Government Representation List of
 those actively seeking to join close relatives in the United
 States and who have been repeatedly refused exit permission by
 the Soviet government.
 There are more than a dozen documented cases of persons living
 in the U.S.S.R. with a valid claim to U.S. citizenship who have
 been denied permission to leave, several for many decades. In
 addition, there are at least seven long-standing cases in which
 
 
 905
 the Soviet government has denied permission for the Soviet
 citizen spouse of an American citizen to emigrate.
 c.   Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 According to Article 6 of the Soviet constitution, the
 Communist Party is "the leading and guiding force of Soviet
 society and the nucleus of its political system, of all state
 organizations and public organizations." No other organized
 party or political group outside the control of the Communist
 Party is tolerated. Strict discipline prevails within the
 mommunist Party itself, and opposition groups within the party
 are prohibited. The limits of intra-party activity are defined
 by a strictly hierarchical structure, and lower-ranking party
 members have little real ability to influence or criticize the
 decisions of the party superiors.
 Participation in the political system is open to all citizens
 who accept the principles of the regime and the Communist
 Party. Discrimination on the basis of race, sex, or other
 grounds is prohibited by the Soviet constitution.
 Russification and, in particular, attempts to impose the
 Russian language over the language of national minorities, have
 in the past, however, led to demonstrations in the Georgian
 Republic, dissatisfaction among Ukrainian intellectuals and
 other protests by national minorities. Reports indicate
 continuing dissatisfaction over nationility issues. In recent
 years, also, there have been allegations that some ethnic
 groups, especially Jews, face restrictions on their ability to
 participate in leading positions in the political system and in
 some other sensitive positions. It has been charged that
 informal quotas exist to limit the access of Jews to some
 universities and research institutes.
 Soviet trade unions are subordinated strictly to the communist
 party and act as agents of the government in implementing
 economic policy and ensuring labor discipline rather than as
 collective bargaining agents for workers. The right to strike
 is not recognized in the Soviet constitution, and strikes are
 infrequent. There were some reports of brief work stoppages
 during 1980, in Togliatti and Gorkiy, but these apparently were
 resolved quickly and nonviolently. In the wake of the Polish
 strikes, the official media have devoted increased attention to
 the need for the official Soviet trade unions to play a more
 active role in ensuring that worker needs are satisfied. The
 government has continued its policy of repressing any attempts
 to establish independent trade union organizations, such as MOT
 (or AFTU, Association of Free Trade Union of Workers) and its
 successor group SMOT (Free Inter-Professional Association of
 Workers), or any other expression of workers' dissent.
 Examples include the expulsion of Vladimir Borisov and the
 psychiatric incarceration of SMOT members Vladimir Gershuni and
 Valentin Smirnov. Member delegations to the ILO continued in
 1980 to press complaints in that forum against repression of
 Soviet free trade union activists and other violations of ILO
 Conventions on Forced Labor and on Freedom of Association.
 Those Soviet workers who do not engage in free trade union
 activities or other dissident political activities enjoy a
 large measure of job security.
 Women are legally equal to men in the U.S.S.R. and they
 participate in all areas of the country's social, political,
 and economic life. An extensive system of day-care service and
 
 
 906
 maternity leave benefits, which allow women up to one year off
 from work, significantly enhances the rights of women and
 facilitates their membership in the work force. However, males
 tend to occupy the leading positions in most fields of society,
 especially politics. Since the founding of the Soviet Union,
 only one woman has served on the Politburo, the country's
 leading political body. There is no stated economic
 discrimination against women, but a far larger number of women
 than men tend to be found in lower-paying positions.
 Because of low wages relative to the overall cost of living,
 women's right to work actually reflects a necessity to work in
 order to meet the family expenses. The mother who has the
 choice of staying at home with her children is rare. Moreover,
 in addition to a full work day on the job, a working woman must
 spend long hours standing in lines at food shops and has a full
 schedule of household duty with few modern household
 conveniences. The Soviet press has reported recent measures to
 limit work by women in more strenuous, hazardous occupations.
 Such measures may reflect official concern over the declining
 birthrate and the problem of rising infant mortality. In the
 non-European portions of the Soviet Union, cultural, social,
 and religious biases restricting women to "traditional" roles
 tend to be much stronger.
 As noted elsewhere in this report, the Soviet government in
 1980 subjected to forced emigration three feminist activists
 whose samizdat journal Women and Russia had criticized Soviet
 performance in actually guaranteeing full equality for women.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Soviet government contends that all internationally
 recognized human rights are fully protected in the U.S.S.R.,
 and asserts that only "socialism" can truly guarantee human
 rights by assuring their basic economic, social, and cultural
 bases. The Soviet government rejects foreign criticism of its
 human rights record as interference in its internal affairs, in
 spite of the fact that the U.S.S.R. is a signatory of, or party
 to, numerous international documents, including the Helsinki
 Final Act, the United Nation Charter, the International
 Conventions on Civil and Political Rights and on Economic,
 Social, and Cultural Rights, and the several ILO Conventions,
 which recognize that human rights are a valid subject of
 international concern. The government-controlled press
 publishes sharp criticism of the human rights situation in
 Western countries, especially the United States.
 The Soviet government in general does not permit independent
 foreign investigation of the human rights situation in the
 country. The only significant, recent exception was a visit
 there in 1962 by an ILO delegation which resulted in the
 publication of a controversial report. In the fall of 1980 a
 high ILO official again visited the USSR. No public report on
 that trip was available. In 1977 the Soviet press reported an
 international medical symposium held inside the Serbskiy
 Institute for Forensic Psychiatry, which has been alleged to be
 involved in misuse of psychiatry for political purposes. The
 Institute's director reportedly used the occasion to rebut
 charges about the Institute's "impassable iron gates" and to
 depict the meeting, including a tour of the wards, as a
 contribution toward carrying out the provisions of the Helsinki
 Final Act. International human rights organizations such as
 Amnesty International have frequently addressed communications
 to the Soviet government concerning human rights, but that
 government is not known to have replied to these inquiries in a
 substantive fashion. Soviet authorities have attempted to
 suppress the activities of the Moscow chapter of Amnesty
 International and in 1980 published a series of attacks
 
 
 alleging that Amnesty International was working in conjunction
 with Western intelligence. The head of the now inactive Moscow
 chapter of Amnesty International reportedly has been questioned
 by authorities.
 After lengthy debate over procedures for the Madrid CSCE Review
 meeting, the Soviets acquiesced in a late compromise which
 allowed a period for a full and candid review of implementation
 of the human rights pledges of the Helsinki Final Act.
 When allegations of human rights violations in the U.S.S.R. are
 raised in international forums, including the United Nations
 Human Rights Commission (UNHRC), Soviet representatives
 generally attempt to bar, or limit discussion on procedural
 grounds. They strongly, but unsuccessfully resisted efforts to
 discuss the exile of Dr. Sakharov at the last UNHRC meeting.
 If such discussion cannot be avoided, the Soviet
 representatives normally deny the substance of the allegations,
 or present their actions as a matter of law enforcement, in
 accordance with internationally accepted norms, and solely of
 internal Soviet concern.
 Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania: The human rights situation in
 the Baltic States has not been addressed specifically in the
 foregoing report since the United States has not recognized the
 illegal forcible incorporation in 1940 of Estonia, Latvia, and
 Lithuania into the Soviet Union. Human rights conditions in
 the three Republics are similar to those in the Soviet Union.
 The Lithuanian Catholic Church is under particularly heavy
 pressure. There appears to be a systematic program of
 "Russification" of the Baltic States by continuing resettlement
 there of a greater percentage of Russians relative to the
 native Estonian, Latvian, and Lithuanian populations. Reports
 of student demonstrations in Tallin in October indicate
 continuing dissatisfaction over nationality issues in the
 Baltic States. The forty-five signers of the Baltic
 Declaration of August 1979, protesting the occasion of the
 fortieth anniversary of the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact which led
 to the Soviet occupation of the Baltic States, have been
 subjected to severe harassment. Baltic activists, including
 signers of the Declaration, who have been reported arrested or
 tried during 1980 include: Vytautas Skuodis (who was born in
 the United States), Julius Sasnauskas, Mecisclovas.Jurevicius,
 Arvydas Cekanavicius, Antanas Terleckas (who like Skuodis and
 some activists in the U.S.S.R. was held somewhat longer than
 the statutory nine-month limitation on pre-trial detention),
 Mart Niklus, Ona Vilkauskaite, Gene Navichaite, Jur Kukk,
 Vytautas Abrutis, Maris Lukjanovics and Viktor Niitsoo.
 Jurevicius is a member of the Helsinki Monitoring Group in
 Vilnius. Like their counterparts in the U.S.S.R., Baltic human
 rights activists, for example Balys Gajauskas and Viktoras
 Petkus, frequently are sentenced to long terms of imprisonment.
 
 
 908
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: USSR
 1978     1979     1980
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL,..          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS..............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.AID ................           0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS...........             0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS............           0.0      0.0      0.0
 (SECSUPP.ASSIST.) o.         0.0      0.0       0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE ......          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS..............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL..........          0.0      0.0       0.0
 REPAY. IN $-LOANS.....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR... .         0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL.........          0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.          0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY ..           0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS..............          0.0      00       0.0
 GRANTS.............          0.0      00      0.0
 CONTR. TO IFI....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS......          0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER............         0.0       0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST-TOTAL ...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS......... .0.0                  0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.........              0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS..........          0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT SALES-FMS,,..          0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL HIL.ED.TRNG....         0.0       0.0      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL.           0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS..............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 -----      -------------------------------------------------
 OTHER US LOANS ......            0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS......           0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER .............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 ;---S -N----------T--------I----------------------
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1978     1979     1980     1946-80
 ----------            ----o ------   ------- - ------ -----------
 TOTAL.......      0.0      0.0       0.0      0.1
 IBRD               0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 IFC                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 IDA                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 IDS                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 ADB                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 AFDB               0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 UNDP               0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0       0.0      0.1
 EEC                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 
 
 909
