 RUSSIA
 Politically, economically, and socially, Russia continues to be a state in transition.
 While constitutional structures are well-defined and democratic in conception, de-
 mocratization continues to be slow. The 1993 Constitution establishes a tripartite
 government with checks and balances. The executive branch consists of an elected
 president and a government headed by a prime minister. There is a bicameral legis-
 lature (Federal Assembly), consisting of the State Duma and the Federation Coun-
 cil, and a judicial branch. Both the President and the legislature were selected in
 competitive elections judged to be largely free and fair, with a broad range of politi-
 cal parties and movements contesting offices. The judiciary, still the weakest of the
 three branches, showed signs of limited independence.
 President Boris Yeltsin and Chechen President Asian Maskhadov signed a peace
 agreement on May 12 in which both sides agreed to settle their dispute by peaceful
 means. In an earlier agreement, the two sides agreed to resolve Chechnya's political
 status prior to 2001, but fundamental differences remain on that question with
 Chechnya asserting that it has earned the right to full independence and Russia in-
 sisting that Chechnya will remain a part of the Federation.
 The Ministry of Internal Affairs (MV]), the Federal Security Service (FSB), the
 Procuracy, and the Federal Tax Police are responsible for law enforcement at all lev-
 els of government throughout the Russian Federation. The MVD oversees most of
 the prison system, though most functions have been ordered transferred to the Min-
 istry of Justice. The FSB has broad law enforcement functions, including fighting
 crime and corruption, in addition to its core responsibilities of security, counterintel-
 ligence, and counterterrorism. The FSB operates with only limited oversight by the
 Procuracy and the courts. The military's primary mission is national defense, but
 it is occasionally employed for riot-control missions. Many members of the security
 forces, particularly within the internal affairs apparatus, continued to commit
 human rights abuses.
 The economy stabilized during 1997, although estimated real gross national prod-
 uct remained almost 28 percent below 1992 levels. Inflation has dropped from 198
 percent in 1995 to 11 percent in 1997. The per capita income was $152 per month.
 The ruble exchange rate stabilized and net outflow of capital ceased in 1997. Pro-
 duction increased slightly, but the level of capital investment remained low. The
 trade balance remains positive. Around 900,000 small businesses are registered.
 Crime and corruption significantly retard economic growth. According to official esti-
 mates, the informal and shadow economy accounts for 26 percent of gross domestic
 product. Unemployment reached a high of 9.6 percent in April. Moreover, an esti-
 mated 6.4 million people, of a work force of 72 million were considered under-
 employed. Wage and pension arrears continued to be a problem, with accumulated
 wage arrears reaching $9.5 billion by October. Wages and incomes showed a slight
 real increase by midyear. Approximately 21 percent of the population had incomes
 below the poverty level, up from 19 percent in 1996.
 
 
 1245
 The arrears in payment of public-sector wages and transfer payments were a
 symptom of a fiscal crisis that has plagued the Government for the past several
 years. Fulfilling a pledge to the public, the Yeltsin administration paid off all of its
 arrears as of December 31. The Government has been unable to formulate and im-
 plement an effective tax policy, resulting in widespread nonpayment and evasion of
 taxes. Federal tax revenues totaled approximately 9 percent of GDP. The con-
 sequent strain on the state budget has caused prolonged delays in payment of public
 servants and forced the Government to defer needed reforms and investments in
 areas regarded as low priorities by top officials. Delays in expanding and moderniz-
 ing the prison system, introducing jury trials to more regions, training the judiciary
 and investing in the infrastructure of the court system and ensuring military reform
 contributed to human rights violations.
 The Governmentis human rights record was uneven in 1997. There were credible
 reports that law enforcement and correctional officials tortured and severely beat
 detainees and inmates. Prison conditions worsened and are extremely harsh. Ac-
 cording to human rights groups, between 10,000 and 20,000 detainees and prison
 inmates may die in penitentiary facilities annually, some from beatings, but most
 as a result of overcrowding, inferior sanitary conditions, disease, and lack of medical
 care. The Government has made little progress in combating abuses committed by
 soldiers, including "dedovshchina" (violent hazing of new recruits). Military justice
 systems consistent with democratic practices remain largely underdeveloped. There
 were credible reports of deaths or suicides as a result of abuse, with sharply diver-
 gent statistics offered by the Ministry of Defense and human rights groups. Arbi-
 trary arrest and detention remained problems. Police and other security forces in
 various parts of Russia continued their practice of targeting citizens from the
 Caucasus and darker-skinned persons in general for arbitrary searches and deten-
 tion on the pretext of fighting crime and enforcing residential registration require-
 ments. However, in a positive development, the President overturned two prior de-
 crees (one presidential, the other from the mayor of Moscow) permitting officials to
 detain certain individuals for up to 30 days without access to a lawyer and in some
 cases to expel them from Moscow. Lengthy pretrial detention remained a serious
 problem. The Government made little progress in the implementation of constitu-
 tional provisions for due process, fair and timely trial, and humane punishment. In
 addition, the judiciary was often subject to manipulation by political authorities and
 was plagued by large case backlogs and trial delays. Authorities infringed on citi-
 zens' privacy rights.
 The case of Aleksandr Nikitin, a retired naval captain who had been researching
 the environmental dangers of nuclear waste from the Northern Fleet, continued to
 be fraught with serious violations of due process, suggesting that the FSB's case
 against him was politically motivated.
 Institutions such as the Ministry of Internal Affairs remain largely unreformed
 and have not yet adopted practices consistent with law enforcement in a democratic
 society. While the President and the Government have supported human rights and
 democratic practice in their statements and policy initiatives, they have not institu-
 tionalized the the rule of law required to protect them. While most abuses occur at
 lower levels and not by central direction, Government officials do not investigate the
 majority of cases of abuse and do not dismiss or discipline the perpetrators.
 In the face of a variety of obstacles, the media continued to represent a wide
 range of opinion. The major print media organizations functioned relatively
 unhindered by governmental pressure at the national level, although respect for
 freedom of the press varies in the regions. The principal obstacle to independent
 journalism was the concentration of ownership of news media by major banks and
 businesses, which sought to ensure that reporting was in line with their interests.
 Such pressure caused journalists to practice self-censorship. The practice of accept-
 ing money for printing articles remains widespread. Foreign and Russian journalists
 were frequent victims of kidnapings for ransom by criminals in Chechnya and
 throughout the north Caucasus.
 In October the Government enacted a restrictive and potentially discriminatory
 law on religion which raised questions about Russia's commitment to international
 agreements honoring freedom of religion. The implications of the law, which will not
 be fully implemented until the end of 1999, remain unclear though it contains provi-
 sions that could result in significant restrictions on the activities of minority reli-
 gious communities, including foreign missionaries. By year's end, there had been
 numerous instances of harassment of religious groups by local authorities, citing the
 new law. In addition, 22 regional governments have passed laws and decrees since
 1994 restricting the activities of minority religious groups, some of which have been
 subjected to harassment as a result. The constitutionality of the new national law
 
 
 1246
 has not been formally challenged, nor has the Federal Government challenged the
 constitutionality of the local laws.
 Despite constitutional protections for citizens' freedom of movement, regional gov-
 ernments (especially the city of Moscow) have imposed restrictions on movement
 through residence registration mechanisms. These restrictions, though successfully
 challenged in court, remain largely in force and are tolerated by the Federal Gov-
 ernment. The presence of these restrictions demonstrated the continued obstacles to
 the enforcement of judicial rulings.
 Although the Duma passed a law providing for a human rights ombudsman, it
 failed to select a canddate within the period allowed under the law. The post re-
 mamned vacant at year's end. The Human Rihts Commission examined human
 rights issues such as prison conditions, war crimes in Chechnya, and a draft law
 on religion. Similary, the human rights chamber of the President's Political Con-
 sultative Council held a number of sessions and offered opinions on human rights
 issues. Governmental human rights commissions have been formed in 66 regions.
 With few exceptions, human rights nongovernmental organizations (NGO's) docu-
 mented and reported on human rights violations without governmental interference
 or sanctions. However, some local officials harassed human rights monitors and in
 some cases arrested them. The Prosecutor General's response to these incidents was
 criticized. Some groups in Moscow have demonstrated their expertise on particular
 issues and regularly participate in Duma legislative working groups, as well as in
 the human rights chamber of the President's Political Consultative Council.
 Violence against women and abuse of children remain problems, as do discrimina-
 tion against women and religious and ethnic minorities.
 In the breakaway Republic of Chechnya, kidnapings orchestrated by uncontrolled
 armed formations and bandits, some of wch may    ave links to the former insur-
 gent forces, have become frequent. The usual motivation for kidnapings is ransom,
 but some cases have political overtones. Both journalists and humanitarian assist-
 ance workers have been targets. Despite the strong opposition of federal authorities,
 Chechen authorities used Shari'a courts in some cases and carried out death sen-
 tences without respect for due process. The Shari'a law is still not codified.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no confirmed political
 killings by agents of the Government. However, an undetermined number, up to
 several thousand, detainees and prison inmates died after beatings by security offi-
 cials or due to harsh conditions in detention (see Section 1.c.). A number of govern-
 ment officials, Duma aides, and other public figures were murdered, although fewer
 than in recent years. Few of these crimes appear to be politically motivated; the ma-
 jority were linked to private financial or commercial dealings. Internal Affairs Min-
 ister General Anatoliy Kulikov acknowledged that police solved only about 10 per-
 cent of the a pproximately 600 contract murders in 1996.
 Mikhail Manevich, deputy mayor and chairman of the City Property Committee
 for St. Petersburg, was killed on August 18 while on his way to work. Media reports
 suggested that Manevich was killed by individuals whose financial interests may
 have been threatened by his conduct of privatization in the city. A joint FSB-MVD
 investigation, ordered by the President, is underway. FSB officers claim to have
 interviewed over 1,000 witnesses and collected over 40 expert opinions and were
 working with their law enforcement and special services colleagues in the region.
 However, there were no reports of progress in the case at year's end.
 Vladimir Frantskevich, -Mikhail Shilov, Vyacheslav Usov, Gennadiy Dzen, and
 Stanislav Amirov, at least nominally aides to Duma deputies in Vladimir
 Zhirinovskiy's Liberal Democratic Party of Russian (LDPR), were murdered in 1997.
 The victims had prior criminal records or links with criminal activity and were vic-
 tims of contract-style killings. No link between the crimes and the LDPR was estab-
 lished.
 Procurator General Yuriy Skuratov reported that investigations continued in the
 unsolved murders of orthodox priest Aleksandr Men (1990), journalists Dmitriy
 Kholodov (1994), and Vladimir Listyev (1995).
 There were no developments in the 1996 murder of U.S. businessman Paul
 Tatum.
 Following 2 years of investigation, the Moscow procurator's office reported that it
 was ready to bring charges in the February 1995 murder of LDPR Duma Deputy
 Ser ey Skorochkin. Investigators have dismissed any political motives and are fo-
 cusing on Skorochkin's business dealings. They also indcated that Skorocbkin may
 have committed a double murder shortly before his death.
 
 
 1247
 In the procurator's office charged chairman of the Afghan War Veterans Associa-
 tion Valeriy Radchikov, along with five others, in the November 1996 bombing in
 the Kotlyakovskiy cemetery which killed 14 persons and injured 50 others. Authori-
 ties believe that internal disputes over the organization's lucrative tobacco and liq-
 uor duty-free-import privileges provided the motive for the bombin
 Unknown persons in the Republic of Northern Ossetiya-Alaniya tilled several eth-
 nic Ingush refugees returning to places of former residence in the contested
 Prigorodnyy rayon (located between the Republic of Northern Ossetiya-Alaniya and
 Ingushetiya).
 Ethnic unrest in the North Caucasus regions of North Ossetia and Ingushetia
 claimed the lives of 11 people in several incidents. The tension in the region arises
 from a territorial dispute which has displaced a number of ethnic Ingush.
 On June 10, Mullah Khasanbek Yakhayev of the Groznyy Mosque was shot at
 point-blank range by an unknown man who was himself then lynched by Yakhayev's
 relatives. Motives are unclear although reports from witnesses claim that the killer
 told Yakhayev that he would not permit him to insult Wahhabism, conservative
 form of Islam that has recently been in conflict with Sufism, the form of Islam that
 is more widely practiced in the Caucasus.
 No formal charges have been filed in the investigation into the December 1996
 attack on the ICRC compound in Novyy Atagi, Chechnya, during which six ICRC
 workers were killed and one was wounded. Minister of Internal Affairs Kulikov
 claims to have detained suspects outside Chechnya, but indicated that he is not par-
 ticipatingin the main investigation inside Chechnya.
 On July 30 a bomb attack in Groznyy against the headquarters of Salman
 Raduyev, a militant former Chechen military commander, killed three persons.
 President Maskhadov of Chechnya told the press that he planned to execute pub-
 licly those guilty of kidnaping. At least four persons were executed in Chechnya dur-
 ing the year as a result of sentences handed down by Shari'a courts (see Sction
 i.e.). The Federal Government termed the executions "barbaric" and the trials ille-
 gal under Russian law.
 Commander Saman Raduyev claimed responsibility for two terrorist attacks on
 Russian railway lines in early April, one in Armavir and another in Pyatigorsk,
 each of which killed two persons and resulted in more than a dozen injuries.
 Unknown elements in Chechnya fired on border patrols in nearby Dagestan and
 killed Dagestani law enforcement personnel.
 In the ongoing conflict between the republics of Ingushetiya and northern
 Ossetiya-Alaniya, there were reports that unknown persons fired on refugees at-
 tempting to return to their places of former residence.
 For example, on July 17, unknown forces fired a rocket-propelled grenade at two
 buses carrying returning Ingush refugees as they passed a state automobile
 inspectorate checkpoint. Two persons were killed and 10 injured seriously. On July
 29, a mob attacked an Ingush refugee camp near the Prigorodnyy town of
 Tverskoye, burning two trailers and causing one death and six injuries, according
 to press reports.
 In February Russia app roved an amnesty for Russian soldiers and Chechen rebels
 who committed illegal acts in connection with the war in Chechnya between Decem-
 ber 9, 1994, and September 1, 1996. The pardon excludes crimes such as murder,
 rape, and hostage- taking, and orders the establishment of a commission to review
 appeals for amnesty. Although many Chechen rebels, including Deputy Prime Min-
 ister Shamil Basayev, are under indictment in Russia for commission of serious
 crimes during the war, there has been no demonstrated attempt by Russian law-
 enforcement organs to bring such persons to justice. In effect, this selective amnesty
 is being applied as a blanket amnesty. In  onecya there also is no attempt to pros-
 ecute persons accused of serious offenses during the conflict.
 The Chechen Government passed an amnesty designed to cover persons guilty of
 war crimes similar to felonies (that is, premeditated murder, rape, assault and rob-
 bery, terrorism and banditry, and kidnaping and hostage-taking). The goal of the
 amnesty was to facilitate the most rapid possible prisoner exchange. In this, it was
 supported by the Soldiers' Mothers Committee, among others, but was opposed by
 human rights groups who sought the fullest possible accountability of those who
 were involved in violations of humanitarian law during the armed conflict. However,
 disputes over the types of prisoners covered under the amnesty, particularly with
 regard to Chechens held in Russian detention facilities for crimes rather than acts
 of combat have mitigated against effective implementation. Other reports indicate
 that the Russian side has returned Chechen criminals but continued to detain sus-
 pected insurgents. The Glasnost Public Fund has alleged that the authorities who
 physically hold those potentially eligible for the amnesty also maintain the power
 to decide who actually receives amnesty.
 
 
 1248
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of government involvement in cases of
 politically motivated disappearances. Kidnaping s frequently committed by criminal
 groups in the North Caucasus, some of which may have links to elements of the
 former insurgent  forces. The main motivation seems to be ransom, although some
 cases have political overtones. A number of journalists were seized and held for ran-
 som during the year, as were several humanitarian aid workers. For example, on
 September 20, two Russian employees of the International Orthodox Christian
 Charities, Dmitriy Petrov and Dmitriy Pyankovskiy, were abducted while on a hu-
 manitarian relief mission to Chechnya.
 According to the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), at
 year's end 71 hostages remained in captivity, including (15 foreigners, of whom 5
 are journalists and 10 are NGO representatives). There were no reports of dis-
 appearance as a precursor to an execution or other political killing, although a num-
 ber of persons remain missing at year's end.
 The Chechen authorities have frequently claimed that they are actively fighting
 kidnapers. On July 6, Chechen
 Procurator General Khalash Serbiyev estimated that 32 persons were held on sus-
 picion of kidnaping. New Chechen laws call for jail terms or public executions of kid-
 napers. However, there have been reports that Chechen authorities including Vice
 President Vakha Arsanov have been involved.
 There were no further developments in the case of American relief expert Fred
 Cuny, who disappeared in Chechnya in April 1995 and is believed to have been
 killed. No trace has been found of American photojournalist Andrew Shumack, who
 disappeared in July 1995 after reportedly entering Chechnya.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits torture, violence, and other brutal or humiliating treat-
 ment or punishment. However, there are credible reports that law enforcement per-
 sonnel use torture to coerce confessions from suspects and that the Government
 does not hold most of them accountable for these actions. Prisoner's rights groups
 have documented numerous cases in which law enforcement and correctional offi-
 cials tortured and beat detainees and suspects.
 In a 1997 report, Amnesty International described five methods used by law en-
 forcement officials either to gain confessions or simply to control or abuse prisoners.
 The "elephant" involves placing a gas mask over the head of the victim and then
 restricting or cutting off the  ow of oxygen. Sometimes tear gas is introduced as
 well to induce vomiting. The "swallow" involves binding the victim's hands behind
 his back above the level of his head, forcing painful arching in the back. This meth-
 od is used in conjunction with the elephant or separately, with the victim suspended
 from the wall or ceiling so that he can be beaten. The "envelope" involves securing
 the victim's legs near his head. The "press-camera" is a system whereby violent pris-
 oners are coopted by guards and used to control or punish other prisoners. The co-
 opted prisoners are permitted to torture prisoners (sometimes to gain confessions)
 or deal with "difficult" prisoners. The "crucifixion of Christ" involves the victim
 being secured spread-eagled to either a metal cot or prison bars, to which powerful
 electric shocks are applied. These allegations have been corroborated by other credi-
 ble sources.
 In a February 1996 report, the Presidential Human Rights Commission noted that
 existing legal norms and administrative instructions failed to provide specific, clear
 regulation of the application of physical force and that this allowed "the use of im-
 permissible physical coercion directed against prisoners virtually without restraint."
 Various abuses against military servicemen, including but not limited to the prac-
 tice of "dedovshchina" (the violent hazing of new military recruits, MVD, and border
 guards), continued unabated, and may have increased during the past year. Press
 reports indicate that this mistreatment often includes extortion of money or mate-
 rial goods in the face of the threat of increased hazing or actual beatings. Soldiers
 usually do not report hazing to officers due to fear of reprisals, since officers in some
 cases reportedly tolerate or even encourage such hazing as a means of controlling
 their units. There are also reports that officers use beatings to discipline soldiers
 whom they find to be "inattentive to their duties." In one incident, a Pacific fleet
 sailor died when an officer punished him by placing him in a missile tube. The case
 is reportedly still under investigation.
 According to a June General Staff briefing, during 1996 there were 2,000 deaths
 of servicemen, 526 of which were suicides. For 1997 military physicians reportedly
 estimate the army's suicide rate at 14 per 100,000, about 200 per year. The Mothers'
 Rights Foundation, however, cites a figure of 5,000 noncombat deaths linked to vio-
 lence per year. The Mothers' Rights Foundation and the Soldiers' Mothers' Commit-
 tee believe that many of those who reportedly committed suicide were driven to do
 so by violent hazing or abuse.
 
 
 1249
 
 The Ministry of Defense's main military procurator noted an increase in 1997 of
 the incidence of "barracks hooliganism," reporting 378 incidents. Statistics for the
 first 6 months of 1997 show over 3,000 crimes against servicemen, with 900 persons
 injured and over 160 killed. Prosecutors attributed the military service's inability
 to crack down on hazing in part to the reluctance of inexperienced, low-ranking offi-
 cers to report hazing incidents.
 Senior Ministry of Defense officials acknowledge that hazing is a problem, but in-
 sist that the deteriorating quality of incoming conscripts makes it difficult to eradi-
 cate. Official reports on the spring conscription campaign state that 6 percent of
 those inducted had criminal convictions and 8 percent had arrest records. Military
 officers and spokesmen insist that they make every effort to punish soldiers and offi-
 cers who either take part in or tolerate hazing. In some units, officers reportedly
 have been ordered to sleep in their unit barracks until the situation improves. The
 Soldiers' Mothers Committee confirm the military authorities' claim that hazers are
 punished, although they argue that action is not taken in enough cases.
 The Soldiers' Mothers Committee believes that the vast majority of hazing inci-
 dents are never reported. In incidents brought to the attention of the military or
 civilian authorities, the Soldiers' Mothers Committee reported that in 60% of the
 cases there was an official finding that abuse had taken place, and that some dis-
 ciplinary action was taken as a result.
 Despite the admitted seriousness of the problem, the military leadership has not
 made any effort to implement large-scale changes in training or education programs
 to combat abuse, at least in part due to lack of funding for new training materials.
 At a November international conference in Moscow on human rights in the armed
 forces, sponsored in part by the Russian Federation Presidential Commission on
 Human Rights, the military services came under harsh attack for systematic and
 widespreadhuman rights violations, including hazing, beatings, and torture. The re-
 port called on the President and the Duma to undertake a series of reforms, includ-
 ing creation of a civilian post of human rights ombudsman with the power to make
 unannounced inspections at military bases; creation of a military police system
 charged with investigating human and civil rights, among other crimes; uncondi-
 tional implementation of the presidential decree for an all-volunteer force by 2000;
 and, in the interim, observance of the constitutional right to alternative civilian
 service to the draft in a nonpunitive program.
 The systematic abuse of psychiatry as a form of punishment during the Soviet-
 era has ended. However, human rights groups char     that psychiatric hospitals con-
 tinue to conceal their archives and their practices. Further, Moscow police commit-
 ted some sane followers of the Orthodox Society of True Believers to a psychiatric
 hospital for treatment (see Section 2.c.). Moreover, authorities apparently still abuse
 the practice of psychiatry for other purposes. The Independent Psychiatric Associa-
 tion of Russia has criticized the use of psychiatry in "deprogramming" "victims" of
 "totalitarian sects." In such cases, authorities use pseudo-psychological and spiritual
 techniques to "treat" persons who had been memtbers of new religious groups (see
 Section 2.c.).
 Conditions for detainees and prisoners in government facilities were extremely
 harsh, particularly in pretrial detention facilities ("SIZO's), where overcrowding is
 rampant, and the authorities frequently employ physical abuse and torture to coerce
 confessions. Most detainees face extremely harsh and even life-threatening condi-
 tions. Yuriy Kalinin, head of the MVD's main Directorate of Internal Affairs, stated
 in 1995 that "the conditions in our pretrial detention centers can be classified as
 torture under international standards. That is, the deprivation of sleep, air, and
 space." These conditions have not improved.
 According to the 1995 law "On the Detention of Those Suspected or Accused of
 Committing Crimes," inmates must be provided with adequate space, food, and med-
 ical attention. Although most of the law's provisions were due to come into effect
 by the end of 1996, the authorities were not able to ensure compliance, due in part
 to lack of funds and the absence of a bail system.
 Prisons are extremely overcrowded. The State Department of the Execution of
 Sentences (GUIN) figures for July 1 show 273,367 persons occupying prisons and
 pretrial detention facilities designed to hold 182,358, a total that is 149.9 percent
 of the designed capacity. The Moscow Center for Prison Reform (MCPR) reported
 in that one average medium-sized SIZO (investigative isolation ward) designed for
 1,500 prisoners held 2,300. These inmates have only 1.4 square feet per person. The
 law mandates 9 square feet of space per detainee. In another case, a SIZO in the
 Urals holds 8,000 persons in facilities designed for 3,500. In "Kresty," St. Peters-
 burg's largest SIZO, 5 to 15 prisoners are held in cells that were built 100 years
 ago to hold 1 prisoner.
 
 
 1250
 Under such conditions, prisoners sleep in shifts, and there is little, if any, room
 to move within the cell. In most pretrial detention centers and prisons, there is no
 ventilation system. Cells are stiflingly hot in summer (up to 40 degrees centigrade,
 according to the MCPR) and dangerously cold in winter. Reports indicate that
 matches can not be lit in many SIZO cells during the summer because of a lack of
 oxygen.
 Health, nutrition, and sanitation standards in penal facilities remain low due to
 a lack of funding. MCPR estimated that the MVD was able to provide only 20 to
 30 percent of needed supplies and medications, leaving some facilities without any
 medicine at all. Head lice, scabies, and various skin diseases are prevalent. The
 MCPR estimates that MVD penitentiary facilities were able to provide only 60 to
 70 percent of the daily food rations they envisioned providing. Prisoners and detain-
 ees typically rely on families to provide them with extra food.
 Detention facilities have infection rates of tuberculosis at far higher rates than
 the population at large. The MCPR reports that as of the summer 70,000 persons
 in corrective labor colonies and 10,000 in SIZO's were infected with tuberculosis. In
 1996 the MCPR asserted that the rate of tuberculosis is 40 times higher in the pris-
 on system than in the general population, and that the mortality rates was 17 times
 higher. 1IV/AIDS infection rates are also a source of concern. The MCPR reported
 1,000 cases (which it believes to be a low figure)in a total prison population of about
 1 million. The highest rate of infection is in Kainingrad, where the MCPR reports
 between 207 and 225 cases, one-eighth of the prison population.
 Statistics on the number of detainees and prisoners who were killed or died and
 on the number of law enforcement and prison personnel disciplined for use of exces-
 sive force are not released publicly. While reliable figures are extremely difficult to
 establish Russian human rights groups have in the past estimated that between
 10,000 and 20,000 detainees and prison inmates die each year in penitentiary facili-
 ties, some due to beatings, but most as a result of overcrowding, poor sanitary condi-
 tions, or lack of medical care. The Ministry of Internal Affairs does not break down
 its statistics to specify how many of the 21,000 personnel dismissed were punished
 for abusing detainees or convicts. The new Duma Committee on Penitentiary Re-
 form has heard 35 complaints of abuse since 1995. Its predecessor, a Duma commis-
 sion, investigated 1,200 cases of abuse.
 The penitentiary system is centrally administered from Moscow. The MVD, the
 Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Defense, and the Ministry of Education all main-
 tain penitentiary facilities. The MVD oversees about 85 percent of the prison popu-
 lation. According to GUIN statistics, the total prison population was 1,017,848 as
 of July 1. At years end there were reportedly 275,567 detainees in centers built for
 a maximum of 182,358, according to Human Rights Watch.
 Violence among inmates, including beatings and rape, is common, as elaborate in-
 mate-enforced caste systems in which informers, homosexuals, rapists, rape victims,
 child molesters, and others are to be "untouchable" and treated very harshly, with
 little or no protection from the prison authorities.
 There are five basic forms of detention in the MVD correctional system. Prison
 conditions in police station detention centers vary considerably, but are as a rule
 harsh. In most cases, detainees are not fed and have no bedding, sleeping place,
 running water, or toilet.
 Suspects awaiting completion of criminal investigation, trial, sentencing, or appeal
 are confined in pretrial detention centers (SIZO's). GUIN has 178 SIZO s. Convicts
 are on occasion imprisoned in SIZO's because there is no transport to take them
 elsewhere. Conditions in SIZO's are extremely harsh. Cells are overcrowded and
 prisoners must sleep in shifts due to insufficient numbers of beds.
 Correctional labor colonies (ITK's) are penal institutions, which handle the bulk
 of the convicts. The GUIN reported on July 1 that 723,540 persons were detained
 in 742 facilities. According to the MCPR, conditions in ITK's are better than those
 in SIZO's and prisons only to the extent that there is fresh air. In the 122 timber
 correctional colonies, where hardened criminals serve their time, beatings, torture,
 and rape by guards are common.
 "Prisons are penitentiary institutions for those who repeatedly violate the rel-
 atively lax rules in effect in ITK's. The GUIN has 13 prisons with 273,367 inmates.
 Conditions in many prisons are extremely harsh. Although they are not as crowded
 as SIZO's, guards reportedly severely discipline prisoners to break down resistance.
 Prisoners are sometimes humiliated, beaten, and starved.
 Educational labor colonies for juveniles ("VTK's ") are prisons for juveniles 14 to
 20 years of age. The GUIN reported on July 1 that there were 20,941 inmates being
 held at 61 VTK's. Conditions in VTK's are significantly better than in 1TIs, but
 juveniles in VTK's and juvenile SIZO cells suffer from beatings, torture, and rape.
 The MCPR reports that such facilities have a poor psychological atmosphere and
 
 
 1251
 lack educational and vocational training opportunities. Many of the juveniles are
 from orphanages, have no outside support, and are unaware of their rights.
 In October President Yeltsin signed an edict providing for the transfer of the
 GUIN from the MVD to the Ministry of Justice, in accordance with a recommenda-
 tion of the Ministerial Committee of the Council of Europe. The MVD is resisting
 the transfer and had prevented it from taking place by year's end.
 In January 1996, President Yeltsin approved the MVD's project to reorganize
 criminal procedures and the penal system in order to bring the penal system into
 line with international standards. The President's Commission for Prison Reform
 monitors prison conditions and has prepared recommendations and legislation for
 reform. None of these efforts have led to any demonstrable progress.
 In recognition of the inhuman conditions present in detention facilities, on Decem-
 ber 24 the Duma passed the'Yeltsin administration proposal for an amnesty for
 prisoners held for minor crimes and for first-time offenders, specifically veterans of
 military service in defense of the Motherland, pregnant women or women with chil-
 dren, invalids, tuberculosis-infected prisoners, minors and senior citizens. The meas-
 ure will potentially release 445,000 persons, including 35,000 who would be released
 from prisons and 60,000 whose terms of detention would be reduced. While noting
 that the measure will alleviate some of the problems of overcrowding, human rights
 NGO's argue that the plan does not fully resolve the ongoing crisis.
 Moscow human rights groups make frequent visits to the prisons in the Moscow
 area, but they have neither the resources nor a national network to investigate con-
 ditions in all 89 regions. According to the MCPR, conditions in penal facilities vary
 among the regions. Some regions offer assistance in the form of food, clothing and
 medicine. Saratov oblast, concerned over the tuberculosis crisis in facilities located
 there, fully funded the tuberculosis-related medicinal needs of prisoners, according
 to the MCPR. Other support is offered by NGO's and religious groups.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Arbitrary arrest and detention remain
 problems. The Constitution provides that the arrest, taking into custody, and deten-
 tion of persons suspected of crimes are permitted only by judicial decision. However,
 the Constitution's transitional provisions specify that these provisions do not take
 effect until a new Criminal Procedure Code is adopted The new code had its first
 reading in and was not expected to go into effect until 1998. The new Criminal Code
 that was passed in 1995 went into effect at the beginning of 1997. Under the new
 code the maximum sentence increased from 15 years to 30 years.
 There are credible reports from throughout the country that police detain people
 without observin man ated procedures and fail to issue proper protocols of arrest
 or for confiscated propery. Credible reports exist of physical abuse being used by
 officers in these arrests. Moscow city law enforcement authorities frequently detain
 persons unlawfully for alleged violations of registration requirements (see Section
 2.d.).
 In the absence of measures to implement the procedural safeguards contained in
 the Constitution, suspects were often subjected to uneven and arbitrary treatment
 by officials acting under the present Criminal Procedure Code and "temporary" pres-
 idential decrees. The code gives procurators authority to issue an order of detention
 without a judge's authorization and, if police believe that the suspect has committed
 a crime or is a danger to others, he can be detained for up to 48 hours without a
 warrant. The Constitution and the Criminal Procedure Code provide that detainees
 are entitled to have a lawyer present from the time of detention, during questioning
 following detention, and throughout investigation up to and including the formal fir-
 ing of charges. This generally is followed in practice. The Moscow Center for the
 Promotion of Criminal Justice Reform reports that detainees are given the oppor-
 tunity to have access to a lawyer in accordance with their rights. However, the Cen-
 ter notes that the high cost of legal fees and the poor quality of court-appointed pub-
 lic defenders for those lacking the funds to engage counsel effectively deny the ma-
 jority of suspects competent legal representation. As a result, many prisoners do not
 exercise this right because they believe it useless.
 A 1994 presidential decree on combating organized crime allowed law enforcement
 authorities to detain persons suspected of ties to organized crime for up to 30 days
 without explanation of the reasons for detention and without access to a lawyer. A
 July 1996 decree on combating crime in Moscow went even further, allowing officials
 to hold unregistered residents suspected of crimes for up to 30 days and in certain
 cases to expel them from Moscow. These two decrees were overturned by a June 14
 presidential decree that allows detention for up to 10 days without bringing charges.
 The June decree instructed the Government to submit to the Duma a draft federal
 law on preventing vagrancy and social rehabilitation of the homeless.
 The Criminal Procedure Code specifies that only 2 months should elapse between
 the date an investigation is initiated and the date the file is transferred to the proc-
 
 
 1252
 urator so that he can file formal charges against the suspect in court. However, in-
 vestigations are seldom completed that quickly. Some suspects spend 18 months or
 longer in detention under harsh conditions in a SIZO while the criminal investiga-
 tion is conducted. The Moscow Center for Prison Reform (MCPR) reports terms of
 pretrial detention extending up to 3 years, with the average ranging from 7 to 10
 months. In some extreme cases, however, the MCPR reports detention periods of 5
 years due to financial difficulties and poor investigative and court work. The code
 provides that the regional procurator may extend the period of criminal investiga-
 tion to 6 months in "complex" cases. If more time is required in "exceptional" cases,
 the Procurator General can personally extend the period up to 18 months. Exten-
 sions of the investigation period are often issued without explanation to the de-
 tainee. Until the investigation is completed, the suspect is under the jurisdiction of
 the procurator's office and the Ministry of Internal Affairs. There is no procedure
 for a suspect to plead guilty during the investigative period, although if a suspect
 informs the investigator that he is guilty, the period of the investigation is usually
 shorter than if he maintains his innocence. Suspects frequently fear exercising their
 rights to request judicial review of their detention out of fear of angering the inves-
 tigating officer.
 -There were also credible reports that persons have been detained far in excess of
 the permissible periods for administrative offenses, in some cases so that police offi-
 cials could extort money from friends or relatives. The. situation has improved some-
 what since a Yeltsin decree issued in the summer that annulled a previous Yeltsin
 decree that had allowed for 30-day detentions. However, the practice of detaining
 individuals in excess of permissible periods is still not uncommon, and this is often
 done for the purpose of extorting money.
 The use of bail is extremely rare, even if suspects are not flight risks or have not
 been charged with violent crimes. This aggravates overcrowding in pretrial deten-
 tion and, due to delays in bringing cases to trial, results in many suspects remain-
 ing in pretrial detention for longer than the maximum penalty they might face if
 convicted.
 Delays also plague the trial stage. Although the Criminal Procedure Code requires
 court consideration to begin no more than 14 days after the judge issues the order
 designating the location of the trial, congestion in the court system frequently leads
 to long postponements. Some suspects actually serve the length of their sentences
 while awaiting trial. Judges often do not dismiss cases involving improper investiga-
 tions or indictments, particularly if the procurator's case has political support or the
 case is controversial. Instead, such cases are often returned to the procurator for
 additional investigation.
 Some authorities have taken advantage of the system's procedural weaknesses to
 arrest people on false pretexts for expressing views critical of the Government.
 Human rights advocates in the regions have been charged with libel, contempt of
 court, or interference in judicial procedures in cases with distinct political overtones.
 Others have been charged with other offenses and held either in excess of normal
 periods of detention or for offenses that do not require detention at all.
 The case of Aleksandr Nikitin, a retired Russian naval captain who was detained
 for much of 1996 continued to be characterized by serious violations of due process,
 suggesting that his detention was politically motivated. The FSB detained Nikitin
 in St. Petersburg in February 1996 on suspicion of espionage and revealing state
 secrets. Nikitin had been working with a Norwegian environmental foundation,
 Bellona, to publish information on the dangers posed by the nuclear waste gen-
 erated by the northern fleet, in which Nikitin had served.
 In December 1996, the federal Deputy Procurator General ordered the FSB to re-
 lease Nikitin on his own recognizance. Nikitin remains at liberty but was restricted
 to the St. Petersburg city limits, although he was permitted to visit Moscow in No-
 vember
 On June 17, the FSB announced its most recent charges against Nikitin, "state
 treason" and "revealing state secrets," crimes punishable by up to 20 years in pris-
 on. The FSB was subsequently granted several 3-month extensions to their inves-
 tigation, the reasons for which are unclear. The FSB concluded its investigation in
 September, but the defense team protested that key documents were removed from
 the case file. The court upheld the challenge, and the FSB restored the file and
 closed its investigation in November.
 The indictments reportedly cite classified decrees that have never been made
 available to Nikitin's defense team and were unknown to Nikitin when he was writ-
 ing the Bellona report. Two of them were issued in 1993 (after Nikitin's retirement
 in 1992) and one was issued in 1996, after Nikitin's arrest. A third was not sched-
 uled to take effect until January 1, 1998. The prosecution also has not made avail-
 able the findings of its expert review (conducted solely by Defense Ministry officers)
 
 
 1253
 and has refused the defense team's right to an independent expert review of the ma-
 terial grounds for the indictment.
 The defense team demonstrated that all the information used in Nikitin's report
 is freely available in open sources. It also has challenged the FSB's use of classified
 decrees as the basis for indictment on the grounds that the Constitution specifies
 that "any normative legal enactments affecting human and civil rights, freedoms,
 and duties cannot be applied unless they have been officially published for universal
 information." Finally, the defense team has cited constitutional provisions giving
 "each person. . . the right to a decent environment [and] reliable information about
 the state of the environment" as a reason that none of the information can legally
 be classified.
 Grigoriy Pasko, an active-duty officer in the Pacific Fleet, was arrested on sus-
 picion of treason in November. His attorney questioned the legality of the arrest and
 claimed that Pasko is being persecuted for his environmental activism.
 Murmansk human rights activist Oleg Pazyura was arrested on May 26. The spe-
 cific charges under which he would be tried were not known at year's end. It is e-
 lieved that the charges have to do with libeling, insulting, and possibly threatening
 public officials. His defenders allege that Pazyura was taken to St. Petersburg some
 time toward the end of the year for court-mandated psychiatric testing, allegedly to
 remove him from the purview of a team from the general procurator's office, which
 had arrived in Murmansk from Moscow to review his case. He was returned to Mur-
 mansk in late December, after the team had returned to Moscow. Pazyura's trial
 was scheduled for January 19, 1998.
 Vasiliy Chaykin, an activist with the Krasnodar Provincial Association for the
 Protection of Human Rights, was arrested on April 17 on charges of statutory rape.
 Chaykin denies the charges and claims that they stem from his vocal criticism of
 law enforcement authorities. Chaykin was denied access to a lawyer of his choice
 for a month after his arrest.
 Larisa Kharchenko, a housing advisor to former St. Petersburg Mayor Anatoliy
 Sobchak, was detained in July in connection with a corruption case involving the
 former Mayor. She was held incommunicado for 17 days and then charged with
 bribery and abuse of office. Her lawyer contended that the authorities do not have
 a case against her and that she was kept in jail and deprived of medical care in
 order to force her to testify against Sobchak. She was released in mid-December,
 but must stay in St. Petersburg pending further developments in her case. No trial
 date has been set.
 The Government does not use forced exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary; the development of an independent judiciary continued and there are signs
 of limited independence. However, the judiciary does not yet act as an effective
 counterweight to other branches of government. A 1996 law separated the courts
 from the Ministry of Justice and placed them within a separate part of the Judicial
 Department. In the 1998 budget, this department is funded independent of the Min-
 istry. Judges remain subject to some influence from the executive, military, and se-
 curity forces, especially in high profile or political cases. The judiciary also lacks ie-
 sources and is subject to corruption.
 Low salaries and scant prestige make it difficult to attract talented new judges
 and contribute to the vulnerability of existing judges to bribery and corruption. On
 July 29, President Yeltsin ordered a 65 percent pay raise (from an average salary
 of $333 (rr 2 million) to $533 (rr 3.2 million per month) in an attempt to attract
 new judges to fill approximately 1,500 vacancies in the judiciary.
 The Criminal Code provides for the court to appoint a lawyer if the suspect cannot
 afford one. The Society for the Guardianship of Penitentiary Institutions is often
 called upon by judges to provide legal assistance for suspects facing charges and
 trial without any representation. This society operates primarily in Moscow, al-
 though it uses its connections throughout Russia to appeal to legal professionals to
 represent the indigent. However, in many cases the indigent receive little legal as-
 sistance, because funds are lacking to pay for trial attorneys for them and public
 defenders are poorly trained.
 Because the right to a lawyer during pretrial questioning is often not exercised
 (see Section 1.d.), many defendants recant testimony given in pretrial questioning,
 stating that they were denied access to a lawyer or that they were coerced into giv-
 ing false confessions or statements. Nevertheless, human rights monitors have docu-
 mented cases in which convictions were obtained on the basis of testimony that the
 defendant recanted in court, even in the absence of other proof of guilt.
 In the 80 regions where adversarial jury trials have not yet been introduced,
 criminal procedures are heavily weighted in favor of the procurator. The judge or
 panel of judges conduct the trial by asking questions based on their prior review
 
 
 1254
 of the evidence. Reports indicate that in practice the constitutionally-mandated pre-
 sumption of innocence is often disregarded. Judges are known to return poorly de-
 veloped cases to the prosecution for additional investigation rather than risk con-
 frontation with powerful prosecutors. This greatly increases the time that defend-
 ants spend in SIZO's (see Section 1..).
 Adversarial jury trials, at the option of the accused in cases where there is a risk
 of a death penalty, were introduced in 1993 and 1994 in nine areas, comprising 23
 percent of the population. The Department of Judicial Reform of the State Legal Ad-
 ministration of the President, which is charged with reintroducing jury trials,
 p~lanned in early 1996 to expand jury trials to 12 new.regions, but failed to do so
 due to lack of funds. Such an expansion would extend access to jury trials to ap-
 proximately half of the population.
 The Moscow Center for the Promotion of Criminal Justice Reform reports that 336
 cases, involving 618 persons, were tried by jury in 1996. Of these, 80 resulted in
 acquittals (19.1 percent) and around one quarter were returned for fiurther inves-
 tigation. According to the Center's figures, the acquittal rate for nonjury trials is
 approximately 2 percent.
 In April Amnesty International reported on efforts by the Government of the
 breakaway Republic of Chechnya to establish a new criminal code based on the Is-
 lamic Shari'a code. Although the code has not been formally enacted, elements of
 Shari'a law have already been cited in court decisions. Four Chechens were found
 guilty by Shari'a courts and executed publicly by firing squad in August and Sep-
 tember.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution states that officials can enter a private residence only in cases pre-
 scribed by federal law or on the basis of a judicial decision. It permits the Govern-
 ment to monitor correspondence, telephone conversations, and other means of com-
 munication only with judicial permission. It prohibits the collection, storage, utiliza-
 tion, and dissemination of information about a person's private life without his con-
 sent. However, the implementing legislation necessary to bring these provisions into
 effect has not yet been passed. In 1995 legislation was passed that gave brad au-
 thority for the FSB to utilize domestic surveillance and to conduct searches of pri-
 vate residences, with only limited oversight by the courts and the procuracy. These
 measures remaln in force. There were reports of electronic surveillance by govern-
 ment officials and others. Moscow police entered residences without warrants during
 checks for illegal residents of the city (see Section 2.d.).
 Officers in the special services, including authorities at the highest levels of the
 Ministry of Internal Affairs (MVD) and Federal Security Service (FSB), have been
 accused of using their services' power to gather "kompromat" (compromising mate-
 rials) on political and public figures as political insurance and to remove rivals.
 Similarly, persons in these agencies, beth active and retired, have been accused of
 working with commercial or criminal organizations for the same purpse. For exam-
 plth ere were reports that a criminal organization was responsible for taping or
 laiga videotape showing Justice Minister Valentin Kovalev disporting himelf
 with young women in a bathhouse.
 There are credible reports that regional branches of the FSB continue to exert
 pressure on citizens employed by western firms and organizations, often with the
 goal of coercing them into becoming informants.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of the
 press and mass in format ion and the "right of each person to seek, pass on, produce,
 and disseminate information freely by any legal method." The Government generally
 respects these provisions; however, the law contains prvisions regarding secrecy of
 information that federal, regional, and local athorities have on occasion chosen to
 interpret broadiy in order to limit access to information and to prosecute journalists
 and media organizations that publish critical information.
 Because Russian media generally are not financially self- sufficient, they are sub-
 ject to manipulation by the Government and by companies that are their majority
 shareholders. These financial entities manipulat the media at times to further
 their own political and financial goals. Journalists and editors admit that the politi-
 cal and business interests of major shareholders are paramount, causing journalists
 to practice self-censorship. Prominent Russian human rights activist Sergey Kovelov
 has stated that, in these circumstances, 'The Russian media are free but not inde-
 pendent."
 Despite this, the major print media organizations represent Russia's broad politi-
 cal spectrom and provide readers with a variety of information. Independent and
 
 
 1255
 
 semi-independent television stations continue to develop, and the number of small
 private radio stations, mostly in the big cities, continues to increase. Nevertheless,
 reports of government pressure on the media continue, particularly when coverage
 deals with corruption or criticism of the authorities.
 Private companies began investing heavily in the media market in 1997, even
 though the media generally are not yet profitable. The most powerful companies,
 such as Lukoil, Gazprom, and a number of banks, fought for influence on the Mos-
 cow media market and began to invest in media in the provinces.
 Federal, regional, and local governments continued to exert pressure on journal-
 ists by depriving them of access to information, using accreditation procedures to
 limit access, removing them from their jobs, and bringing libel suits against them.
 The Glasnost Defense Fund's (GDF) mid-year report noted that such actions against
 journalists increased from 126 cases in the firsthalf of 1996 to 202 in the first half
 of 1997. By year's end the GDF's updated figures for 1997 included 420 cases in
 which the rights of journalists and press freedom were violated. Further, the GDF
 reported that there were 353 incidents in which journalists and media sources were
 accused by the authorities of abuse of their journalistic privileges (defined as "incite-
 ment to societal animosity," violations related to advertising activity, campaign ac-
 tivities, publication of state secrets, and libel).
 Accreditation rules often violate the constitutional right of journalists to access to
 information. For example, at the beginning of the year, the public relations depart-
 ment of the Ministry of Internal Affairs revised its accreditation procedure and re-
 quired journalists to submit their articles for the previous 6 months in order to be
 considered for accreditation. The Internal Affairs Ministry withdrew this policy only
 after the GDF insisted that such a requirement violated federal law.
 In March the State duma withdrew accreditation from ORT (Russian public tele-
 vision) ournalists on the grounds that their coverage of a duma debate was not ob-
 jective.For 3 weeks these journalists were refused access to duma proceedings; the
 Supreme Court ruled the duma's action illegal.
 In the provinces, the use of accreditation to limit journalists' access was even
 more common because every regional duma, court, or city administration devises its
 own accreditation procedures. In July the Bryansk duma refused to renew the ac-
 creditation of Yevgeniy Yegorov, a journalist from the local daily Dobriy Den, be-
 cause he wrote an article criticizing the deputies' excessive expenditures on business
 trips and gifts. In May the Novosibirsk mayor denied accreditation to journalists
 from Komk newspaper on the grounds that he needed "to see how they do for a
 month or two" and that he had a feeling that the newspaper might be "shut down."
 The number of court cases against journalists increased 2.5 times over 1996. In
 the majority of these cases, a government body or individual official accused journal-
 ists and their newspapers of "causing damage to reputation." According to the
 GDF's mid-year report, libel and criminal proceedings against journalists often do
 not have a sound legal foundation. Nonetheless, judges rule against the media in
 the majority of these cases because the law is vague and judges are reluctant to
 challenge powerful local officials. Such rulings reinforce the tendency towards self-
 censorship
 Journlts publishing critical information about local governments and influen-
 tial businesses, as well as investigative journalists writing about crime and other
 sensitive issues, were subjected to threats, beatings, and even murder. In a 1997
 report on violations of the rights of journalists, the GDF found numerous instances
 of harassment, including financial pressure, physical assaults, and threats against
 journalists' families.
 In a widely publicized incident, Duma member and leader of the Liberal Demo-
 cratic Party Vladimir Zhirinovskiy physically attacked Moscow Television Channel
 (MTK) journalist Yulia Olshanskaya and a cameraman from the 2x2 television
 channel, Valeriy Ivanov. Zhirinovskiy attacked the journalists because they tried to
 film him as he attempted to cross the militia cordon at the annual May 9 World
 War II victory celebration. Zhirinovskiy dragged Olshanskaya to a nearby car,
 forced her in, and locked her inside. Then he and his bodyguards proceeded to beat
 up Ivanov, repeatedly slamming a car door on his head. The Committee to Protect
 Journalists sent a letter to President Boris Yeltsin expressing concern over the in-
 difference of law- enforcement officers towards these attacks on journalists.
 Olshanskaya filed criminal charges against her attacker. Zhirinovskiy was not de-
 tained (Duma members enjoy immunity from criminal prosecution), and the case
 against the bodyguards is still pending.
 In the regions outside the major media markets of Moscow and St. Petersburg,
 the pressure against the media is even more pronounced. Local authorities and
 criminal groups often feel that they have absolute power in "their" regions. Many
 authorities continued to use their ownership of media premises, printing facilities,
 
 
 1256
 government subsidies, and charges of libel to pressure the media. In May two men
 severely beat "Komsomolskaya Prvda" correspondent Irina Chernova in the center
 of Volgo~rad. Chernova alleged that the attack was connected to one of the two in-
 vestigations that she was working on at the time. One involved suspicious dealings
 between the local Hermes- Povolz.hye Bank and a local drilling technology factory.
 The other involved the Volgograd Region police, against which she brought harass-
 ment charges shortly before the incident.
 In February two journalists of Irkutk's Zemlya newspaper, Robert Sheptalin and
 Aleksandr Shakhmatov, were arrested and imprisoned on bribery charges. Their col-
 leagues alleged that the two men were imprisoned as a result of their unfavorable
 reporting on prominent city officials. They were still in prison months after their
 arrest, and the investigation was not proceeding.
 Several journalists were killed throughout the country. However, at year's end, it
 was not yet known whether they were killed in circumstances connected to their
 work. For example, on March 20, a radio correspondent of Kabardino-Balkariya
 radio, Vladimir Aliyev, was found with a cracked skull 60 kilometers from the re-
 gion's capital, Nalchik, and died from the injury a few days later. Even though the
 attack was classified as a theft because his documents and money were missing, the
 journalist's colleagues are convinced it was murder. They claim Aliyev received nu-
 merous death threats before the attack. The local procuracy, which seems to be
 treating it as a routine homicide, states that the case has been closed because the
 alleged perpetrator has since died.
 Komsomolskaya Pravda special correspondent Valeriy Krivosheyev was killed in
 Lipetsk on September 6. According to a report from the Committee to Protect Jour-
 nalists, Krivosheyev had told colleagues the day before that he was pursuing a story
 that he termed a bombshell of national proportions." Krivosheyev had previously
 pursued controversial stories as an investigative journalist for the Lipetsk daily De
 Fakto.
 The Government's information policy remained restrictive. Facts, documents, and
 statistical data are still frequently kept from the press. The secrecy of information,
 and the resistance of senior officials to its release, were typically cited as pretexts
 for refusing to provide information to journalists.
 In response to the kidnapings of journalists in Chechnya in March, the Chechen
 Internal Affairs Ministry announced that all journalists wishing to visit Chechnya
 must register with the Ministry, travel to the Republic only by air, stay in the gov-
 ernment compound at the airport, and hire armed government bodyguards. Russian
 and foreign correspondents generally refused to comply.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides citi-
 zens with the right to assemble freely, and the Government respects this right in
 practice. Organizations must obtain permits in order to hold public meeting. The
 application process must begin between 5 and 10 days before the scheduled event.
 Citizens freely and actively protested government decisions and actions. Permits to
 demonstrate were readily granted to both opponents and supporters of the Govern-
 ment.
 The Constitution provides for freedom of association, and the Government re-
 spects this right in practice. Public organizations must register their bylaws and the
 names of their leaders with the Ministry of Justice. In 1995 a registration law was
 passed specifying that organizations had until 1999 to reregister.
 In addition to submitting their bylaws and the names of their leaders, political
 parties must present 5,000 signatures and pay a fee to register. The Constitution
 and the law on elections ban the participation in elections of organizations that pro-
 fess anticonstitutional themes or activities.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice. The Constitution also provides for the
 equality of all religions before the law and the separation of church and state. How-
 ever, in practice the Government does not always respect the provision for equality
 of religions. In December 1990, the Soviet Government adopted a law on religious
 freedom designed to put all religions on an equal basis. (After the breakup of the
 Soviet Union, this law became part of the Russian Federation's legal code.) The law
 forbade government interference in religion and established simple registration pro-
 cedures for religious groups. Registration of religious groups was not required, and
 some evangelical and other religious groups have continued to operate while choos-
 ing not to register officially with the Government. By registering, however, groups
 obtained a number of advantages; for example, the ability to establish official places
 of worship or benefit from tax exemptions. The Government does not designate reli-
 gion on passports or national identity documents.
 Over the past several years the sharp increase in the activities of well-financed
 foreign missionaries has disturbed many sectors of society, particularly nationalists
 
 
 1257
 
 and those in the Russian Orthodox Church, some of whom advocated limiting the
 activities of what they termed "nontraditional" religious groups and what were
 sometimes termed "totalitarian sects."
 In October the Government enacted a new, restrictive, and potentially discrimina-
 tory law on religion, which raised questions about the Government's commitment
 to international agreements honoring freedom of religion. Passage of the law
 prompted concern in the international community because, for the first time since
 the break-up of the Soviet Union, Russia had adopted legislation that could abridge
 fundamental human rights. This law replaced the progressive 1990 religion law that
 had helped facilitate a revival of religious activity.
 The new law was ostensibly targeted at so-called "totalitarian sects" or dangerous
 religious cults. However, the intent of some of the law's sponsors appears to have
 been to discriminate against members of less well-established religions by making
 it difficult for them to manifest their beliefs through organized religious institutions.
 The law is very complex, with many ambiguous and contradictory provisions. Sup-
 porters and critics of the law differ as to its potential impact; each side can cite lan-
 guage in the law to support its interpretation. The laws most controversial provi-
 sions center on the creation of various categories of religious communities with dif-
 fering levels of legal status and privileges. The law draws distinctions between reli-
 gious "groups" and "organizations" and creates two categories of organization: "re-
 gional" and 'centralized." A religious group is a congregation of worshipers that does
 not have the status of a juridical person, meaning it cannot open a bank account,
 own proprty, issue invitations to foreign guests or publish literature, among other
 things. ndividual members of groups will presumably retain these rights. For ex-
 ample, a member of a religious group could buy property for the group's use, and
 invite personal guests to engage in religious instruction, and import religious mate-
 rial. In this case, however, the group would not enjoy tax benefits and other privi-
 leges extended to religious organizations.
 Groups that have been in existence for 15 years have the right to obtain the sta-
 tus of "local religious organizations." Similarly, congregations that existed for 15
 years when the new law was enacted will also be eligible for registration as an orga-
 nization. Organizations, both local and centralized, are juridical persons, enjoy tax
 exemptions, and are permitted to establish religious schools and to host foreign reli-
 gious workers. Acentralized religious organizations can be founded by a confession
 that has three functioning "local organizations" in different regions. A centralized
 organization apparently has the right to establish affiliated local organizations with-
 out adhering to the 15-year rule.
 Under the new law, representatives of foreign religious organizations are required
 to -register with state authorities, and are barred from conducting liturgical and
 other religious activity unless they have acquired the status of a group or organiza-
 tion.
 Critics of the law have claimed that it violates the Constitution's provision of
 equality before the law of all confessions. In particular, many religious groups criti-
 cized the law's requirement that religious groups be in existence for 15 years before
 they can qualify for "organization' status. Also, many groups feared the con-
 sequences of the law's provisions limiting the actions of foreign religious mission-
 aries. Representatives of some religions, such as the Mormon Church and some Pen-
 tecostal and Charismatic Christian groups, have said that their activities in Russia
 could be halted under the law. Critics of the law have also expressed concern that
 local authorities could abuse the new law by interpreting and implementing it more
 strictly than intended by the Federal Government.
 President Yeltsin and high-ranking officials have consistently stated that the law
 would be applied in a liberal, tolerant manner, thereby preserving religious freedom
 and the equality of confessions. No mainstream religion already operating in Russia,
 they insist, would see its activities curtailed as a result of the new law. Though for-
 mally in force at year's end, the full effects of the law were not yet apparent as im-
 plementing regulations had not been promulgated. The full effect of the law may
 not be clear until the end of 1999, the time before which organizations registered
 under the old law are required to obtain new registration. Since its adoption, in fact,
 no religious group has completely ceased operations in Russia as a result of the law.
 However, there were numerous instances of obstruction of religious groups' activi-
 ties by local authorities who cited the new law, and more significantly, two reported
 instances of punishment for religious belief or activity. For example, on Octber 2,
 police in Moscow detained followers of the Orthodox Society of True Believers and
 committed them to a psychiatric hospital for treatment (see Section 1.c.). The police-
 men attributed their actions to the new law. In October a mayor in Yamalo-
 Nenetskiy autonomous okrug wrote a letter informing a local judge that the latter
 
 
 1258
 could no longer carry out his official duties because he was a member of a "sect"
 (the Pentecostal Church).
 In another case, local authorities citing the new law canceled the registration of
 the Evangelical Lutheran mission in the town of Touim in the autonomous Republic
 of Khakasiya. The registration was reinstated, reportedly after intervention by the
 authorities in Moscow. However, in November the chief procurator of Khakasiya in-
 formed the mission of his intention to seek judicial approval of his efforts to cancel
 the mission's registration. Similarly, the pastor of an independent Pentecostal con-
 gregation in the town of Semnadtsat, about 25 miles west of Moscow, said that local
 authorities had cited the new law to him when informing him in August that his
 group would no longer be able to rent a classroom for Sunday worship. On October
 12, the head of the Moscow oblast regional administration refused to reissue an au-
 thorization to a Pentecostal group to rent a community center for religious services.
 Many towns in Russia have virtually no facilities available for worship services that
 are not government-owned.
 Furthermore, since 1994, 22 out of 89 regional governments have passed restric-
 tive laws and decrees intended to restrict the activities of religious groups. The Fed-
 eral Government has not sought to challenge the constitutionality of these restric-
 tions. Enforcement is uneven, but there are reports that some local governments
 prevented religious groups from using venues, such as cinemas, suitable for large
 gatherings. As a result, in some instances denominations that do not have their own
 property effectively have been denied the opportunity to practice their faith in large
 groups. In Kursk, for example, authorities declined to renew agreements with the
 Catholic community granting it access to the Church of the Assumption (a Catholic
 church confiscated by the Bolsheviks and converted into a House of Culture); the
 congregation has reportedly resorted to meeting in the street outside. Similarly,
 Belgorod authorities refused to register the Catholic community there on the
 grounds that Catholicism is a "foreign" religious organization, and refused to return
 the Catholic Church of Saints Peter and Paul to the Catholic community. Instead,
 city authorities reportedly plan to turn the building into an Orthodox museum. A
 Catholic priest was reportedly told that he could not conduct mass, even in a private
 apartment.
 These and other actions in certain regions have given rise to concern, but there
 are positive notes as well: the governor of St. Petersburg vetoed restrictive legisla-
 tion on the grounds that its principles were unconstitutional and that the strictures
 imposed on religious groups were not within the power of the city's government to
 establish. While the local legislature passed, and the governor of Sverdlovsk oblast
 signed, a restrictive religion law in October 1996, executive branch officials have re-
 fused to enforce the law, citing fear of lawsuits by minority faiths, vagueness in the
 law's provisions, and the belief by officials that some of the provisions of the law
 were unconstitutional. The Supreme Court of the Republic of Udmurtiya struck
 down a 1996 republic law restricting freedom of religion.
 Despite constitutional provisions for equality of religions, in many areas of the
 country it appeared that the Russian Orthodox Church (Moscow Patriarchate) and,
 in some regions, Islam, had privileged positions, particularly in the pace of return
 of previously nationalized religious properties and in the allocation of public funds
 for restoration and construction of church properties.
 Property disputes are some of the most frequent complaints cited by religious
 groups. For the most part, synagogues, churches, and mosques have been returned
 to communities to be used for religious services. In certain cases churches have not
 yet been returned. Moreover, the Moscow Patriarchate has claimed and taken pos-
 session of properties owned by other branches of orthodoxy. On October 9, local offi-
 cials filed a petition in Penza oblast court to evict the Russian Orthodox Free
 Church from a church building that it had been using for several years. The Moscow
 Patriarchate openly supported this action and the property was returned to them.
 Similarly, at the request of the Russian Orthodox Archbishop of Vladimir and
 Suzdal, the Ministry of Culture and the State Property Committee ordered the Rus-
 sian Orthodox Free Church community in Vladimir oblast in mid-October to relin-
 quish its church to the Moscow Patriarchate. In some property disputes, religious
 buildings have been "privatized," and local authorities often refuse to get involved
 in property disputes, which they contend are between private organizations. Even
 where state or municipal authorities still have undisputed control of properties, a
 number of religious communities continue to meet significant obstacles when they
 request the return of religious buildings, or when they seek to acquire land and nec-
 essary building permits for new religious structures. Some Protestant faiths have
 suggested that the Russian Orthodox Church influences the Government regarding
 land allocated for churches of other sects.
 
 
 1259
 
 Although Jews and Muslims continue to encounter prejudice and societal discrimi-
 nation, they have not been inhibited by the Government in the free practice of their
 religion. In some areas of the country, other religions, including Buddhism, various
 minority Christian faiths, and Shamanism are practiced in accord with local tradi-
 tions.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides citizens with the right to choose their place
 of residence freely. However, regional governments continue to restrict this right
 through residential registration rules that closely resemble the Soviet-era "propiska"
 (pass) regulations. Although the rules, which came into effect at the beginning of
 1996, were touted as a notification device rather than a control system, their appli-
 cation has produced many of the same results as the propiska system.
 Although citizens are free to travel within Russia, the Government also imposes
 registration requirements on domestic travel. All adults are issued internal pass-
 ports which they must carry while traveling and use to register with local authori-
 ties or visits of more than 3 days (in Moscow it is 24 hours). However, travelers
 not staying in hotels usually ignore this requirement.
 Citizens must register to live and work in a specific area within 7 days of moving
 there. Russian citizens changing residence in Russia, as well as citizens of former
 Soviet republics who decide to move to Russia, often face enormous difficulties or
 are simply not permitted to register in some cities. The United Nations High Com-
 missioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and refugee rights NGO's have cited Stavropol,
 Krasnodar, Moscow, and St. Petersburg as being the least open to migrants. The
 cost of registration is often prohibitive, far beyond the means of most migrants or
 refugees who usually do not register. On July 2, the Constitutional Court struck
 down a Moscow oblast registration law on the grounds that the fees collected con-
 stituted a tax that is not in the power of a regional government to levy. However,
 since such decisions do not have universality of application, the ruling does not af-
 fect registration requirements in other oblasts and cities. In October 1996, the city
 of Moscow had set registration fees at 500 times the legal minimum wage, or about
 $7,500 (40 million rubles). In April 1996, the Constitutional Court struck down a
 Moscow city law that gave local officials the right to collect high fees for registra-
 tion, but the Court did not outlaw charging fees or specify how much could be
 charged legally. The mayor's office protested the decision and has not lowered the
 fees
 While federal law provides for education for all children in the Russian federation,
 regional authorities frequently deny access to schools to the children of unregistered
 persons, asylum- seekers, and migrants because they lack residential registration.
 imilary, while the I oscowprocurator's office has upheld the right of migrants to
 receive publicly available medical care, unregistered persons, migrants, and asylum-
 seekers are frequently denied these services.
 The government and residents of Moscow and other large cities defend registra-
 tion as necessary in order to control crime, to keep crowded urban areas from at-
 tracting evei more inhabitants, and to gain revenue.
 The ci of Moscow is frequently cited for violating the rights of nonresidents and
 ethnig/inorities as well as the rights of those legitimately seeking asylum. The
 wedkly Obshchaya Gazeta reported on May 21 that Mayor Yuriy Luzhkov, in prepa-
 ra ion for the 850th anniversary of the city, had ordered the city's Migration Service
 to "cleanse" the city of all "illegal migrants." Mayor Luzhkov has been quoted in the
 past as calling for the expulsion of Chechens and other Caucasians from Moscow.
 Moscow police, particularly special-duty OMON units, conduct frequent document
 checks, particularly of persons who appear to be from the Caucasus or are otherwise
 dark-sknned. Such checks have on many occasions involved police entering resi-
 dences without warrants. There are credible reports that police have fined persons
 without registration documents in excess of legal requirements and have not pro-
 vided proper documentation of the fine.
 Mayor Luzhkov signed a resolution in August 1996 ordering the deportation of all
 unregistered people living in Moscow back to the place where they were last reg-
 istered to live. At the end of September 1996, the press reported that 4,051 unregis-
 tered people had "voluntarily" departed from Moscow and that 812 were deported
 under armed guard. The resolution was still in effect at year's end, and the practice,
 often reporte    a    at extorting money, continued.
 The Constitution provides all citizens with the right to emigrate. The Government
 does not impose more than nominal emigration taxes, fees, or duties. On average
 it takes 3 months to process a passport application, although it can take much
 longer if documentation is needed from elsewhere in the former Soviet Union.
 Some liberal principles regarding emigration procedures were formally codified in
 the August 1996 law Concerning Order in Exit From the Russian Federation and
 
 
 1260
 Entry Into the Russian Federation. This law abolished the old Soviet requirement
 that, in order to emigrate, citizens must receive a stamp permitting "permanent res-
 idence abroad" ("PMZH ")-essentially a propiska for those living outside Russia.
 The law required the Ministry of Internal Affairs, through its Office of Visas and
 Registration (OVIR), to establish regulations for eliminating this practice within 6
 months of the passage of the law. However, no regulations have been published and
 the requirement remains effectively in force. OVIR offices throughout Russia con-
 tinue to issue the stamp and border guards continue to refuse to allow emigrants
 to depart who have not received the stamp.
 Another feature of the law is the codification of the legal grounds for denying for-
 eign travel documents to citizens who had access to state secrets. Under the new
 law, access to such classified material can only occur with the consent of the citizen,
 established in the form of a written contract that states that the signatory under-
 stands that he has been given access to state secrets and that his ability to travel
 abroad may be restricted. However, the law envisions a maximum period of delay
 under normal circumstances of 5 years, and it grants the interagency Commission
 on Secrecy the right to add an additional 5-year term to the period of delay if the
 Commission finds that a person had access to particularly sensitive materials. This
 latter provision has raised serious concerns among human rights advocates con-
 cerned about arbitrary and excessive powers on the part of the Government to re-
 strict foreign travel.
 If a citizen had access to classified material, police and FSB clearances are nec-
 essary to receive an external passport. Persons denied travel documents on secrecy
 grounds can appeal the decision to an interagency commission chaired by First Dep-
 uty Foreign Minister Igor Ivanov. The Ivanov Commission cannot rule on whether
 the material should or should not be classified, but can rule on the legality of travel
 restrictions imposed, and on whether or not the traveler actually had access to ma-
 terials requiring a travel restriction. Since it was established in 1994, the Ivanov
 Commission has granted travel permission to approximately 95 percent of appel-
 lants.
 Other grounds for denial of the right to travel abroad are military conscription
 or assignment to civilian alternative service, being under investigation for or serving
 a sentence for a crime, evasion of a court-ordered obligation, or providing false infor-
 mation on a passport application. The requirement tha citizens satisfy obligations
 to immediate relatives, such as material support for parents, have been eliminated
 except for court-ordered obligations, such as alimony payments.
 Emigrants who have permanently resettled abroad, including in Israel, Germany,
 or theUnited States have been able to visit or repatriate without hindrance. How-
 ever, emigrants who departed without first obtaining a "PMZH" stamp have been
 stopped at the border and prevented from departing Russia (though they may enter
 without dificulty), as they could present neither a nonimmigrant visa to another
 country nor evidence of permission to legally reside abroad.
 Since 1993 Russia has been a party to the 1951 United Nations Convention Relat-
 ing to the Status of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol. On July 28, President Yeltsin
 signed the federal law, Concerning Making Changes and Additions to the Law of
 the Russian Federation, Concerning Refugees. This law offers substantially fewer
 benefits to refugees than the original 1993 law it replaces. The earlier laws fairly
 generous commitments of resettlement support for refugees have been cited by some
 observers as discouraging the Federal Migration Service (FMS), which has few re-
 sources to meet this obligation, from adjudicating the cases of asylum seekers. With
 the passage of the new law, the FMS is expected to expedite its procedures for adju-
 dicating asylum claims.
 The Government cooperates to a limited extent with the United Nations High
 Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the International Organization for Migra-
 tion. Both organizations assist the Government in devloping a humane migration
 management system; this includes effective and fair refugee status determnation
 procedurea. Te UNHCR recognizes some 30,000 asylum seekers who originate from
 outside the territories of the former Soviet Union.
 Since 1994 the FMS gave refugee status to only 80 persons originating outside
 the Commonwealth of Independent States(CIS). In comparison, the Government pro-
 vided refugee status to 130,000 former citizens (mainly ethnic Russians) of the
 former Soviet Union. The Government acts more expeditiously for the latter group
 and applies a more lenient standard.
 Despite some progress in adjudicating nonformer Soviet Union aslum claims by
 the regional branches of the F   , there are still major conerns about the ability
 and willingness of the Moscow office to process non-CIS asylum seekers. Human
 rights organizations claim that this is part of intentional efforts by the authorities
 to rid the city of foreign asylum seekers. Local legislation in Moscow, St. Petersburg,
 
 
 1261
 
 Rostov, and other major population centers prohibits the settlement of refugees
 within these cities.
 A large number of workers and students from Africa and Asia, who came to work
 or study in accordance with treaties between their countries and the former Soviet
 Union, remain in Russia. The Government has not deported them but encourages
 their return home.
 The UNHCR and Amnesty International are working with the FMS and border
 officials to ensure that interviews of potential refugees are conducted in a timely
 fashion, that the UNHCR is allowed access to potential refugees in airport transit
 lounges, and that deportations of potential refugees are delayed until cases are adju-
 dicated. Despite these efforts, it appears that the Government is more concerned
 with creating a disincentive for future nonformer Soviet Union asylum seekers than
 with meeting its international obligations.
 The case of Sheremetyevo 2 airport is one example. The physical layout of the air-
 port contains an individual from exercising his right to claim asylum. The FMS es-
 tablished a Point of Immigration (PIC) at Sheremetyevo 2 in 1996. PIC officials are
 responsible for processing requests for refugee status. The PIC office is located out-
 side the transit zone. No PIC or UNHCR phone number is listed in the transit zone,
 nor is any other information provided that would assist an asylum seeker. Undocu-
 mented travelers are not allowed to leave the transit zone and are often returned
 to Aeroflot (the carrier on which most migrants enter the Russian Federation). Le-
 gally bound to provide food and emergency medical care for undocumented travelers,
 Aeroflot returns them to their point of departure as quickly as possible. Human
 rights organizations allege that Aeroflot deports hundreds of asylum seekers. In
 cases where asylum seekers from Sheremetyevo 2 have accessed the PIC, FMS offi-
 cials reportedly never have granted an individual refugee status. Deportations of
 those waiting for a decision on their cases have been documented.
 In the past, the UNHCR has had limited access to the transit areas of Moscow's
 airports. Access to the Sheremetyevo 2 transit lounge eased somewhat in October,
 but remains sporadic.
 Armenians evacuated from Baku in the wake of late 1980's ethnic violence are
 recognized as refugees, although their credentials require annual renewal. The vast
 majority of those evacuated have either emigrated from Russia or found some way
 to live in Russia. However, a group of about 1,400-2,000 are still housed in the
 "temporary quarters" assigned after the evacuation, usually in Moscow hotels or
 workers' dormitories in the greater Moscow area. They are unable to return to Azer-
 baijan and are not accepted by Armenia. Since they lack residency permits for Mos-
 cow, they cannot legally apply for work and are effectively denied the ability to reg-
 ister their children or public schooling. They have declined offers of Russian citizen-
 ship on the grounds that they would lose even the meager benefits they presently
 receive (although such a step would allow them to establish legal residence, seek
 work, and apply for benefits such as foreign travel passports). They have also re-
 jected offers of relocation to other regions of Russia because they allege that the al-
 ternative residences they are offered frequently are not habitable, are still occupied
 by others, or simply do not exist. Their situation is becoming increasingly precarious
 as the formerly state-owned hotels in which many reside are privatized, and the
 new owners exert financial and other pressure on them to depart. A number of or-
 ders have already been served in- such cases. The courts are legally required to ap-
 point a new residence, but have been uneven in meeting this requirement.
 The Constitution states that the Russian Federation does not permit the extra-
 dition to other states of persons persecuted for their political beliefs or their actions
 (or inactions) that are not considered a crime in the Russian Federation. However,
 instances have occurred in the past in which opposition figures were deported to
 countries of the former Soviet Union to face charges that were political in nature.
 Under the 1993 Commonwealth of Independent States Convention on Legal Assist-
 ance in Civil, Family, and Criminal Affairs, persons with outstanding warrants can
 be detained for periods of up to 1 month while the Procurator General investigates
 the nature of outstanding chares against the detainee. This system is informally
 but effectively reinforced hy col egiallinks among senior law enforcement and secu-
 rity officials in the various republics of the former Soviet Union. Human rights
 groups allege that this network is employed to detain opposition figures from the
 other former Soviet republics without actual legal grounds.
 On February 21, journalist Albert Musin, an ethnic Uzbek citizen of Kazakhstan,
 was detained by Moscow Police during a documents check (the Moscow police also
 reported that Musin was drunk and disorderly). During processing at the police sta-
 tion, authorities found outstanding warrants for Musin's arrest in Uzbekistan on
 charges of slandering President Karimov and "illegally" gathering and disseminat-
 ing information. Despite calls for his release from human rights activists, such as
 
 
 1262
 Human Rights Watch and the Union of Councils, Musin was held in custody until
 March 7, on the grounds that the police needed official confirmation from the Uzbek
 Government as to the nature of the charges and the continued status of the war-
 rant. The Uzbek Government indicated that it was no longer pursuing the case and
 Musin was released. While technically legal under the Convention, the case raised
 clear concerns about Russia's willingness to forcibly return opponents of friendly re-
 gimes in the Commonwealth of Independent States to a country where they feared
 persecution.
 In another case, a member of the opposition in Tajikistan, former Deputy Chair-
 man of the Supreme Soviet Akmadzhon Sayidov, was extradited to Tajikistan due
 to outstanding criminal warrants. While the warrants were for criminal rather than
 political offenses, Human Rights Watch believes that Sayidov is at risk of persecu-
 tion for opposition activities. The Russian Government made extradition contingent
 on a promise by the Tajik Government not to pursue charges of "anti-State activi-
 ties" against Sayidov.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides citizens with the right to change their government, and
 citizens exercise this right in practice.
 The Federal Assembly comprises two chambers. The lower chamber, the State
 Duma, consists of 450 deputies, half elected in single mandate constituencies, half
 by party lists. In the December 1995 parliamentary elections, 43 political blocs ap-
 eared on the ballot. The upper chamber, the Federation Council, has 178 mem-
 bers-the 89 chief executives of regional administrations and the 89 chairpersons
 of regional legislatures, all of whom are popularly elected. The Constitution provides
 the President and the Prime Minister with substantial powers, which they used in
 the absence of effective opposition from the Parliament and the courts.
 A democratic election for the President of the Russian Federation took place in
 July 1996 for the first time in the history of Russia as an independent state. Presi-
 dent Yeltsin was reelected in a generally free and fair election.
 In 1997 gubernatorial elections were held in 13 federation regions. Some of these
 elections were complicated by extensive residence requirements, age requirements,
 or local language requirements in federal republics, which the Central Electoral
 Commission (CC) has ruled to be illegal.
 The (OSCE) monitored the January 27 elections in the breakaway Republic of
 Chechnya and found them to reflect the will of the voters. The Russian Government
 recognized the election of Aslan Maskhadov as Republic President.
 Women are underrepresented in government and politics. In the December 1995
 elections, 46 female deputies were elected to the 450-member Duma, a decrease
 from the 58 female deputies in the Duma elected in 1993.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Many domestic and international human rights groups operate freely. Most
 rups investigated and publicly commented on human rights issues, generally
 doing so without government interference or restrictions. However, some local offi-
 cials harassed human rights monitors, going so far as to arrest them. Human Rights
 Watch criticized the Prosecutor General's response to these incidents. Several
 NGO's are headquartered in Moscow and have branches throughout the country.
 Some of the more prominent human rights organizations are the Moscow Center for
 Prison Reform, the Society for the Guardianship of Penitentiary Institutions, the
 Glasnost Public and Defense Funds, Memorial, the Moscow Research Center for
 Human Rights, the Soldiers' Mothers' Committee, the Mothers' Rights Foundation,
 and the Moscow Helsinki Group. Several of these groups are recognized by govern-
 ment and legislative officials for their expertise in certain fields, and such groups
 participate (with varying degrees of success) in the process of drafting legislation
 and decrees.
 Various types of regionally based human rights groups are being established. So-
 cial-economic rights groups are the most numerous and monitor issues such as un-
 paid wages and benefits. There Ere fewer civil-political rights groups, but according
 to Memorial, these are growing in number. These groups inclue "generalist" organi-
 zations that cover the range of human rights issues and "specialist" organizations
 that cover only one issue. Public legal centers have been formed, due to the critical
 lack of legal advice that is available to the general public. These centers are usually
 run on a part-time basis by lawyers who, while they cannot afford to offer trial
 counsel or actual legal work, offer advice at no cost on legal rights and recourse
 under the law.
 
 
 1263
 Regional groups, which generally do not benefit from any international support
 or attention, reported that local authorities have obstructed their work and that law
 enforcement officers have begun criminal investigations based on fabricated charges
 against certain regional human rights groups' leaders (see Section 1.d.). Criticism
 of the Federal Government and regional authorities is usually permitted without
 hindrance. The threshold appears to be criticism of a specific political leader in the
 region (usually the governor or a senior law enforcement official). Regional human
 rights advocates have been charged with such offenses as libel, contempt of court,
 and interference in judicial proceedings, along with other crimes, in cases with dis-
 tinct political overtones (see Section 1.d.). Local human rights groups have far fewer
 opportunities to interact with legislators in developing legislation than their Moscow
 counterparts; some are excluded from the process entirely by local authorities.
 The import of copies of the NGO report "Russia's Northern Fleet: Sources of Ra-
 dioactive Contamination," authored in part by former Naval Captain Aleksandr
 Nikitin, is still blocked by the FSB. Copies of the report in English and Norwegian
 are available over the Internet through Russian providers, but the Russian version
 is blocked out. Bellona Foundation employees continue to experience difficulties
 when applying for visas to the Russian Federation, a situation that the Russian
 Government has declined to fully explain.
 Nongovernmental organizations have entirely withdrawn from Chechnya since the
 murder of six International Committee of the Red Cross personnel in December
 1996 because of the risk of kidnaping and other criminal attacks (see Section 1.b.).
 Chechen authorities have generally discouraged NGO's from returning to Chechnya,
 although the motive for such discouragement appears to be based more on security
 concerns than unwillingness to submit to nongovernmental human rights monitor-
 ing.
 The Government's human rights institutions lack independence. The President's
 Human Rights Commission is composed primarily of people from the Government
 (unlike the 1993-1996 Commission under Sergey Kovalev which had large represen-
 tation by human rights activists). Some human rights groups complained that the
 Commission's focus has changed from advocacy of human rights to defending the
 Government's policy. Commission Chair Vladimir Kartashkin indicated to the press
 that his role is mainly consultative and investigatory, without powers of enforce-
 ment. The Commission examined and was often critical of the Government on issues
 such as prison conditions, human rights violations and amnesties in Chechnya, and
 human rights in the military, and is involved in the planning of "Human Rights
 Year" for 1998.
 The Constitutional law establishing the position of a human rights ombudsman
 was passed by the Federal Assembly on February 12. It was signed by President
 Yeltsin on February 26 and it entered into force on March 4. The law establishes
 a two-stage election process in selecting a human rights ombudsman. To be on the
 slate of candidates, a nominee must receive support from two-thirds of the Duma.
 Deputies can vote for multiple candidates. The ombudsman is then selected from the
 candidates by a simple majority. Despite language in the law requiring an ombuds-
 man to be elected by the Duma within 30 days after the law's promulgation, the
 Duma failed to nominate any candidates in voting held on April 4. The post re-
 mained vacant at year's end.
 In June 1996, President Yeltsin signed a decree entitled "On Certain Measures
 of State Support for the Human Rights Movement in the Russian Federation,"
 which called for a high degree of coordination between federal structures and the
 human rights community. Specific measures laid out in the decree included the cre-
 ation of three entities: An interregional human rights center to coordinate human
 rights activities; a human rights training center; and a center to publish human
 rights literature. Regional administrations were instructed to establish bodies analo-
 gous to the federal Human Rights Commission. Progress on establishing the bodies
 has been slow. Sixty-six regions have established commissions. Of these, 12 commis-
 sions are working effectively according to the Moscow Helsinki Group.
 In July 1996, President Yeltsin established by decree a Political Consultative
 Council (PCC) to assist in the creation of a legal framework for economic and politi-
 cal reforms with 12 standing chambers, including a human rights chamber, headed
 by Duma Deputy Valeriy Borshchev, and a legal chamber, headed by Boris
 Zolotukhin, a former Duma Deputy. The PCC meets monthly. The Human Rights
 Chamber includes representatives of the various Duma factions as well as 10 mem-
 bers of the NGO human rights community. The Chamber has held hearings on is-
 sues such as the proposed union with Belarus, the situation of refugees in Russia,
 and freedom of conscience. The effect of the Human Rights Chamber on the legisla-
 tive process remained unclear at year's end.
 
 
 1264
 On April 9, President Yeltsin signed a decree declaring that, in recognition of the
 50th anniversary of the Universal-Declaration of Human Rights, 1998 was to be the
 Year of Human Rights in the Russian federation. A committee was established to
 make preparations for the year under the chairmanship of Human Rights Conmnis-
 sioner Kartashkin. The committee's membership is broadly representative of the
 human rights community. One stated goal is to establish programs in human rights
 education. However, the committee has yet to receive a budget.
 In 1996, the Glasnost Fund established an "International Intergovernmental Tri-
 bunal on Crimes Against Humanity and War Crimes in Chechnya," to conduct in-
 vestigations and forward its findings to the Russian Procurator General, the Council
 of Europe, and the European Court of Human Rights. The Tribunal's members in-
 clude prominent human rights activists from throughout the world. Results of its
 deliberations have not been publicly released.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination based on race, sex, religion, language,
 social status, or other circumstances. However, both official and societal discrimina-
 tion still exist.
 Women.-Domestic violence remains a major problem, as victims rarely have re-
 course to protection from the authorities. Police are frequently reluctant or even in-
 willing to involve themselves in what they see as purely domestic disputes. Many
 women are deterred from reporting such crimes because of this and because the
 housing system makes it difficult either to find housing outside the family dwelling
 or to expel an abusive spouse, even after a final divorce action.
 According to a December Human Rights Watch report, the Government reported
 that almost 11,000 women reported rape or attempted rape in 1996. Human Rights
 Watch further reported that Yekaterina Lakhova, President Yeltsin's advisor on
 women's issues, has estimated that 14,000 women are killed by husbands or family
 members each year. Human Rights Watch notes, however, that these statistics un-
 derestimate the extent of the problem, due to the underreporting of these crimes by
 victims. In 1996 the MVD estimated that 80 percent of violent crime occurred in
 the home.
 Hospitals and members of the medical profession provide assistance to women
 who have been assaulted. However, some doctors are reluctant to ascertain the de-
 tails of a sexual assault, fearing that they will be required to spend long periods
 in court. While noting that the Government has begun to address the seriousness
 of the problem of violence against women, the Human Rights Watch report criticized
 the Government for "failing to afford victims of violence the protection of the law
 ," and Russian law enforcement officials for not effectively ensuring that inci-
 dents of violence against women are investigated and prosecuted, and for sometimes
 obstructing their investigation and prosecution. The report further stated that "This
 discrepancy between the law as written and the law as applied demonstrates Rus-
 sia's failure to fulfill its international human rights obligations." Human Rights
 Watch also criticized the State Duma for its "seriously flawed" drafting of a law on
 family violence. It noted that many women's groups have faced considerable dif-
 ficulty in gaining access to and commenting on drafts of the law.
 There is credible evidence that women encounter considerable discrimination in
 employment. At a Duma-sponsored roundtable held on March 5, 1996, representa-
 tives of 53 women's associations appealed to the Duma to improve the legal status
 of women by creating a council to assess all draft legislation to ensure that it pro-
 vides for equal opportunities for women and men. In their appeal to the Duma, the
 women's associations' representatives raised their concerns that women form a dis-
 proportionately high percentage (62 percent) of the officially registered unemployed,
 that women are discriminated against in hiring and firing, that the differences be-
 tween the salaries of men and women have increased sharply, and that few women
 attain senior positions.
 Human Rights Watch in 1996 accused the Government of participating in dis-
 criminatory actions against women, contending that the Government seldom en-
 forces employment laws concerning women. Employers prefer to hire men, thereby
 saving on maternity and child care costs, and avoiding the perceived unreliability
 that accompanies the hiring of women with small children. In July 1996, a change
 in the Labor Code prohibited women between the ages of 15 and 49 from being
 hired for jobs that are considered to be harmful to their health, including working
 on the night shift. Many of these jobs pay more, allow early retirement, or both.
 Women continue to report cases in which they are paid less for the same work that
 their male colleagues perform. Moreover, women have reported sexual harassment
 in the workplace, with employers frequently requesting female employees "without
 
 
 1265
 
 complexes," meaning that they should be receptive to liberties taken by their em-
 ployers.
 Job advertisements often specify sex and age groups, and sometimes physical ap-
 pearance as well. The Government does not collect statistics on wages or income by
 sex; one informal estimate is that women's average incomes are about 50 to 55 per-
 cent of the average male incomes. Professions dominated by women tend to be lower
 paid than those dominated by men. Moscow human resources managers privately
 admit that discrimination against women in hiring is common. Unemployment, at
 9.3 percent of the work force as of August, also disproportionately afrects women.
 Children.-The Constitution assigns the Government some responsibility for safe-
 guarding the rights of children. The State endeavors to provide, within its reduced
 means, for the welfare of children.
 A new family code regulating children's rights and marriage and divorce issues
 came into effect on March 1, 1996. Although the President has stated that govern-
 ment policies to improve the situation of children were a top priority, the Govern-
 ment had not begun any significant programs in this area by year's end. Many Mos-
 cow charitable organizations have established productive relations with the city gov-
 ernment to address the needs of disabled children, as well as other distressed
 groups.
 The position of many children has deteriorated since the collapse of communism
 because of falling living standards, an increase in the number of broken homes, and
 domestic violence. According to press reports, 40 percent of all children live below
 the poverty line. In November 1995, Duma Deputy Mariya Gaydash stated that 2
 million children under 14 years of age suffer from physical or mental abuse, with
 as many as 200,000 dying each year from injuries received at home, usually from
 parental abuse or neglect. About 50,000 children run away from home each year,
 Gaydash asserted, and 2,000 commit suicide. Children on the street often become
 dependent on illegal narcotics. To combat the growing number of children being ab-
 ducted, police organizations, like the Nizhny-Tagil Police Academy in Sverdlovsk ob-
 last, are forming programs to protect children.
 The most vulnerable groups of children in society are orphans and the mentally
 disabled, who are often given up by their parents to state-run institutions. Human
 rights activists allege that children in state institutions are poorly provided for
 (often because funds are lacking) and in some cases are physically abused by staff.
 Some children are improperly diagnosed and evaluated as being either mentally ill
 or retarded. Facilities to which such children are remanded frequently use
 unprescribed narcotics to keep children under control. The Moscow Human Rights
 Research Center's "Rights of the Child" project has called for the establishment of
 an ombudsman for the rights of children with the power to enter and inspect chil-
 dren's' facilities at any time of day or night without advance notification.
 There were no reports of children working in violation of labor laws.
 People With Disabilities.-The Constitution does not directly address the issue of
 discrimination against disabled persons. Although laws exist that prohibit discrimi-
 nation, the Government has not enforced them. The meager resources that the Gov-
 ernment can devote to assisting disabled persons are provided to veterans of World
 War II and other military conflicts. Special institutions exist for children with var-
 ious disabilities. The Government does not mandate special access to buildings for
 the disabled. The Society for the Defense of Invalids is working to broaden public
 awareness and understandingof issues concerning people with disabilities.
 A November 1995 law established a requirement that firms with over 30 employ-
 ees either reserve 3 percent of their positions for persons with disabilities or contrib-
 ute to a government fund to create job opportunities for the disabled. The law also
 removed language defining an "invalid" as a person unable to work. However, the
 Government has not implemented this law. Some persons with disabilities have
 found work within factories run by the All-Russian Society for the Disabled, but the
 majority are unable to find work and are frequently discouraged from working rath-
 er than subsisting on social benefits.
 Incdgenous People.-The State Committee for the Development of the North,
 based in Moscow, is charged with representing and advocating the interests of indig-
 enous people. With only a small staff, its influence is limited. Local communities
 have organized in some areas to study and make recommendations regarding the
 preservation of the culture of indigenous people. People such as the Buryats in Sibe-
 ria; the Tatar and Bashkiri in the Urals; the people of the North, including the
 Enver, Tafarli, and Chukchi; and others have worked actively to preserve and de-
 fend their cultures, as well as the economic resources of their regions. In this con-
 text, some groups in the far eastern part of the country have criticized the Federal
 Government for not developing an overall concept for the development of indigenous
 people. Most believe that they are treated equally with ethnic Russians within the
 
 
 1266
 Russi n Federation, although some groups believe that they are unrepresented in
 region$l governments. The principal problems for indigenous people center on dis-
 tribution of necessary supplies and services, particularly in the winter months for
 those  ho live in northern climes.
 Reli' ous Minorities.-Muslims, who comprise approximately 10 percent of Rus-
 sia's  pulation, continue to encounter societal discrimination and antagonism.
 The   are between 600,000 and 700,000 Jews in Russia (0.5 percent of the total
 popula ion). Jews continue to encounter societal discrimination, and government au-
 thoriti s have been criticized for insufficient action to counter it. There were no re-
 ported incidents of major crimes or acts of intimidation linked to anti- Semitic
 groups or motives in 1997. No progress was reported in investigations of several in-
 cident that occurred in 1996. However, anti-Semitic themes continued to figure
 pro     ntly in hundreds of extremist publications, and some Russian politicians
 made nti-Semitic remarks. These public statements contributed to ageneral atmos-
 phere f anti-Semitism. Members of Russian National Unity, an anti-Semitic organi-
 zation hat uses a modified swastika as its symbol, continued to patrol two Moscow
 parks,  eportedly at the request of local officials.
 In Sptember Jehovah's Witnesses missionaries in the St. Petersburg region were
 victims1 of severe beatings and their meeting hail was vandalized, apparently by ex-
 treme nationalists. The police have not identified any suspects in the incidents.
 Members of religious movements, including some Protestant movements, Jeho-
 vah's Witnesses and the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints (Mormons)
 faced discriminatio n  their ability, despite legal registration, to rent premises and
 conduct group activities (see Section 2.b.).
 Nat ionalRacia/Et hnic Minorities.-Ethnic Roma from      the Caucasus and
 Central Asia face widespread societal discrimination, which is often reflected in offi-
 cial attitudes and actions. In addition, since 1993 discrimination against people from
 the Caucasus and Central Asia increased concurrently with new measures at both
 the federal and local levels to combat crime. Law enforcement authorities targeted
 people with dark complexions for harassment, arrest, and deportation from urban
 centers (see Section 2.d.). In Moscow such persons are subjected to far more fre-
 quent document checks than lighter-skinned persons, and are frequently detained
 or fined in excess of permissible penalties, often without formal documents of the
 infraction being drawn up and presented by police. Reports also suggest a pattern,
 at least tacitly supported by city authorities, of extortion and beatings by law en-
 forcement officials.
 In Stavropol kray, the local branch of Aleksandr Barkashov's neo- Nazi "Russian
 National Unity" (RNE) and a parallel organization called Russian Knight claim sup-
 port from local leaders, members of the armed services, and law enforcement offi-
 cials. The stated goal of the organization is to develop Russian youth to establish
 "Russian order," a vision of a great Russia with orthodox values, a goal for which
 the claim to be ready to shed blood. The group runs kindergartens in Stavropol
 andtrains Russian youths of various ages. The group reportedly has several hun-
 dred followers.
 No cases involving charges of inciting racial hatred (a crime defined in the Crimi-
 nal Code) were successfully completed in 1997, and there were no statistics avail-
 able on how many such cases (if any) were filed.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The law provides workers with the right to form and
 join trade unions, and roughly 55 percent of the work force are nominally organized.
 Oblast authorities in Sverdlovsk, however, refused to issue registration certificates
 to four new unions in the spring, despite general instructions from the Ministry of
 Justice that registration of unions be automatic upon presentation of the protocol
 of the founding meeting.
 The Federation of Independent Trade Unions of Russia (FNPR), the successor or-
 ganization to the Communist trade unions, largely dominates the trade union move-
 ment and, thus, still provides a practical constraint on the right to freedom of asso-
 ciation. FNPR unions frequently include management as part of the bargaining
 unit. The FNPR has inherited the bulk of the property of its predecessors, including
 office and recreational property. The majority of its income comes from sources other
 than dues, such as rental income and member services.
 The FNPR and other trade union federations act independently on a national po-
 litical level, although on local levels, FNPR unions are sometimes closely affiliated
 with local political structures.
 Benefits vary depending on union affiliation, and generally discourage the forma-
 tion of new unions. For example despite a trade umon law that stipulates that all
 unions enjoy equal rights, a court upheld the Ministry of Railroad's claim that it
 
 
 1267
 could give free tickets only to "its" union members. At the enterprise level, FNPR
 unions often still control access to the Government's social fund, from which benefits
 such as the child subsidy and vacations are paid.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Collective bargaining is pro-
 tected under the law. Most strikes, however, are considered technically illegal since
 often the labor dispute at issue was not first reviewed by an arbitration court. The'
 court has the right to order the confiscation of union property to settle damages and
 losses to an employer if a strike is found to be illegal An increasing number of
 strikes are therefore organized by strike committees, rather than unions.
 Unions have complained that arbitration court findings favor management. Trans-
 portation unions in particular have complained that, because transportation can be
 considered an essential service that must be provided under law, their right to
 strike has been denied. This law was successfully challenged in 1995 by air trans-
 port workers, with the Constitutional Court finding that banning industry-wide
 strikes is unconstitutional and that each needs to be considered on a case-by-case
 basis. However, a subsequent 1995 federal law on collective labor dispute resolution
 banned railway strikes.
 Various employers, such as St. Petersburg's Channel Five, have refused to nego-
 tiate collective bargaining agreements, particularly for unions not affiliated with the
 FNPR. Despite a legal requirement to do so, management also frequently refuses
 to provide the fimancial information demanded by trade unions. In Vladivostok, a
 local transport company attempted to stop payment of benefits for workers involved
 in organizin . In another case, the management of the Beriozovskiy hot water pipe
 production facility sought to prevent a union from organizing by producing a icti-
 tious collective bargaining agreement that later was successflly challenged in
 court.
 There were incidents of reprisals for organizing, protesting and strike activity. In
 Krasnodar kray, teachers active in organizing January strikes were called into the
 procurator's office and threatened. In Yakutiya air traffic controllers who refused to
 work as cashiers were fired. The general director of the mine "Sokolovskoye" threat-
 ened to fire striking miners who were demanding 5 months' back pay, but was pre-
 vented from doing so by the local administration. Ambulance drivers who partici-
 pated in a warning strike in Nizhniy Tagil did not receive bonuses to which they
 were entitled. In other instances, organizers and union leaders have been placed on
 administrative leave or transferred to lower-paying jobs, even though such reprisals
 are illegal. Local prosecutors have threatened atrers with criminal proceedings,
 but generally have not followed through, since public support for strikes, particu-
 larly given the high level of wage arrears, is stron Yu
 Activist union eader Sergey  elyayev, head of the Yekaterinburg Comradeship of
 Free Trade Unions, lost a lawsuit filed against him by Mayor Anatoliy Chernetskiy
 of Yekaterinburg. After two city newspapers accused Belyayev of espionage, he filed
 a libel case against the Mayor. Mayor Chernetskiy filed a countersuit, arguing that
 the fact that a libel case had been filed against him was in itself a libel. Belyayev
 lost his cases in June 1996 and paid an unusually heavy fine. Damages included
 a 50 million ruble fine against the Comradeship, which owned no property. To sat-
 isfy this debt, court authorities seized property that belonged to a separate organiza-
 tion with which Belyayev was also associated.
 There are no export processing zones. Worker rights in the special economic
 zones/free trade zones are fully covered by the Labor Code.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Labor Code prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor by adults and children. Soldiers are regularly sent to work on
 farms to gather food for their units. There are documented cases of soldiers being
 sent by their superior officers to perform work for private citizens or organizations.
 Such labor may violate military regulations and, if performed by conscripts, would
 be an apparent violation of ILO convention 29 on forced labor.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The
 Labor Code prohibits regular employment for children under the age of 16 and also
 regulates the working conditions of children under the age of 18, including banning
 dangerous, nighttime and overtime work. Children may, under certain specific con-
 ditions, work in apprenticeship or internship programs at the ages of 14 and 15.
 While in some instances children can be found selling consumer goods on street cor-
 ners, accepted social prohibitions against the employment of children and the avail-
 ability of adult workers at low wage rates combine to prevent widespread abuse of
 child labor legislation. The Government prohibits forced and bonded labor by chil-
 dren, and there were no reports that it occurred (see Section 6.c.).
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The monthly minimum wage in 1997 was
 roughly $14 (83,490 rubles). While this amount does not constitute a living wage
 under prevailing conditions, most people receive several times the official minimum.
 
 
 1268
 At the same time, much of the population continues to reside in low-rent or sub-
 sidized housing and receive various social services from enterprises or municipali-
 ties. The official minimum wage is primarily a benchmark figure for calculating uni-
 versity stipends, old age pensions, civil service wages, and many other social bene-
 fits.
 The Labor Code provides for a standard workweek of 40 hours, with at least one
 24-hour rest period. The law requires premium pay for overtime work or work on
 holidays. Workers have complained of being forced to work well beyond the normal
 week, that is, 10 to 12-hour days, of abrogations of negotiated labor agreements, and
 of forced transfers of workers.
 The nonpayment of wages continues to be the most widespread abuse of the Labor
 Code. As of December, official government statistics showed that workers were owed
 roughly $9.5 billion (55.3 trillion rubles) in accumulated wage arrears. Wage arrears
 affect workers in many fields, especially education, medicine, industry, and the en-
 ergy/coal sector. Arrears generally range between 3 and 9 months.
 In 1997 the Government concentrated primarily on paying off government pension
 arrears and wage arrears to servicemen. Its goal was to clear allwage arrears owed
 to government workers by year's end.
 About 80 percent of all arrears are due to failure by enterprises to pay salaries.
 Anecdotal evidence indicates that many enterprises are forcing employees to take
 wages in barter, sometimes in goods with limited appeal. A ball bearing factory in
 the Urals paid its workers in vodka and cognac in May. Rosugol, the government
 coal parastatal, announced at the Presidential Advisory Council that it could take
 3 years to repay all back wages to miners.
 Although a small but increasing percentage (perhaps 6 percent) of workers owed
 back wages sought relief through the court system, this has proved to be a lengthy
 p roess. Courts are often willing to rule in favor of employees, but the collection of
 ba=C wages is difficult. Courts often insist that cases be filed individually, in con-
 tradiction to the law on trade unions, thereby undercutting union attempts to in-
 clude the entire membership in one case. This insistence also makes the process
 lengthier and more difficult for the affected workers, and exposes them to possible
 retaliation.
 The problem of wage arrears is aggravated by limitations on labor mobility. Work-
 ers find it difficult to exchange or sell their apartments. A system of residency per-
 mits and notifications also can make it both difficult and expensive to move to areas
 of low unemployment (see Section 2.d.). The knowledge that workers cannot easily
 move across regions and find employment made managers in some one-factory
 towns reluctant to lay off workers.
 Enterprises also placed workers on involuntary leave. According to official statis-
 tics for July, approximately 4 million workers were considered to be underemployed.
 Many of these were on involuntary leave or were forced to work substantially cur-
 tailed hours.
 The law establishes minimum conditions of workplace safety and worker health,
 but these standards are not effectively enforced. Workers wear little protective
 equipment in factories, enterprises store hazardous materials in open areas, and
 smoking is permitted near containers of flammable substances. The Labor Code does
 establish workers' right to remove themselves from hazardous or life-threatening
 work situations without endangering their continued employment.
 Workers were at high levels of risk of industrial accidents or death. In 1996 work-
 related deaths and injuries increased over 1995, to 6.1 injuries per 1,000, up from
 5.5. Death rates per 1,000 stood at 0.155 deaths, up from 0.138 in 1995. Workers
 in agriculture suffered the highest injury rates, with 12.4 accidents per 1,000 work-
 ers. Construction workers had the highest fatality rates, at 0.262 deaths per 1,000.
 These data do not include deaths and disabilities resulting from occupational dis-
 eases, for example, black lung disease. Official statistics from early 1996 indicate
 that 13 percent of all workers in industry worked at sites where air quality was in-
 adequate or polluted; for workers in metallurgy, the total was 24 percent.
