Russia
As parliamentary and presidential elections in late 2007 and early 2008
approached, the administration headed by President Vladimir Putin cracked down
on civil society and freedom of assembly. Reconstruction in Chechnya did not
mask grave human rights abuses including torture, abductions, and unlawful
detentions.
International criticism of Russia’s human rights record remains muted, with the
European Union failing to challenge Russia on its human rights record in a consistent
and sustained manner.
Elections and Political Participation
In 2007 Russian authorities beat, detained, and harassed activists participating
in and planning peaceful political protests. Authorities banned or severely
restricted a series of opposition demonstrations known as “Dissenters’ Marches,”
which were nonetheless held across Russia. In April riot police and special forces
used excessive force to break up a Moscow Dissenters’ March, beating numerous
demonstrators and detaining hundreds. Authorities prevented activists and
observers from traveling to Samara to participate in a May Dissenters’ March,
which coincided with the EU-Russia summit held there.
In November the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights of the
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe cancelled its mission to
observe Russia’s December 2 parliamentary elections, citing operational concerns.
The Russian government had imposed unprecedented restrictions on the
size of the mission and did not issue visas to observers in a timely manner.
Also in November, riot police used excessive force to disperse Dissenters’
Marches in Moscow and St. Petersburg, and made arrests. Among those detained
were several march organizers and prominent opposition candidates including
Garry Kasparov, leader of the Other Russia coalition, who subsequently received a
five-day prison sentence.
In late November Farid Babaev, a human rights activist and opposition parliamentary
candidate from Dagestan, was shot dead by unidentified assailants.
Civil Society
The government is tightening controls over civil society through new legislation,
interference with peaceful assembly, and harassment of nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs) and government critics.
The 2006 NGO law increased government oversight and restrictions on NGOs. It
requires NGOs to submit regular activity reports or face liquidation, and allows
intrusive and punitive inspections that often result in warnings for minor, technical
violations. Two warnings lead to liquidation even if the organization corrects
the violation.
The Registration Service demanded the liquidation of several NGOs for failure to
provide timely activity reports. For example, in June 2007 a court in Nizhni
Novgorod ordered the liquidation of the Youth Human Rights Movement (YHRM)
for this failure, even though the organization submitted the reports as prescribed
by law. The YHRM is appealing the liquidation.
During a two-month inspection of the St. Petersburg rights organization Citizens’
Watch, the Registration Service demanded all of the organization’s outgoing correspondence,
including that containing confidential information. In April police
conducted an 11-hour search of the Educated Media Foundation (EMF) in Moscow,
a prominent media training organization, seizing all financial documents and
computers. Police linked the search to criminal proceedings against EMF’s director
for failing to declare excess cash on returning to Russia, a violation ordinarily
treated as an administrative offense. In July, after a court refused to return the
confiscated items, the organization could no longer function and was forced to
liquidate. Similarly, in August Federal Security Service agents searched the Nizhni
Novgorod Center for Assistance to Migrants in connection with criminal charges of
document forgery against the center’s head. Agents confiscated financial documents,
computer equipment, and archives, paralyzing the center’s work.
In August new amendments to the Law on Extremism entered into force, prohibiting
the media from mentioning any group found by a court to be extremist without referencing the court’s designation. The amendments also allow any politically
or ideologically-motivated crime to be designated extremist, raising concerns
that the law will be used to silence critics of the government.
The Prosecutor General’s Office arrested three suspects for the 2006 murder of
investigative journalist Anna Politkovskaia, but serious questions remain about
the case, which officials claim was organized by “opponents abroad.” The defendants’
lawyers do not have access to the case materials.
On May 27 several dozen Russian lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender people,
and their supporters, tried to hold a peaceful demonstration outside Moscow’s
City Hall. Police arrested 21 demonstrators and observers as the event’s organizers
attempted to deliver a petition to the mayor’s office protesting its ban on a
gay pride parade, which Moscow Mayor Yury Luzhkov had declared “satanic.”
Dozens of anti-gay protesters, including skinheads, nationalists, and Russian
Orthodox adherents, beat and kicked peaceful participants as riot police stood
by.
Moscow city police announced that it would recruit volunteers from the pro-
Kremlin youth group Nashi (Ours) to patrol Moscow streets, including at demonstrations
and opposition events. Members of Nashi have stated that they will
mobilize Nashi patrols to prevent “destabilization” of the country from opposition
groups. Federal Migration Service (FMS) officials also used members of a nationalist
youth group called Mestnye (Locals) to find and detain migrants allegedly
working illegally at a Moscow market. The head of the FMS announced that it
would continue collaboration with Mestnye.
The North Caucasus
Ramzan Kadyrov, a former security chief, became president of Chechnya and is
presiding over significant reconstruction of civilian infrastructure, changing the
face of Grozny, the capital. Russian federal and Chechen officials have claimed
that the conflict in Chechnya is “solved,” though sporadic armed clashes and
counterinsurgency operations continue. These are carried out chiefly by forces
under Kadyrov’s command, known as “kadyrovtsy,” who torture those suspected of ties to rebels and hold them in unlawful detention, including in secret detention
centers.
Local human rights groups continued to report a decline in the number of
enforced disappearances, documenting 25 abductions leading to five disappearances
by August 2007. However, few efforts have been made to address the cases
of as many as 5,000 people “disappeared” since 1999.
In November uniformed and masked men in Nazran, Ingushetia, robbed, kidnapped,
and brutally beat Oleg Orlov, leader of prominent human rights organization
Memorial, and three television journalists, before leaving them at the border
with Chechnya.
Violence continued elsewhere in the North Caucasus, with armed clashes
between rebels and police in Ingushetia and Dagestan. In October the trial of 59
alleged participants of the 2005 Nalchik uprising, in Kabardino-Balkaria, began.
Many of the defendants have alleged torture and other abuses while in custody.
Entrenched Problems
Denial of food and other abuses against conscripts continue in the armed forces,
with several horrific cases in 2007 underscoring the government’s failure to sufficiently
acknowledge or address the problem. After one conscript was severely
beaten and not given timely medical care, later requiring multiple transplants, the
minister of defense denied that the violence exemplified a broader problem. The
rare prosecutions in such cases are not proporti0nal to the scope of violent hazing,
which results in the death of dozens of young soldiers every year and serious
injuries to thousands more. Many conscripts commit or attempt suicide and thousands
defect from their units to escape harm. In October the term of conscription
was reduced from two years to 18 months.
While Russia continues to make progress in making antiretroviral treatment (ART)
available to people living with HIV, a disproportionately low number of HIV-positive
injection drug users receives such treatment. The ban on the use of substitution
therapy in treating injection drug users and, more generally, the poor quality
of drug dependence treatment at state clinics are key barriers to improving injection
drug users’ access to ART.
Key International Actors
While many global leaders expressed concern over developments in Russia, such
as restrictions on civil society, human rights issues remain on the margins of
Russia’s bilateral and multilateral relations, with many key interlocutors failing to
press Russia to reform or to challenge it on continuing problems, especially
Chechnya.
The EU held two rounds of human rights consultations with Russia, meetings ultimately
undermined by the lack of high-level Russian participation and adequate
follow-up mechanisms. Human rights did not figure prominently in the broader
EU-Russia agenda. Although the German EU presidency raised human rights
issues at the May EU-Russia summit, particularly around freedom of assembly,
this stance was compromised by subsequent statements made by the Portuguese
presidency equating the raising of human rights issues with inappropriate “lecturing.”
Due to a standstill over concerns unrelated to human rights, the EU made no
progress on strengthening the human rights component of its Partnership and
Cooperation Agreement with Russia, set to expire in December 2007.
The United States government issued several strong statements on human rights
but lacked the leverage to challenge Russia meaningfully on its worsening human
rights record.
Russia has served on the new United Nations Human Rights Council since its
inception in May 2006. However, the government has not fulfilled its obligation to
cooperate fully with UN human rights mechanisms, including the UN special rapporteur
on torture, who has remained unable to visit the country due to the government’s
continued failure to allow a visit in accordance with the mandate’s
terms of reference.
In March 2007 the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT) took
the rare step of issuing a public statement on its 2006 visits to the North
Caucasus, expressing concern about torture, unlawful detention, and a failure to
investigate allegations of abuses, as well as lack of cooperation and improvements
by Russia. Russia remains the only Council of Europe member state that
regularly fails to voluntarily allow the publication of the CPT’s reports. The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe failed to reverse its misguided
2006 decision to discontinue the assembly’s monitoring mandate on Chechnya.
2007 proved a landmark year for international justice on Chechnya. Unable to
secure justice domestically, hundreds of victims of abuse have filed applications
with the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR). In 11 rulings to date, the ECtHR
found Russia responsible for serious human rights abuses in Chechnya, including
torture, extrajudicial executions, and enforced disappearances. In every ruling the
court has found a failure by the Russian government to launch a meaningful
investigation. Russia has taken insufficient steps to implement the general measures
recommended by the ECtHR to remedy systemic problems and prevent the
reoccurrence of abuses. Russia remains the only Council of Europe member not to
have ratified Protocol 14 of the court’s charter, which would streamline the court’s
procedures and reduce backlog.