 RUSSIA
 Politically, economically, and socially, Russia continues to be a state in transition
 but experienced additional severe pressures during the year related to the country's
 widespread financial crisis. While constitutional structures are wel-defined and
 democratic in conception, democratic institution-building continues to face serious
 
 
 1434
 
 challenges, often due to significant limitations on the State's financial resources.
 The 1993 Constitution establishes a government with three branches and checks
 and balances, although it provides for a strong executive. The executive branch con-
 sists of an elected president and a government headed by a prime minister. There
 is a bicameral legislature (Federal Assembly), consisting of the State Duma and the
 Federation Council, and a judicial branch. Both the President and the legislature
 were selected in competitive elections judged to be largely free and fair, with a
 broad range of political parties and movements contesting offices. As the country's
 economic difficulties mounted over the course of the summer, President Boris
 Yeltsin removed Sergey Kiriyenko as Prime Minister and nominated the previous
 Prime Minister, Viktor Chernomyrdin. A confirmation battle ensued between the
 President and the Duma over the nomination. After the State Duma twice rejected
 Chernomyrdin's nomination (a third rejection would have required new parliamen-
 tary elections), President Yeltsin nominated Foreign Minister Yevgeniy Primakov to
 be Prime Minister. The Duma quickly approved Primakov, lessening the political
 crisis. Primakov subsequently appointed a cabinet comprised of members of a range
 of Duma factions, including a Communist as First Deputy Prime Minister in charge
 of economic policy. The judiciary, still the weakest of the three branches, showed
 some signs of limited independence.
 The Ministry of Internal Affairs (MVD), the Federal Security Service (FSB), the
 Procuracy, and the Federal Tax Police are responsible for law enforcement at all lev-
 els of government throughout the Russian Federation. On September 1, responsibil-
 ity for overseeing most of the prison system was transferred from the MVD to the
 Ministry of Justice. The FSB has broad law enforcement functions, including fight-
 ing crime and corruption, in addition to its core responsibilities of security, counter-
 intelligence, and counter-terrorism. The FSB operates with only limited oversight by
 the Procuracy and the courts. The military's primary mission is national defense,
 although it has been employed in local conflicts for which it was prepared inad-
 equately and occasionally is used to control civil disturbances. More recently, inter-
 nal security threats in parts of the Russian Federation have been dealt with by mili-
 tarized elements of the security services. These same organizations are tasked with
 domestic law enforcement. Many members of the security forces, particularly within
 the internal affairs apparatus, continued to commit human rights abuses.
 During the first half of the year, Russia feil into a protracted financial crisis, the
 result of a combination of market crises in Asia, fundamental structural problems
 related to its market transition, the Government's inability to implement an effec-
 tive tax policy, and low oil prices. Stock and bond markets declined significantly.
 Forei.n investors-who held one-third of Russian debt-pulled out of government
 securities, driving yields to very high levels and putting pressure on dwindling for-
 eign currency reserves. In August the Kiriyenko Government reversed exchange
 rate policy and allowed the ruble's value to drop sharply. Through December the
 Primakov Governments new economic team worked to contain ruble devaluation,
 inflation, and bank failures. By year's end, the Primakov Government still was ne-
 gotiating with international lending institutions to attempt to renew financing. The
 Government also declared a moratorium on repayment of debt to private creditors.
 According to official government statistics, the gross domestic product (GDP) was
 $278 billion (2,781 billion rubles), per capita GDP was $1,870 (18,696 rubles), and
 annual inflation was 85 percent, compared to 11 percent for 1997. The government
 statistics office estimates that the informal economy-barter and hidden commercial
 activity designed to avoid heavy tax and regulatory burdens-accounts for 24 per-
 cent of GDP. However, other authoritative sources believe it to be much higher. The
 economy contracted by an estimated 5 percent during the year and is expected to
 contract by 5 to 12 percent in 1999. Corruption continues to be a dominant, negative
 factor in the development of commercial relations. Wage arrears-the major cause
 of Russia's numerous labor strikes-reached $12 billion (12 trillion rubles) on Au-
 gust 1. Official unemployment was 13 percent, but actual unemployment was sig-
 nificantly higher.
 The Government's human rights record was uneven. There were credible re-
 ports-and government officials admitted-that law enforcement and correctional of-
 ficials tortured and severely beat detainees and inmates. Prison conditions continue
 to be extremely harsh and frequently life threatening. According to human rights
 groups, between 10,000 and 20,000 detainees and prison inmates may die in peni-
 tentiary facilities annually, some from beatings, but most as a result of overcrowd-
 ing, inferior sanitary conditions, disease, and lack of medical care. The Government
 has made little progress in combating abuses committed by soldiers, including
 "dedovshchina" (violent hazing of new recruits). Military justice systems consistent
 with democratic practices remain largely underdeveloped. Both the main military
 procuracy and human rights groups reported an increase in systematic human
 
 
 1435
 rights abuses during military service, which at times resulted in deaths or suicides.
 It is unclear whether the reported increase is indicative of more abuses or of more
 effective monitoring and reporting procedures by the military procuracy, which in
 turn resulted in greater willingness of victims to file complaints. Existing laws on
 military courts, military service, and the rights of service members often contradict
 the Constitution, federal laws, and presidential decrees, elevating arbitrary judg-
 ments of unit commanders over the rule of law.
 Arbitrary arrest and detention remain problems. Police and other security forces
 in various parts of the country continued their practice of targeting citizens from
 the Caucasus and darker-skinned persons in general for arbitrary searches and de-
 tention on the pretext of fighting crime and enforcing residential registration re-
 quirements. Lengthy pretrial detention remained a serious problem. Institutions
 such as the Ministry of Internal Affairs have begun to educate officers about safe-
 uarding human rights during law enforcement activities through training provided
 yother countries, but remain largely unreformed and have not yet adopted prac-
 tices fully consistent with law enforcement in a democratic society. While the Presi-
 dent and the Government have supported human rights and democratic practice in
 statements and policy initiatives, they have not institutionalized the rule of law re-
 quired to protect them. Most abuses occur at lower levels and not by central direc-
 tion, but government officials do not investigate the majority of cases of abuse and
 do not dismiss or discipline the perpetrators.
 The Government made little progress in the implementation of constitutional pro-
 visions for due process, fair and timely trial, and humane punishment. In addition,
 the judiciary often was subject to manipulation by central and local political au-
 thorities and was plagued by large case backlogs and trial delays. Aleksandr
 Nikitin, a retired Soviet Navy captain, was arrested in 1996 and accused of reveal-
 ing state secrets for his part in publishing a report on environmental hazards in
 the country's northwest. Nikitin's case continued to be characterized by serious vio-
 lations of due process, and there are credible charges that the FSB's case against
 him was politically motivated. The case went to trial in October, but on October 29
 the judge in the case concluded that the evidence provided by the prosecution did
 not support the indictment and returned the case to the prosecution for further in-
 vestigation. Authorities continued to infringe on citizens' privacy rights. In the face
 of a variety of obstacles, the media continued to represent a wide range of opinion.
 The major print media organizations functioned relatively unhindered by govern-
 mental pressure at the national level, although respect for freedom of the press var-
 ies in the regions. The principal obstacle to independent journalism was the contin-
 ued trend towards concentration of ownership of news media in the hands of major
 banks and businesses, most of which often sought to ensure that reporting was in
 line with their interests. Such pressure caused journalists to practice self-censor-
 ship. Foreign and Russian journalists were frequent victims of kidnapings for ran-
 som by criminals in Chechnya and throughout tenorer Caucasus. The country's
 mass media also was affected by the economic and financial crisis. Newspapers,
 radio, and television stations faced a liquidity crisis, and advertisers drastically
 scaled back purchases of advertising, causing severe economic hardship for the
 media.
 In October 1997, the Government enacted a restrictive and potentially discrimina-
 tory law on religion. The Government subsequently sought to develop an interpreta-
 tion of the law that would comply with the international agreements addressing
 freedom of religion to which Russia is a party. However, the implementing regula-
 tions, issued piecemeal during the year and completed in October, did not resolve
 many of the law's inherent ambiguities. Discriminatory practices at the local level
 are attributable to the increased decentralization of power, as well as to government
 inaction and discriminatory attitudes that are widely held in society. Many reli-
 gions, including many Protestant sects that are new to the country, have rereg-
 istered successfully at the federal and local levels, as required by the law, and con-
 tinue their activities. However, there are numerous reports that religious organiza-
 tions either were denied registration or experienced long delays in reregistration, as
 local authorities sought to obstruct the activities of religious groups. All religious
 organizations must reregister by the end of 1999. The judicial system offers an ap-
 peals process, which a number of groups have chosen to pursue. Two challenges to
 the constitutionality of the religion law were accepted for review in November. A
 court date is expected in the second half of 1999. In addition, some regional govern-
 ments have passed laws and decrees since 1994 that restrict the activities of minor-
 ity religious groups, some of which have been subject to harassment as a result.
 Despite constitutional protections for citizens' freedom of movement, the Govern-
 ment places some limits on this right, and some regional and local authorities (most
 notably the city of Moscow) restrict movement through residence registration mech-
 
 
 1436
 
 anisms. These restrictions, though successfully challenged in court, remain largely
 in force and are tolerated by theFederal Government. The presence of these restric-
 tions demonstrated the continued obstacles to the enforcement of judicial rulings.
 In May the State Duma filled the post of Human Rights Ombudsman. Although
 the post was created by the Duma in 1997, it had gone unfilled well beyond the pe-
 riod allowed under the law. The selection of a candidate was part of a larger politi-
 cal deal involving a number of other parliamentary committee posts. The new Om-
 budsman, Duma Deputy Oleg Mironov, was a member of the Communist Party and
 is not known for interest or expertise in human rights. The abolition of govern-
 mental human rights commissions by at least eight regional governors, in apparent
 contravention of a presidential decree that all regions establish such commissions,
 was a significant setback for human rights. Independent human rights organiza-
 tions had rated the commissions as effective. Governmental human rights commis-
 sions have been formed in 58 regions.
 With few exceptions, human rights nongovernmental organizations (NGO's) docu-
 mented and reported on human rights violations without governmental interference
 or sanctions. However, some local officials harassed human rights monitors and, in
 some cases, arrested them. Human Rights Watch and other organizations criticized
 the Procurator General's lack of response to these incidents. Violence against
 women, trafficking in women, and abuse of children remain problems, as do dis-
 crimination against women and religious and ethnic minorities. There are some lim-
 its on worker rights, and there were reports of instances of forced labor.
 President Yeltsin and Chechen President Aslan Maskhadov signed a peace agree-
 ment on May 12, 1997, in which both sides agreed to settle the Russia-Chechnya
 dispute by peaceful means. In an earlier agreement, the two sides had agreed to
 resolve Chechnya's political status prior to 2001, but fundamental differences re-
 main on that'question, with Chechnya asserting that it has earned the right to full
 independence and Russia insisting that Chechnya remain a part of the Federation.
 During the year, no progress was reported on resolving differences between-the two
 sides, particularly on the question   of Chechnya s independence. Continued
 kidnapings and instability in Chechnya, where the Federal Government exercises
 virtually no authority, exacerbated tensions between federal and republican authori-
 ties. Kidnapings orchestrated by uncontrolled armed formations and bandits, some
 of which may have links to the former insurgent forces, have become frequent. The
 usual motivation for kidnapings is ransom, but some cases have political overtones.
 Both journalists and humanitarian assistance workers have been targets. Despite
 the strong opposition of federal authorities, Chechen authorities used Shari'a courts
 in some cases; and there were unconfirmed reports that death sentences were car-
 ried out without respect for due process. The Shari'a law still is not codified.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Feedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no confirmed political
 killings by agents of the Government. However, an undetermined number-up to
 tens of thousands-of detainees and prison inmates died after beatings by security
 officials or due to harsh conditions in detention (see Section 1.c.). A number of gov-
 ernment officials, including Duma Deputy and noted reformist Galina Starovoytova,
 were murdered. Few of these crimes appear to be politically motivated; the majority
 were linked to private financial or commercial dealings. In 1997 then Internal Af-
 fairs Minister Anatoliy Kulikov acknowledged that police solved only about 10 per-
 cent of the approximately 600 contract murders in 1996. Journalists also were killed
 during the year (see Section 2.a.).
 On June 8, Larisa Yudina, editor of Sovyetskaya Kalmykiya Segodnya, a news-
 paper often critical of Kalmykiya president Kirsan Ilyumzhinov, was found mur-
 dered on the outskirts of Elista, the republic's capital. Her death was widely be-
 lieved to be regional government retribution for her news stories investigating high-
 level corruption in the republic (see Section 2.a.).
 On September 28, Yevgeniy Agarev, the Deputy Chairman of the St. Petersburg
 office responsible for providing many municipalservices, was killed by a remote-con-
 trolled bomb. A spokesman with the local office of the Emergency Situations Min-
 istry said that the incident was probably a contract killing, perhaps having to do
 with Agaryov's responsibility for funerals. Press reports indicated that the burial
 business in St. Petersburg has the reputation of being heavily infiltrated by orga-
 nized crime.
 In July the Ministry of the Interior announced that four members of a profes-
 sional hit squad had been apprehended in the Kyrgyz Republic and had confessed
 to the killing of Mikhail Manevich. Manevich, deputy mayor and chairman of the
 
 
 1437
 
 city property committee of St. Petersburg, was killed in August 1997 while on his
 way to work. However, despite the arrests, there were no reported developments in
 the search for those who had ordered the killing or for a motive for the crime. Media
 reports at the time had suggested that Manevich was killed by individuals whose
 financial interests may have been threatened by his privatization program in the
 cituma Deputy and noted reformist Galina Starovoytova was murdered in her St.
 Petersburg apartment building late on November 20. Starovoytova was shot by
 automatic weapon fire in what press reports characterize as a professional "hit." Her
 aide, who was accompanying her, was seriously wounded in the attack. One of the
 most prominent themes in the press is speculation that the killing may have been
 ordered to prevent publication of material on local officials' corruption. The MVD
 launched a broad investigation.
 In December kidnapers beheaded four foreign telecommunications workers after
 holding them hostage in Chechnya for 2 months. The heads of the three Britons and
 one New Zealander were found in a sack in the western part of Chechnya; their bod-
 ies were found more than a week later. An investigation by Chechen authorities is
 ongoing (see Section 1.b.).
 Akmal Saidov, the Deputy Representative of the Russian Federation to the
 Chechen Republic, was kidnaped after attending a public rally on September 29. On
 October 2, police found his body outside the city of Sleptsovsk. Police said that
 Saidov showed signs of having been tortured and then strangled. The Interfax News
 Agency reported that a note attached to the body warned against cooperating with
 Russia's Federal Security Service. The Service denied that Saidov was an intel-
 ligene agent. The Chechen Foreign Mistry""  stated that Saidov's killing was "a po-
 litical provocation aimed at complicating Russian-Chechen relations," according to
 the ITAR-TASS news agency..
 Dagestan's mufti, Said-Mukhamed Abubakarov, was killed on August 21 by a re-
 mote-controlled land mine while traveling by car to the central mosque in
 Makhachkala. President Yeltsin stated that the killing was an attempt to sow ha-
 tred among believers, push Dagestan toward civil war, and thereby destabilize the
 situation throughout the northern Caucasus. As of mid-September, law enforcement
 authorities had made several arrests in the case but had not filed any charges.
 The chief of the kidnaping investigation department of Chechnya's State Shariat
 Security Ministry, Shadid Bargishev, was killed on October 25 by a remote-con-
 trolled bomb. The killing occurred the day that Bargishev was to lead the first ever
 Chechnya-wide campaign against hostage-takers. The next day, October 26,
 Chechnya's leading Muslim cleric, mufti Akhmad Khazdhi Kadirov, narrowly sur-
 vived a similar car bomb attack.
 No formal charges have been filed in the investigation into the December 1996
 attack on the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) compound in Novyy
 Atagi, Chechnya, during which six ICRC workers were killed and one was wounded.
 In 1997 then Minister of Internal Affairs Kulikov claimed to have detained suspects
 outside Chechnya but indicated that he was not participating in the main investiga-
 tion inside Chechnya. In January Chechen President Maskhadov publicly charged
 that the Russian Government was sheltering a key suspect in the case. Chechen au-
 thorities named Adam Deniyev, who they said was an ethnic Chechen working as
 a colonel in the Russian army, as the individual who had organized the killings of
 the aid workers. Russia's Ministry of Interior had promised to surrender Deniyev
 in April 1997, after the charges against him first surfaced, if his guilt could be
 proved, the ITAR-TASS news agency reported. Maskhadov's top aide said that suffi-
 cient information to implicate Deniyev had been sent to Moscow, but that "the Rus-
 sian leadership, ignoring repeated appeals, fails to surrender him."
 In March, just 2 days a~r President Yelts in berated General Prosecutor Yuriy
 Skuratv in front of television cameras for a lack of progress in the 1995 murder
 investigation of Vladislav Listyev, First Deputy Minister of Interior Vladimir
 Kolesnikov announced that arrests had been made. Listyev, a popular television
 host and executive, was shot and killed outside his home. At the time of his murder
 he had just been named to head Russia's main television network, Russian Public
 Television. In July Vladislav Selivanov, head of the Interior Ministry's crime-fight-
 ing division, told a newspaper that "there was a basis for the supposition" that the
 hit squad arrested in connection with the Manevich murder also was involved in
 Listyev's murder. In August the Procurator General's office announced that it was
 making progress on the case, but details were not forthcoming.
 In February four police officers were convicted for killing Oleg Igonin, who was
 tortured to death in 1995 (see Section 1.c.).
 Procurator General Skuratov reported in February two arrests in the 1994 mur-
 der case of investigative reporter Dmitriy Kholodov. The two were members of Rus-
 
 
 1438
 sia's airborne troops. Two additional suspects were charged in July, including an of-
 ficer in the Moscow branch of the airborne troops. Kholodov, age 27, a reporter for
 the popular daily Moskovskiy Komsomolets, was killed in October 1994 when a
 briefcase supposedly provided by an informant exploded in his hands at the news-
 paper's office. At the time, he was investigating corruption in the military. The daily
 claimed that the murder was linked to that investigation. Kholodov's murder came
 days before he was expected to testify on military corruption before the State Duma.
 There were no developments in the 1996 murder of U.S. businessman Paul
 Tatum, or in the 1990 murder of Orthodox priest Aleksandr Men. A Duma commis-
 sion investigating the murders of Duma deputies is stil holding hearings.
 According to the Moscow office of the Carnegie Endowment for International
 Peace, there were two public executions in Chechnya in September and numerous
 public punishments for murder, rape, and drug-related offenses. Carnegie Moscow
 has received reports that refugees in Ingushetiya and North Ossetia have been in-
 volved in violence, but the exact causes or the numbers of persons affected is not
 known.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of government involvement in cases of
 politically motivated disappearances. Kidnaping frequently is used by criminal
 gr oups in the northern Caucasus, some of which may have inks to elements of the
 former insurgent forces. The main motivation behind such cases apparently is ran-
 som, although some cases have political overtones. A number of journalists were
 seized and held for ransom during the year, as were several humanitarian aid work-
 ers. Russian law enforcement agencies told the news agency Interfax in October
 that, since the beginning of the year, 176 persons had been abducted in the north-
 ern Caucasus, of whom 90 had been freed. According to the Organization for Secu-
 rity and Cooperation in Europe_ (OSCE) 12 foreign nationals were still being held
 hostage at year's end. Many of the hostages were being held in Chechnya. One hos-
 tage, a Russian government official in Chechnya, was executed by his captors in Oc-
 tober (see Section l.a.). Otherwise, there were no reports of disappearance as a pre-
 cursor to an execution or other political killing, although a number of persons re-
 mained missing at year's end.
 Valentn Vlasov, President Yeltsin's personal representative in Chechnya, was
 kidnaped on May 1 when his car was stpped by armed gunmen while en route to
 Groznyy. He reportedly was being held for ransom. Vlasov was released on Novem-
 ber 13 and according to officials in Moscow and the northern Caucasus, no ransom
 was paid. Press reports speculate that he was released in exchange for the Russian
 Governmenfs release of Ingushetia's Interior Minister, Daud Korigov. Vincent
 Cochetel, Director of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
 for the northern Caucuses, was kidnaped at gunpoint in the North Ossetian capital
 of Vladikavkaz on January 29. Cochetel was released on December 12.
 On December 8, the heads of four hostages who were held captive in Chechnya
 for the prior 2 months were found. The four were telecommunications engineers in-
 stalling a cellular phone network in Chechnya. The heads of the three Britons and
 one New Zealander were found in a sack in the western part of Chechnya and were
 identified by their former bodyguard. Their bodies were repatriated later (see Sec-
 tion l.a.).
 On July 3, 1997, British aid workers Camilla Carr and John James were taken
 hostage in the Chechen capital of Groznyy. The two had been working for a Russian
 charity helping child victims of the 1994-96 war in that region. Carr and James
 were freed on September 20. Carr later told news services that she had been raped
 repeatedly by her captors.
 The Chechen authorities frequently have claimed that they are actively fighting
 kidnapers. New Chechen laws call for jail terms or public executions of kidnapers.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits torture, violence, and other brutal or humiliating treat-
 ment or punishment; however, there are credible reports that law enforcementper-
 sonnel regularly use torture to coerce confessions from suspects and that the Gov-
 ernment does not hold most of them accountable for these actions. Institutions such
 as the Ministry of Internal Affairs have begun to educate officers about safeguard-
 ing human rights during law enforcement activities through training provided by
 other countries, but remain largely unreformed and have not yet adopted practices
 fully consistent with law enforcement in a democratic society.
 Prisoners' rights groups, as well as other human rights groups, have documented
 numerous cases in which law enforcement and correctional officials tortured and
 beat detainees and suspects. An Amnesty International researcher described the
 practice of torture as "widespread." Reports suggest a pattern of beatings, arrests,
 and extortion by police against minorities (see Sections 2.d. and 5). Police also used
 excessive force in dealing with demonstrators. For example, in Yekaterinburg in
 
 
 1439
 
 April, special OMON troops ("special purpose" MVD law enforcement forces) used
 clubs to disperse an unauthorized student demonstration protesting planned federal
 cuts in student subsidies. As a result, 14 students r  minor medical treatment
 and a militia member was injured seriously. MVD investigators arrived from Mos-
 cw 3 days after the incident to determine who, if anyone, ordered the troops to use
 force. A special Duma commission also visited Yekatarinburg to investigate. The oh-
 last prosecutor opened a criminal case against the students on charges of violations
 of public order (see Section 2.b.). Police also increasingly targeted defense lawyers
 for harassment, including beatings and arrests (see Section I.e.).
 In a 1997 report, Amnesty International described five methods used by law en-
 forcement officials either to gain confessions or simply to control or abuse prisoners.
 The "elephant" involves placing a gas mask over the head of the victim and then
 restricting or cutting off the flow of oxygen. Sometimes tear gas is introduced as
 well to induce vomiting. The "swallow" involves binding the victim's hands behind
 his back above the level of his head, forcing painful arching of the back. This meth-
 od is used in conjunction with the elephant or separately, with the victim suspended
 from the wall or ceiling so that he can be beaten. The "envelope" involves securing
 the victim's legs near his head. The "press-camera" is a system whereby violent pris-
 oners are coopted by guards and used to control or punish other prisoners. The c-
 opted prisoners are permitted to torture prisoners (sometimes to gain confessions)
 or deal with "difficult" prisoners. The "crucifixion of Christ" involves the victim
 being secured spread-eagled to either a metal cot or prison bars, to which powerful
 electric shocks are applied. These allegations have been corroborated by other credi-
 ble sources.
 Sergey Pashin, a judge in a Moscow appeals court, was quoted in a foreign news-
 paper in January as saying that in the cases that come before him, confessions often
 have beenb beaten out of suspects. He also charged that "witnesses" often have been
 beaten to force them into testifyingwhen in act they may have no knowledge of
 the case. In A pril the Permanent IHuman Rights Chamber, an advisory presidential
 committee, held hearings at the State Duma on the use of torture by police. The
 Committee concluded that torture was "common"~ among representatives of the Min-
 istry of Interior and that it was "widespread and systematic," especially in the pre-
 trial stages of law enforcement Yakov Pister, head of the administration of the
 Procurator General's office, testified that the Criminal Code has no definition of tor-
 ture and that no statistics were gathered on the use of torture. He blamed police
 reliance on torture as a means of gathering evidence on a lack of professional train-
 ing. Pister reported that at least half of the investigators in the Ministry of Interior
 have no legal education, while about half of police detectives lack any special train-
 mOne of the victims who testified before the Human Rights Chamber, Olga
 Smirnova, told of being raped and beaten over the course of a 10-day detention in
 1994 at a Moscow police station. Smirnova was tortured to force her to testify as
 a witness in a criminal case of which she said she had no knowledge. She said she
 tried three times to fie a complaint with the district procurator's office, but her
 complaint was rejected each time. Valeriy Abramkin of the Civic Center for Assist-
 ance in Reform of Criminal Law Enforcement said that the Moscow procurator's of-
 fice finally ordered an investigation into the case, but as of year's end it had not
 been completed.
 In 1997 the Russian Procurator General's office received 27,155 complaints about
 police actions. In 17,850 cases, accusations against officers led to convictions or offi-
 cial reprimands. Of those, 853 officers were convicted of exceeding their authority,
 505 of falsifying evidence, 117 of murder, 208 of premeditated bodily harm and 64
 of rape. Yuriy Sinelshchikov, Moscow's First Deputy Procurator, said that in 1997
 the Moscow procurator's office received over 1,200 complaints about unlawful inves-
 tigative methods. As a result, 66 criminal charges were ified against policemen, and
 11 were arrested.
 Four police officers were convicted in February for torturing to death Oleg Igonin
 in Saransk, Mordovia. The Moscow Times newspaper quoted an Amnesty Inter-
 national researcher as saying that the conviction marked the first time in Russian
 history that torture had been cited as the reason for the conviction of law enforce-
 ment officers. Igonin was being questioned in connection with the shooting of a
 kiosk attendant. The court found that the police officers had bound Igoniln's hands
 and feet, then placed a gas. mask over his head, aliowing them to control the flow
 of oxygen. This method of torture--the elephant-reportedly is employed commonly
 by police because it leaves no marks on the victims. Doctors determined that Igonin
 died in police custody as a result of asphyxiation. The four police officers were con-
 victed of murder, but all appealed the conviction. Two of the officers said that they
 were acting on orders from superiors.
 
 
 1440
 
 In a second trial later that same month in Saransk, four police officers (including
 two convicted for the murder of Igonin) were convicted of torturing six victims in
 the course of an investigation into the theft of a tractor in 1994. All six victims testi-
 fied at the trial. Nikolay Abramov, a major in the State Automobile Inspectorate
 (GAI), testified that he was kicked and beaten repeatedly in the genitals with a pipe
 and lost consciousness three times when repeatedly subjected to "the elephant." The
 six policemen convicted in the two trials received prison sentences ranging from 3
 to 9 years. The court also ordered the Ministry of Interior to pay compensation to
 Igonin's mother and to Abramov.
 Various abuses against military servicemen, including but not limited to the prac-
 tice of "dedovshchina" (the violent, sometimes fatal, hazing of new junior military
 recruits, MVD, and border guards), rose sharply during the past year. Press reports
 indicate that this mistreatment often includes extortion of money or material goods
 in the face of the threat of increased hazing or actual beatings. Press reports also
 indicate that this type of mistreatment has resulted in permanent injuries and
 deaths among servicemen. Soldiers usually do not report hazing to officers due to
 fear of reprisals, since officers in some cases reportedly tolerate or even encourage
 such hazing as a means of controlling- their units. There are also reports that offi-
 cers in some cases use beatings to discipline soldiers whom they find to be "inatten-
 tive to their duties."
 According to the main Military Procuracy, reported cases of such illegal activities
 increased 50 percent during the first 6 months of 1998. In 1997 in Moscow alone,
 the Russian Soldiers' Mothers Committee (an NGO) registered '1,409 in-person re-
 ports of torture; beatings, and institutionalized humiliation of junior conscripts, with
 an additional 2,368 primary-source written reports of similar treatment from sol-
 diers or their relatives. During the first 8 months of 1998, the Soldiers' Mothers
 Committee in Moscow received 1,720 in-person reports of similar human rights
 abuses in the armed forces.
 Both the Soldiers' Mothers Committee and the main Military Procuracy also have
 noted an increase in the number of reports about "non-statutory relations" in which
 officers or sergeantsphysically assault or demean their subordinates. This tendency
 commonly is attributed to stressful conditions throughout the military and to the
 widespread placement of inexperienced reserve officers, on active duty for 2 years,
 in primary troop leadership positions. In 1998 every second draftee expressed con-
 cern that his ife, health, or sanity would be threatened during'the period of mili-
 tary service by such incidents.
 During the first 4 months of an antidesertion amnesty campaign which began on
 March 28, 54 percent of the 6,187 deserters who turned themselves in to the main
 Military Procurator's office cited fear for their personal safety as the principal rea-
 son for their desertion. Since October 1997, criminal investigators have been con-
 ducting "prosecutor raids" on military units to ascertain service conditions. Discipli-
 nary action has been brought against more than 100 perpetrators of human rights
 abuses since these unannounced inspections began.
 The main Military Procuracy also is cooperating with the Soldiers' Mothers Com-
 mittee to investigate allegations of abuse and recently has established telephone
 and postal "hot lines" to receive reports directly from soldiers. Nonetheless, the Sol-
 diers' Mothers Committee believes that the majority of hazing incidents and as-
 saults are not reported, due to fear of reprisals, indifference of commanders, and de-
 liberate efforts to cover up such activity. In May a media team was assaulted and
 its equipment destroyed by officers and soldiers from the 205th brigade in
 Budennovsk while reporting on the killing of a soldier there through hazing.
 According to representatives of the Duma Defense Committee, there were 1,534
 noncombat deaths of servicemen during 1997 and the first 4 months of 1998. While
 the Ministry of Defense reported 233 suicides among servicemen during 1997, it had
 registered 162 suicides within only the first 5 months of 1998. According to the
 armed forces' Medical Service, approximately 45 percent of those committing or at-
 tempting suicide were driven to it by either physical abuse or the often inhuman
 conditions of military service. Nonpayment of wages was also a factor, particularly
 in cases of suicide among officers.
 The Mothers' Rights Foundation and the Soldiers' Mothers Committee believe
 that many of those who reportedly committed suicide were driven to do so by violent
 hazing or abuse. The Soldiers' Mothers Committee believes that the vast majority
 of hazing incidents are never reported. In incidents brought to the attention of the
 military or civilian authorities, the Soldiers' Mothers Committee reported in 1997
 that in 60 percent of the cases there was an official finding that abuse had taken
 place, and that some disciplinary action was taken as a result.
 The deteriorating quality of the armed forces, cited as the main reason for the
 breakdown in discipline, is aggravated by negligence of selection committees during
 
 
 1441
 
 the conscription process. In one Moscow-region unit cited by the Soldiers' Mothers
 Committee, 46 percent of the newly arrived conscripts had physical or psychological
 health problems, that should have exempted them from military service. The rise
 in the number of draftees unfit for military service also allegedly is contributing to
 the increasing crime rate within the armed forces, up by 12 percent during the first
 half of the year. Draft evasion is common, including the reported "purchase" of un-
 warranted medical deferments by potential conscripts otherwise ineligible for one of
 the many categories of legal deferment.
 Degrading and substandard living conditions persist throughout the military,
 principally due to insufficient funding. According to the Ministry of Defense, over
 100,000 servicemen were without housing. The 20th Army in Voronezh reported in
 July that every second military family did not have a place to live. With a continu-
 ing 3-month delay in the payment of wages, the Ministry of Defense suggested in
 August that soldiers forage for food. Diminished funds have resulted in the military
 purchasing inedible food products for its troops (including, in one well-publicized
 case, dog food), while in September the Baltic Fleet was assessed as being on the
 brink of starvation."
 Despite the acknowledge'd seriousness of the problem, the military leadership has
 made only superficial efforts to implement substantive reforms in training, edu-
 cation, and administration programs within units to combat abuse, at least in part
 due to lack of funding and the leadership's preoccupation with-urgent reorganiza-
 tional issues.
 At a 1997 international conference in Moscow on human rights in the armed
 forces, sponsored in part by the Russian Federation Presidential Commission on
 Human Rights, the military services came under harsh attack for systematic and
 widespreadhuman rights violations, including hazing, beatings, and torture. The re-
 port called on the President and the Duma to undertake a series of reforms, includ-
 ing creation of a civilian post of human rights ombudsman with the power to make
 unannounced inspections at military bases; creation of a military police system
 charged with investigating human and civil rights, among other crimes; uncondi-
 tional implementation of the presidential decree for an all-volunteer force by 2000;
 and, in the interim, observance of the -constitutional right to alternative civilian
 service in a nonpunitive program. The proposal for all-volunteer armed forces has
 been put off indefinitely in the face of the current economic crisis, which has crip-
 pled the Government's ability to raise military pay. Although some regional authori-
 ties are attempting to introduce alternative service programs, national legislation
 necessary to implement the constitutional right to alternative service has yet to be
 passed by the Duma.
 The systematic abuse of psychiatry as a form of punishment during the Soviet-
 era has ended. However, human rights groups charge that psychiatric hospitals con-
 tinue to conceal their archives and their practices: Further, authorities apparently
 still occasionally abuse the practice of psychiatry for other purposes. In March police
 in the republic of Kalmykiya placed Lydia Dordzhiyeva, leader of an invalids' rights
 advocacy group, in the republic's mental hospital for 5 days after forcibly breaking
 up a hunger strike in which members of her group were participating. Dordzhiyeva
 later was pronounced sane by the hospital. However, the head psychiatrist of the
 Kanykiya Ministry of Health was quoted as saying that forcible psychiatric incar-
 ceration for purposes of evaluation was appropriate in dealing with persons "who
 violate public order." (An article on this incident was the last piece written by jour-
 nalist Larisa Yudina before her murder in Kalmykiya; see Section L.a.). Federal au-
 thorities have not investigated the case.
 In January Moscow police sent poet Almna Vitukhnovskaya, age 24, to Moscow's
 Serbskiy Psychiatric Institute for tests of her sanity. She was released in March
 when the tests found her normal. It was the second time that she had been sub-
 jected to psychiatric tests since her October 1994 arrest, allegedly for selling a small
 quantity of drugs. The Russian and international branches of PEN, the inter-
 national writers group, claimed that Vitukhnovskaya had been framed, and that her
 arrest by the FSB was an attempt to silence her investigative reporting (see Section
 2.a.).
 The Independent Psychiatric Association of Russia, along with several human
 rights organizations, has criticized the use of psychiatry in "deprogramming" victims
 of "totalitarian sects." In such cases, authorities use pseudo-psychological and spir-
 itual techniques to "treat" persons who had been members of new religious groups
 (see Section 2.c.).
 Yuriy Savenko, head of the Independent Psychiatric Association of Russia (origi-
 nally formed during the Soviet era when psychiatric hospitals were used to punish
 dissidents), told Time magazine in 1998 of another aspect of psychiatric abuse.
 Savenko said that military, police, and state security agencies often use internal,
 
 
 1442
 closed-door tribunals to deal with whistle-blowers by sending them to psychiatric in-
 stitutions. He said that "more and more" policemen and military and intelligence
 officers sought out his organization after they had been labeled mentally ill.
 Prison conditions are extremely harsh and frequently life threatening. The peni-
 tentiary system is administered centrally from Moscow by the Ministry of Justice.
 The Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Defense, and the
 Ministry of Education all maintain penitentiary facilities. The MVD oversees about
 85 percent of the prison population. However, formal responsibility for managing the
 MVD's prison facilities was transferred to the Ministry of Justice in September.
 Conditions for detainees and prisoners in most government facilities remain ex-
 tremely harsh, particularly in pretrial detention facilities (SIZO's) where overcrowd-
 ing is rampant and the authorities frequently employ physical abuse and torture to
 coerce confessions. Most -detainees face extremely harsh and even life-threatening
 conditions. Russian news agencies reported on June 25 that Procurator General
 Skuratov had written to Minister of Interior Sergey Stepashin that human rights
 are "systematically and massively violated" in the nation's prisons. He alleged that
 lack of funding is less to blame than "mismanagement an misuse" of government
 funds allocated for prison maintenance. After a tour of pretrial detention centers in
 1997, Skuratov had warned that there was a real danger of a "social explosion"
 within the penitentiary system.
 According to the 1995 law On the Detention of Those Suspected or Accused of
 Committing Crimes, inmates must be provided with adequate space, food, and medi-
 cal attention. Although most of the law's provisions had been due to come into effect
 by the end of 1996, the authorities were not able to ensure compliance, due in part
 to lack of funds and the absence of a bail system.
 Prisons remain extremely overcrowded. According to a 1998 analysis of govern-
 ment statistics by the Moscow Center for the Promotion of Criminal Justice Reform
 (MCPCJR), the total number of persons held by the penitentiary system in January
 was 1,009,863 down from 1,051,515 in the beginning of 1997. This number included
 278,782 in pretrial detention (SIZO). The 1998 MCPCJR analysis showed that occu-
 pancy rates of pretrial detention cells across the country ranged from 160 percent
 to 380 percent, with a nationwide average of 240 percent-that is, 2.4 persons are
 being held in space designed for one. On average SIZO detainees have only 1.4
 square feet per person, while the law mandates 9 square feet. In one example, a
 SIZO in the Urals held 8,000 persons in facilities designed for 3,500. In "Kresty,"
 St. Petersburg's largest SIZO, 5 to 15 prisoners were held in cells that were built
 100 years ago to hold 1 prisoner. The occupancy rate for the overall penitentiary
 system is 112 percent. In 1997 there were approximately 38,000 women held in pris-
 on.
 Under such conditions, prisoners sleep in shifts, and there is little, if any, room
 to move within the cell. In most-pretrial detention centers and prisons, there is no
 ventilation system. Cells are stiflingly hot in summer (up to 40 degrees centigrade,
 according to the MCPCJR) and dangerously cold in winter. Reports indicate that
 matches cannot be lit in many SIZO cells during the summer because of a lack of
 oxygen.
 Health, nutrition, and sanitation standards in penal facilities remain low due- to
 a lack of funding. The MCPCJR estimated that the MVD was able to provide only
 20 to 30 percent of needed supplies and medications, leaving some facilities without
 any medicine at all. Head lice, scabies, and various skin diseases are prevalent. The
 MCPCJR estimated in 1997 that MVD penitentiary facilities were able to provide
 only 60 to 70 percent of the daily food rations they envisioned providing. Prisoners
 and detainees typically rely on families to provide them with extra food.
 This situation was aggravated by the country's economic crisis and resulting
 budgetary problems. Col. Vladimir Yalunin, head of the Justice Ministry's State De-
 partment of the Execution of Sentences (GUIN), told the Moscow newspaper Novyye
 Izvestiya late in September that in its current budget, the Government had allo-
 cated the correctional system only 45 percent of the amount needed to keep the sys-
 tem running. The system had received no money for the last 3 months; there was
 no money for food, nor for preparations for the harsh winter. According to an
 Interfax report, Justice Minister Krasheninnikov told prison officials on October 22
 that the prison service (through the first 9 months of this year) had received $117
 million (2 billion rubles) less than it was allocated in the federal budget. Under the
 current budget, prison authorities were spending 4 cents (70 kopecks) a day on each
 inmate, the equivalent of 300 grams of bread per day. However, many penal institu-
 tions are able to supplement significantly their budget allocations with income from
 prison labor. In many cases prisoners produce much of their own food.
 According to the MCPCJR, conditions in penal facilities vary among the regions.
 Some regions offer assistance in the form of food, clothing and medicine. Saratov
 
 
 1443
 oblast, concerned with the tuberculosis crisis in facilities located there, fully funded
 the tuberculosis-related medicinal needs of prisoners, according to the MCPCJR.
 Other support is offered by NGO's and religious groups.
 Inmates in the prison system suffer from inadequate medical care. In August
 Yuriy Shcherbanenko, a senior official of the Procurator General's office, told col-
 leagues at a conference that the level of medical services in prisons was far below
 international standards and even elementary sanitary norms. Ten thousand persons
 die in prisons ever year, he said. The most common causes of death in prisons are
 typhoid, venereal diseases, and tuberculosis. Over the past 2 years, tuberculosis had
 taken the lives of 20,000 prisoners. GUIN figures show 50,435 prisoners in tuber-
 culosis colonies and another 19,361 patients in hospitals as of January 3. Justice
 Minister Krasheninnikov said on October 22 that prison camps for tuberculosis pa-
 tients have 124 percent more inmates than they were designed for, according to an
 Interfax report.
 Detention facilities have infection rates of tuberculosis far higher in than the pop-
 ulation at large. On June 25, the Government's main sanitary doctor, Gerinadiy
 Onishchenko, told journalists that tuberculosis rates in the prisons were five times
 the national average. The MCPCJR reports that as of the summer of 1997, 70,000
 persons in corrective labor colonies and 10,000 in SIZO's were infected with tuber-
 culosis. In 1996 the MCPCJR asserted that the rate of tuberculosis was 40 times
 higher in the prison system than in the general population and that the mortality
 rate was 17 times higher. HIV/AIDS infection rates are also a source of concern. The
 MCPCJR reported 1,000 cases (which it believes to be a low figure) in a total prison
 populati on on. In his Otober 22 speech to prison officials, Justice
 Minister Krasheninnikov said the number of inmates infected with HV, the virus
 that causes AIDS, had reached 2,000, representing a 500 percent increase since Sep-
 tember 1997. The highest rate of infection was in Kalinngrad, where in 1997 the
 MCPCJR reported between 207 and 225 cases, one-eighth of the prison population.
 The tuberculosis epidemic in prisons became particularly urgent in August, when
 doctors announced that they had discovered a new multidrg resistant fomof t-
 berculosis, known as MDR-TB, in the country. They said that the strain was con-
 centrated primarily among prison inmates. Of the 15,000 to 20,000 persons infected
 with the strain, two-thirds are in prison. Medicins sans Frontieres (Doctors without
 Borders), Medical Emergency Relief International, and the Public Health Institute
 of New York sent a joint letter to President Yeltsin warning that Russia had become
 "an international incubator of a new illness." Aleksandr Goldfarb, director of the
 Sores Foundation's antituberculosis program in Russia, stated in August that in re-
 cent years, the supply of antituberculosis drugs seldom met more than 20 to 25 per-
 cent of the prisons requirements. In addition, in the prisons there were few who
 knew how to treat the disease, so it was treated ineffectively with incorrect dosages
 of medicine. As a result, the prisons had become "veritable factories" of drug-resist-
 ant strains of tuberculosis. Currently about 12 percent of tuberculosis infected in-
 mates have a multidrng resistant strain that is especially difficult to cure.
 Statistics on the number of detainees and prisoners who were killed or died and
 on the number of law enforcement and prison personnel disciplined for use of exces-
 sive force are not released publicly. While reliable figures are extremely difficult to
 establish, Russian human rights groups have in the past estimated that between
 10,000 and 20,000 detainees and prison inmates die each year inpenitentiary facili-
 ties. Some die due to beatings, but most as a result of overcrowding, poor sanitary
 conditions, or lack of medical care. The Ministry of Internal Affairs does not break
 down its statistics to specify how many of the 21,000 personnel dsissed were pun-
 ished for abusing detainees or convicts. The Duma Commission for Verification of
 Facts of Violations Against the Accused and Convicts in Penal Institutions has re-
 viewed 600 complaints since its inception in mid-1997.
 Violence among inmates, including beatings and rape, is common. There are
 elaborate inmate-enforced caste sstems in which informers, homosexuals, rapists,
 rape victims, child molesters, and others are to be tonuchable and treated very
 harshy, with little or no protection from the prison authorities.
 There are five basic forms of detention in the Ministry of Justice correctional sys-
 tem. Prison conditions in police station detention centers vary considerably but are
 as a rule harsh. In most cases, detainees are not fed and have no bedding, sleeping
 place, running water, or toilet.
 Suspects awaiting completion of criminal investigation, trial, sentencing, or appeal
 are confined in SIZO's. The GUIN has 178 SIZO's. Convicts on occasion are impris-
 oned in SIZO's because there is no transport to take them elsewhere. Conditions in
 SIZO's remain extremely harsh; they fall far short of minimum international stand-
 ards and pose a serious threat to life and health. Cells are overcrowded and pris-
 oners must sleep in shifts due to insufficient numbers of beds.
 
 
 1444
 The 1997 Amnesty International Report on Torture in Russia noted that "torture
 and ill-treatment occur at all stages of detention and imprisonment," but most often
 was reported in pretrial detention. Yuriy Kalinin, head of the MVD's Main Direc-
 torate of Internal Affairs, stated in 1995 that "the conditions in our pretrial deten-
 tion centers can be classified as torture under international standards. That is, the
 deprivation of sleep, air, and space." These conditions have not improved. In Feb-
 ruary, then-Justice Minister Stepashin admitted that "the pretrial detention centers
 are the most serious problem" in the prison system. Vyacheslav Budnov, the interior
 ministry official in charge of prisons was quoted in 1998 as saying that "this is a
 Russian paradox." Persons incarcerated in detention centers "have not gone to trial,
 but they are living-in worse conditions than those already sentenced."
 Correctional labor colonies (ITIKs) are penal institutions, which handle the bulk
 of the convicts. The GUIN reported that as of January 3, 706,236 persons were de-
 tained in 742 facilities. According to the MCPCJR, conditions in ITI's are better-
 than those in SIZO's and prisons only to the extent that there is fresh air. In the
 122 timber correctional colonies, where hardened criminals serve their time, beat-
 ings, torture, and rape by guards are common.
 "Prisons" are penitentiary institutions for those who repeatedly violate the rel-
 atively lax rules in effect in ITK's. The GUIN has- 13 prisons with 273,367 inmates
 (1997 figures). Conditions in many prisons are extremely harsh. Although they are
 not as crowded as SIZO's, guards reportedly severely discipline prisoners to break
 down resistance. Prisoners sometimes are humiliated, beaten, and starved.
 Educational labor colonies for juveniles (VTIs) are prisons for juveniles 14 to 20
 years of age. The GUIN reported that as of January 3, 19,672 inmates were being
 held at 61 VTKs. Conditions in VTK's are significantly better than in ITIKs, but
 juveniles in VTIs and juvenile SIZO cells suffer from beatings, torture, and rape.
 The MCPCJR reports that such facilities have a poor psychological atmosphere and
 lack educational and vocational training opportunities. Many of the juveniles-are
 from orphanages, have no outside support, and are unaware of their rights.
 In January 1996 President Yeltsin approved the MVD's project to reorganize
 criminal procedures and the penal system in order to bring the penal system into
 line with international standards. The President's Commission for Prison Reform
 monitors prison conditions and has prepared recommendations and legislation for
 reform. None of these efforts has led to any demonstrable progress.
 The formal transfer of responsibility for managing the MVD's prison facilities to
 the Ministry of Justice on September 1 was a potentially positive development The
 transfer fulfilled one of the obligations Russia undertook when it joined the Council
 of Europe in 1996. Although the director of the Moscow office of -Human Rights
 Watch noted that the transfer in itself "does not mean a big change," giving the Jus-
 tice Ministry jurisdiction was an improvement because it took the prisons "out of
 the hands of those whose main concern is to have good statistics on the number con-
 victed." Vyacheslav Bubnov, the official in charge of prisons at the Ministry of Inte-
 rior, reportedly said that the transfer process would not bring any immediate
 changes to the situation inside prisons, and he predicted that it would will take at
 least 7 to 10 years before conditions approached European standards. Bubnov esti-
 mated that transfer of control to the Ministry of Justice would provide 20 percent
 of the solution to improving conditions at prisons, but that the rest was dependent
 on increased funding. In view of the Government's serious budgetary problems, in-
 creased funding appeared unlikely.
 In recognition of the inhuman conditions present in detention facilities, in Decem-
 ber 1997 the Duma passed the Yeltsin administration's proposal for an amnesty for
 prisoners held for minor crimes and for first-time offenders, specifically veterans of
 military service in defense of the Motherland, pregnant women, women with chil-
 dren, invalids, tuberculosis-infected prisoners, minors and senior citizens. Pro-
 ponents estimated that the measure potentially would release 445,000 persons, in-
 cluding 35,000 who would be released from prisons and 60,000 whose terms would
 be reduced. However, only about 30,000 prisoners were released under the amnesty,
 according to Human Rights Watch. The Moscow Center for Promotion of Criminal
 Justice Reform reports that 24,000 persons (16,000 from prisons and 8,000 from pre-
 trial detention) were released as a result of the amnesty proposed in 1997.
 On August 14, Justice Minister Krasheninnikov said that he would ask the Duma
 to amnesty some 100,000 prisoners held for what he termed minor crimes (those
 convicted of nonviolent offenses). In addition, he said that he wanted to limit all fu-
 ture pretrial detentions to less than 1 year. However, that step also would require
 approval by the State Duma. On September 28, the Ministry of Justice announced
 that it planned to grant amnesty to about 115,000 prisoners by the end of the year
 to ease chronic overcrowding in jails. The proposed amnesty was expected to cover
 at least some still awaiting trial in detention centers. The 1998 government proposal
 
 
 1445
 
 for amnesty is still in the review process, and the Government has not yet submit-
 ted it to the Duma. No one has been released yet. While noting that the measure
 would alleviate some of the problems of overcrowding, human rights NGO's argued
 that the amnesties would not resolve fully the ongoing prison overcrowding crisis.
 Human Rights Watch pointed out that without a change in the policy of the Procu-
 rator's Office of placing persons in detention and arresting them for minor crimes,
 in view of the time needed to obtain a court hearing there would not be any major
 improvement in the prison situation.
 Moscow-based human rights groups make frequent visits to the prisons in the
 Moscow area, but they have neither the resources nor a national network to inves-
 tigate conditions in all 89 regions.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Arbitrary arrest and detention remain
 problems. The Constitution provides that the arrest, taking into custody, and deten-
 tion of persons suspected of crimes are permitted only by judicial decision. However,
 the Constitution's transitional provisions specify that these provisions do not take
 effect until a new criminal procedure code is adopted. The new Criminal Code that
 was passed in 1995 went into effect at the beginning of 1997. Under the new code
 the maximum sentence for all offenses increased from 15 years to 30 years. Crimi-
 nal proceedings continue to be governed both by the new 1997 Criminal Cede and
 the Soviet Criminal Procedure Code, adopted in 1960.
 There are credible reports from throughout the country that police detain persons
 without observing mandated procedures and fail to issue proper protocols of arrest
 or for confiscated property. Credible reports exist of physical abuse being used by
 officers in these arrests. Moscow city law enforcement authorities frequently detain
 persons unlawfully for alleged violations of registration requirements (see Section
 2.d.).
 In the absence of measures to implement the procedural safeguards contained in
 the Constitution, suspects often were subjected to uneven and arbitrary treatment
 by officials acting under the Criminal Procedure Code and "temporary" presidential
 decrees. The code gives procurators authority to issue an order of detention without
 a judge's authorization and, if police believe that the suspect has committed a crime
 or is a danger to others, to detain him for up to 48 hours without a warrant.
 The Constitution and the Criminal Procedure Code provide that detainees are en-
 titled to have a lawyer present from the time of detention, during questioning fol-
 lowing detention, and throughout investigation up to and including the formal filing
 of charges. This procedure generally is followed in practice. The Moscow Center for
 the Promotion of Criminal Justice Reform reports that detainees are given the op-
 portunity to have access to a lawyer in accordance with their rights. However, the
 Center notes that the high cost of legal fees and the poor quality of court-appointed
 public defenders for those lacking the funds to engage counsel effectively deny the
 majority of suspects competent legal representation. As a result, many prisoners do
 not exercise this right because they believe it useless.
 A June 1997 presidential decree allows police to detain persons suspected of ties
 to organized crime for up to 10 days without bringing charges. The law overturned
 two previous presidential decrees (of 1994 and 1996) that allowed detention for up
 to 30 days. The 1997 decree also instructed the Government to submit to the Duma
 a draft federal law on preventing vagrancy and social rehabilitation of the homeless.
 However, there is not yet any draft law under consideration according to Duma and
 NGO sources for preventing vagrancy and social rehabilitation of the homeless.
 The Criminal Procedure Code specifies that only 2 months should elapse between
 the date an investigation is initiated and the date the file is transferred to the proc-
 urator so that the procurator can file formal charges against the suspect in court.
 However, investigations seldom are completed that quickly. Some suspects spend 18
 months or longer in detention under harsh conditions in a SIZO while the criminal
 investigation is conducted. The MCPCJR reports terms of pretrial detention extend-
 ing up to 3 years, with the average ranging from 7 to 10 months. However, in some
 extreme cases the MCPCJR reports detention periods of 5 years due to financial
 constraints and poor investigative and court work.
 The Code provides that the regional procurator may extend the period of criminal
 investigation to 6 months in "complex' cases. If more time is required in "excep-
 tional" cases, the Procurator General personally can extend the period up to 18
 months. Extensions of the investigation period often are issued without explanation
 to the detainee. Until the investigation is completed, the suspect is under the juris-
 diction of the Procurator's office and the Ministry of Internal Affairs. There is no
 procedure for a suspect to plead guilty during the investigative period, although if
 a suspect informs the investigator that he is guilty, the period of the investigation
 usually is shorter than if he maintains his innocence. Suspects frequently fear exer-
 
 
 1446
 cising their rights to request judicial review of their detention out of fear of anger-
 ing the investigating officer.
 There also were credible reports that persons have been detained far in excess of
 the permissible periods for administrative offenses, in some cases so that police offi-
 cials could extort money from friends or relatives. The situation has improved some-
 what since the issuance of a presidential decree in the summer of 1997 that an-
 nulled a previous decree that had allowed for 30-day detentions. However, the prac-
 tice of detaining individuals in excess of permissible periods is still not uncommon,
 and this often is done for the purpose of extorting money.
 The use of bail is rare, even if suspects are not flight risks or have not been
 charged with violent crimes. This aggravates overcrowding in pretrial detention and,
 due to delays in bringing cases to trial, results in many suspects remaining in pre-
 trial detention for longer than the maximum penalty they might face if convicted.
 Delays also plague the trial stage. Although the Criminal.Procedure Code requires
 court proceedings to begin no more than 14 days after the judge issues an order des-
 ignating the location of the trial, congestion in the court system frequently leads to
 long postponements. Some suspects actually serve the equivalent of their sentences
 while awaiting trial. Judges often do not dismiss cases involving improper investiga-
 tions or indictments, particularly if the procurator's case haspolitical support or the
 case is controversial. Instead, such cases often are returned to the procurator for
 further investigation.
 Some authorities have taken advantage of the system's procedural weaknesses to
 arrest persons on false pretexts for expressing views critical of the Government.
 Human rights advocates in the regions have been charged with libel, contempt of
 court, or interference in judicial procedures in cases with distinct political overtones.
 Others have been charged with other offenses and held either in excess of normal
 periods of detention or for offenses that do not require detention at all (see Section
 4).
 The case of Aleksandr Nikitin, an environmentalist and retired Soviet Navy cap-
 tain, continued throughout the year and continued to be characterized by serious
 violations of due process. There were credible charges that his detention was politi-
 cally motivated. The FSB detained Nikitin in St. Petersburg in February 1996 on
 suspicion of espionage and revealing state secrets, crimes punishable by up to 20
 years in prison. Nikitin had been working with Bellona, a Norwegian environmental
 NGO, on the publication of a report detailing the hazards pozed by the nuclear
 waste generated by the Northern Fleet, in which Nikitin had served. In December
 1996, Nikitin was released from pretrial detention but was restricted to the St. Pe-
 tersburg city limits.
 Indictments cite classified decrees that were made available to Nikitin's defense
 team only at the beginning of the trial, which finally commenced in October, nearly
 3 years after Nikitin's detention. On October 29, the judge in the case returned the
 indictment to the prosecution for further investigation, as there was insufficient evi-
 dence to support the charges. Although Nikitin's defense claimed a qualified victory,
 this was hardly an acquittal. The FSB was given another opportunity to solidify its
 case against Nikitin, who at year's end remained restricted to the city of St. Peters-
 burg.
 Both sides have appealed the judge's decision to the Supreme Court. Bellona be-
 lieves the judge took the path of least resistance: The judge avoided reprisals which
 could have followed an acquittal, while at the same time did not convict Nikitin,
 avoiding international criticism.
 The defense team demonstrated that all the information used in Nikitin's report
 is freely available in open sources, a claim verified in an independent report pub-
 lished by three retired Soviet Navy admirals. The defense also challenged the FSB's
 use of classified decrees as the basis for indictment on the grounds that the con-
 stitution specifies that "any normative legal enactments affecting human and civil
 rights, freedoms, and duties cannot be applied unless they have been officially pub-
 lished for universal information." Finally the defense team cited constitutional pro-
 visions giving each person "the right to a decent environment (and) reliable informa-
 tion about the state of the environment" as a reason that none of the information
 legally can be classified (see Section 4).
 Grigoriy Pasko, an active-duty officer in the Pacific Fleet, was arrested on sus-
 picion of treason in November 1997. His attorney questioned the legality of the ar-
 rest and claimed that Pasko is being persecuted for his environmental activism. He
 still is being held while investigation continues (see Section 2.a.).
 No progress was reported in 1998 in two other longstanding cases involving
 human rights activists. Yuriy Shadrin of Omsk was arrested in November 1996 on
 several unrelated charges involving death threats, a car accident, and contempt of
 court. Whl   e was released on December 31, 1996, charges have not been dropped
 
 
 1447
 and he remains subject to arrest and trial. The same is true for Yuriy Padalko of
 Irkutsk, who originally was arrested in 1992 on what Human Rights Watch called
 "presumably trumped-up charges of libel, hooliganism, and other offenses."
 Larisa Kharchenko, a housing advisor to former St. Petersburg mayor Anatoliy
 Sobchak, was detained in July 1997 in connection with a corruption case involving
 the former mayor. She was held incommunicado for 17 days and then charged with
 bribery and abuse of office. Her lawyer contended that the authorities do not have
 a case against her and that she was kept in jail and deprived of medical care in
 order to force her to testify against Sobchak. She was released in mid-December
 1997, but must stay in St. Petersburg pending further developments in her case.
 After her release, doctors determined that, along with other medical complications,
 she had suffered a stroke while in jail. As a result, she was classified legally as dis-
 abled. As of September, no trial date had been set for Kharchenko.
 The Government does not use forced exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary; the development of an independent judiciary continued, and there are signs
 of limited independence. However, the judiciary does not yet act as an effective
 counterweight to other branches of government. A 1996 law separated the courts of
 general jurisdiction from the Ministry of Justice and placed them under a separate
 agency, the Judicial Department, which is under the supervision of the Supreme
 Court. In the 1998 budget, this department is funded independently of the Ministry.
 Judges remain subject to some influence from the executive, military, and security
 forces, especially in high profile or political cases. The judiciary also lacks resources
 and is subject to corruption.
 The judiciary is divided into three branches: The courts of general jurisdiction,
 subordinated to the Supreme Court; the arbitration court system, under the High
 Court of Arbitration; and the Constitutional Court. Civil and criminal cases are
 tried in courts of primary jurisdiction, courts of appeals, and higher courts. The gen-
 eral court system's lowest level is the municipal court, which serves each city or
 rural district and hears over 90 percent of all civil and criminal cases. The next
 level of courts of general jurisdiction are the regional courts. At the highest level
 is the Supreme Court. Decisions of the lower trial courts can be appealed only to
 the immediately superior court unless a constitutional issue is involved. The arbitra-
 tion court system consists of both business courts as well as economic courts subor-
 dinated to the High Court of Arbitration.
 Low salaries and scant prestige make it difficult to attract talented new judges
 and contribute to the vulnerability of existing judges to bribery and corruption. In
 July 1997, President Yeltsin ordered a 65 percent pay raise (from an average salary
 of $333 (RR 2 million) to $533 (RR 3.2 million per month) in an attempt to attract
 new judges to fill approximately 1,500 vacancies in the judiciary.
 However, in its 1998 budget the Government called for cutting spending on the
 court system by 26 percent. This was despite appeals by the Federation Council
 (upper house of Parliament) and leading judges, as well as presidential orders
 issued in July, which had instructed the Government to make the "normal function-
 ing of the judicial system" a priority. In response, the Supreme Court launched a
 legal challenge to the budget cuts with the Constitutional Court. On July 17, the
 Constitutional Court struck down the article in the 1998 budget that authorized the
 Government to reduce spending on the judicial system. The Court cited Article 124
 of the Constitution, which stipulates that the federal budget must provide for the
 "complete and independent" functioning of the judiciary.
 Cuts in the judicial system's budget raised concerns over the permanence of gains
 made in recent years in judicial independence. For example, according to the Con-
 stitution courts should be financed only by the Federal Government. But because
 of federal budget cuts, district courts often seek additional funds from their local
 governments, leaving them more vulnerable to pressure from local politicians. A sur-
 vey of 250 judges, conducted by the University of Toronto, found that about half
 were receiving financial aid from local governments. Many courts now lack adequate
 funding to cover such basic expenses as electricity, telephone charges, and postage.
 Because of unpaid debts, many courts lost their telephone and electricity service.
 Without money to mail subpoenas, courts often are forced to hold trials without key
 witnesses. The Globe and Mail newspaper of Canada reported in July that some re-
 gional courts are so impoverished that they ask plaintiffs in civil cases to supply
 their own envelopes for summoning witnesses. This has led to some misunderstand-
 ings. The Globe reported that at least one plaintiff filled his envelope with cash, on
 the assumption that the court was seeking a bribe.
 Judges are subject to physical intimidation and bribery. Judges have been mur-
 dered in Moscow, Irkutsk, and Yekaterinburg. As judges generaly bear responsibil-
 ity both for reaching a verdict and handing down a sentence, they are logical targets
 
 
 1448
 for intimidation. In January then Prime.Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin signed a de-
 cree that allowed judges to apply for permission to carry firearms. Many judges re-
 portedly took advantage of the decree.
 . The Criminal Code provides for the court to appoint a lawyer if the suspect cannot
 afford one. The Society for the Guardianship of Penitentiary Institutions often is
 called upon by judges to provide legal assistance for suspects facing charges and
 trial without any representation. This society operates primarily in Moscow, al-
 though it uses its connections -throughout the country to appeal to legal profes-
 sionals to represent the indigent. However, in many cases the indigent receive little
 legal assistance, because funds are lacking to pay for trial attorneys for them and
 public defenders are poorly trained.
 Because the right to a lawyer during pretrial questioning often is not exercised
 (see Section 1.d.), many defendants recant testimony given in pretrial questioning,
 stating that they were denied access to a lawyer or that they were coerced into giv-
 ing false confessions or statements. Nevertheless, human rights monitors have docu-
 mented cases in which convictions were obtained on the basis of testimony that the
 defendant recanted in court, even in the absence of other proof of guilt.
 In the 80 regions where adversarial jury trials have not yet been introduced,
 criminal procedures are weighted heavily in favor of the procurator. The judge or
 panel of judges conducts the trial by asking questions based on a prior review of
 the evidence. Reports indicate that in practice, the constitutionally mandated pre-
 sumption of innocence often is disregarded. Judges are known to return poorly de-
 veloped cases to the prosecution for additional investigation rather than risk con-
 frontation with powerful prosecutors. This practice greatly increases the time that
 defendants spend in SIZO's (see Section 1.c.).
 Adversarial jury trials, at the option of the accused in cases where there is a risk
 of a criminal penalty of 15 years or more, were introduced in 1993 and 1994 in nine
 regions, encompassing 23 percent of the population. The Department of Judicial Re-
 form of the State Legal Administration of the President, which is charged with re-
 introducing jury trials, planned in early 1996 to expand jury trials to 12 new re-
 gions. However, as of December, the Department had failed to do so due to lack of
 funds. Such an expansion would -extend access to jury trials to approximately half
 of the population.
 The Moscow Center for the Promotion of Criminal Justice Reform reports that 336
 cases, involving 618 persons, were tried by jury in 1996. Of these, 80 resulted in
 acquittals (19 percent) and around one-quarter were returned for further investiga-
 tion. According to the Center's figures, the acquittal rate for nonjury trials is ap-
 proximately 2 percent.
 The heads of several lawyers' associations reported during the year that defense
 lawyers increasingly were the target of police harassment, including beatings and
 arrests. Professional associations at both the local and federal levels report that
 such abuses are increasing throughout the country. They charge that police are try-
 ing both to intimidate defense attorneys and to cover up their own criminal activi-
 ties.
 The Russian Lawyers' Guild cited the case of attorney Oleg Kolesnikov, who was
 beaten severely in a hallway in the Vykhino regional court in Moscow in September
 1997. Kolesnikov said that he recognized some of his attackers as policemen. The
 men then took him to police headquarters for interrogation and attempted to coerce
 him into giving testimony against his client. Kolesnikov, who went into hiding,
 charged that the police attacked him because they were assisting the losing side in
 a property case in return for a share in the apartment at issue. A criminal inves-
 tigation into the attack is being conducted by the Kuzminskiy procurator's office.
 Gassan Mirzuyev, head of the Russian Lawyers' Guild, told the Moscow Times
 newspaper in December 1997 that bar officials in Nizhnevartovskiy, Samara, and
 Sverdlovsk have lodged high-level complaints in the wake of imprisonment or abuse
 of attorneys. He said that police rebuffed the Guild representatives sent to inves-
 tigate. The newspaper also reported that Vladimir Smirnov, chairman of the
 Sverdiovsk Region Lawyers' Council, sent an open letter to colleagues in Moscow re-
 porting on increased police attacks on lawyers.
 There also were instances in which the right to due process and a fair trial were
 violated. For example, Vasiliy Chaykin, an activist with the Krasnodar Provincial
 Association for the Protection of Human Rights, was arrested in April 1997 on
 charges of sexual relations with minors and the production and sale of pornographic
 materials. Chaykin denies the charges and claims that they stem from his vocal crit-
 icism in the press of law enforcement authorities. Human Rights Watch noted that
 there was "sound reason" to believe that the charges had been fabricated "as a form
 of revenge for his public -criticism." The entire legal process against Chaykin report-
 edly has been -marred by irregularities. In 1996 Chaykin had complained to the
 
 
 1449
 Procurator General of abuse of power and embezzlement on the part of the local
 (Krasnodar district) Procurator, A. Khrebets.
 Instead of opening an investigation, the Procurator General's office reportedly for-
 warded Chaykin's letter to the local procurator, Khrebets himself. Local police
 searched Chaykin's house, then filed charges. Chaykin was denied access to a law-
 yer of his choice for a month after his arrest.
 Since his arrest, he has been held continuously in pretrial detention. Chaykin's
 trial began on September 15 following numerous serious legal procedural violations.
 At the trial, Chaykin requested medical help, but the plea was rejected by the judge.
 Chaykin suffered a heart attack several days later. The case against Chaykin rests
 on the testimony of nine young women. During the trial, five of the alleged victims
 in the case appeared in court and recanted the statements they made to investiga-
 tors, saying that they had been coerced by the investigating officer. The judge re-
 portedly did not allow the court secretary to record these charges of police intimida-
 tion. Instead, he threatened the young women with criminal action for giving false
 testimony; finally, all agreed to confirm their previous statements. Protests by the
 defense attorney about these procedures were ignored and not recorded by the court
 secretary. The trial has been postponed while Chaykin recovers.
 In April 1997 Amnesty International reported on efforts by the Government of the
 breakaway republic of Chechnya to establish a new criminal code based on the Is-
 lamic Shari'a cede. Although the code has not been enacted formally, elements of
 Shari'a law already have been cited in court decisions. According to the Carnegie
 Endowment for International Peace Moscow Office, two persons were publicly exe-
 cuted in September, and numerous other were publicly punished for murder, rape,
 and drug-related offenses (see Section La.).
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Au-
 thorities continued to infringe on citizen's privacy rights. The Constitution states
 that officials can enter a private residence only in cases prescribed by federal law
 or on the basis of a judicial decision. It permits the Government to monitor cor-
 respondence, telephone conversations, and other means of communication only with
 judicial permission. It prohibits the collection, storage, utilization, and dissemina-
 tion of information about a person's private life without his consent. Legislation to
 implement these provisions was passed as part of the country's new criminal code,
 which provides for criminal penalties. However, problems still remain, and no one
 has ever been convicted of violating those safeguards. In 1995 legislation was passed
 that gave broad authority for the FSB to utilize domestic surveillance and to con-
 duct searches of private residences, with only limited oversight by the courts and
 the procuracy. These measures remain in force. There were reports of electronic sur-
 veillance by government officials and others. Moscow police entered residences with-
 out warrants during checks for illegal residents of the city (see Section 2.d.).
 Procurator General Skuratov told a Russian newspaper in November 1997 that
 the problem of abuse by governmental agencies was aggravated because the list of
 government agencies authorized to carry out wiretaps and undercover operations
 has been expanded and now includes, for example, tax authorities. Skuratov also
 noted that while the law provides that his office must authorize wiretaps and other
 undercover operations by state agencies, it does not allow prosecutorial oversight
 once those operations have begun.
 Officers in the special services, including authorities at the highest levels of the
 MVD and FSB, have been accused of using their services' power to gather
 "kompromat" (compromising materials) on political and public figures as political in-
 surance and to remove rivals. Similarly, persons in these agencies, both active and
 retired, have been accused of working with commercial or criminal organizations for
 the same purpose.
 There are credible reports that regional branches of the FSB continue to exert
 pressure on citizens employed by Western firms and organizations, often with the
 goal of coercing them into becoming informants.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and of the press. However, while the Government generally respects these provi-
 sions, reports of government pressure on the media continue, particularly when cov-
 erage deals with corruption or criticism of the authorities. Federal, regional, and
 local governments continued to exert pressure on journalists by depriving them of
 access to information, using accreditation procedures to limit access, removing them
 from their jobs and bringing libel suits against them, and violating their legal
 rights. Oleg Panfilov of the Glasnost Defense Fund (GDF), a nongovernmental orga-
 nization which tracks violations of journalists' rights, estimates that between 250
 
 
 1450
 
 and 300 lawsuits and other legal -actions were brought by the Government against
 journalists and journalistic organizations during the year in response to unfavorable
 coverage of government policy or operations. In most of these cases, a government
 body or individual (often with links to a figure in power) accused journalists of dam-
 aging its (or his or her) "reputation and honor." In some instances, judges found for
 the journalists, but in the vast majority of such cases, the Government succeeded
 in either intimidating or punishing the journalist. Typically, judges seemed unwill-
 ing to challenge powerful federal and local officials. Stiff fines for journalists were
 a common result of these proceedings; jail terms occasionally were handed down, as
 well. According to the Committee to Protect Journalists these rulings had a "chilling
 effect on investigative journalism," and such rulings reinforce the tendency toward
 self-censorship. On occasion journalists were attacked physically and even mur-
 dered, leading a number of Russian newscasters to characterize journalism as Rus-
 sia's "most dangerous profession."
 Private media continued to proliferate, and by the first half of 1998, some 20 new
 newspapers were being registered by the Russian press committee each week. Mag-
 azines totaled about 2,000. The major print media organizations represent a broad
 political spectrum and provide readers with a variety of information; however, be-
 cause Russian media generally are not financially self-sufficient, they are subject to
 manipulation by the Government and by companies that are their majority share-
 holders. These financial entities manipulate the media at times to further their own
 political and financial goals. Journalists and editors admit that the political and
 usiness interests of major shareholders are paramount, causing journalists to prac-
 tice self-censorship. Prominent human rights activist Sergey Kovalev has stated
 that, in these circumstances, "the Russian media are free but not independent."
 The concentrated structure of the ownership of major media does not encourage
 editorial independence. Private companies began investing heavily in the media
 market in 1997, even -though the media generally are not yet profitable. The most
 powerful companies, such as Lukoil, Gazprom, and a number of banks, fought for
 influence in the Moscow media market and began to invest in media in the prov-
 inces.
 The resulting concentration of ownership of major Russian media organizations
 increased in 1998. The economic crisis that began in August exacerbated the prob-
 lem, weakening the financial positions of most news organizations, thereby increas-
 ing their dependence on financial sponsors and, in some cases, the federal and re-
 gional governments. Many businesses began to struggle, and as a result, advertising
 revenues decreased for nearly every major media organization in the country, in
 some cases as much as 50 percent in late August and September alone. Con-
 sequently, many media organizations saw their tenuous financial independence dis-
 integrate. The economy was unable to sustain such a large number of media organi-
 zations (in particular, there were far too many newspapers for the size of the mar-
 ket).
 These phenomena affected regional media organizations, those based outside Mos-
 cow, to an even greater degree. With prices up sharply, newspapers in regions in
 which the average family's monthly income was rarely over $100 (1000 rubles) be-
 came even less affordable. The National Press Institute (NPI), a nonprofit organiza-
 tion dedicated to the development and maintenance of a free press, reported in Sep-
 tember that "the landscape" for the regional media had "changed for the worse."
 Newspaper managers found that their dependence on advertising revenue could be
 less reliable than dependence on political patronage. Reliance on political patronage,
 in turn, resulted in the deterioration of journalistic objectivity. As the NPI report
 noted, private newspapers faced intense pressure from major financial groups in
 Moscow and from dominant local business interests to influence their editorial con-
 tent. There was also widespread concern that state agencies would attempt to take
 over impoverished media organizations as commercial sponsors sought to divest
 themselves of these properties.
 In a number of key respects, private media organizations across the country re-
 mained dependent on the Government as well. According to the GDF, four-fifths of
 all print media organizations continued to rely on state-controlled concerns for
 paper, printing, and distribution; these companies lacked their own equipment.
 Moreover, the cost of printing at state-controlled printing presses rose from 15 to
 30 percent in most locations with the onset of the financial crisis. The GDF collected
 considerable evidence that throughout the year, the Government continued to ma-
 nipulate these prices from time to time in an effort to apply pressure on private
 media rivals; the GDF notes that this practice was more common outside the Mos-
 cow area than in the capital itself. -
 Independent and semiindependent television stations continued to develop, and
 the number of small private radio stations, mostly in the large cities, continued to
 
 
 1451
 increase. However, television companies faced government economic pressure simi-
 lar to that experienced by the print media. Many stations were forced to rely on
 the State (in particular, regional committees for the management of state property)
 for access to airwaves and office space.
 Both private print and broadcast media, like other enterprises, were vulnerable
 to unpredictable changes in the policy and practice of tax collection. (Tax avoidance
 is extremely widespread, both among commercial enterprises and individuals.) In
 August, federal tax authorities sought to shut down Novaya Gazeta, a Russian daily
 known for its relative independence and aggressive reporting on corruption at high
 levels, on the pretext of alleged improprieties in the organization's internal account-
 ing. Novaya Gazeta continued to publish.
 In some instances, the private media faced more direct challenges from the Gov-
 ernment. The State owns and controls some major media organizations, such as the
 national television station RTR, the radio stations Mayak and Radio Rossii, the
 newspapers Rossiyskaya Gazeta and Parlamentskaya Gazeta, and the news agen-
 cies ITAR-TASS and RIA-Novosti. At the regional and local levels, governments op-
 erated a much higher percentage of the media than in Moscow; in many cities and
 towns across the country, government-run media organizations were the only media
 outlet, according to the GDF. Thus, in an increasing number of media markets, citi-
 zens received information only from government-owned sources.
 In May the Government took steps to strengthen its control over the state
 media-and to a certain extent, to increase its leverage over other, private broadcast
 organizations-by consolidating its central and local television and radio companies
 into an enlarged and potentially more powerful holding company, the All-Russia
 Television and Radio Company (known by its Russian acronym, VGTRK). The
 VGTRK began to manage the sites that transmit the broadcasts of private television
 channels. The head of the VGTRK is appointed by and answers to the President
 On more than one occasion, senior government officials, including in one case
 President Yeltsin, voiced "expectations" or "suggestions" to media representatives
 and government officials that clearly were intended to change the way the media
 operated.
 Local governments, also, applied pressure on media based within their jurisdic-
 tions. Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty noted in a 1998 report on the Russian media
 that the mayor of Moscow, Yuriy Luzbkov, could exert pressure on distribution com-
 panies, on paper suppliers, or on the corporate parents of "any media enterprise
 deemed to be objectionable," and that Luzhkov had used his power "to ensure a
 largely compliant press in his hometown."
 There were many instances in which authorities disregarded and challenged the
 right of journalists to investigate and publish stories. In late January, President
 Yeltsin signed a decree "on the List of Information that Constitutes a State Secret,"
 widening the scope of privileged information that legally could be withheld from the
 public. Information pertaining to the development, production, storage, and disposal
 of nuclear ammunition, for example, was included explicity in the language of the
 decree, with the result that it has now become much more difficult-in fact illegal-
 for citizens residing near disposal sites to publicize through the media the increased
 health risks and environmental degradation. According to this decree, information
 on the preparation and conclusion of international treaties, as well as information
 in certain economic categories, falls within the domain of state secrets.
 The controversy about military journalist Grigory Pasko continued during the
 year (see Section 1.d.). Attorneys for Pasko, an active duty officer in the Russian
 Pacific Fleet, claimed he is being persecuted for his environmental activism. Pasko
 was arrested in November 1997 on charges of revealing state secrets. He had been
 working on a freelance basis with Japanese television network NHK and Japanese
 newspaper Asahi Shinbun to expose environmental dangers posed by the activities
 of the Russian Pacific Fleet, including the dumping of liquid radioactive nuclear
 wastes from nuclear submarines in the Sea of Japan. Pasko has remained in deten-
 tion since his arrest, spending much of that time in solitary confinement. He faces
 a maximum of 18 years in prison if convicted.
 In April Russian poet and journalist Alina Vitukhnovskaya faced trial for alleg-
 edly selling $40 (400 rubles) worth of drugs (see Section 1.c.). At the time of her
 arrest, in October 1994, she was researching newspaper articles on drug use by the
 children of Moscow's political and business elite. In January she was sent to a psy-
 chiatric institute for tests of her sanity. Two months later, she was released when
 the tests found her normal. Her lawyers contended that Vitukhnovskaya was de-
 prived of food and sleep at various points during the course of the trial; she endured
 what these attorneys described as "torture" at the hands of the legal authorities.
 Both her attorneys and the international PEN group charged that Vitukhnovskaya
 was being harassed for her investigative reporting.
 
 
 1452
 In mid-July, the Constitutional Court rejected an appeal by well-known journalist
 Irina Chernova against sections of federal law on operational-investigative activi-
 ties. As a correspondent for Komsomolskaya Pravda in 1994 and 1995, Chernova
 published several articles criticizing the Volgograd police. She subsequently was fol-
 lowed and detained in 1995 without being told the grounds on which she was being
 investigated; reportedly, police officers also tried to blackmail her by threatening to
 release pictures and videotapes of her engaged in sexual acts. The Constitutional
 Court found that the disputed articles in the law either were not relevant to
 Chernova's case or did not violate her rights.
 Journalists publishing critical information about local governments and influen-
 tial businesses, as well as investigative journalists writing about crime and other
 sensitive issues, were Subjected to threats, beatings, and even murder.
 According to the CPJ, murders and beatings of journalists were "routine" in Rus-
 sia, and in particular, journalists who pursued investigative stories on corruption
 and organized crime found themselves at greatest risk. Police seldom found the per-
 petrators of crimes against journalists. The GDF's midyear report indicated that in
 the first half of the year, it recorded 602 actions against, or with negative ramifica-
 tions for, journalists, the majority of which were related to their work as journalists
 (this figure included numerous legal actions and decisions with a bearing on the
 rights of journalists.) Sixteen killings of journalists, proved or presumed to be di-
 rectly related to the journalistic work of the victims, and 10 other bodily assaults
 on the heads of news and media organizations were reported by the press and media
 NGO's.
 On March 16, journalists Timur Kukuyev and Yuriy Safronov, who were working
 for the national ORT television station, were harassed and beaten by a group of men
 dressed in paramilitary uniforms as they tried to film at the Dagestani-Chechen
 border. The assailants destroyed the crew's camera and confiscated their video foot-
 age. Dagestani border guards who were stationed nearby reportedly failed to inter-
 vene. Later that evening, unidentified men severely beat Kukuyev, warning him
 against filming "on foreign territory" in the future; on March 9, the ORT had broad-
 cast a story that showed paramilitary formations on Dagestani territory near the
 Chechen border. The attack on Kukuyev, which resulted in his hospitalization for
 broken ribs, a concussion, and a badly disfigured face, represented the tenth such
 attack on journalists in Dagestan in the last 2 years.
 In April, Aleksey Nevinitsyn, the editor in ci  of the Zolotoye Koltso newspaper
 in Yaroslavl, was beaten badly. Prior to the beating, "zolotoye koltso" had published
 a series of articles that documented corruptionin therans of the local administra-
 tion; specifically, a top municipal official in the pharmaceutical administration was
 purchasing medical supplies for the city from a company owned by the official's son.
 As a result of the articles, the mayor of Yaroslavl fired the senior official and a
 number of lawsuits were brought against Zolotoye Koltso, though municipal judges
 found in favor of the newspaper. Nevinitsyn-and, privately, other witnesses-stat-
 ed that the man who brutally beat him was the son of the fired official; however,
 the witnesses were reluctant to come forward. As a result, no formal investigation
 of the beating was initiated and no one was charged with the crime.
 On May 27, police raided the offices of Radio Titan, the only independent radio
 station in the Republic of Bashkortostan, and arrested its manager and news direc-
 tor, Altaf Galeyev. The police also rounded up and beat staff members and support-
 ers. The police assault on Radio Titan came in the wake of the station's airing of
 interviews with three opposition candidates for president of the republic who had
 been banned from participating in the June 14 elections. Police also seized the sta-
 tion's equipment and detained the entire staff before releasing them the next day.
 Galeyev still is being held for "hooliganism" and "illegal use of firearms" for firing
 several shots in the air with a handgun when police stormed the radio's offices. Two
 days earlier, Radio Titan had quoted several Moscow-based newspapers that alleged
 corruption on the part of Bashkir President Murtaza Rakhimov. Radio Titan staff
 members maintained that as a result of these and other similar broadcasts, local
 authorities had made several attempts to silence the station by shutting off the elec-
 tricity, telephone lines, and water supply.
 In June Larisa Yudina, editor of the Sovetskaya Kalmykia Segodnya opposition
 newspaper, was killed, apparently in retaliation for investigating reports of corrupt
 business practices by regional officials (see Section l.a.). She disappeared on June
 7. On that day she had been planning to meet a source who had promised to give
 her evidence of financial improprieties by local firms involved in an effort by
 Kalmyk president Kirsan Ilyumihinov to set up an offshore economic zone in the
 republic. On June 8, she was found dead with multiple stab wounds and a fractured
 skull. For years Yudina had-been harassed and threatened because of her exposes
 of local corruption and opposition to the hard-line rule of president Ilyumzhinov. Be-
 
 
 1453
 fore her death, Yudina's application for press credentials had been rejected; she had
 been fired from her position; and her automobile had been confiscated. For several
 years, Yudina had been forced to print her newspaper in a neighboring oblast after
 president Ilyumzhinov allegedly prohibited local printing presses from publishing it.
 The investigation continues. The Russian procurator arrested four individuals in
 connection with the murder. Two of the suspects had close ties to President
 llyumzhinov. One of those arrested was Ilywnzhinov's personal representative in
 Volgograd. Officials in the republic denied any involvement in the murder. Yudina's
 death triggered a widespread reaction in Russian and international media and
 human rights circles, andit was perhaps the most widely publicized case in a year
 replete with assaults on journalists.
 On August 21, Anatoliy Levin-Utkin deputy editor of the St. Petersburg weekly,
 Yuridichesky Peterburg Segodnya, was beaten to death in apparent reprisal for his
 work as a journalist. Levin-Uttn also was robbed of his money and  *s briefcase,
 in which he was carrying materials that he had gathered for the next installment
 of a series of investigative articles on rivalries between major local financial and po-
 litical figures. The local procurator's office investigated the murder, but by the end
 of September, there were no arrests. Many observers believe that the killing was
 directly related to the investigative work Levin-Utkin was undertaking; the customs
 service and the secret services were subjects of his research.
 Journalists maintained and strengthened associations to defend their rights and
 monitor governmental abuse.
 Murmansk human rights activist Oleg Pazyura was arrested in May 1997. He was
 charged with libel, contempt of court, and threatening public officials. At his trial
 in January, Pazyura was found guilty, but the judge immediately granted him am-
 nesty (see Section 4).          a
 In 1997 the Editor in Chief and a correspondent of the Irkutsk paper, Zemlya
 Novyy Poryadok, wereae acs o acce a bribe of $20,000. These individuals
 were subsequently released on grounds of insufficient evidence. Reportedly new in-
 criminating evidence emerged during the year, and the two are once again under
 the threat of arrest. Some observers of the case stated that the charges represented
 an attempt by local authorities to trump up charges in order to suppress the
 ultranationalist activities of the newspaper for which the two journalists worked.
 The matter remained unresolved at year's end.
 Communist members of the Duma attempted to deflect public outcry over their
 anti-Semitic statements by blaming the broad condemnation that they received on
 a smear campaign by the media (see Section 5). At a November 5 joint press con-
 ference at the Duma with Communist Party leader Gennadiy Zyuganov, the head
 of the Moscow Municipal Committee of the Communist Party,  eran  Kunayev,
 publicly called for a campaign against Moscow-based television journalists whome
 he accused of "active and conscious complicity with the present regime and criminal
 acivities." He declared that he would seek the resignation of a number of leading
 television journalists.
 In 1997 Duma Deputy Vladiir Zhirinovskiy, leader of the Liberal Democratic
 Party of Russia (LDPR) faction, and his bodyguards physically attacked Moscow tel-
 evision journalist Yulia Olshanskaya and Valeriy Ivanov, a cameraman from the
 2X2 television channel. As of the end of 1997, the case against Zhirinovstpy's body-
 guards was still pending. During the year, the case was dropped; no one was pros-
 ecuted for the beatings.
 Violations of journalists' rights in Chechnya, rampant in 1997, decreased mark-
 edly during the year, according to the Glasnost Defense Fund. Nonetheless a num-
 ber of serious abuses were reported. For example, the Maskhadov Government took
 actions against opposition television stations. In May acting prime minister Shamil
 Basayev ordered the confiscation of transmitter equipment used by opposition leader
 Salman Raduyev. The Chechen authorities tried to restrict reporting critical of
 President Maskhadov's administration.
 On July 22, authorities in the republic of Chechnya declared a "state of emer-
 gency" and banned the activities of all non-Chechen state television and radio com-
 panies and newspapers and magazines. During the state of emergency, only state-
 owned television channels were permitted to broadcast programs. The authorities
 announcedg th they would strip the broadcast rights and confiscate the equipment
 of any media organization that attempted to violate this order. A Chechen military
 official explained that the decision to close down the independent media was taken
 because these media spread "unreliable and often provocative and biased informa-
 tion," which destabilized the social and political situation in the republic.
 The Government respects academic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.--The Constitution provides citi-
 zens with the right to assemble freely, and the Government respect  s right in
 
 
 1454
 practice. Organizations must obtain permits in order to hold public meetings. The
 application process must begin between 5 and 10 days before the scheduled event.
 Citizens freely and actively protested government decisions and actions. Permits to
 demonstrate were granted readily to both opponents and supporters of the Govern-
 ment.
 I In April students in Yekatirinburg had a permit to demonstrate against cuts in
 student subsidies, yet when the crowd left the designated protest site and marched
 to the oblast administration building it was met by special OMON militia units who
 beat demonstrators with clubs. Fourteen students required minor medical treat-
 ment, and a militia member was injured seriously (see Section 1.c.).
 The Constitution provides for freedom of association, and the Government re-
 spects this right in practice. Public organizations must register their bylaws and the
 names of their leaders with the Ministry of Justice. In 1995 a registration law was
 passed specifying that organizations had until 1999 to reregister.
 In addition to submitting their bylaws and the names of their leaders, political
 parties must present 5,000 signatures and pay a fee to register. The Constitution
 and the Law on Elections ban the participation in elections of organizations that
 profess anticonstitutional themes or activities.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government generally respects this right in  practice; however, although the Con-
 stitution also provides for the equality of all religions before the law and the separa-
 tion of church and state, in practice the Government does not always respect the
 provision for equality of religions.
 In December 1990, the Soviet Government adopted a law on religious freedom de-
 signed to put all religions on an equal basis. (After the breakup of the Soviet Union,
 this law became part of the Russian Federation's legal code.) The law forbade gov-
 ernment interference in religion and established simple registration procedures for
 religious groups. Re *stration of religious groups was not required, and some evan-
 gelical and other religious groups have continued to operate while choosing not to
 register officially with the Government. However, by registering groups obtained a
 number of advantages, for example, the ability to establish official places of worship
 or benefit from tax exemptions.
 During the early and mid-1990's, the sharp increase in the activities of well-fi-
 nanced foreign missionaries disturbed many sectors of society, particularly national-
 ists and many members of the Russian Orthodox Church, some of whom advocated
 limiting the activities of what they termed "nontraditional" religious groups and
 what were sometimes called "dangerous" or "totalitarian" sects.
 In October 1997, the Government enacted a new, restrictive, and potentially dis-
 criminatory law on religion, which raised questions about the Governmens commit-
 ment to international agreements honoring freedom of religion. Passage of the law
 prompted concern in the international community, because for the first time since
 the break-up of the Soviet Union, the Government had adopted legislation that
 could abridge fundamental human rights. This law replaced the progressive 1990 re-
 ligion law that had helped facilitate a revival of religious activity.
 The new law ostensibly targeted so-called "totalitarian sects" or dangerous reli-
 gious cults. However, the intent of some of the law's sponsors appears to have been
 to discriminate against members of foreign and less well-established religions by
 making it difficult for them to manifest their beliefs through organized religious in-
 stitutions.
 The law is very complex, with many ambiguous and contradictory provisions. On
 its face the law creates various categories of religious communities with differing
 levels of legal status and privileges. The law draws distinctions between religious
 "groups" and "organizations," two mutually exclusive registration categories, and
 creates two categories of organizations: "regional" and "centralized." A religious
 "group" is a congregation of worshipers that does not have the legal status of a ju-
 ridical person, meaning that it cannot open a bank account, own property, issue in-
 vitations to foreign guests, or publish literature, among other things. ,roups are
 permitted to rent public spaces and hold services. Moreover, the law does not pur-
 port to abridge the rights of individual members of "groups." For example, a mem-
 ber of a religious group could buy property for the group's use, invite personal
 guests to engage in religious instruction, and import religious material. However,
 in this case, the group would not enjoy tax benefits and other privileges extended
 to religious organizations, such as proselytizing.
 The most controversial provisions are those that limit the rights, activities, and
 status of religious groups existing in Russia for less than 15 years. Groups that
 have been in existence for 15 years have the right to obtain the status of "local reli-
 gious organizations." Similarly, congregations that existed for 15 years when the
 new law was enacted also are eligible for registration as an organization. Organiza-
 
 
 1455
 tions, both local and centralized, are juridical persons, enjoy tax exemptions, and
 are permitted to proselytize, establish religious schools, host foreign religious work-
 ers, and publish religious literature.
 Under the the 1997 religion law, representative offices of foreign religious organi-
 zations are required to register with state authorities, and they are barred from con-
 ducting liturgical and other religious activity unless they have acquired the status
 of a group or organization. Although the law officially requires all foreign religious
 organizations to register, in practice foreign religious representatives' offices (those
 not registered under Russian law) have opened without registering or have been ac-
 credited to a registered Russian religious organization. However, these representa-
 tive offices cannot carry out religious activities or have the status of a religious or-
 ganization.
 A "centralized religious organization" can be founded by a confession that has
 three functioning "local organizations" in different regions. A centralized organiza-
 tion apparently has the right to establish affiliated local organizations without ad-
 hering to the 15-year rule. In implementing this provision, the Government has ex-
 tended this definition to include 'a registered centralized managing center." Central-
 ized organizations also have been accorded the right to organize affiliated local orga-
 nizations, which themselves do not comply with the 15-year rule.
 Critics of the law have claimed that it violates the Constitution's provision of
 equality before the law of all confessions. In particular, many religious groups criti-
 cized the law's requirement that religious groups be in existence for 15 years before
 they can qualify for organization   status. Also, many groups feared the con-
 sequences of the law's provisions limiting the actions of foreign religious mission-
 aries. Representatives of some religions, such as the Mormon Church and some Pen-
 tecostal and Charismatic Christian groups, have said that their activities in Russia
 could be halted under the law. Critics of the law have also expressed concern that
 local authorities could abuse the new law by interpreting and implementing it more
 strictly than intended by the Federal Government.
 Between February 12 and June 3 the Government issued three sets of regulations
 governing implementation of the new law. While providing procedural guidelines for
 registration, the regulations fail to clarify many key definitional points in the law.
 International and well-funded Russian religious organizations, in particular,
 began the reregistration process soon after the publication of the regulations govern-
 ing reregistration. Russian Pentecostal groups, which have a solid and growing net-
 work of churches throughout the country, sought guidance from the Ministry of Jus-
 tice on reregistration as early as November 1997. One of the larger organizations,
 the Russian Unified Fellowship of Christians of the Evangelical Faith (which traces
 its origins back to the early 1900's) reregistered as a centralized religious organiza-
 tion by late March. It has since incorporated many smaller, newer Pentecostal
 groups within its structure. As of the end of July over 26 confessions had rereg-
 istered at the federal level, including the Apostolic Administration of Latin-rite
 Catholics, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints (Mormons), and the Sev-
 enth-Day Adventists. Some religious groups were reregistering successfully at the
 local level by year's end. The delay in reregistration is due in part to the slow pace
 at which the federal Ministry of Justice has disseminated the regulations and guide-
 lines to local authorities. It also is due to the fact that smaller, minority confessions
 sometimes fear the registration process. Many of the 89 regions' laws and decrees
 on religion contradict federal law; presumably they would have to be changed. In
 the meantime, many local religious organizations continue to try to seek means of
 affiliating themselves with centralized organizations or confessions that can meet
 the 15-year rule and provide a protective legal cover. However, some individual local
 churches, citing their theological and administrative independence, are reluctant to
 make themselves part of a larger organization. Under the new system, such reli-
 gious communities face considerable legal disadvantages.
 President Yeltsin and other high-ranking Russian officials have stated consist-
 ently that the law would be applied in a liberal, tolerant manner, thereby preserv-
 ing religious freedom and the equality of confessions. They insist that no main-
 stream religion already operating in Russia would see its activities curtailed as a
 result of the new law. Although the full effect of the law on minority confessions
 or religions considered nontraditional may not be clear until the end of 1999, the
 time before which organizations registered under the old law-are required to obtain
 new registration, no religious organization has ceased operations as a result of the
 law. However, despite the federal Government's efforts to -implement the law lib-
 erally and to provide assurances that religious freedom would be observed, restric-
 tions continued at the local level.
 The vagueness of the law and regulations, the contradictions between federal and
 local law, and varying interpretations furnish regional officials with a pretext to re-
 
 
 1456
 strict the activities of religious minorities. For example, Jehovah's Witnesses report
 that local authorities are refusing to register some local Jehovah's Witness organiza-
 tions, pending resolution of the case against the Moscow Jehovah's Witnesses, under
 Article 14 of the 1997 xeligion law. Discriminatory practices at the local level are
 attributable to the-increased decentralization of power, as well as to government in-
 action and discriminatory attitudes that are widely held in society.
 Furthermore, since 1994, 22 out of 89 regional governments have passed restric-
 tive laws and decrees intended to restrict the activities of religious groups. The Fed-
 eral Government has not sought to challenge the constitutionality of these restric-
 tions. There are reports that some local governments prevented religious groups
 from using venues, such as cinemas, suitable for large gatherings. As a result, in
 some instances denominations that do not have their own property effectively have
 been denied the opportunity to practice their faith in large groups.
 As of year's end, some local executive authorities continued to cite the new law
 or local laws to obstruct religious groups' activities or to rescind their existing local
 registrations. Reports of harassment and punishment for religious belief or activity
 continued. For example, in January and February, the Khakasiya Lutheran Church,
 the Khakasiya Christian Center and the Yaroslavl New Generation Church received
 orders from local officials to suspend production and distribution of religious videos
 and publications and religious education. Yaroslavl officials in January refused to
 register the New Generation Church, previously an unregistered underground
 church. Local officials cited the new law as the basis for their actions. Some mem-
 bers of these churches reported being fired from their jobs, beaten, and imprisoned
 for their religious affiliations. Based on a complaint from the Committee to Save
 Youth From Totalitarian Cults, a Moscow municipal procurator is seeking liquida-
 tion of the Moscow Jehovah's Witnesses organization under the 1997 religion law.
 This is the first proceeding in the judicial branch that attempted to suspend the op-
 erations of an existing religious organization at a local level.
 The Khakasiya and Yaroslavl cases form the basis of the constitutional challenge
 to the law on religion, filed with the Constitutional Court in May by the Institute
 of Law and Religion, an NGO. The petition challenges the constitutionality of the
 15-year requirement and the limitations on the rights and activities of confessions
 that do not meet that requirement. Constitutional Court officials say that the case
 is under review to determine whether the Court has jurisdiction to hear the case.
 The Constitutional Court accepted the case for review in November, but a court date
 had not been set by year's end.
 Human rights activists contend that only 15 percent of actual violations of reli-
 gious freedom are reported. They maintain that most citizens, especially those living
 in the regions, are still skeptical about the protection of religious freedom and are
 reluctant to make public complaints due to fear of retaliation. Federal authorities
 did not take sufficient action to reverse discriminatory actions taken at the local
 level, or to discipline those officials responsible.
 Property disputes are some of the most frequent complaints cited by religious
 groups. For the most part, synagogues, churches, and mosques have been returned
 to communities to be used for religious services. The Federal Government has met
 the requirements of the 1993 presidential decree on communal property restitution,
 and the decree continues to guide the ongoing process. However, jurisdiction in most
 cases is at the regional level, and there is no centralized source of information on
 these cases. Nonetheless, there continue to be reports of religious property that has
 not been returned. The Moscow Patriarchate has claimed and taken possession of
 properties owned by other branches of Orthodoxy and, in certain cases, property of
 other religions. In  some property    disputes, religious buildings have been
 "privatized," and there are long delays in finding new locations for the current occu-
 pants. Local authorities often refuse to get involved in property disputes, which they
 contend are between private organizations. Even where state or municipal authori-
 ties still have undisputed control of properties, a number of religious communities
 continue to meet significant obstacles when they request the return of religious
 buildings or when they seek to acquire land and necessary building permits for new
 religious structures.
 Some Protestant faiths have suggested that the Russian Orthodox Church influ-
 ences the Government regarding land allocated for churches of other sects. The Jew-
 ish community, which has met with some success on communal property restitution,
 faces the same obstacles as other religious communities and has concerns about the
 return of Torah scrolls.
 In its preamble (which government officials insist has no legal standing), the Reli-
 gion Law recognizes the "special contribution of Orthodoxy to the history of Russia
 and to the establishment and development of Russia's spirituality and culture." It
 accords respect to Christianity, Islam, Buddhism, Judaism, and certain other reli-
 
 
 1457
 
 glans as an inseparable part of the country's historical heritage. Russian Orthodoxy
 is considered in conservative circles as the de facto official religion of the Russian
 Federation. Many Russians firmly believe that at least nominal adherence to the
 Russian Orthodox Church is at the heart of what it means to be Russian.
 The Russian Orthodox Church was involved actively in the development of the
 new Law on Religion and has special arrangements with government agencies to
 conduct religious education. These arrangements do not appear to be available to
 other religions. The head of the Moscow Patriarchate, the Patriarch of Moscow and
 all Russia, participates in-most high-level official events and appears to have direct
 access to and influence with officials of the executive branch. The traditional view
 that Russian soil is an exclusively "Orthodox domain" leads to frequent criticism
 and intolerance of foreign religious groups that proselytize in the country. Many Or-
 thodox Church officials condemn such "sheep stealing" when practiced by other
 Christian churches. Even well-established foreign religious organizations have been
 characterized by the Orthodox leadership as "dangerous and destructive sects."
 Although Jews and Muslims continue to encounter prejudice and societal discrimi-
 nation (see Section 5), they generally have not been inhibited by the Government
 in the free practice of their religion. Other religions, including Buddhism and
 Shamanism, are practiced in specific localities where they are rooted in local tradi-
 tions.
 At two public Communist Party rallies in October, Duma Deputy and retired Gen-
 eral Albert Makashov made blatantly anti-Semitic remarks, threatening to take the
 Jews "to the next world." In an October 20 newspaper article he blamed the finan-
 cial crisis on the country's Jews. The Duma's Communists blocked a November 4
 motion to censure Makashov.
 On December 15, Viktor Ilyukhin, a Communist Party Duma member and Chair-
 man of the Duma Security Committee, accused President Yeltsin of "genocide"
 against the Russian people, "which would not have been possible if the entourage
 of Yeltsin and the country's previous governments had consisted basically of mem-
 bers of the native peoples rather than only members of the Jewish nation." In a De-
 cember 23 statement, Communist Party leader Zyuganov explained his party's posi-
 tion as "anti-Zionist," not anti-Semitic. Jewish groups believe that the Communists
 are using anti-Semitism as a political tool to build populist support.
 The President's administration, the Government, and, in particular, the Russian
 media reacted immediately to the Communist Party's expressions of anti-Semitism.
 Communist Party leaders accused the press of conducting a smear campaign and
 threatened retribution (see Section 2.a.). A December 16 presidential statement de-
 livered to the Duma declared that "any attempt to insult ethnic groups, to limit the
 rights of citizens on the basis of origin, will be stopped in accordance with the Con-
 stitution and the laws of the Russian Federation." On December 30, Yeltsin ordered
 cabinet officials responsible for law-enforcement issues to prepare a comprehensive
 federal program against political and religious extremism by March 1, 1999.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides citizens with the right to choose their place
 of residence freely. However, some regional governments continue to restrict this
 right through residential registration rules that closely resemble the Soviet-era
 "propiska" (pass) regulations. Although the rules, which came into effect at the be-
 ginning of 1996, were touted as a notification device rather than a control system,
 their application has produced many of the same results as the propiska system.
 Although citizens are free to travel within the country, the Government also im-
 poses registration requirements on domestic travel. All adults are issued internal
 passports, which they must carry while traveling and use to register with local au-
 thorities for visits of more than 3 days (in Moscow it is 24 hours). However, travel-
 ers not staying in hotels usually ignore this requirement.
 Citizens must register to live and work in a specific area within 7 days of moving
 there. Russian citizens changing residence in Russia, as well as citizens of former
 Soviet republics who decide to move to Russia, often face enormous difficulties or
 are simply not permitted to register in some cities. The UNHCR and refugee rights
 NGO's have cited Stavropol, Krasnodar, Moscow, and St. Petersburg as being the
 least open to migrants. The UNHCR reports that the cost of registration is no longer
 prohibitive. Permanent registration costs only $0.50 (5 rubles). Temporary registra-
 tion is renewable every 3 months but costs only $10 (100 rubles), according to the
 UNHCR's legal counsel.
 While federal law provides for education for all children in the Russian Federa-
 tion, regional authorities frequently deny access to schools to the children of unreg-
 istered persons, asylum seekers, and migrants because they lack residential reg-
 istration. Similarly, while the Moscow procurator's office has upheld the right of mi-
 
 
 1458
 grants to receive publicly available medical care, unregistered persons, migrants,
 and asylum seekers frequently are denied these services.
 The Government and residents of Moscow and other large cities defend registra-
 tion as necessary in order to control crime, to keep crowded urban areas from at-
 tracting even more inhabitants, and to gain revenue.
 The city of Moscow frequently is cited for violating the rights of nonresidents and
 ethnic minorities as well as the rights of those legitimately seeking asylum. Human
 rights groups complained in June that City of Moscow authorities were conducting
 a mass deportation of "undesirables" prior to the July 13 opening ceremony of the
 World Youth Games.
 Mayor Luzhkov has been quoted in the past as calling for the expulsion from Mos-
 cow of Chechens and other persons from the-Caucasus. Moscow police, parhcularly
 special duty OMON units, conduct frequent'document checks, particularly of per-
 sons who are dark-skinned and therefore appear to be from the Caucasus or else-
 where. Such checks on many occasions have involved police entering residences
 without warrants. There are many credible reports that police have fined unregis-
 tered persons in excess of legal requirements and have not provided proper docu-
 mentation of the fine.
 Mayor Luzhkov signed a resolution in 1996 ordering the deportation of all unreg-
 istered persons living in Moscow back to the place where they last were registered
 to live. City of Moscow authorities have released no figures on the number of indi-
 viduals who have "voluntarily" departed from Moscow but readily admit that some
 20,000 to 25,000 annually are deported against their will. This procedure consists
 of being taken to special shelters, checked for criminal records, then escorted 100-
 150 kilometers out of town. The authorities complain that these deportations are
 only temporary measures because deportees steadily find their way back to Moscow.
 The resolution was still in effect during the year, and the practice, reportedly often
 aimed at extorting money, continued.
 On February 2, the Constitutional Court again addressed the issue, declaring un-
 constitutional the most restrictive aspects of the propiska system. It ruled that a
 city may only, "certify the act of the free exression of the will of a citizen" to live
 there. The city could not "grant permission' or limit where people choose to live,
 nor could it dictate how long a person could live in a -particular place. However,
 Moscow Mayor Luzhkov stated in a March 11 television interview that he was refus-
 ing to implement the Court's decision. He announced that he had instructed the
 city's police to continue to enforce the old registration regulations. Luzhkov's actions
 were clearly illegal, as the Constitution states that the Constitutional Court's rul-
 ings are final and mandatory for all state officials. On July 20, the Supreme Court
 made a ruling repealing both temporary and permanent residence permits. Never-
 theless, City of Moscow authorities have made clear their intention to oppose the
 ruling and, by the end of the year, seemed to have persuaded the Federal Govern-
 ment that Moscow merits an exception to such decrees. The federal authorities have
 demonstrated little enthusiasm for enforcing the court rulings. However, the Mos-
 cow City regulations have had little if any impact on the numbers of such persons
 in Moscow.
 The Constitution provides all citizens with the right to emigrate. The Government
 imposes nominal emigration taxes, fees, and duties. On average it takes 3 months
 to process a passport application, although it can take much longer if documentation
 is needed from elsewhere in the former Soviet Union.
 Some liberal principles regarding emigration procedures were codified formally in
 the August 1996 law Concerning Exit from and Entry into the Russian Federation.
 This law abolished the old Soviet requirement that, in order to emigrate, citizens
 must receive a stamp permitting "permanent residence abroad" ("PMZH)--essen-
 tially a propiska for those living outside Russia. The law required the Ministry of
 Internal Affairs, through its Office of Visas and Registration (OVIR), to establish
 regulations for eliminating this practice within 6 months of the passage of the law.
 As of March, the law went into effect and regulations established that exit permis-
 sion would not be required. However, despite the existence of the law, border guards
 continued to refuse selectively emigration to those who had not received the stamp.
 Another feature of the law is the codification of the legal grounds for denying for-
 eign travel documents to citizens who had access to state secrets. Under the new
 law, access to such classified material can occur only with the consent of the citizen,
 established in the form of a written contract that states that the signatory under-
 stands that he has been given access to state secrets and that his ability to travel
 abroad may be restricted. The law envisions a maximum period of delay under nor-
 mal circumstances of 5 years, and it grants the interagency Commission on Secrecy
 the right to add an additional 5:year term to the period of delay if the Commission
 finds that a person had access to particularly sensitive materials. This latter provi-
 
 
 1459
 sion has raised serious concerns among human rights advocates concerned about ar-
 bitrary and excessive powers on the part of the Government to restrict foreign trav-
 el. However, there were no reports that the provision has been restrictive in prac-
 tice.
 If a citizen had access to classified material, police and FSB clearances are nec-
 essary to receive an external passport. Persons denied travel documents on secrecy
 grounds can appeal the decision to an interagency commission chaired by the First
 Deputy Foreign Minister (until his promotion in September to Foreign Minister, this
 was Igor Ivanov-hence the commission commonly is referred to as "the Ivanov
 Commission"). The- Ivanov Commission cannot rule on whether the material should
 or should not be classified, but it can rule on the legality of travel restrictions im-
 posed and on whether or not the traveler actually had access to materials requiring
 a travel restriction. Since it was established in 1994, the Ivanov Commission has
 granted travel permission to a proximately 90 percent of appellants.
 Other grounds for denial of the right to travel abroad are military conscription
 or assignment to civilian alternative service (although in fact the Duma has failed
 to pass legislation implementing the constitutionally provided right to civilian alter-
 native service), being under investigation for or serving a sentence for a crime, eva-
 sion of a court-ordered obligation, or providing false information on a passport appli-
 cation. The requirement that citizens satisfy obligations to immediate relatives, such
 as material support for parents, has been eliminated except for court-ordered obliga-
 tions, such as alimony payments.
 Emigrants who have resettled permanently abroad have been able to visit or repa-
 triate without hindrance. However, visiting emigrants who departed without first
 obtaining a 'PMZH" stamp have been stopped at the border and prevented from de-
 parting Russia (though they may enter without difficulty), as they could present nei-
 ther a nonimmigrant visa to another country nor evidence of permission to reside
 legally abroad.
 The Supreme Court in August overturned two Soviet-era regulations that limited
 the movement of foreigners within the country. The Court stated that foreigners no
 longer have to notify police before traveling to another part of the country. In addi-
 tion, the Court ruled that organizations and private citizens no longer have to report
 the visits of traveling foreigners. However, the Court left standing the threat of de-
 portations for foreigners who violate registration regulations. Starting in October,
 the Foreign Ministry no longer required that Russian visas list the cities that for-
 einers are allowed to visit. President Yeltsin had signed a decree in 1997 that per-
 mitted foreigners to move freely around the country regardless of which cities were
 listed on their visas. However, a few local officials continued to enforce the visa limi-
 tation, sometimes denying entrance to foreigners-including missionaries--they con-
 sidered undesirable. The Federal Government at times intervenes in cases of local
 noncompliance but only on a case-by-case basis.
 In July 1997, President Yeltsin signed the federal law, Concerning Making
 Changes and Additions to the Law of the Russian Federation Concerning Refugees.
 This law offers substantially fewer benefits to refugees than the original 1993 law
 it replaced. The earlier law's fairly generous commitments of resettlement support
 for refugees had been cited by some observers as discouraging the Federal Migration
 Service (FMS), which has few resources to meet this obligation, from adjudicating
 the cases of asylum seekers. With the passage of the new law, the FMS had been
 expected to expedite its procedures for adjudicating asylum claims. However, this
 did not occur. In the first 6 months of the year, the FMS granted refugee status
 to only 44 persons from countries outside the former Soviet Union; all but one of
 these persons were from Afghanistan. The UNHCR reported that the FMS still was
 declining to grantrefugee status to qualified individuals, based on its decision that
 such persons were not refugees. However, the FMS decision making process is con-
 sidered to be flawed by many NGO's, and UNHCR officials consider many of those
 refused to be in fact refugees.
 The Govffermentscoerates to a limited extent with the United Nations High
 Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the International Organization for Migra-
 tion (IOM). Both organizations assist the Government in developing a humane mi-
 gration management system; this includes effective and fair refugee status deter-
 mination procedures. The UNHCR recognizes some 30,009 asylum      seekers who
 originate from outside the territories of the former Soviet Union.
 At year's end according to the UNHCR, the Government granted first asylum in
 only 323 cases since 1994 to persons from outside the former Soviet Union (includ-
 ing the Baltic states); all but 7 of those individuals were from Afghanistan. By con-
 trast, the comparable figure for former citizens of the Soviet Union (mainly ethnic
 Russians) granted refugee status by the FMS is 172,925. The Government acts more
 expeditiously for the latter group and applies a more lenient standard.
 
 
 1460
 Despite some progress by the regional branches of the FMS in adjudicating non
 former Soviet Union asylum claims, there are still major concerns about the ability
 and willingness of the Moscow office to process asylum seekers from outside the
 former Soviet Union. Human rights organizations claim that this lack of progress
 is part of intentional efforts by the authorities to rid the city of foreign asylum seek-
 ers. Local legislation in Moscow, St. Petersburg, Rostov, and other major population
 centers prohibits the settlement of refugees within these cities.
 There were unconfirmed reports that the Russian Federal Migration Service has
 attempted to have asylum seekers unwittingly sign an "application form," sup-
 posedly to extend the validity of their registration documents but which instead re-
 nounces their claims for asylum in the Russian Federation.
 A large number of workers and students from Africa and Asia, who came to work
 or study in accordance with treaties between their countries and the former Soviet
 Union, remain in Russia. The Government has not deported them but encourages
 their return home. Their numbers have increased in recent years due to the recent
 arrival of persons seeking refugee status.
 The UNHCR and Amnesty International are working with the FMS and border
 officials to ensure that interviews of potential refugees are conducted in a timely
 fashion, that the UNHCR is allowed access to potential refugees in airport transit
 lounges, and that deportations of potential refugees are delayed until cases are adju-
 dicated. Despite these efforts, it appears that the Government is more concerned
 with creating a disincentive for future asylum seekers from outside, the territory of
 the former Soviet Union than with meeting its international obligations.
 The case of Sheremetyevo 2 airport is one example. The physical layout of the air-
 port hinders an individual from exercising his right to claim asylum. The FMS es-
 tablished a Point of Immigration (PIC) at Sheremetyevo 2 in 1996. PIC officials are
 responsible for processing requests for refugee status. The PIC office is located out-
 side the transit zone. No PIG or UNHCR phone number is listed in the transit zone
 nor is any other information provided that would assist an asylum seeker. Undocu-
 mented travelers are not allowed to leave the transit zone and often are returned
 to the carrier on which they entered the country. Legally bound to provide food and
 emergency medical care for undocumented travelers, the airline returns them to
 their point of departure as quickly as possible. (Airlines are fined if an undocu-
 mented passenger is admitted to Russia, but not if returned to the country of ori-
 gin.) Human rights organizations allege that Aeroflot deports hundreds of asylum
 seekers. In cases where asylum seekers from Sheremetyevo 2 have accessed the
 PIC, FMS officials reportedly never have granted an individual refugee status. De-
 portations of those waiting for a decision on their cases have been documented by
 the UNHCR.
 In May an Iraqi Kurdish refugee, who was registered with the UNHCR, report-
 edly was repatriated forcibly to Iraq.
 In the past, the UNHCR has had limited access to the transit areas of Moscow's
 airports. Access to the Sheremetyevo 2 transit lounge eased somewhat in October
 1997 but remains sporadic.
 Armenians evacuated from Baku in the wake of late 1980's ethnic violence are
 recognized as refugees, although their credentials require annual renewal. The vast
 majority of those evacuated either have emigrated from Russia or found some way
 to live in Russia. However, a group of about 1,400 to 2,000 still are housed in the
 "temporary quarters" assigned after the evacuation, usually in Moscow hotels or
 workers' dormitories in the greater Moscow area. They are unable to return to Azer-
 baijan and are not accepted by Armenia. Since they lack residency permits for Mos-
 cow, they cannot apply legally for work and effectively are denied the ability to reg-
 ister their children for public schooling. They have declined offers of Russian citizen-
 ship on the grounds that they would lose even the meager benefits they presently
 receive (although such a step would allow them to establish legal residence, seek
 work, and apply for benefits such as foreign travel passports). They also have re-
 jected offers of relocation to other regions of Russia because they allege that the al-
 ternative residences they are offered frequently are not habitable, still are occupied
 by others, or simply do not exist. Their situation remains precarious as the formerly
 state-owned hotels in which many reside are privatized and the new owners exert
 financial and other pressure on them to depart. A number of eviction orders already
 have been served in such cases. The courts are required legally to appoint a new
 residence, but have been uneven in meeting this requirement.
 The Constitution states that the Russian Federation does not permit the extra-
 dition to other states of persons who would be persecuted there for their political
 beliefs or for their actions (or inactions) that are not considered a crime in the Rus-
 sian Federation. However, in the past there were instances in which opposition fig-
 ures were deported to countries of the former Soviet Union to face charges that were
 
 
 1461
 
 political in nature. Under the 1993 Commonwealth of Independent States Conven-
 tion on Legal Assistance in Civil, Family, and Criminal Affairs, persons with out-
 standing warrants can be detained for periods of up to 1 month while the Procurator
 General investigates the nature of outstanding charges against the detainee. This
 system is reinforced informally but effectively by collegial links among senior law
 enforcement and security officials in the various republics of the former Soviet
 Union. Human rights groups allege that this network is employed to detain opposi-
 tion figures from the other former Soviet republics without actual legal grounds.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides citizens with the right to chiange their government, and
 citizens exercise this right in practice.
 The Federal Assembly comprises two chambers. The lower chamber, the State
 Duma, consists of 450 deputies, half elected in single-mandate constituencies, half
 by party lists. In the 1995 parliamentary elections, 43 political blocs appeared on
 the ballot. The upper chamber, The Federation Council, has 178 members-the 89
 chief executives of regional administrations and the 89 chairpersons of regional leg-
 islatures, all of whom are elected popularly. The Constitution provides the President
 and the Prime Minister with substantial powers which they used to dominate most
 areas of administration and day-to-day policy making and to limit the independence
 of the judicial branch. However the opposition of a majority in the Duma has
 checked administration initiatives in a number of areas, including basic changes in
 property ownership and legal reform.
 A democratic election for the President of the Russian Federation took place in
 1996 for the first time in the history of Russia as an independent state. President
 Yeltsin was reelected in a generally free and fair election.
 In 1998 the State Duma amended the law On the Basic Guarantees of Electoral
 Rights and the Right of Citizens to Participate in a Referendum (Voting Rights Act)
 and the federal law on public associations. These amendments clarify which political
 public associations may participate in elections; add restrictions on preferential
 media coverage, d    ons, and financial or material support from foreign entities
 for campaign related activities; introduce measures to reduce the number of non-
 competitive political parties and candidates on the ballot, such as financial deposits
 and other financial penalties alongside signature-collection provisions; increase the
 level of information available to voters about candidates' financial and criminal his-
 tory; introduce provisions allowing multicandidate constituencies; and add other
 provisions affecting federal-eve and regional-level elections and referendums.
 Changes to the Voting Rights Act affect legislation on both the federal and re-
 gional levels of the Russian federation. The regionally oriented Federation Council
 continued to express its dislike for the level of detail in the law, but its veto was
 overridden by the State Duma in September 1997. In June the Constitutional Court
 ruled against a complaint brought by the Federation Council that alleged that the
 Voting Rights Act contradicts the federal Constitution by not allowing the regions
 the right to adapt electoral procedures unique to their situations. The Constitutional
 Court also is expected to rule on Voting Rights Act provisions that pertain to hold-
 ing referndums, which may compel lawmakers to reconsider the law.
 Elections to local and regional offices continue to be marred in some cases by in-
 terference from federal authorities and less than democratic practices by incumbent
 governors. For example, President Yeltsin and former First Deputy Prime Minister
 Boris Nemtsov expressed dissatisfaction that an ex-convict suspected of embezzling
 a federal loan had been elected mayor of the country's third largest city. The local
 election commission in Nizhniy Novgorod canceled the results of the city's mayoral
 election under pressure from federal authorities. Mayor-elect Andrey Klimentyev
 had served a 9-year prison term during the Soviet era, and was at the time of the
 election under investigation for embezzling $2 million (20 million rubles) of a federal
 loan. Following the cancellation of the election results, Klimentyev was arrested,
 convicted, and sentenced to a 6-year prison term; he was not allowed to run in the
 new elections, which took place on September 27.
 The reelection of Murtaza Rakhimov as president of Bashkortostan also drew crit-
 icism. Only one minor alternative candidate was allowed to run, while two major
 opposition candidates were denied registration by the regional Subject Election
 Commission (SEC), despite a Supreme Court decision to reinstate them. News
 sources reported that the electorate voiced its dissatisfaction with a 17 percent vote
 "against all candidates." In the capital city of Ufa, this vote was nearly 35 percent.
 Both of the candidates denied registration contested the election results in the Su-
 preme Court. According to various news sources, they argued that the elections were
 were called early illegally, that regional-level legislation violated federal legislation,
 
 
 1462
 and that the Bashkiria SEC illegally denied them registration. However, federal au-
 thorities rarely try to enforce their own decisions in the regions; often they are un-
 able to do so. Although the Central Election Commission is investigating the case,
 it has no legal power to make or enforce any binding decisions related to regional-
 level elections.
 In 1997 gubernatorial elections were held in 13 federation regions. Some of these
 elections were complicated by extensive residence requirements, age requirements,
 or local language requirements in federal republics, which the Central Electoral
 Commission (CEC) has ruled to be illegal. The OSCE monitored the 1997 elections
 in the breakaway republic of Chechnya and found them to reflect the will of the vot-
 ers. The Russian Government recognized the election of Aslan Maskhadov as repub-
 lic President.
 Women are underrepresented in government and politics. In the December 1995
 elections, 46 female deputies were elected to the 450-member Duma, a decrease
 from the 58 female deputies in the Duma elected in 1993.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Many domestic and international human rights groups operate freely. Most
 groups investigated and publicly commented on human rights issues, generally
 doing so without government interference or restrictions. However, some local offi-
 cials harassed human rights monitors, going so far as to arrest and convict them
 (see Section 1.d.). In 1998 Human Rights Watch again criticized the Procurator Gen-
 eral's response to these incidents. Several NGO's are headquartered in Moscow and
 have branches throughout the country. Some of the more prominent human rights
 organizations are the Moscow Center for Prison Reform, the Society for the Guard-
 ianship of Penitentiary Institutions, the Glasnost Public and Defense Funds, Memo-
 rial, the Moscow Research Center for Human Rights, the Soldiers' Mothers' Commit-
 tee, the Mothers' Rights Foundation, and the Moscow Helsinki Group. Several of
 these groups are recognized by government and legislative officials for their exper-
 tise in certain fields, and such groups participate (with varying degrees of success)
 in the process of drafting legislation and decrees.
 Various types of regionally based human rights groups are being established. So-
 cioeconomic rights groups are the most numerous and monitor issues such as un-
 paid wages and benefits. There are fewer civil-political rights groups, but according
 to one NGO, Memorial, these are growing in number. These groups include "gener-
 alist" organizations that cover the range of human rights issues and "specialist" or-
 ganizations that cover only one issue. Public legal centers have been formed, due
 to the critical lack of legal advice that is available to the general public. These cen-
 ters usually are run on a part-time basis by lawyers who, while they cannot afford
 to offer trial counsel or actual legal work, offer advice at no cost on legal rights and
 recourse under the law.
 Regional groups, which generally receive little if any international support or at-
 tention, reported that local authorities have obstructed their work and that law en-
 forcement officers have begun criminal investigations based on fabricated charges
 against certain regional human rights groups' leaders (see Section 1.d.). With these
 exceptions, criticism of the Federal Government and regional authorities usually is
 permitted without hindrance. The threshold appears to be criticism of a specific po-
 litical leader in the region (usually the governor or a senior law enforcement offi-
 cial). Regional human rights advocates have been charged with such offenses as
 libel, contempt of court, and interference in judicial proceedings, along with other
 crimes, in cases with distinct political overtones (see Section 1.d.). Local human
 rights groups have far fewer opportunities to interact with legislators in developing
 legislation than their Moscow counterparts; some are excluded from the process en-
 tirely by local authorities.
 The importation of copies of the NGO report "Russia's Northern Fleet: Sources of
 Radioactive Contamination," authored in part by former Naval Captain Aleksandr
 Nikitin (see Section 1.d.), still is blocked by the FSB. Copies of the report in English
 and Norwegian are available on the Internet through Russian providers, but the
 Russian version is blocked out. Bellona Foundation employees continue to experi-
 ence difficulties when applying for visas to enter the country, a situation that the
 Government has declined to explain fully (see Section 1.d.).
 Murmansk human rights activist Oleg Pazyura was arrested in May 1997. He was
 charged with libel, contempt of court, and threatening public officials. At his trial
 in January, Pazyura was found guilty, but the judge immediately granted him am-
 nesty (see Section 1.d.).
 Because of the risk of kidnaping and other criminal attacks (see Section 1.b.),
 NGO's largely have withdrawn from Chechnya since the murder of six International
 
 
 1463
 Committee of the Red Cross personnel in 1996. Chechen authorities generally have
 discouraged NGO's from returning to Chechnya, although the motive for such dis-
 couragement appears to be based more on security concerns than unwillingness to
 submit to nongovernmental human rights monitoring.
 In 1996 the Glasnost Defense Fund established an "International Intergovern-
 mental Tribunal on Crimes Against Humanity and War Crimes in Chechnya," to
 conduct investigations and forward its findings to the Procurator General, the Coun-
 cil of Europe, and the European Court of Human Rights. The Tribunal's members
 include prominent human rights activists from throughout the world. Results of its
 deliberations have not been released publicly.
 The Government's human rights institutions lack independence. The President's
 Human Rights Commission is composed primarily of government officials (unlike
 the 1993-96 commission under Sergey Kovalev, which included a large number of
 human rights activists). Some human rights groups continued to complain that the
 Commission's focus has changed from advocacy of human rights to defending the
 Government's policy. Commission Chair Vladimir Kartashkin has indicated to the
 press that his role is mainly consultative and investigatory, without powers of en-
 forcement. The Commission examined and was often critical of the Government on
 issues such as prison conditions, human rights violations and amnesties in
 Chechnya, and human rights in the military, and was involved in the planning of
 "Human Rights Year" for 1998. While the Commission addressed these and other
 issues throughout the year, it cannot yet be determined whether or not the Commis-
 sion's work has delivered concrete results.
 The constitutional law establishing the position of a human rights ombudsman
 entered into force in March 1997. The law establishes a two-stage election process
 in selecting a human rights ombudsman. To be on the slate of candidates, a nomi-
 nee must receive support from two-thirds of the Duma. Deputies can vote for mul-
 tiple candidates. The ombudsman then is selected from the candidates by a simple
 majority. Despite language in the law requiring an ombudsman to be elected by the
 Duma within 30 days after the law's promulgation, the Duma was unable to agree
 on a candidate throughout 1997. The Duma finally approved the candidacy of Duma
 Deputy Oleg Mironov on May 22. A member of the Communist Party, Mironov re-
 signed from both the Party and the Duma after the vote, citing the law's stipulation
 that the Ombudsman be nonpartisan. Because of his party affiliation, and because
 Mironov had no evident expertise in the field of human rights, his appointment was
 widely criticized at the time by human rights activists. One liberal Duma deputy
 termed the appointment "a slap in the face to the entire human rights movement."
 Mironov's appointment largely was seen as part of a larger deal-making process in-
 volving a number of committee posts in the Duma. In his statements to the press,
 Mironov, a constitutional law professor and a former police investigator from
 Saratov, tended to focus on violations of socioeconomic rights, such as wage arrears.
 On July 5, Mirnov told journalists that his office had received 3,000 complaints
 over the preceding month. On July 24, Mironov and Procurator General Yuriy
 Skuratov signed an agreement to cooperate to eliminate human rights violations
 committed against prison inmates, citizens involved in criminal investigations, and
 workers. The two also agreed to conduct joint actions to monitor possible violations
 of citizens' rights in the regions,
 In 1996 President Yeltsin signed a decree entitled "On Certain Measures of State
 Support for the Human Rights Movement in the Russian Federation," which called
 for a high degree of coordination between federal structures and the human rights
 community. Specific measures laid out in the decree included the creation of three
 entities: An interregional human rights center to coordinate human rights activities;
 a human rights training center, and a center to publish human rights literature.
 In addition, regional administrations were instructed to establish bodies analogous
 to the federal Human Rights Commission. Progress on establishing the bodies has
 been slow, and there were some reversals during the year. In direct contravention
 of the 1996 presidential decree, new governors elected in Pskov, Irkutsk and
 Chelyabinsk abolished the commissions that had been working effectively in their
 regions. By September there were 58 commissions, compared with 66 in 1997. Of
 those, only 8 to 10 are working effectively, according to the Moscow Helsinki Group,
 compared with 12 effective commissions in 1997.
 In 1996, President Yeltsin established by decree a Political Consultative Council
 (PCC) to assist in the creation of a legal framework for economic and political re-
 forms with 12 standing chambers, including a human rights chamber, headed by
 Duma Deputy Valeriy Borshchev, and a legal chamber, headed by Boris Zolotukhin,
 a former Duma Deputy. The PCC meets monthly. The Human Rights Chamber in-
 cludes representatives of the various Duma factions as well as 10 members of the
 human rights NGO community. The Chamber has held hearings on issues such as
 
 
 1464
 conditions in the nation's prisons, the situation of refugees, and freedom of con-
 science. The Chamber's hearings on a variety of human rights areas have given
 greater public exposure to such problems. However, human rights organizations
 criticize the Government for being unresponsive to the Chamber's recommendations.
 Groups point out that the Chamber itself has not been responsible for any signifi-
 cant human 'rights improvements or legislation.
 In April 1997, President Yeltsin signed a decree declaring that, in recognition of
 the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1998 was to
 be the Year of Human Rights in the Russian Federation. A committee was estab-
 lished to make preparations for the year under the chairmanship of Human Rights
 Commissioner Kartashkin. The committee's membership was broadly representative
 of the human rights community., One stated goal was to establish pro ams in
 human rights education. However, the Government budgeted only a small amount
 for commemoration of the year of human rights, which meant that much of the com-
 mittee's action plan was not realized.
 In April Parliament ratified the European Convention on Human Rights. (Russia
 had undertaken to ratify the Convention when it joined the Council of Europe in
 1995.) Accession to the accord enables citizens to file appeals to the European Court
 of Human Rights (ECHR) about alleged human rights violations. However, only al-
 leged violations committed after Russia's formal accession to the Convention can be
 addressed to the ECHR. In addition, prospective complainants first must exhaust
 all appeals in Russian courts before they can turn to the European Court.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination based on race, sex, religion, language,
 social status, or other circumstances. However, both official and societal discrimina-
 tion still exist.-
 Women.-Domestic violence remains a major problem, as victims rarely have re-
 course to protection from the authorities. Police frequently are reluctant or even un-
 willing to involve themselves in what they see as purely domestic disputes. Many
 women are deterred from reporting such crimes because of this and because the
 housing system makes it difficult either to find housing outside the family dwelling
 or to expel an abusive spouse, even after a final divorce action. The underlying prob-
 lem that remains is the fact that much of society, including some leaders in the
 human rights community, do not acknowledge domestic violence as a problem, or
 do not believe it to be an area for concern outside the family.
 According to a December 1997 Human Rights Watch report, the Government re-
 ported that almost 11,000 women reported rape or attempted rape in 1996. In Sep-
 tember Human Rights Watch's Europe researcher for women's rights estimated that
 only 5 to 10 percent of rapes are reported to police. Human Rights Watch further
 reported that Yekaterina Lakhova, President Yeltsin's adviser on women's issues,
 estimated in 1997 that 14,000 women are killed by husbands or family members
 each year. However, Human Rights Watch notes that these statistics underestimate
 the extent of the problem, due to the underreporting of these crimes by victims. In
 1996 the MVD estimated that 80 percent of violent crimes occurred in the home.
 Hospitals and members of the medical profession provide assistance to women
 who have been assaulted. However, some doctors are reluctant to ascertain the de-
 tails of a sexual assault, fearing that they may be required to spend long periods
 in court. While noting that the Government had begun to address the seriousness
 of the problem of violence against women, the 1997 Human Rights Watch report
 criticized the Government for failing to afford victims of violence "the protection of
 the law." The report also criticized law enforcement officials for not ensuring effec-
 tively that incidents of violence against women are investigated and prosecuted and
 for sometimes obstructing their investigation and prosecution. The report further
 noted that the discrepancy "between the law as written and the law, as alied"
 demonstrated the Governmenifs "failure to fulfill its international human rights ob-
 ligations." The report also criticized the Duma for its "seriously flawed" drafting of
 a law on family violence. It noted that many women's groups had faced considerable
 difficulty in gaining Access to and commenting on drafts of the law. There are only
 32 women's crisis centers in the country, and there are only A few shelters for bat-
 tered women.
 In October the Russian Government cosponsored an international -conference on
 domestic violence against women; the first conference on this subject in the-country.
 Conference participants discussed the root causes of domestic violence and coopera-
 tion among NGO's, academics, and government officials to address the problem.
 Particularly because of lack of adequate employment opportunities, a significant
 number of women are victims of international trafficking for sexual exploitation. Re-
 
 
 1465
 liable statistics on the number of women involved are difficult to obtain. NGO's al-
 lege that Russian organized crime is increasingly involved in trafficking in women
 and children, but reliable data are not available. Often, women respond to advertise-
 ments promising well-paying jobs abroad, where they are forced into prostitution.
 The Global Survival Network, an international NGO, completed a comprehensive 2-
 year study of trafficking in the former Soviet Union in 1997. The study concluded
 that most women being trafficked are unwittingparticipants who respond to adver-
 tisements while searching. for legitimate work. Some government officials and law
 enforcement agencies acknowledge that a trafficking problem exists. However, the
 belief that women are aware of the risks involved is still pervasive. NGO's charge
 that exploited women are commonly refused help by Russian consular officials
 abroad.
 There is credible evidence that women encounter considerable discrimination in
 employment. At a 1996 Duma-sponsored roundtable, representatives of 53 women's
 associations appealed to the Duma to improve the legal status of women by creating
 a council to assess all draft legislation to ensure that it provides for equal opportuni-
 ties for women and men. In their appeal to the Duma, the women s associations'
 representatives raised their concerns that women form a disproportionately high
 percentage of the officially registered unemployed, that women are discriminated
 against in hiring and firing, that the differences between the salaries of men and
 women had increased sharply, and that few women attain senior positions. Condi-
 tions have not improved significantly since the hearings were held.
 Human Rights Watch in 1996 accused the Government of participating in dis-
 criminatory actions against women, contending that the Government seldom en-
 forces employment laws concerning women. Employers prefer to hire men, thereby
 saving on maternity and child care costs, and avoiding the perceived unreliability
 that accompanies the hiring of women with small children. In 1996 a change in the
 Labor Code prohibited women between the ages of 15 and 49 from being hired for
 jobs that are considered to be harmful to their health, including working on the
 night shift. Many of these jobs pay more, allow early retirement, or both. Women
 continue to report cases in which they are paid less for the same work that male
 colleagues perform. Moreover, women have reported sexual harassment in the work-
 place, with employers frequently requesting female employees "without complexes,"
 meaning that they should be receptive to liberties taken by their employers.
 Job advertisements often specify sex and age groups, and sometimes physical ap-
 pearance as well. The Government does not collect statistics on wages or income by
 sex; however, women's average incomes generally are estimated to be significantly
 below average male incomes. Professions dominated by women are much lower p aid
 than those dominated by men. Moscow human resources managers privately admit
 that discrimination against women in hiring is common. Unemployment, at 13 per-
 cent of the work force at year's end, also disproportionately affects women.
 Children.-The Constitution assigns the Government some responsibility for safe-
 guarding the rights of children. The State endeavors to provide, within its limited
 means, for the welfare of children.
 A new family code regulating children's rights and marriage and divorce issues
 came into effect in 1996. Although the President has stated that government policies
 to improve the situation of children were a top priority, the Government had not
 begun any significant programs in this area by year's end. Many Moscow charitable
 organizations have established productive relations with the city government to ad-
 dress the needs of disabled children, as well as other vulnerable groups.
 The position of many children has deteriorated since the collapse of communism
 because of falling living standards, an increase in the number of broken homes, and
 domestic violence. According to press reports, 40 percent of all children live below
 the poverty line. In 1995 Duma Deputy Mariya Gaydash stated that 2 million chil-
 dren under 14 years of age suffer from physical or mental abuse, with as many as
 200,000 dying each year from injuries received at home, usually from parental abuse
 or neglect. About 50,000 children run away from home each year, Gaydash asserted,
 and 2,000 commit suicide. Children on the street often become dependent on illegal
 narcotics. To combat the growing number of children being abducted, police organi-
 zations are establishing programs to protect children.
 In August a group of prominent Russians signed an appeal calling on the Presi-
 dent to take "energetic measures" to help the country's homeless children, estimated
 to number between 1 and 2 million, including some 60,000 each in Moscow and St.
 Petersburg. (The Russian Red Cross puts the figure for Moscow at 50,000.)
 The most vulnerable groups of children in society are orphans and the mentally
 disabled, who often are given up by their parents to state-run institutions. Human
 rights activists allege that children in state institutions are poorly provided for
 (often because funds are lacking) and in some cases are abused physically by staff.
 
 
 1466
 In September a- Moscow orphanage director convicted of repeatedly raping the
 children in his care over a 3-year period was pronounced clinically insane by the
 judge trring the case. The judge ruled that the director, who ran the small Alpha
 orphanage in Moscow, would not serve a prison sentence. Prosecutors had charged
 that the director had raped at least five girls (then between the age of 12 and 13)
 in his care between 1993 and 1996. They also said that he regularly had beaten at
 least three boys at the orphanage with metal rods.
 Human Rights Watch released in December "Abandoned to the State," a highly
 critical report that documented the dismal conditions that persist in many, although
 not all, orphanages. According to the report, children emerge from the orphanage
 system undereducated, physically underdeveloped, inadequately socialized, and un-
 prepared for life outside an institution. The report contains photographs of severely
 emaciated children in special state orphanages for the disabled. Being orphaned,
 abandoned, or disabled is still a serious social stigma in the country, an attitude
 that profoundly influences how institutionalized children are treated. Many phys-
 ically or mentally disabled children are considered ineducable, even those with only
 minor birth defects. According to the report, many disabled children are confined to
 beds around the clock or to rooms that are inadequately lit, heated, and furnished.
 The children are given only minimal care by low-paid unskilled workers with no
 training in the care of the disabled. Boris Altshuler, head of the Moscow Human
 Rights Research Center's "Rights of the Child" Program, has said that these prob-
 lems are caused less by funding shortages or malfeasance than by inherent defects
 in the state orphanage system, which provides little oversight and no formal re-
 course for orphans who have been misdiagnosed, abused, or neglected.
 Some children are improperly diagnosed and evaluated as being either mentally
 ill or retarded. Facilities to which such children are remanded frequently use
 unprescribed narcotics to keep children under control. The Moscow Human Rights
 Research Center's "Rights of the Child" project has called for the establishment of
 an ombudsman for the rights of children with the power to enter and inspect chil-
 dren's facilities at any time of day or night without advance notification.
 There were no reports of children working in violation of labor laws.
 Trafficking in children/young girls is a problem, but there are no reliable esti-
 mates of its scope.
 People With Disabilities.-The Constitution does not address directly the issue of
 discrimination against disabled persons. Although laws exist that prohibit discrimi-
 nation, the Government has not enforced them. The meager resources that the Gov-
 ernment can devote to assisting disabled persons are provided to veterans of World
 War II and other military conflicts. Special institutions exist for children with var-
 ious disabilities. The Government does not mandate special access to buildings for
 the disabled. The NGO Society for the Defense of Invalids is working to broaden
 public awareness and understanding of issues concerning the disabled.
 A 1995 law established a requirement that firms with over 30 employees either
 reserve 3 percent of their positions for persons with disabilities or contribute to a
 gOVernment fund to create job opportunities for the disabled. The law also removed
 angage defining an "in vaid" as a person unable to work. However, the Govern-
 ment has not implemented this law. Some persons with disabilities have found work
 within factories run by the All-Russian Society for the Disabled, but the majority
 are unable to find work and frequently are discouraged from working rather than
 subsisting on social benefits.
 Human Rights Watch released in December "Abandoned to the State," a highly
 critical report documenting the dismal conditions which persist in many orphanages.
 The report contains especially dramatic photographs of severely emaciated children
 in special state orphanages for the disabled. Being disabled is still a serious social
 stigma in the country, an attitude which profoundly influences how institutionalized
 children are treated. Many physically- or mentally disabled children are 'considered
 ineducable, even those with only minor birth defects. According to the report, many
 disabled children are confined to beds around the clock or to rooms which are inad-
 equately lit, heated, and furnished. The children are given only minimal care by
 low-paid unskilled workers with no training in care of the disabled.
 Indigenous People.-Until its abolition by presidential decree on September 22 (as
 part of a larger cabinet restructuring), the Moscow-based State Committee for the
 Development of the North was charged with representing and advocating the inter-
 ests of indigenous people. With only a small staff, its influence was limited. The
 Committee's functions were transferred to the new Ministry for Regional Policy,
 which is directed by the presidential decree to take "into account the need for sin-
 gling out the most important issues of northern territories" as one of its priorities.
 Local communities have organized in some areas to study and make recommenda-
 tions regarding the preservation of the culture of indigenous people. People such as
 
 
 1467
 the Buryats in Siberia; the Tatar and Bashkiri in the Urals; the people of the North,
 including the Enver, Tafarli, and Chukchi; and others have worked actively to pre-
 serve and defend their cultures, as well as the economic resources of their regions.
 In this context, some groups in the far eastern part of the country have criticized
 the Federal Government for not developing an overall concept for the development
 of indigenous people. Most believe that they are treated equally with ethnic Rus-
 sians, although some groups believe that they are unrepresented or underrep-
 resented in regional governments. The principal problems for indigenous people cen-
 ter on distribution of necessary supplies and services, particularly in the winter
 months for those who live in the far north.
 Religious Minorities.-Muslims, who comp rise approximately 10 percent of the
 population, continue to encounter societal discrimination and antagonism in some
 areas where they are a minority.
 There are between 600,000 and 700,000 Jews in Russia (0.5 percent of the total
 population). Jews continue to encounter societal discrimination, and government au-
 thorities have been criticized for insufficient action to counter it. There were several
 isolated reported incidents of major crimes or acts of intimidation linked to anti-Se-
 mitic groups or motives during the year. For example, a large bomb exploded at the
 Marina Roshcha Synagogue in Moscow on May 13. While the blast injured several
 construction workers at an adjoining construction site, none of the congregants was
 hurt. A previously unknown anti-Semitic organization proved their responsibility for
 the act with a videotape provided to television broadcasters. The attack was con-
 demned by President Yeltsin, Moscow Mayor Luzhkov, the Patriarch of the Russian
 Orthodox Church, and other national leaders. The city of Moscow offered to pay for
 repairs to the synagogue. However, no arrests have been made in the case. In an-
 other incident, 149 graves were desecrated at a Jewish cemetery in Irkutsk in May.
 Swastikas were painted on the graves. No progress was reported in investigations
 of several incidents that occurred in 1996.
 The ultranationalist Russian National Unity (RNE) paramilitary organization, led
 by Aleksandr Barkashov, appeared to extend its presence beyond its southern Rus-
 sian stronghold during the year. Although reliable figures on its membership are
 not available, it claims a membership of 50,000 in 24 federation chapters. According
 to various pollsters, the radical movement appears to have won some degree of na-
 tional name recognition and may enjoy the support of up to 3 percent of the popu-
 lation. RNE "uniformed" members were increasingly visible during the year at polt-
 ical and cultural public gatherings, but their day-to-day visibility on the streets and
 in public areas of Moscow has not been as obvious.
 As an increasingly visible expression of extremism across the country, the activi-
 ties of the RNE and other extremists prompted government efforts to address the
 problem of extremism more forcefully. Moscow authorities banned the RNE from
 convening a congress in December, citing the RNE's lack of credentials as a legally
 registered public organization (the Ministry of Justice twice has denied the RNE's
 registration).
 Anti-Semitic themes continued to figure prominently in hundreds of extremist
 publications, and some politicians made anti-Semitic remarks. Communist Duma
 members Makashov, Ilyukin, and Zyganov made anti-Semitic remarks (see Sec-
 tion 2.c.), blamed Russia's Jews for the economic crisis, called far quotas limiting
 the number of Jews in public office, and claimed that President Yeltsin's entourage
 is made up only of members of the "Jewish nation." Communist Duna members
 blocked a Duna motion to censure anti-Semitic remarks. Some Russian Jews be-
 lieve that these public statements may have contributed to increased societal anti-
 Semitism.
 President Yeltsin has spoken out repeatedly against anti-Semitic and extremist
 attitudes, including at the September dedication of a new memorial synagogue in
 Moscow. He said that it was "bitter to see that our own home-grown Fascists have
 emerged with their racial and national intolerance." Government reaction to the
 anti-Semitic statements was strong and immediate, in particular from President
 Yeltsin's administration. A December 16 presidential statement delivered to the
 Duia declared that "any attempt to insult ethnic groups, to limit the rights of citi-
 zens on the basis of origin, will be stopped in accordance with the Constitution and
 the laws of the Russian Federation." Communist Duma Deputies Makashov and
 Ilyuhin contributed to a climate of intolerance with their public anti-Semitic re-
 marks. Despite an outcry against Makashov in the mass media, both the Duma and
 the Communist Party refused to censure him. On December 30, Yeltsin ordered cab-
 inet law enforcement officials to prepare a comprehensive federal program against
 political and religious extremism by March 1, 1999 (see Section 2.c.).
 Another prominent public "figure who regularly engaged in anti-Semitic remarks
 was Krasnodar Kray governor Nikolay Kondratenko. Because of his position,
 
 
 1468
 
 Kondratenko has a seat in the upper house of Parliament. The governor's public
 speeches in the Kray often contain crude anti-Semitic remarks andstereotypes and
 blame Jews and alleged Jewish conspiracies for the country's problems. For exam-
 ple, Kondratenko has said that the essence of Russian history is the Russian battle
 against Jewish domination. He has blamed "Zionists" for the war in Chechnya, for
 the destruction of the Communist Party, for attacks on the Russian Orthodox
 Church, and for introducing homosexuality in the country. In addition, there have
 been credible reports that Kondratenko has urged the firing of Jewish public em-
 ployees in the region. In July during a tour of the North Caucasus region, Justice
 Minister Krasheninnikov criticized Kondratenko's statements, saying that they were
 meant to foment ethnic strife in the area, and were scaring away foreign investment
 and destabilizing the entire region.
 A report issued in October 1997 by the human rights group Memorial criticized
 Krasnodar government officials for "encouraging radical nationalist groups" includ-
 ing the Cossacks, and "indirectly inciting them to violence" against ethnic minority
 groups in the area.
 After his 1996 election, Kondratenko adopted a new regional charter that declares
 Krasnodar Kray the "place of residence for the (ethnic) Russian people." He ap-
 pointed Cossack "hetman" Vladimir Gromov as deputy governor of the -region. In
 April 1997, Kondratenko and Gromov issued a resolution making Cossack groups
 subordinate to the regional government instead of to the State, according to the
 Center for Human Rights Advocacy. The Center reported that President Yeltsin-sus-
 pended this resolution in September 1997 on the grounds that it was unconstitu-
 tional. According to the statements of the radical Cossack Chieftain Ivan Bezguly,
 reported in the media, he has 44,000 Cossacks at his disposal ostensibly to en orce
 law and order. Estimates of the total number of Cossacks in Krasnodar are as high
 as 300,000. The Cossacks' tactics appear designed to brutalize and intimidate the
 area's ethnic minorities, and to bring about the group's stated goal of cleansing the
 area of all nonslavic Russians.
 The situation in Krasnodar drew the attention during the year of the Human
 Rights Chamber of the President's Political Consultative Council. The Chamber held
 hearings on the situation, and demanded that federal law enforcement agencies in-
 tervene in Krasnodar and that criminal proceedings be launched against local au-
 thorities for inciting racial hatred. In December the Ministry of Justice launched an
 investigation into the reported distribution of anti-Semitic leaflets in Krasnodar
 calling on the population to destroy the homes of Jews. The extent or effectiveness
 of federal investigations of racial or ethnical provocations in Krasnodar is thus far
 unknown. Despite legal registration, members of some religions, including some
 Protestant groups, Jehovah's Witnesses, and the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-
 Day Saints (Mormons), continued to face discrimination in their ability to rent
 premises and conduct group activities (see Section 2.b.).
 Occasionally, opposition to the dissemination of information came from religious
 groups. In Yekaterinburg in early May, Bishop Nikon of the Russian Orthodox
 Church reportedly issued an oral order to burn books that he considered to be heret-
 ical, authored by murdered Archpriest Aleksandr Men. The books were taken from
 the library of the diocesan parochial school and were burned in the yard of the
 church school. The Bishop reportedly explained that his action was an attempt to
 protect Russian Orthodoxy from free interpretations of the teachings of Jesus
 Christ. Eyewitnesses to the book burning included pupils of the church school. From
 time to time, the Russian Orthodox Church also criticized the press for what it
 called "anti-church publications," but stopped short of imposing any church sanc-
 tions against particular authors or editors. However, the Church appealed to au-
 thors of what it considered inaccurate accounts of church history to "realize the sin-
 fulness of their evil deeds."
 NationallRacial /Ethnic Minorities.-In July the presidential Human Rights
 Commission issued an official statement noting that "the increase in the threat of
 fascism" was "taking on visible and ominous features," and that the incitements of
 national, racial, and religious enmity was "taking on an increasingly organized na-
 ture." It noted the increasing number of extremist groups that advocated racial su-
 premacy and "national xenophobia," and commented that such groups were moving
 with increasing frequency from combat training (under the guise of sports training)
 to "acts of direct terror, hoodlum attacks on persons of 'unwelcome' nationality, the
 desecration of cemeteries, and explosions of monuments." The statement followed a
 number of well-publicized incidents in the spring, including several racially moti-
 vated attacks on members of minorities, particularly Asians and Africans. Attacks
 generally appeared to be random, inspired by racial hatred, and carried out by pri-
 vate individuals or small groups, some of whom were known to local law enforce-
 ment authorities for their racial intolerance or criminal records.
 
 
 1469
 The report also warned that the legalization of the activity of extremists on the
 part of a number of local authorities and law-enforcement agencies under the pre-
 text of "providing assistance in -restoring law and order" and in "the patriotic indoc-
 trination of youth," had become a "new and dangerous phenomenon." This appar-
 ently referred to, among other things, the use by authorities in the Kuban area of
 southern Russia of Cossack paramilitary units to assist law enforcement authorities.
 In July the President's Human Rights Commission, created in 1997 under the
 auspices of the Ministry of Justice, called for stepping up the work of police to com-
 bat expressions of extremism. At the same time, the Minister of Justice called for
 necessary legislation to allow the prosecution of extremist organizations. However,
 the Commission's recommendations did not carry the force of law. In December
 President Yeltsin criticized the Minister of Justice and Procurator General for fail-
 ing to deal with extremist groups more vigorously.
 Roma from the Caucasus and Central Asia face widespread societal discrimina-
 tion, which often is reflected in official attitudes and actions. In addition, since 1993,
 discrimination against persons from the Caucasus and Central Asia increased con-
 currently with new measures at both the federal and local levels to combat crime.
 Law enforcement authorities targeted persons with dark complexions for harass-
 ment, arrest, and deportation from urban centers (see Section 2.d.). In Moscow such
 persons-including refugees from Africa as well as darker-skinned citizens from the
 North Caucasus-are subjected to far more frequent document checks than lighter-
 skinned persons, and frequently are detained or fined in excess of permissible pen-
 alties, often without formal documents recording the infraction being drawn up and
 presented by police. Reports also suggest a pattern, at least tacitly supported by city
 authorities, of extortion and beatings by law enforcement officials.
 During the year, dark-skinned individuals were increasingly the victims of beat-
 ings by "skinheads" and members of other racist and extremist groups. In one well-
 publicized case, skinheads on May 4 attacked and beat a person of African-American
 heritage in a Moscow park. Police quickly arrested and charged one of the attackers.
 However, arrests seldom are made in most such attacks, many of which have been
 reported by human rights organizations. Many victims, particularly refugees, choose
 not to report such attacks due to fear of the police.
 In Stavropol Kray, the local branch of Aleksandr Barkashov's neo-Nazi RNE and
 a parallel organization called Russian Knight claim support from local leaders,
 members of the armed services, and law enforcement officials. The stated goal of
 the organizations is to develop Russian youth to establish "Russian order," a vision
 of a great Russia with Orthodox values, a goal for which they claim to be ready to
 shed blood. The group runs kindergartens in Stavropol and trains youths of various
 ages. The group reportedly has several hundred followers in the kray and claims
 to have 24 branches throughout the country and 50,000 members.
 The RNE was named by the Presidential Commission on Countering Political Ex-
 tremism, created in October 1997, as one of the first two extremist groups it would
 investigate. However, in making the announcement, then-Justice Minister Sergey
 Stepashin, Chairman of the Commission, added that the RNE no longer existed offi-
 cially, since it had lost a court case in December 1997 to renew its registration with
 the Ministry of Justice. However, the RNE still is active as an unofficial organiza-
 tion.
 No cases involving charges of inciting racial hatred (a crime defined in the Crimi-
 nal Code) were completed successfully during the year, and there were no statistics
 available on how many such cases (if any) were filed.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Assoiation.-The law provides workers with the right to form and
 join trade unions, but practical limitations on the exercise of this right arise from
 governmental policy and the dominant position of the Federation of Independent
 Trade Unions of Russia (FNPR), the successor organization to the Communist trade
 unions. Approximately 63 percent of the work force is unionized, and approximately
 8 percent of union members belong to independent unions. In response to the block-
 ades of the railroads by miners protesting nonpayment of wages, the Government
 threatened the Free Miners' Union (NPG) with decertification, began criminal inves-
 tigations of leaders for engaging in political activities, and audited miners' unions
 in the FNPR and the NPG.
 The FNPR claims to represent 80 per cent of all workers and largely dominates
 the trade union movement and, thus, still provides a practical constraint on the
 right to freedom of association. The FNPR inherited the bulk of the property of its
 predecessors, including office and recreational property. The majority of its income
 comes from sources other than dues, such as rental income and fees for member
 services. Its unions frequently include management as part of the bargaining unit.
 
 
 1470
 The FNPR and other trade union federations act independently on the national po-
 litical level, but FNPR unions sometimes are affiliated closely with local political
 structures. Political parties often act in parallel with unions, for example, in calling
 for a national day of protest.
 Benefits vary depending on union affiliation, and generally discourage the forma-
 tion of new unions. Although in 1996 the Government took control of the FNPR so-
 cial security fund, FNPR unions often still control access to-the fund by arbitrarily
 deciding who receives benefits, such as the child subsidy and vacations, based on
 the politics or affiliation of union, members of the federation. FNPR unions enjoy a
 privileged position with regard to distribution of state funds at the municipal, ob-
 last, and federal levels. For example, families normally would pay 60 percent of the
 cost of summer camp for children while FNPR members would pay only 20 percent.
 Court rulings have established the principle that nonpayment of wages-by far
 the predominant grievance-is an individual dispute and cannot be addressed collec-
 tively by unions. As a result, a collective action based on nonpayment of wages is
 not recognized as a strike, and individuals are not protected by the labor law's pro-
 tection against being fired for participation.
 As part of bargaining, the right-to strike is difficult to exercise. Most strikes are
 considered technically illegal, because the procedures for disputes are exceedingly
 complex and require coordination of information from both sides, even before courts
 are involved. Strikes may be reviewedby a civil court to establish their legality. The
 civil court has the right to order the confiscation of union property to settle damages
 and losses to an employer if a strike is found to be illegal. As a result, an increasing
 number of strikes are organized by strike committees, rather than unions. Reprisals
 for strikes are common. Jnion leaders have been followed by the security services,
 detained for questioning by police, and subjected to heavy fines, losses of bonuses,
 and demotions. During one-strike, 65 workers were fired for absenteeism. After suc-
 cessful negotiations with the air traffic controllers' union to avoid a strike, the Gov-
 ernment drafted a regulation to ban all strikes in the air traffic sector. In 1995
 transportation unions had complained that, because transportation can be consid-
 ered an essential service that must be provided under law, their right to strike was
 denied. The Constitutional Court agreed and found that banning industrywide
 strikes is unconstitutional, and that each needs to be considered on a case-by-case
 basis. However, a subsequent 1995 federal law on collective labor dispute resolution
 banned railway strikes.
 Several notable strikes occurred during the year. Teachers and medical personnel
 went on strike-including hunger strikes-in various regions. Coal miners camped
 outside the White House (government administration building) from June to Sep-
 tember, demanding President Yeltsin's resignation. Coal miners in all of the coun-
 try's coal mining regions blocked rails during the summer and were joined by gov-
 ernment workers. A nationwide general strike was held on October 7, although par-
 ticipation was low throughout the country.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The law protects collective
 ,bargaining and the Ministry of Labor indicates that 23 percent of officially reg-
 istered trade unions and 11 percent of enterprises have collective bargaining agree-
 ments. However, a gap in Russian law, -which fails to establish the employer's legal
 identity, often makes these agreements ineffective.
 Various employers have refused to negotiate collective bargaining agreements,
 particularly for unions not affiliated with the FNPR. Despite a legal requirement
 to do so, management also frequently refuses to provide the financial information
 demanded by trade unions.
 There are no export processing zones. Worker rights in the special economic
 zones/free trade zones are covered fully by the Labor Code.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Labor Code prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor by adults and children, however, there were some reports of its
 use. Soldiers regularly are sent to work on farms to gather food for their units.
 There are documented cases of soldiers being sent by their superior officers to per-
 form work for private citizens or organizations. Such labor also may violate military
 regulations. There were no reports of forced or bonded labor by children.
 d. Status of Child 'Labor Practices and Minimum-Age for Employment.-The
 Labor Code prohibits regular employment for children under the age of 16 and also
 -regulates the working conditions of children -under the age of-18, including banning
 dangerous, nighttime an& overtime work. Children may, under certain specific con-
 ditions, work in apprenticeship or internship programs at the ages of 14 and, 15.
 While in some instances children can be found selling goods on street corners, ac-
 cepted social prohibitions against the employment of children and the availability
 of adult workers at low wage rates combine to prevent widespread abuse of child
 labor legislation. Homeless children are at risk for exploitation in prostitution or
 
 
 1471
 
 criminal activities. Other children are used by their parents to lend credence to
 their poverty when begging. The mayor of Moscow in August issued a decree that
 required enterprises with more than 15 employees either to hire a young intern or
 disabled person or to contribute $140 (1,400 rubles, or the average monthly wage
 of a metallurgical worker) per month to the Employment Fund. The absence of a
 program to implement the decree encourages the hiring of fictitious employees to
 avoid contributing to the Fund. The Government prohibits forced and bonded labor
 by children, and there were no reports that it occurred (see Section 6.c.).
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The monthiy minimum wage of roughly $8.30
 (83 rubles) is well below the living wage of $53 (530 rubles) per month, and is insuf-
 ficient to provide a decent standard of living for a worker and family. In May a total
 of 21.8 percent of workers earned less than the living wage. However, most workers
 receive several times the monthly minimum, and the minimum wage is essentially
 an accounting reference for calculating university stipends, pensions, civil service
 wages, and social benefits. It is not a number used for real salaries. Enterprises
 often use this number to avoid taxation by reporting the number of employees paid
 at the minimum wage instead of-reporting actual salaries. Various sources estimate
 that from 50 to 70 percent of the working population have extra jobs, the incomes
 from which are not reported. In addition, much of the population continues to reside
 in low-rent or subsidized housing and receives various social services from enter-
 prises or municipalities.
 The Labor Code provides for a standard workweek of 40 hours, with at least one
 24-hour rest period. The law requires premium pay for overtime work or work on
 holidays. Workers have complained of being required to work well beyond the nor-
 mal week, that is, 10- to 12-hour days, of abrogations of negotiated labor agree-
 ments, and of forced transfers.
 Nonpayment of wages continues to be the most widespread abuse of the Labor
 Code. As of August 1, official statistics showed that workers were owed roughly $12
 billion in accumulated wage arrears. Wage arrears, generally between 3 -and 9
 months, especially affect workers in the education, medicine, industry, and energy/
 coal sectors. Toward the end of 1997, the Government succeeded in lowering wage
 arrears in the state sector, but did not create a mechanism to keep the payments
 current. As a result, in 1998 wage debt in the state sector increased more than twice
 as fast as in the private sector. Many enterprises were forcing employees to take
 wages in barter, sometimes in goods with limited appeal. In one extreme case, work-
 ers were paid in pistols.
 Although a small but increasing percentage (perhaps 6 percent) of workers owed
 back wages seek relief through the court system, this has proved to be a lengthy
 process. Courts often are willing to rule in favor of employees, but the collection of
 back wages is difficult. Courts often insist that cases be filed individually, in con-
 tradiction to the law on trade unions, thereby undercutting union attempts to in-
 clude the entire membership in one case. This insistence also makes the process
 lengthier and more difficult for the affected workers and exposes them to possible
 retaliation. It is widespread practice to remove the names of workers who win judg-
 ments for back wages, but have not yet received the wages, from the list of those
 who can buy food on credit from the company store.
 The problem of wage arrears is aggravated by limitations on labor mobility. For
 various reasons, many workers are not able to move to other areas of the country
 in search of work. Many say they are constrained economically: Their savings were
 destroyed by the rampant inflation of the early 1990's; they have not been paid for
 periods of 5 to 9 months; and their freedom to move in search of new employment
 is limited further by the system of residency permits (see Section 2.d.). These work-
 ers effectively are tied to enterprises that can give them only credits at the company
 cafeteria and grocery and the hope of future salary payments. The knowledge that
 workers cannot easily move across regions and find employment made managers in
 some one-factory towns reluctant to lay off workers. Other factors, such as the avail-
 ability of subsidized housing and cultural ties to locations, also inhibited the move-
 ment of workers. By decriminalizing the nonpayment of wages and by maintaining
 the system of residency permits, the Government has restricted even further the
 mobility of labor. Approximately 4 million workers were considered "underemployed"
 due to involuntary leave or curtailed hours.
 The law establishes minimal conditions of workplace safety and worker health,
 but these standards are not enforced effectively. Workers wear little protective
 equipment in factories, enterprises store hazardous materials in open areas, and
 smoking is permitted near containers of flammable substances. As economic activity
 continued to decline during the year, funds were not available for safety and health
 in the workplace. The pressure for economic survival displaced concern for safety.
 
 
 1472
 For example, trade union sources reported that it has become commonplace for min-
 ers to remove the supports from mineshafts and sell them for scrap metal.
 Workers were still at high levels of risk of industrial accidents or death. Reliable,
 recent statistics on accident and 'death rates for workers were not available. How-
 ever, according to official government statistics, the construction industry had the
 highest reported death rates of workers at 0.262 deaths per 1,000 in 1996. The agri-
 cultural sector. reported the highest injury rates of workers at 12.4 accidents per
 1,000 workers in 1996.
 The Labor Code establishes workers' right to remove themselves from hazardous
 or life-threatening work situations without endangering their continued employment
 and entitlements to such compensations as shorter hours, increased vacations, extra
 pay and pension benefits for working under such conditions.
