RUSSIA
The State Department report on human rights in Russia during 1993 is complete and accurate in most respects. It covers many advances, such as the approval of the new Constitution in December, as well as continuing problem areas, such as prison conditions. However, it omits or understates other areas of concern. Some of its shortcomings appear to reflect the Clinton Administration's historic policy of total — many would say unquestioning — support for the Yeltsin government. Ironically, this is the same criticism that was made in the 1991 edition of the Critique, in relation to the Bush Administration's reluctance to criticize the human rights performance of the Gorbachev government.
While the report correctly points out that Russia's overall human rights record is "uneven," and that some "serious problems remain," it adopts throughout a style and tone that soften the impact of its reporting of governmental misconduct. In almost every respect, the report eschews criticism of actions taken by the Yeltsin government. This flaw is most apparent in the report's description of the "October crisis." While it mentions most of the events precipitated by Yeltsin's dissolution of parliament, it glosses over a number of reported human rights violations committed by the government during the crisis. Furthermore, the report omits reference to some important events that led up to the crisis, beginning as early as the spring of 1993.
Yeltsin shocked many people in Russia and abroad when he issued Decree no. 1400 on September 21, dissolving the parliament. He announced at the same time that new elections to a ftilly reconstituted parliament would be held in December. He also decreed that the Constitutional Court not meet until after the December elections. Nevertheless, in defiance of Yeltsin, the court immediately declared the disbanding of the Congress of People's Deputies (CPD) unconstitutional in a nine to four vote. For its part, the CPD voted to impeach Yeltsin and elected Aleksandr Rutskoi president. Rutskoi then proceeded to create a substitute government and occupied the White House with representatives hostile to Yeltsin.
The report characterizes Yeltsin's acts as necessary to maintain control, and implies that the actions by the CPD and the Constitutional Court's self-defense were wrong, with no acknowledgment of the strong arguments that Yeltsin's acts were unconstitutional. The report says, for example, that Yeltsin "disbanded" the CPD, and that the CPD "initially refused to accept its dissolution." It fails to point out, however, that Yeltsin had no authority to "disband" the CPD, and that the CPD appeared well within its rights in refusing to "accept" the President's extra-legal actions. Similarly, in describing the CPD's subsequent naming of an alternative government, the report places quotation marks around the word "ministers" when
292
_RUSSIA
referring to the CPD's designees. This not so subtly imparts an air of legitimacy to Yeltsin's actions.
Another general problem with the report is that, while it describes constructive legislative and administrative changes in Russia that could potentially have an important impact upon human rights, it fails to examine subsequently whether they are in fact being enforced. This has also been a problem m previous reports. Of course, lack of credible information is a problem in the Russian context. Brief analyses of specific examples, as well as fiirther details on the events of October 1993, follow below in the general order of the report.
As the report notes, there appear to have been no political killings or disappearances in Russia in 1993, except for those stemming directly from the October events or ethnic violence. Several hundred people who disappeared during hostilities in North Ossetia in 1992 are still missing. President Yeltsin and Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin issued an appeal for calm to North Ossetia and Ingushetia in July, stating that they would continue to investigate the disappearances and the fate of hostages taken during the events of October and November 1992. The appeal also stated that the return of refugees and forced resettlers would begin in August 1993, according to the Kislovodsk agreement of March 20, 1993. However, no frirther information regarding the fate of those missing has been forthcoming.
The report describes the poor conditions and overcrowding in the prisons and the physical and mental abuse of prisoners. It mentions the 1992 changes in procedures limiting the time a prisoner may be held in harsh punishment cells, but it does not relate whether these changes are in fact being implemented. In most cases, conditions at labor camps for teenage offenders are as poor as those for adults. Guards at those institutions reportedly intentionally dehumanize the minors. The teenage offenders are placed in adult holding centers prior to their placement at the labor camps, often becoming malnourished and contracting diseases carried by adult prisoners.
The inadequacy of the State Department's current instructions on the treatment of homosexuals is highlighted by the report on Russia. The instructions contain a very narrow mandate to report on "incitement to violence" against minorities - among them groups identified by sexual orientation. No mention is made in the report of the repeal in April 1993 of Russia's harsh sodomy law. About 200 men, however, still languish in prisons and labor camps for committing sodomy and/or other crimes under the old statute. Future State Department reports should pay close attention to whether these men are released under Article 54 of the new Constitution, which provides that when an act is decriminalized or a sentence reduced, those convicted must not serve excess time for that crime,
Lesbian relations, while not criminalized, are considered a form of mental illness in Russia, The report passes over the use of psychiatric repression against
293
CRITIQUE 1993
lesbians. Since there are no laws against lesbian acts, lesbians are frequently placed in psychiatric hospitals if caught. The report also ignores the harassment of gays by law enforcement authorities and the severe mistreatment of gays in labor camps and prisons. Such harassment includes the practice by law enforcement officials of maintaining lists of people whom they know or think to be gay. Facts such as these should still have been included even under the narrow requirement to report on "incitement to violence," especially since the instructions include the mandate to state the government's attitude toward the practice and what efforts, if any, it has made to eradicate such behavior.
The report's coverage of arbitrary arrest and detention is accurate but somewhat incomplete. While it notes that the practice of detention without formal charges continues, and mentions that most detainees are released within the legally prescribed 72-hour time limit, it fails to recount the efforts by officials to coerce confessions during that period. Such incidents occurred during the October crisis and in the interrogation of an American journalist who had interviewed the Russian scientist. Vil Mirzayanov.
The report mentions the incident involving the journalist in its discussion of freedom of the press, but it fails to address his charges that he had been denied access to a lawyer and asked to sign a statement against his will. Mention of the Mirzayanov case itself is also resfricted to the section on press freedom. Yet the treatment of Mirzayanov has been very controversial since he first published articles about a powerful Russian chemical weapon in 1992. At that time, Mirzayanov was detained in Moscow's Lefortovo prison. In 1993, it was not completely clear whether he could still be brought to trial. The charges against him were not made public. Mirzayanov's case finally came to trial on January 24, 1994, in closed proceedings before a panel of three judges. The scientist refused to participate on the grounds that his trial was illegal and unconstitutional. Human rights organizations have protested both about Mirzayanov's treatment in prison and about the trial, which illustrates some of the problems that persist in the Russian judicial system. For example, his trial was not open to the public because the court ruled that it could involve the disclosure of state secrets. The report should have referred to the case in this context.
The report correctly states that efforts to reform the judicial system have had limited effects for a number of reasons, and its coverage of the problems to be overcome, such as the poor training of judges and their lack of independent judgment, is accurate. The report also recognizes Russia's mixed success in providing an accused or detained person with access to legal representation, and accurately and thoroughly describes the problems that continue to inhibit attorneys' access to their clients and the consequences.
The fair implementation of jury trials will be a slow process in Russia, as the report comments. At present, only those charged with a "serious crime" are
294
_RUSSIA
entitled to a trial by jury. Jury trials first came into effect on July 16, and will gradually be introduced across the country. The new Constitution enshrines the right to a jury trial in capital cases and in other cases as "provided by federal law." Article 49 guarantees that the accused is presumed innocent until proven guilty.
With respect to other judicial matters, the failure to offer impartial criticism of Yeltsin's actions manifests itself glaringly in the report's treatment of the suspension of the activities of the Constitutional Court. The report makes no negative comment in reporting the facts of the extra-legal suspension and Yeltsin's own argument that his action was based on the court's alleged improper partiality in respect of the legal effect of Decree No. 1400. The forced resignation of the Chairman of the Constitutional Court is not mentioned. Curiously, the report then congratulates the court for promoting the notion of an independent judiciary during the crisis events of 1993 — which may perhaps be read as a veiled criticism of Yeltsin's suspension of the court's activities.
As a result of the adoption of Article 125 of the new Constitution, the Constitutional Court no longer derives its power from parliamentary legislation, but has a new, constitutional basis for its authority and jurisdiction. Additionally, the existence of a truly post-Soviet Constitution should be of real benefit in the court's efforts to establish the basis for an independent judiciary. The real test of independence will occur when the court tries to resist the pressures of the executive and legislative branches in controversial cases.
The report adequately covers the trial of those accused of plotting the August 1991 coup attempt, It generally falls short, however, in its analysis of the freatment of the instigators of the October events, beyond noting that Rutskoi and the speaker of the Russian Parliament, Ruslan Khasbulatov, were denied access to counsel.
The report gives only brief coverage to the continuing problem of state-sanctioned interferences with privacy. While it mentions Yeltsin's break-up of the Ministry of Security and his announcement that surveillance of individuals would end, it fails to say what occurred before that announcement. It also fails to discuss whether authorities comply with the requirement for obtaining search warrants. The new Constitution provides that the right to privacy and confidentiality is assured, but may be restricted by a court decision. While it is too early to know the conditions under which such rights may be restricted by court order, at the present time it appears that violations continue to occur.
According to former Procurator General Valentin Stepankov, the interdepartmental commission on corruption was created to investigate problems of corruption throughout the Govemment. Since then, an unpublished presidential decree has reportedly set up another body, also calling itself the "commission." This body, Stepankov alleged, was acting like Stalin's' repressive All-Russian Central Executive Committee of 1934. Among other things, he said, the
295
CRITIQUE 1993
commission had carried out actions for which it had no authority, such as placing people under surveillance and listening to and recording their conversations in violation of constitutional rights.
With respect to the use of excessive force and violations of law in internal conflicts, the report minimizes the involvement of Russian troops in human rights violations in other areas by referring the reader to other country reports. Russian troops currently stationed in Moldova have been accused by human rights organizations of a number of atrocities, including political killings, attacks on civilians and the use of land mines in civilian areas. Russia is also suspected of assisting in the forcible removal in June 1993 of the democratically elected president of Azerbaijan, Abulfaz Elchibey, and his replacement with Moscow loyalist and former KGB chief, Geidar Aliev. Elchibey had initiated a policy of alignment with Turkey. Russia has also often taken an active role in attempting to influence events in Georgia. Russian troops encouraged the Abkhazians to rebel against Georgia in 1993, reportedly supplying both troops and weaponry, Russian volunteers assisting the Abkhazian army are among those accused of human rights violations against civilians in Sukhumi, including the torture and killing of women, children and the elderly.
The report's section on respect for civil liberties in Russia is reasonably accurate and complete. However, while misstatements and wholesale omissions are rare and generally immaterial, the report again minimizes the scope and significance of the events of September and October, It portrays the censorship, arrests, beatings and deportations as mere temporary setbacks in an otherwise upbeat year for human rights. The report tends to accept official Russian statistics on government excesses during the crisis, and declines to point out that renewed violations may be no further away than the next intragovemmental power struggle.
The report mentions conscientious objectors briefly in its discussion of freedom of religion, but should have said more. In 1993, following amendments the previous year to the old Russian Constitution, the right to conscientious objection to military service was established, together with the right to fulfill such duties with alternative civilian service. Furthermore, the new Constitution contains the right to perform ahemative service. Nevertheless, the military and the courts have ignored these provisions because the Parliament still has not promulgated implementing legislation to defme alternative service. Without such guidance, the courts have argued that they have nothing to enforce. At least two conscientious objectors were tried in 1993; both were convicted and received suspended sentences. There is nothing as yet to prevent ftirther convictions.
The report correctly notes that the government continues to subsidize directly and indirectly virtually the entire Fourth Estate, and controls monopolies on paper and ink supplies. Such indirect control suggests that press fi"eedom is still largely viewed as a matter of government largesse rather than a fundamental right.
296
_RUSSIA
Indeed, the October crisis was characterized in large part by the executive and legislative branches wrestling over control of the media, with each purporting to act as the defender of press freedom. In March, for example, the CPD passed a resolution on "Measures To Ensure Freedom of Speech in State Television and Radio Broadcasting," which would have effectively placed the electronic media under the confrol of "watchdog councils" created by the CPD. Yeltsin aide Mikhail Poltoranin, then head of the Federal Information Center, responded by denying that the media was controlled by the President, maintaining rather that they "are simply under the shield, the umbrella of the president." This shield turned into a sword as events heated up in the fall.
The report says that, "Freedom of speech and press was widely respected during much of 1993." However, it minimizes the gravity of threats to that freedom. The treatment of the press during the October events vividly illustratived the dubious and fragile nature of press freedom in Russia. While the report acknowledges that police reportedly beat more than 20 journalists attempting to cover the crisis, the total number of those beaten or injured may well be over 60. Additionally, seven journalists were killed during October 3-4, some apparently deliberately by snipers. Otherwise during the year, one journalist was killed and others beaten, although organized crime rather than state action seems to have been implicated in those cases.
Although the report mentions the censorship and outright banning of opposition newspapers during October, it concludes that freedom of speech and press had been largely restored by the following month. It also asserts that three of the banned publications, Pravda, Sovetskaya Rossiya, and Den', resumed publication. These statements are misleading. First, the report does not mention that about 15 newspapers were actually baimed altogether on October 3-4. Second, although Pravda and Sovetskaya Rossiya did resume publication, the price extracted by the government was the removal of their respective editors-in-chief Sovetskaya Rossiya remained banned until mid-December. Even many pro-government journalists found these actions offensive and illegal, pointing out that, under Russian law, the executive may only close newspapers after exhausting judicial procedures. Third, this brief period of de jure censorship was followed by official or quasi-official attempts to impose "self-censorship" on the press. Immediately after lifting censorship, the acting press minister called on journalists to exercise "self-censorship," and said that his ministry should foster a "new ideology" based on essentially nationalist precepts. Yeltsin soon fired the head of Ostankino, the regime-controlled television company, largely because of his lukewarm support during the October showdown.
There were other ominous aspects of the October crackdown on the press. Many of the censors were Soviet-era apparatchiks who acquired their expertise as military censors or employees of Glavlit, the Communist government's censorship
297
CRITIQUE 1993
directorate. Indeed, the chief censor was the former head of Glavlit, who justified using the ancien régime censors by remarking, "You wouldn't expect me to use pastry chefs, would you?" Further, although Yeltsin declared a state of emergency for Moscow alone, even provincial publications were censored.
With respect to religious fi"eedom, it may be true that access to Orthodoxy "expanded" during 1993, but it seems less clear that there was any growth in true religious tolerance. The report mentions that relations between the Russian Orthodox Church and the government have grown closer in recent years, but it is not clear whether the State Department views this as good news or bad. In fact, the Orthodox Church received what amounted to a windfall government subsidy in April when the President ordered that all Orthodox properties confiscated by the Bolsheviks be returned to the church within two months. This action was taken a mere five days before the April referendum, and two days after the Archbishop of Vladimir and Suzdal had eulogized at Easter that, "Believers are grateful for this miracle of life to our President Boris Yeltsin, and the forthcoming referendum will show this."
As the report notes, the Church aggressively lobbied for the new law on religion which passed the CPD. As originally conceived, the law would have essentially outlawed non-Orthodox proselytizing without government consent. The report is somewhat misleading in ascribing the death of the law to Yeltsin's veto. Indeed, a compromise version approved by Yeltsin was on the table when he disbanded the CPD. This version, though less restrictive than that favored by the Church and the CPD, would still have been usefiil to authorities wishing to prohibit or restrict non-Orthodox proselytizing.
A troubling factor in the resurgence of Orthodoxy in state and society is the Church's historical toleration, and at times its direct encouragement, of the persecution of non-Orthodox, especially non-Christian, minorities. The author of the proposed new law on religion, a people's deputy and Orthodox priest, explained that the new law was needed to counteract the influence of Islamic fimdamentalism. In a similarly intolerant vein, the Metropolitan of St. Petersburg gave public vent to his anti-Semitic views on a "world Zionist anti-Russian conspiracy" and the importance of "Orthodox statehood." Revealing, too, is the use of Orthodox imagery alongside Nazi symbols in anti-Semitic pamphlets and propaganda, which seems particularly ubiquitous in Rostov. While these views caimot be ascribed to the government or even the official Church, they bear mention in view of the influential and quasi-official status of the Church today.
The report correctly notes that anti-Semitism remains a threat in spite of its illegality, and commendably goes on to describe non-governmental anti-Semitic acts, pointing out that in some cases authorities have been unhelpful to the victims. While the report mentions the suspicious December 30 fire that destroyed one of
298
_RUSSIA
Moscow's three synagogues, it should have pomted out that this was the third major outbreak of fire at a Jewish institution in Moscow during a two-week period.
Finally, the discussion of freedom of religion is perhaps impeded by the decision to freat minority religions as a sub-issue of discrimination rather than in the section on freedom of religion as such. The effect of this organization of the report is to marginalize questions concerning Orthodox predominance and the freatment of Jews and Muslims in particular.
The discussion of respect for political rights and separation of powers is a weak link in the report, which skims over the events that led to the October crisis in only a few sentences. It fails to mention, for example, that the political problems of 1993 actually began in March, when the CPD voted to curtail Yeltsin's right to issue decrees. Yeltsin reacted to the vote with his March 20 decree of "special rule." The Constitutional Court protested, as did a number of republics. Especially incensed were the Novosibirsk and frkutsk Oblasts of Siberia, because the decree ordered the dismissals of their heads of adminisfration. While Yeltsin said that these officials had violated the law, there were no formal accusations following an investigation. However, both officials had criticized the Yeltsin government's economic policies. Because Yeltsin did not have the backing of the military and other influential forces for the substance of the "special rule" decree, he quickly backed down.
As the power struggle continued, the government conducted the April 25 referendum on economic reform and early elections. As the report notes, Yeltsin's position was sfrengthened by the results, especially on economic matters, although he was not given the mandate to call for early elections. In addition, one US monitoring group reported that although there was no actual voting fraud, balloting procedures were lax and the tabulating process was inconsistent among the regions and republics. Apart from the exfra-legal basis of Decree No, 1400 dissolving the parliament, the failure to obtain a mandate for early elections in April further demonstrated the questionable basis for Yeltsin's actions.
As a result of the October crisis, Yeltsin officially suspended ten political parties and organizations, although by some accounts as many as sixteen were suspended. On October 22, the parties were allowed to resume their activities, but only two — the Russian Communist Party and the People's Party of Free Russia — were permitted to take part in the December elections. Given the short period given to prepare for the elections, these parties faced difficulties submitting their electoral lists on time; other requirements initiated by the Yeltsin government created obstacles to fielding a good list of candidates. Despite these impediments, however, approximately 2,000 candidates were registered for the 628 seats of the bicameral parliament.
With the new Constitution, as the report notes, the Russian people should have the right to change their government. Even with constitutional safeguards,
299
CRITIQUE 1993
however, it is still unclear whether they will be able to control changes in government, For example, Yeltsin dissolved the St, Petersburg City Council in December for interfering with administrative affairs. Under the new Constitution, the president retains the right to dissolve the Duma in certain circumstances, Yeltsin also revoked his agreement to hold presidential elections in June 1994, announcing instead that he would remain in office for his full term. If Yeltsin continues to circumvent the parliament whenever the deputies are uncooperative, or removes officials when they are critical of his actions, democratic reform will be a seriously threatened. Perhaps indicative of the path that Yeltsin is likely to follow in the future is his statement, "My only counterbalance is my conscience,"
The report accurately describes conditions in Russia as generally benign for non-governmental organizations monitoring human rights practices. It also correctly points out the funding problems faced by domestic groups. Most human rights monitoring efforts are carried on a voluntary basis. It should also be pointed out that, unlike many other budding post-Soviet initiatives, human rights groups receive no government subsidies or the use of any state facilities for communications, printing or holding meetings. Finally, it should be noted that a representative of Human Rights Watch/Helsinki was denied entry into the Supreme Soviet compound during the standoff between the CPD and President Yeltsin.
The new Constitution contains numerous guarantees against discrimination, but as the report notes, reality and theory often clash in this area. The report notes several important issues relative to the treatment of women, children, disabled people, indigenous people and various other national, racial, religious and ethnic minorities. It does not, however, adequately assess alleged discrimination against and harassment of peoples from other countries of the former Soviet Union, including Armenians, Georgians and Azeris. Human rights groups have received reports of verbal and physical abuse of people detained for identity checks, as well as of extortion. One report concerned an incident on October 7-8 when OMON special forces beat eight refugees from Tajikistan and forced them to lie on the floor at gunpoint while the special forces ransacked their Moscow apartment and stole money and clothing. Such incidents suggest that Russia is not yet fully and effectively committed to upholding the human rights of national or ethnic minorities.
The report's treatment of worker rights competently addresses a number of thorny issues, the most difficult being the continued domination of unions by the successor to the Soviet-era central trade union. The so-called Federation of Independent Trade Unions of Russia, clearly backs, and is backed by, the more conservative factions in Russian politics. As the report points out, the federation has often sided with management against the Yeltsin government, thereby creating an unusual alliance in Western eyes. The federation has in fact blamed the Yeltsin
300
_RUSSIA
reforms, which it characterizes as "totalitarian fantasies," for the loss of workers' previously "secure and modestly comfortable living standards."
The severe economic and institutional crises associated with privatization and the disengagement of the state from the economic sector are probably the major causes for many of the oppressive conditions found in the Russian workplace. Because the government still controls many industries indirectly through subsidies and control of access to materials and markets, there seems an utter lack of accountability. Management blames government fiscal policy for industry failures and government blames managerial incompetence and greed, with workers caught in the middle.
Moreover, the inflation of the last three years makes even progressive social insurance programs nearly impossible to plan and maintain. A May 1993 study showed that the minimum pension in Russia had grown from 120 rubles to 8,120 rubles over the previous two years, though this reflects the collapse of the ruble more than an increased commitment to social welfare. Although pensions are indexed, such increases cannot be maintained and in any case compound the problem of inflation. Similarly, the percentage of income spent on food for the average Russian household was reported to have risen to 59% in May 1993, up from 34% a little over a year earlier. Pensioners were spending up to 80% of their income on food.
A special problem exists in the military, where work and housing conditions are truly catastrophic. Figures show that over 100,000 members of the military currently lack proper housing; some estimates are as high as 180,000. Work and safety conditions are reported to be among the worst in the world.
Finally, the report fails to discuss the growing violence associated with organized crime, which seems to operate either beyond government control or with tacit support of some sectors of government. The Interior Ministry reported the 94 entrepreneurs killed in 1993, and several extrajudicial killings have been linked to the Russian mob. Refusal to pay protection money may be one motive. There are reportedly over 3,000 organized gangs in Russia, some of which control entire industries.
301
CRITIQUE 1993
