Russia
The brazen murders of at least five civic rights activists and violence and harassment
toward several others marked a severe deterioration in the human rights climate
in Russia. These shocking developments contrasted sharply with some positive
rhetoric by President Dmitry Medvedev recognizing the importance of civil
society.
Civil Society
2009 saw an increase in violence and threats against human rights defenders,
civic activists, and independent journalists in Russia, particularly those working
on the North Caucasus. These attacks—along with restrictive laws, harassment of
independent groups, and hostile official attitudes—worsened the already negative
environment for civil society.
On January 19, 2009, Stanislav Markelov, a prominent human rights lawyer who
had defended victims of rights violations in Chechnya, was shot dead on a central
Moscow street in broad daylight. Anastasia Baburova, a journalist with him, was
also killed. Two people were charged with the killings. In March, Lev Ponamaryev,
head of the Za Prava Cheloveka movement, was severely beaten in Moscow. In
July unknown attackers shot Albert Pchelintsev, an anti-corruption activist in
Khimki near Moscow, in the mouth with a stun gun, telling him it was to shut him
up.
In summer 2009 three local civic activists were abducted and killed in Chechnya.
On July 15, Natalia Estemirova, a leading human rights defender who documented
abuses by Chechen law enforcement and security agencies for the Memorial
Human Rights Center, was abducted in Grozny, the Chechen capital; her body was
found later the same day. Estemirova’s shocking murder was followed by harassment
and intimidation of several Memorial staff in Chechnya; one had to be evacuated
due to threats to his security. On August 10, Zarema Sadulayeva and her
husband Alik Dzhabrailov, who worked for Save the Generation, a humanitarian
organization, were abducted from their Grozny office and were found murdered
the next day. Local law enforcement and security personnel are implicated in the abduction and murder of Sadulayeva and Dzhabrailov, and their involvement in
Estemirova’s murder cannot be excluded.
In October, Maksharip Aushev, a prominent opposition and civic activist in
Ingushetia, was murdered when unknown shooters sprayed his car with bullets.
Following Estemirova’s murder, Oleg Orlov, chairman of the Memorial Human
Rights Center, made a statement implicating Ramzan Kadyrov, the president of
Chechnya, in the crime. Kadyrov sued Orlov for defamation and lodged a criminal
complaint against him. In October a Moscow civil court ordered Orlov to pay a fine
and issue a public retraction, and police launched an investigation against Orlov
for criminal libel, which carries a maximum sentence of three years’ imprisonment.
In 2009 President Medvedev made several statements underscoring the importance
of democracy and human rights in Russia and acknowledging areas where
change is needed. Notably, Medvedev appointed a working group to propose
reforms to the restrictive 2006 law on NGOs. As a result, in June parliament
adopted modifications to the registration and accounting procedures for noncommercial
organizations.
Most restrictive aspects of the 2006 law and its implementing regulations remain,
however, which subject Russian and foreign NGOs to excessive, unwarranted government
scrutiny and interference. The authorities also use tax inspections,
inspections for fire code or labor code compliance, police raids, and politically
motivated criminal charges to harass and intimidate in particular organizations
that receive foreign funding or work on controversial issues. For example, in July
the Kazan Human Rights Center, which assists victims of police abuse, and Agora,
a consortium of human rights organizations, endured a series of harassing
inspections and legal action against their leaders that appeared to be aimed at
stopping their work.
Many NGOs are vulnerable to being targeted under the 2002 Law on Countering
Extremist Activity, which designates certain forms of defamation of public officials
as extremist and allows any politically or ideologically motivated crime to be designated
as extremist.
The North Caucasus
The Islamist insurgency in the North Caucasus republics of Chechnya, Dagestan,
and Ingushetia appeared to intensify in 2009. Casualties among civilians and law
enforcement and security forces increased. Counterterrorism operations continue
to involve grave human rights violations such as torture, enforced disappearances,
and extrajudicial executions. Impunity for these abuses is rampant.
On April 16, federal authorities announced that they had ended the counterterrorism
operation in Chechnya, marking a formal end to the armed conflict. The
announcement had no bearing on the authorities’ use of torture and illegal detention
in counterterrorism efforts. Collective punishment against people with suspected
rebel ties became a pronounced trend beginning in June 2008 and continuing
into 2009: Memorial and Human Rights Watch documented at least 30 cases
in which such individuals’ homes were deliberately burned, apparently by
Chechen law enforcement personnel. No one has been held responsible for the
house burnings. High-level Chechen officials, including President Kadyrov, made
public statements stressing that insurgents’ families should expect to be punished
unless they convince their relatives among the insurgents to surrender.
The July murder of Natalia Estemirova (see above) highlights the danger to those
who expose abuse. High-level Chechen officials have made threatening statements
accusing human rights activists of supporting insurgents.
In 119 rulings by November, the European Court of Human Rights has held Russia
responsible for serious human rights violations in Chechnya. In almost all cases
the court also found Russia responsible for failing to properly investigate these
crimes. In most cases Russia has promptly paid the compensation and legal fees
as required by the judgments. But it has failed to implement measures to rectify
violations in individual cases, including ensuring effective investigations and
holding perpetrators accountable. It has also failed to adopt so-called general
measures to implement the rulings, which entail policy and legal changes to prevent
similar violations recurring. This failure serves to perpetuate the violations
described above.
In Dagestan, according to local groups, at least 18 persons were abducted in
2009. The bodies of 11 were found shortly after their abduction, bearing gunshot or other wounds indicating a violent death. One of them was Nariman
Mamedyarov, who had told Human Rights Watch that in September 2008 he was
abducted and held by authorities in incommunicado detention and tortured.
Mamedyarov was abducted again in September 2009 and was found shot dead;
the authorities claimed he died during an armed clash with law enforcement officials.
Of the other abductees, three were released or escaped their captors, and
four remain missing. In some cases, the individuals’ Islamic practices made them
vulnerable to being branded “extremists” by the authorities, and in others the
authorities suspected them of some connection with the insurgency.
Human rights activists and independent journalists in Dagestan have been subjected
to violence and intimidation. On August 20 an arson attack burned the
office of the Mothers of Dagestan for Human Rights (MDHR), an independent
organization that documents abusive counterterrorism practices. The fire followed
the shooting death on August 11 of Abdumalik Akhmedilov, a newspaper editor
who had criticized law enforcement officials for suppressing political and religious
dissent in their campaign against religious extremism. In September several
local activists, journalists, and lawyers received leaflets with explicit death
threats.
Insurgent attacks on public officials, security and law-enforcement personnel,
and civilians in Ingushetia have been on the rise since 2007, with a marked
increase in such violence in summer 2009.
The Ingush leadership stands out for making at least a rhetorical acknowledgment
of human rights obligations. In April 2009 Yunus-Bek Yevkurov, president of
Ingushetia, committed to ensuring that counterinsurgency operations are carried
out in line with Russia’s legal obligations. In 2009 he held numerous meetings
with local human rights defenders and relatives of the “disappeared.” He also
created a human rights council to advise him. In June Yevkurov suffered severe
injuries from an assassination attempt.
Despite this rhetorical commitment, local organizations continue to report that
government forces commit extrajudicial executions, unlawful, abduction-style
detentions, and torture and cruel or degrading treatment during the course of
counterinsurgency operations.
The Armed Conflict over South Ossetia
More than a year after the August 2008 conflict between Russia and Georgia over
South Ossetia, impunity for violations of international humanitarian law by all
sides of the conflict still prevails. More than 20,000 individuals displaced from
deliberately destroyed ethnic Georgian villages in South Ossetia remain unable to
return to their homes.
In September 2009 a European Union-funded independent fact-finding mission
published its report, concluding that Georgian, Russian, and South Ossetian
forces committed international human rights and humanitarian law violations during
the conflict. The violations included indiscriminate attacks by the Georgian
and Russian militaries, and a widespread campaign of looting and burning of ethnic
Georgian villages, along with ill-treatment, beatings, hostage-taking, and arbitrary
arrests, by South Ossetian forces. The report also found that the Russian military
failed to prevent or stop violations by Ossetian militia.
Migrant Worker Rights
Russia has between 4 and 9 million migrant workers, over 80 percent of whom
come from other countries of the former Soviet Union. Forty percent of migrant
workers are employed in construction, where they face abuses that include confiscation
of passports, denial of contracts, non-payment or delayed payment of
wages, and unsafe working conditions. Migrant workers have few effective
options for redress for these abuses. Government agencies continue to consider
and implement measures that reverse progressive reforms of laws affecting
migrant workers enacted in 2007.
Police frequently use document inspections to extort money from visible minorities,
including migrant workers.
Health Issues and the HIV/AIDS Epidemic
Hundreds of thousands of people in Russia are dependent on opioids. The government’s
decision to shift funding away from harm reduction programs, which
have saved thousands from becoming infected, is a devastating blow to HIV prevention efforts in the country. Paired with its stubborn refusal—despite overwhelming
evidence of its effectiveness—to allow drug treatment with methadone,
the Russian government’s new position is putting injection drug users at grave
risk of HIV infection.
Poor availability of morphine due to unnecessarily strict drug laws continues to
cause tremendous suffering for hundreds of thousands of patients with pain due
to cancer, HIV/AIDS, and other conditions.
Key International Actors
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) adopted a new
Russia Strategy in 2009. The strategy did not adequately reflect serious problems
with Russia’s commitment to pluralism and the rule of law, and did not reflect
EBRD policies requiring measures to ensure that recipients of the bank’s funding
do not benefit from the exploitation of workers, including migrant workers.
The European Union held two rounds of human rights consultations with Russia,
meetings ultimately undermined by the lack of high-level Russian participation
and adequate follow-up mechanisms. Apart from ad hoc statements and bilateral
interventions by select European leaders, notably Germany’s chancellor Angela
Merkel, human rights concerns overall appeared to remain largely absent from
higher-level talks between the EU member states and the EU institutionally and
Russia. The EU continued negotiations on its Partnership and Cooperation
Agreement with Russia, which expired in December 2007.
The election of Barack Obama as president of the United States renewed
prospects for a constructive US-Russia relationship. Obama and Secretary of
State Hillary Clinton vowed to reset relations with Moscow, and Obama noted that
improved relations should include strengthened human rights and rule of law in
Russia. It remains to be seen whether this will result in a strong resolve to confront
egregious human rights problems. During his July 2009 trip to Moscow,
Obama underscored the importance of a vibrant civil society, civic freedoms, and
“a government that’s accountable and transparent.” Clinton visited Russia in
October and emphasized to a group of civil society actors that human rights and
democratic values will have an important place in the Russian-American dialogue.
In a report published in September, Dick Marty, Parliamentary Assembly of the
Council of Europe (PACE) rapporteur on legal remedies for human rights violations
in the North Caucasus, noted that the “general climate of impunity at all levels
has generated an atmosphere conducive to the spread of violence.” Also in
September PACE expressed concern about attacks and threats against human
rights defenders in the North Caucasus by holding a focused debate on the issue.
During the same session PACE adopted another resolution on the August 2008
war over South Ossetia and its fallout, demanding that international monitors and
returning Georgian residents be granted unrestricted access to both South
Ossetia and Abkhazia.
Russia underwent review by the United Nations Human Rights Council (HRC)
Universal Periodic Review mechanism in February, during which it failed to commit
to concrete human rights reforms in key areas of concern raised during the
review, such as access for UN monitors, reform of the restrictive NGO law, and
ending impunity for rampant abuses in the North Caucasus. Russia was reelected
to the HRC in May, despite concerns about its human rights record. Following
Natalia Estemirova’s murder in July, the UN special procedures on torture,
enforced disappearances, extrajudicial executions, and human rights defenders
requested access to Russia to conduct an investigation, which the Russian government
refused. Russia’s human rights record came up for close scrutiny again
in October during a review by the UN Human Rights Committee, which resulted in
strongly-worded conclusions highlighting numerous concerns and urging Russia
to take concrete action to address them.
The International Criminal Court continued to keep under analysis crimes committed
by all parties to the 2008 conflict over South Ossetia. Russia is not an ICC
state party.
The International Olympic Committee (IOC) made several visits to Sochi, the Black
Sea resort that will host the 2014 Winter Olympic Games. The IOC did not grant a
request to meet with activists or citizens seeking to raise concerns about property
rights and environmental violations in connection with preparations for the
Games.