 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 According to the Soviet Constitution, the Soviet Union
 (U.S.S.R.) is "a Socialist state of the whole people,
 expressing the will and interests of the workers, peasants,
 and intelligentsia, and the working people of all nations and
 nationalities of the country." In fact, the U.S.S.R. is a
 one-party dictatorship, dominated by the leadership of the
 Communist Party. That leadership is a self-perpetuating elite
 which, with the assistance of a powerful secret police
 apparatus, attempts to direct all aspects of public life and
 to prohibit the development of independent centers of
 political or ideological influence.
 The Committee for State Security (KGB), police authorities,
 and prosecutors' offices are charged by the party leadership
 with enforcing the population's compliance with policy
 decisions, directives, and legislation. They do so by seeking
 to intimidate dissenters and potential dissenters and, when
 necessary, by meting out punishment, including long-term
 imprisonment or exile.
 The Constitution limits the exercise of basic civil and
 political rights to activities which "strengthen and develop
 the Socialist system" as defined by the party. These
 limitations are reflected in legislation circumscribing
 freedom of speech, assembly, association, and religion, and
 providing criminal penalties for "anti-Soviet" behavior.
 Those who attempt to exercise their rights face arrest, trial,
 and imprisonment, or internment in a psychiatric hospital.
 Human rights monitors, religious believers, peace activists,
 and proponents of greater cultural and political rights for
 ethnic minorities were all subjected to arrest and
 imprisonment in 1986.
 The December release of Andrey Sakharov and Yelena Bonner from
 internal exile and the early releases from labor camp of
 several other prominent dissidents were positive developments.
 But the deaths of human rights advocates Anatoliy Marchenko
 and Mark Morozov in Chistopol' prison underscored the
 continuing perilous position of thousands of Soviet prisoners
 of conscience.
 Jewish, ethnic German, and Armenian emigration remained at
 severely restricted levels, despite the desire of many
 thousands to emigrate. Jewish emigration was the second
 lowest in 20 years. Those few who were allowed to emigrate
 during 1986 included a number of prominent "refuseniks" whose
 applications had been pending for more than 10 years.
 In early November, the Soviet authorities made public
 regulations controlling the granting of exit permission to
 Soviet citizens. In singling out family reunification as the
 only legitimate ground for emigration, the regulations
 violated the Soviet commitment to the Universal Declaration of
 Human Rights, which was incorporated into the Helsinki Final
 Act.
 Soviet performance in resolving longstanding family
 reunification cases was significantly better than in previous
 years. Over 100 such cases, affecting the United States,
 Canada, France, and Australia, were resolved in 1986 or were
 in the process of being resolved.
 
 
 1055
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 Abroad, the Soviet Union continues its occupation of
 Afghanistan and its support of the Vietnamese occupation of
 Cambodia which have resulted in widespread and egregious human
 rights violations. There has been evidence in previous years
 that the Soviet Union has been responsible for the use of
 chemical warfare in Afghanistan, Laos, and Cambodia.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS.
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were occasional reports of the death under unusual
 circumstances of people engaged in religious or political
 dissent or members of their families. The possibility of
 official involvement in such deaths, however, can neither be
 substantiated nor investigated. Also, a number of political
 prisoners and common criminals perish each year in prison and
 forced labor camps because of the severe conditions:
 beatings, strenuous physical labor, poor diet, extreme cold,
 and lack of adequate medical care. It is impossible to
 estimate the number of such deaths.
 Mark Morozov, samizdat publisher and member of the unofficial
 Free Inter-Professional Trade Union, reportedly died in
 Chistopol' Prison in August. He had suffered from heart
 disease and rheumatoid arthritis. One of the pioneers of the
 human rights movement, Anatoly Marchenko, died on an
 undisclosed date in the same prison apparently following a
 4-month hunger strike. Press reports stressed that his health
 had already been ruined by long years of hard labor and
 beatings in prison. His body was not released to his family.
 Soviet law provides for the imposition of capital punishment
 for a variety of offenses, including treason, but also for
 some economic crimes (e.g., fraud, corruption) which are not
 generally considered capital offenses outside the U.S.S.R.
 There are no official statistics available regarding its
 imposition, but official confirmations sometimes appear. In
 August, for example, a former Uzbek Minister of the
 Cotton-Ginning Industry, Vakhobzhan Usmanov, was sentenced to
 death for corruption and fraud.
 b. Disappearance
 There have been no known instances of prolonged or permanent
 disappearance in recent years. However, it is not unusual for
 people to be arrested or confined in psychiatric facilities
 without next of kin being notified. Concerned relatives are
 expected to initiate an inquiry with the authorities to find
 out if and when their family member was arrested, and where he
 or she is being held.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 So many Soviet political prisoners suffer both mental and
 physical abuse and mistreatment during interrogation, trial,
 and confinement, according to a wide variety of sources, that
 such treatment must be regarded as a systematic policy and
 practice. Sources indicate that before trial, some defendants
 have been threatened, humiliated, and beaten to force
 confessions. Once convicted, prisoners find that the limited
 
 
 1056
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 rights guaranteed them by prison or camp regulations --the
 ability to receive packages, send letters, and see family--are
 frequently and arbitrarily withdrawn. Life in prison is
 marked by isolation, poor diet and malnutrition, compulsory
 hard labor, beatings, frequent illness, and inadequate medical
 care. Small infractions of camp rules can lead to weeks or
 months in isolation cells or to extensions of the original
 sentence. Camp authorities reportedly have occasionally
 incited other inmates to beat a political prisoner, and then
 charged and punished the victim for having caused the
 disturbance. Attempts by prisoners to practice their religion
 or to protest their treatment with hunger strikes also have
 met with punishment.
 In 1986 human rights activist Naum Yefremov was beaten
 systematically by other prisoners in a labor camp near the
 Tyumen region, according to reliable sources. In late 1985,
 the psychiatrist and Helsinki psychiatric abuse monitor Dr.
 Anatoliy Koryagin, now serving a 12-year sentence in
 Chistopol' Prison for "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda,"
 was placed in self-tightening handcuffs. He subsequently
 spent large portions of December, January, February, and April
 in a punishment cell for refusing to acknowledge his "guilt."
 Prison authorities cancelled a scheduled January family visit
 and denied his requests for medical treatment. In the
 Siberian labor camp of Vidriro, medical treatment was withheld
 for several weeks from Hebrew teacher Yuliy Edelshteyn after
 he suffered a torn urethra and broken leg in a January 1986
 fall. When he was finally taken to the hospital, doctors said
 that the delay in treatment would probably result in a
 permanent disability. Two ethnic Germans from Dushanbe
 reportedly were severely beaten by Moscow police after
 demonstrating in favor of their right to emigrate to the
 Federal Republic of Germany. Both were then sentenced to 10
 days of administrative detention.
 Provisions in Soviet law for early release from prison for the
 very ill are seldom used. At the time of release, many
 prisoners have tuberculosis, heart disease, ulcers, arthritis,
 pneumonia, meningitis, and vision and hearing problems. The
 32-year old poetess Irina Ratushinskaya emerged from prison in
 October weak from several hunger strikes and a beating.
 The Government continues to place selected political and
 religious activists in psychiatric hospitals where they are
 often subjected to the painful, forced administration of
 sedatives, antipsychotics, and other drugs. At the seventh
 All-Union Congress of Neuropathologists and Psychiatrists in
 1981, the Soviet Ministry of Health's chief neuropsychiatrist
 stated that 1.2 percent of the patients in Moscow psychiatric
 hospitals were there "in connection with visits to state
 agencies to present groundless complaints and slanderous
 statements." The Soviet Union withdrew from the World
 Psychiatric Association in February 1983 rather than face
 censure for Soviet psychiatric abuses.
 Several demonstrators suffered psychiatric confinements in
 1986. Russian "refusenik" Serafim Yevsyukov was detained in
 July and placed in a psychiatric hospital for protesting the
 second jailing of his son on the charge of draft evasion.
 Nina Kovalenko, member of the unofficial "Group to Establish
 Trust between the U.S.S.R. and U.S.A.," was arrested and
 committed to Kashchenko psychiatric hospital twice in 1986,
 both times after participating in the group's demonstrations.
 
 
 1057
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 Her treatment consisted of the forced administration of
 several antipsychotic drugs and sedatives, as well as
 interrogations about her activities. In June two group
 members from Gor'kiy were arrested and placed in a psychiatric
 hospital for demonstrating in Red Square in support of their
 right to emigrate. Moscow dissident artist Aleksandr Kalugin
 spent 1 month in a psychiatric hospital in 1986 after being
 stopped on the street during the "Good Will" games; drugs also
 were forcibly administered to him. Other political victims of
 psychiatric abuse remained in such facilities in 1986, many of
 them in special psychiatric hospitals operated by the Ministry
 of the Interior.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Government spokesmen insist that prosecution occurs only in
 cases in which persons commit acts prohibited by law. But the
 provisions of laws under which prosecutions have occurred
 themselves violate internationally recognized human rights,
 including freedom of expression and freedom of association.
 Among these provisions are:
 --Article 70, "Anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda,"
 which carries a maximum penalty of 7 years' imprisonment and
 up to an additional 5 years in internal exile.
 --Article 190-1, "The dissemination of deliberately
 hostile fabrications defaming the Soviet State and social
 system." This article, introduced in 1965, carries a maximum
 penalty of 3 years' imprisonment;
 --Article 190-3, "The organization of, or active
 participation in, a group actively violating public order,"
 which carries a maximum penalty of 3 years' imprisonment.
 --Article 227, "The infringement of the person and the
 rights of citizens under the appearance of performing
 religious ceremonies," which carries a maximum penalty of 5
 years' imprisonment.
 In addition to these provisions, the authorities continue to
 use criminal code provisions against "parasitism,"
 "hooliganism," and "illegal commerce" or "speculation" to
 harass persons for political activity. Dissidents are
 sometimes fired from their jobs, then threatened with arrest
 or even in some cases arrested for "parasitism" because they
 have no jobs. The authorities also reportedly fabricate
 charges for common crimes, such as the possession of drugs or
 weapons. In one case, Moscow "refusenik" and Hebrew teacher
 Aleksey Magarik was sentenced in June to 3 years in a labor
 camp on charges of possession and transport of narcotics; such
 charges have been frequently used against dissidents in the
 past under circumstances suggesting that the narcotics were
 planted on the victims by the authorities.
 Soviet criminal codes also permit administrative jailing for
 periods of up to 15 days. In practice, such incarcerations
 are often used to punish demonstrators and political and
 religious activists under the guise of "hooliganism" or
 "disturbing the peace." The criminal codes also provide
 Soviet authorities power to detain citizens for 3 to 4 hours
 for questioning; after this period, detainees must either be
 charged or released. There were several reports in 1986 of
 groups or individuals who held unofficial demonstrations in
 support of various causes; most were either detained for a few
 
 
 1058
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 hours or given 15-day jail sentences. However, a few managed
 to carry out public protests without being detained; in some
 cases, this may have been due to the presence of foreigners,
 particularly the broadcast media. In other cases, however,
 the authorities responded more sharply, subjecting protestors
 to beatings or confinement to psychiatric institutions.
 Arbitrary detention and house arrest continued to be used by
 the authorities to prevent citizens with dissenting views from
 meeting with foreigners or other dissidents.
 According to the code of criminal procedure, pretrial
 detention can last as long as 9 months, and prisoners are not
 entitled to consult with a lawyer until shortly before trial.
 Prolonged detention thus functions as a form of preventive
 detention.
 Most political prisoners, as well as most ordinary criminals,
 are confined to camps where they are forced to labor, often
 under harsh and degrading conditions, on Soviet developmental
 projects and to assist in the production of large amounts of
 primary and manufactured goods.
 Soviet psychiatric institutions are also used to detain and
 confine dissidents arbitrarily. A Soviet Ministry of Health
 directive, issued in August 1971, authorizes the psychiatric
 confinement of individuals who pose a "social danger", without
 providing an identifiable list of suspect symptoms. In
 effect, individuals can be confined, with the assistance of
 the police, without their consent or that of their families.
 Often dissidents are arrested and, after interrogation, taken
 to psychiatric hospitals without an examination. The length
 of the detention can vary greatly, and doctors often refuse to
 give a diagnosis or set a release date. Patients committed
 under criminal confinement procedures may lose the right to be
 informed about the charges brought against them and the right
 to mount their own defense.
 In September 1983, the authorities approved a new addition to
 the Russian Soviet Federated Socialist Republic Criminal Code
 dealing with "malicious disobedience to the administration of
 corrective labor institutions." Under this provision,
 prisoners who disobey camp authorities or who have spent time
 in solitary confinement during the course of the previous year
 may be sentenced to an additional 3 years. In 1986 at least
 five political prisoners had their sentences extended at
 trials held in the prisons themselves on the basis of evidence
 given by the authorities, and several others were threatened
 with prosecution.
 The authorities have continued the practice of exiling
 political dissenters which dates back to Tsarist times. Exile
 often follows prison and, in practice, means confinement in a
 remote village where climatic conditions are often severe,
 fresh food is relatively scarce, and isolation is an
 additional burden. These conditions are mitigated only by the
 privilege of receiving food parcels from family members,
 moving about within a limited area, finding work (usually
 menial), and arranging one's own (often primitive)
 accommodations. The families of exiles are usually permitted
 to live with them, although it may take several months to
 receive the required permits.
 Persons released from exile often are not allowed to return to
 their former places of residence. Some are forced to live in
 other areas of the country, in reality ensuring continued
 
 
 1059
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 separation from their homes. Others, having nowhere to go,
 return to their old homes without residence permits, where
 they risk arrest for violating residence laws. In August
 1985, the Council of Ministers reportedly issued Decree No.
 736, as yet unpublished, which severely limits the right of
 former prisoners to visit Moscow or its suburbs until the
 record of the conviction is officially removed.
 The authorities also occasionally exile persons abroad or
 permit their "voluntary" departure. In 1986 the Soviets
 released six well-known political prisoners, including two
 Helsinki Monitor Group founders. Anatoliy Shcharanskiy, along
 with three other prisoners held by the East, was released in
 Berlin in February in exchange for five prisoners held by the
 West. In October, Yuriy Orlov left the Soviet Union with his
 wife, Irina, at the time of the release and return to the
 U.S.S.R. of accused Soviet spy Gennadiy Zakharov. Two other
 imprisoned Soviet dissidents, Vladimir Brodskiy and Alexandr
 Shatravka, members of the "Group to Establish Trust between
 the U.S.S.R. and the U.S.A.," were also released from prison
 ahead of schedule and allowed to leave the country. In
 October the dissident poetess Irina Ratushinskaya was released
 from prison and in December allowed to emigrate to Great
 Britain. In late December, at the end of a 3-year sentence,
 Crimean Tatar leader Mustafa Dzhimilyev was suddenly released
 shortly after being sentenced to an additional 3 years in a
 labor camp. "Group to Establish Trust" member Ludmilla
 Chukayeva, meanwhile, was also released in late December,
 after serving 6 months of a 2-year sentence. Finally, in
 December Andrey Sakharov and Yelena Bonner were released from
 their long and isolated internal exile in the closed city of
 Gor'kiy. According to Sakharov, General Secretary Gorbachev
 telephoned him on December 16 to inform him that he and Bonner
 were being permitted to return to Moscow.
 Despite these actions, the Government continues to resist
 international pressure on behalf of other widely respected
 prisoners of conscience, such as Anatoliy Koryagin and Iosif
 Begun, and to imprison or confine to internal exile more than
 35 former Helsinki monitors.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Communist Party control of society extends to the legal and
 judicial system and is exercised in political cases to negate
 constitutional guarantees of the objectivity and independence
 of the judicial process. Soviet authorities generally ensure
 that political trials are closed to the public by requiring
 admission passes, packing the courtroom, and harassing or
 detaining observers outside. The location and date of a trial
 are often announced on short notice and may be changed with
 little warning. Western journalists and diplomats are
 regularly denied access to political trials as well as
 permission to visit cities outside Moscow where trials are
 taking place.
 Defense attorneys, like judges, are subject to political
 pressures and constraints applied by the security forces and
 the party. According to official statistics, about 60 percent
 of attorneys are party members. Moreover, attorneys must have
 special clearance to act as defendant's counsel in a political
 case. Attorneys who overstep their assigned role of providing
 a perfunctory defense risk losing their clearance and even
 destroying their careers. Even the most honest and vigorous
 defense is of limited utility since results indicate that the
 
 
 1060
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 outcome of political trials is determined beforehand by the
 authorities. Appeals, although permitted, are usually a
 formality. For example, in one case this year, the order
 transferring a prisoner from jail to a labor camp was signed
 1 month before his appeal was heard.
 Since data on political prisoners is regarded as a state
 secret, estimates about the number vary considerably, reaching
 many thousands. The most authoritative listing of known
 political prisoners, compiled by Soviet emigre and former
 prisoner of conscience Kronid Lubarsky, contains nearly 900
 names. Although prominent political and religious figures are
 segregated and kept in special labor camps, many lesser known
 activists are tried on nonpolitical criminal charges (e.g.
 speculation, parasitism, hooliganism, resisting arrest) and
 are treated as ordinary criminals.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Government interference in personal life is pervasive. The
 authorities regard it as a citizen's duty to inform on the
 unorthodox attitudes of family members, friends, and
 neighbors. The electronic monitoring of the residences and
 telephones of certain Soviet citizens and foreigners is done
 routinely, despite constitutional guarantees of the
 inviolability of citizens' homes. In theory no one may enter
 a home against the will of the resident "without legal
 grounds." In practice this provision has little restraining
 effect on investigative agencies, and well-documented cases of
 forced entry and illegal searches continued in 1986. Through
 the control of mail and telephone circuits, the authorities
 selectively restrict contact between citizens and foreigners,
 often intercepting mail or cutting off telephone conversations.
 Contacts with foreigners have been further discouraged with
 the issuance of a decree in 1984 which mandates fines for
 Soviet citizens who provide foreigners with "accommodation or
 transportation or have rendered them other services in
 violation of established rules." Soviets who have invited
 foreigners home have sometimes been subjected to extended
 interrogations. Foreigners are also sometimes questioned,
 harassed, threatened, and occasionally expelled after visiting
 Soviet citizens.
 Foreigners who decide to marry Soviet citizens are sometimes
 prevented from returning to the Soviet Union for the required
 registration of the intention to marry or the marriage
 itself. In one case in 1986, a U.S. citizen was not allowed
 to return to the Soviet Union to marry his pregnant fiancee;
 the baby eventually was born out of wedlock.
 The Government continues to jam U.S. and some other Western
 radio broadcasts in Russian and other Soviet languages, an
 action clearly inconsistent with the provisions of the
 Helsinki Final Act. Broadcasts in English and other Western
 European languages generally are not jammed.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution provides for most internationally accepted
 political liberties but requires that their exercise be in
 accordance with the "interests of the people and the
 
 
 1061
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 strengthening and development of the Socialist system." In
 practice, the Government does not tolerate dissident behavior
 and has not hesitated to imprison persons for exercising
 freedom of expression.
 All information media are controlled by the party and the
 Government, which own or operate almost all of them.
 Publications, films, and radio and television scripts are
 subject to censorship by the Main Administration for
 Safeguarding State Secrets in the Media. Soviet journalists
 are subject to the discipline of the Communist Party and
 subordinated to the directives of their editorial superiors,
 themselves trusted members of the party. As such, they are
 not journalists in the Western sense but rather spokesmen for
 official government policies.
 Openly dissident views on important questions of policy do not
 appear in the media. As part of the Soviet leadership's
 campaign of spotlighting problems, the media in 1986 published
 stinging criticism of corruption within the party and the
 Government and reported on the abuse of party privileges and
 on widespread mismanagement. Within narrow limits, discussion
 of policy choices and of critical domestic political,
 economic, and social issues has continued. But once a
 decision is taken, dissenting views are seldom heard. Debate
 within the leadership is occasionally reflected in published
 texts where sophisticated polemics and criticism, expressed in
 veiled language, allow experienced readers to identify policy
 trends and controversial issues. Such policy debate may not
 call into question the existing political and social system.
 Authors, publishers, and distributors of literary, religious,
 and political samizdat (self-published) materials have been
 subject to a wide range of harassment, including loss of
 employment, warnings from the KGB, apartment searches, and,
 ultimately, arrest and conviction or incarceration in mental
 hospitals. For example, six Baptist underground publishers in
 Moldavia were sentenced in May to up to 2 years in labor camp
 for their printing activities.
 The Government continues severely to circumscribe the work of
 foreign journalists and the circulation of non-Communist
 foreign newspapers, which are rarely available to average
 Soviet citizens. Overt censorship of wire and satellite
 transmissions of news stories out of the country is rare, but
 the authorities regularly harass selected foreign journalists,
 especially those who maintain close contacts with dissidents
 and "refuseniks." The arrest of U.S. correspondent Nicholas
 Daniloff on charges of espionage underscores the vulnerable
 position of foreign correspondents in the U.S.S.R.
 All universities and research institutes are operated by the
 State or party; teaching and research must conform to official
 requirements. In areas such as foreign policy and
 contemporary Soviet history, these requirements narrowly
 circumscribe the content of research and teaching to the
 virtual exclusion of independent investigation. Academic
 freedom, as it is known in the West, does not exist. All
 books in the Soviet Union are published by the State or party
 and are subject to prepublication censorship. Somewhat
 greater freedom of expression is allowed in fiction and
 scholarship not involving politically sensitive subjects.
 However, the Government's range of political sensitivities is
 broad, and censorship standards are often applied in an
 arbitrary and capricious manner.
 
 
 1062
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 During 1986 censorship standards were relaxed somewhat, and
 the realm of the permissible in the field of culture was
 expanded under the new policy of "glasnost," variously
 translated as "publicity" or "openness." A number of
 previously banned books and plays were published, and more
 far-reaching, though still limited, criticism of Soviet
 institutions was permitted. In addition, the Soviet news
 media was allowed to publish information on internal events,
 such as disasters and riots, which was previously forbidden.
 Despite this relaxation, the "glasnost" policy was carefully
 controlled and stage-managed from above. And portrayals of
 the negative aspects of Soviet life tended to serve the
 leadership's interests by discrediting its adversaries within
 the Soviet official establishment.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Constitution grants citizens the right to associate in
 public organizations "in accordance with the aim of building
 communism." In practice, public associations are organized by
 the authorities or are subject to their strict control, and
 the Government suppresses attempts to function independently
 of its supervision. As a result of a campaign during the last
 few years, most independent human rights or peace groups have
 been broken up and have ceased functioning. Those eliminated
 include the Helsinki Watch groups, which attempted to monitor
 the Government's implementation of the Helsinki Final Act, and
 the Psychiatric Watch Group, which monitored Soviet abuses in
 psychiatry. Most of the members of these groups remain
 imprisoned or in exile. Georgian human rights activists
 Tenghiz Gudava and Emanuel Tvaladze, who attempted in 1985 to
 revive the Georgian branch of the Helsinki Watch Group, were
 tried, convicted, and sentenced in June 1986 to terms of 5 and
 7 years in a labor camp respectively, followed by 3 years in
 internal exile. Gudava's brother Eduard was sentenced to 4
 years in a labor camp in January on charges of malicious
 hooliganism.'
 Those unofficial groups and associations which have not been
 completely suppressed function under severe pressure and
 harassment from the authorities. For example, the "Group to
 Establish Trust between the U.S.S.R. and the U.S.A." was a
 major target of the authorities in 1986 as members were
 arrested, detained, beaten, confined to psychiatric
 institutions, or exiled abroad. The group's attempts to hold
 seminars have been blocked by arrests, both before and during
 the meetings. Group members Yuriy Medvedkov, Nikolai Khramov,
 and Aleksandr Zaytsev, among others, each spent at least 15
 days in detention in 1986 on charges of petty hooliganism for
 their parts in street protests. In an evident effort to
 remove the group's leadership, leader Vladimir Brodskiy was
 released in September from prison 2 years early and allowed to
 emigrate with his family. Yuriy and Ol'ga Medvedkov, active
 members of the group, also received exit permission and
 emigrated in September. Nina Kovalenko, who was twice
 confined to psychiatric hospitals in 1986, was released in
 December and permitted to emigrate.
 Persons who staged their own protests were also subject to
 repression by the authorities. Yuriy Chekanovskiy, who along
 with another "refusenik" held a brief demonstration in June in
 Moscow's Gogol Square insisting on the right to go to Israel,
 was arrested and sentenced to 10 days for disturbing the peace
 and impeding traffic.
 
 
 1063
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 Trade unions are strictly subordinated to the Communist Party
 and act as agents of the Government in implementing economic
 policy and ensuring labor discipline. The unions do not act
 as collective bargaining agents. The International Labor
 Organization's Committee of Experts has noted that the Soviet
 Union has contravened the Convention on Freedom of Association
 and Protection of the Right to Organize by imposing a
 constitutional link between the Communist Party and trade
 unions, which restricted the right of the unions to organize
 their own activities and formulate their own programs. The
 right to strike is not recognized, and strikes are rare. Some
 strikes are known to have been ruthlessly put down by the
 security forces. At the same time, local authorities often
 make concessions when confronted with a spontaneous strike
 over a local, limited grievance. Strikes which reportedly
 occurred in 1986 in the Ukraine and Belorussia to protest
 increases in the price of meat reportedly ended peacefully,
 with the authorities making concessions on the strikers'
 demands.
 There were no reports of independent labor activity in the
 U.S.S.R. during 1986.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Constitution guarantees the "right to profess or not to
 profess any religion and to conduct religious worship or
 atheistic propaganda." The right to conduct religious worship
 and the right to make atheistic propaganda are not equivalent,
 however, since the former right does not include the right to
 conduct "religious propaganda," i.e., to engage in public
 defense of religious values or to rebut official attacks on
 religion. Moreover, extensive legislation and administrative
 regulations on "religious cults" place additional restrictions
 on the freedom of religion.
 Registration with the Soviet Council on Religious Affairs is
 required for religious groups of 20 adults or more. The State
 is able to limit the number of congregations since the
 authorities reserve the right to grant or withhold
 registration. Their refusal to grant registration has been
 used to deny legal status to an entire religious denomination,
 for example, to the Ukrainian Catholic (Uniate) Church since
 1946. Once registered, religious congregations must accept
 strict regulations which prohibit proselytizing, religious
 discussion and Bible study groups, charitable activity, and
 formal religious training for children. In some instances,
 the authorities reportedly have removed children from families
 permitting or conducting such instruction in place of Soviet
 schooling. Participation in religious ceremonies is cause for
 exclusion from the Communist Party. Existing seminaries and
 other institutions of clerical education and the numbers of
 students permitted to pursue a religious vocation do not
 provide a sufficient body of trained clergy for officially
 registered denominations.
 Many groups of believers refuse to register officially on the
 grounds that much of the legislation affecting "religious
 cults" contradicts the tenets of their religious beliefs.
 Unregistered believers, such as some Baptists, Jehovah's
 Witnesses, Seventh-Day Adventists, Pentacostalists, and Hare
 Krishnas are subject to repressive measures, including
 harassment at school or place of employment, denial of access
 to housing, dismissal from work, and imprisonment. One
 reliable Western count lists approximately 400 religious
 
 
 1064
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 activists who are currently serving prison sentences on
 charges related to their religious beliefs.
 The unregistered Pentacostalist Church continued to suffer
 severe persecution. Pentacostalist Bishop Vasiliy Boyechko
 was sentenced in March to 3 years in a labor camp allegedly
 for encouraging his congregation to resist official
 registration. The small Pentacostalist community in
 Chuguyevka in the Soviet Far East likewise continued to face
 repression during 1986. All adult members of that community
 waged a hunger strike in April to protest harassment by local
 KGB officials and the mistreatment of eight imprisoned fellow
 parishoners. Among the Baptists, former vice president of
 the Soviet Baptist Church Pyotr Rumanchik, who had already
 served 5 years in a labor camp, was sentenced to an additional
 5 years in February for anti-Soviet slander and violations of
 camp regulations. Baptist leader Pavel Rytikov, who has
 already spent 10 years in camps, reportedly was sentenced in
 April to 18 months for parole violations.
 The traditional religious affiliation of ethnic Russians and
 Eastern Ukrainians is the Russian Orthodox Church. While
 tolerating the existence of this church, the authorities
 usually have sought by a variety of means to discourage the
 population's interest and participation and to limit access to
 churches. A late September Pravda editorial criticized the
 official religious establishment and called for stronger
 stress on atheistic education, and an October 1 speech by
 Party leader Yegor Ligachev echoed that theme.
 In Moscow, authorities permit only about 50 churches to
 function, At Easter, the Russian Orthodox Church's most
 important religious holiday, police often block or deny access
 to the crowds trying to attend services.
 Believers active in other than officially sanctioned church
 rituals are often punished. Two Orthodox activists, Aleksandr
 Ogorodnikov and Sergey Khodorovich, who were already serving
 sentences for their religious activities, were given
 additional 3-year sentences for violations of labor camp
 regulations. Orthodox activist Feliks Svetov was sentenced
 January 8 to 5 years in internal exile for anti-Soviet
 slander. Ukrainian Orthodox activist Pavel Protsenko
 reportedly was arrested in July on charges of anti-Soviet
 slander. Russian Orthodox deacon and dissident historian
 Vladimir Rusak was arrested in April and sentenced in
 September to a total of 7 years in a labor camp followed by 5
 years in internal exile on charges of anti-Soviet agitation
 and propaganda.
 In the Ukraine, the campaign against defenders of the outlawed
 Uniate Church continued. Despite the 1985 imprisonment of
 church leaders Iosif Terelya and Vasiliy Kobrin, the church
 remained active, and the clandestine Chronicle of the Catholic
 Church in Ukraine reportedly reappeared after an extended
 hiatus.
 Persecution of Catholic activists continued unabated. In
 Moscow, Catholic activist Kirill Popov was sentenced in April
 to 6 years of strict-regime labor camp followed by 5 years of
 internal exile on charges of anti-Soviet agitation and
 propaganda.
 Religious Jews also have come under heavy harassment and
 pressure to curtail their activities. Moscow Jewish activist
 
 
 1065
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 Pinkas Polonskiy was threatened in May with legal action by
 the KGB for his activities involving the teaching of the
 Torah. In September, after a group of Jews organized the
 repair of a ritual bath in Moscow's one Hasidic synagogue,
 local government authorities destroyed the bath, claiming that
 the group had not requested the necessary official permission
 to repair it.
 Although only a small number of mosques are open for use in
 the Muslim regions of Central Asia and Azerbaijan, Islam
 appears to retain a strong hold on the population. Unofficial
 mullahs, who function without government permission, are the
 subject of nearly constant pressure. Soviet press
 condemnations of foreign (mostly Iranian) Islamic radio
 broadcasts and increased jamming of these broadcasts reflect
 considerable anxiety on the part of the authorities. Official
 propaganda efforts are tailored to bolster atheism among the
 Muslim peoples of the U.S.S.R. and advocate secular Soviet
 ceremonies as substitutes for religious observances on the
 occasion of births, marriages, and deaths. The unauthorized
 printing and distribution of religious books continues to be
 met with harsh punishment.
 Even tiny religious groups were not immune to severe
 pressure. Harassment, arrests, and trials of Hare Krishna
 followers in the Baltic Republics, the Ukraine, the Russian
 Republic, and the Caucasus continued unabated. Ukrainian
 Krishna activist Ol'ga Sushchevskaya was sentenced to 3 years
 in a labor camp for "infringement of the rights of citizens,
 under the guise of performing religious rites." Followers
 have been confined to psychiatric hospitals in Armenia and the
 Ukraine. According to a reliable Western source, 28 Hare
 Krishna followers are currently in labor camps or psychiatric
 hospitals.
 The authorities exert wide-ranging pressure, including through
 the official media, to discourage religious belief in general
 among its citizens. The Communist Party is, according to its
 rules, an atheistic organization. Membership in the party,
 considered incompatible with religious belief, is in effect a
 requirement for advancement to most positions of authority or
 prestige in the country. Thus the authorities have virtually
 excluded practicing believers from attractive educational
 opportunities and desirable careers.
 Only a few religious publications of controlled content, such
 as the "Vestnik" of the Russian Orthodox Patriarchate, are
 allowed to appear. The practice of religion is discouraged by
 strictly applied limitations on the number of sacred books,
 such as the Bible or the Koran, which may be printed and by
 government prohibitions against their importation. The number
 of clergymen and places of worship today is only a small
 fraction of the number which existed before the October 1917
 Revolution. At the same time, Soviet officials recognize that
 up to 70 million Soviet citizens adhere to some religion.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Freedom of movement is neither guaranteed by law nor respected
 in practice. Although citizens are generally free to move
 about within the country, travel in certain areas (e.g.,
 frontier regions or areas of military significance) requires
 special permission. All adults are issued identity documents
 or internal passports which must be carried on their person
 
 
 1066
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 during travel and used to register visits of more than 3 days
 with the local authorities. Approximately 20 percent of
 Soviet territory is formally closed to travel by foreigners,
 and except for major urban centers most of the remaining
 territory is in practice difficult to visit or inaccessible.
 The right to choose one's place of residence, although
 formally guaranteed by law, is subject to restrictions.
 Everyone is required to register his or her place of
 residence. The authorities'limit the number of residence
 permits in an increasing number of large cities, including
 Moscow, Leningrad, and Kiev, where housing is at a premium.
 An unpublished directive issued by the USSR Council of
 Ministers in August 1985 (the text became available from
 unofficial sources in 1986) excludes from Moscow citizens
 convicted of certain offenses, including all the "political"
 articles of the criminal code. Its purpose was to reduce
 contacts between released activists and foreigners resident in
 Moscow, and it reinforces the KGB practice of interfering with
 trips to Moscow by activists living elsewhere.
 Foreign travel, in particular to Western countries, is a
 privilege reserved primarily for trusted persons in high party
 or government positions. Soviet citizens must have a special
 passport for foreign travel and an exit visa specifying the
 precise destination for each trip. Almost all international
 travel by Soviet citizens, except to a few "safe" Eastern
 European countries, is done in closely monitored groups to
 lower the risk of embarrassing defections. Soviet
 authorities, with rare exceptions, require that a traveler's
 spouse or children remain in the U.S.S.R. as a guarantee of
 their return.
 The right to emigrate is extremely restricted. While the
 U.S.S.R. has signed the Helsinki Final Act and other
 international documents in which the right to leave one's
 country and return thereto is recognized, Soviet law does not
 recognize the right of citizens to emigrate by choice. The
 only recognized motive for emigration (as opposed to temporary
 visits abroad) is reunification of families. In 1986 the
 Soviet Council of Ministers adopted an emigration law which
 made that limitation explicit.
 Many Jews have waited in vain for more than 10 years for
 permission to emigrate. Official Israeli sources estimate
 that there are approximately 370,000 Soviet Jews who have
 requested the letters of invitation (vyzovs) necessary to
 apply to emigrate, and that many more Jews would eventually
 leave if emigration restrictions were lifted. However, a
 variety of administrative and extralegal sanctions, including
 loss of employment, harassment, social ostracism, and long
 delays, dissuade many Jews from even attempting to submit an
 emigration application. Jewish emigration in 1986 totaled
 914, down from 1140 in 1985, and only marginally higher than
 the 20-year low figure of 896 in 1984.
 Approximately 400 Germans and 100 Armenians left the U.S.S.R.
 in 1985. The levels in 1986 have been equally low.
 Soviet authorities in 1986 resolved a significant number of
 divided family cases affecting the United States, France, the
 United Kingdom, and Australia. Currently, 106 Soviet
 families, numbering some 375 individuals, are on a United
 States Government list of families who are actively seeking to
 
 
 1067
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 join relatives in the United States and who have been refused
 exit permission at least twice by the Soviet Government.
 During 1986 the Soviet authorities declared 75 cases from the
 U.S. list "resolved," although by year's end only about 75
 percent of these had actually been processed. By comparison,
 12 such cases had been resolved in 1985. Of 20 cases on the
 U.S. list of separated spouses at the beginning of 1986, 10
 were resolved during the course of the year, while 3 new cases
 were added.
 At least 19 U.S. citizens, who also hold Soviet citizenship
 and who are living in the Soviet Union, have been denied
 permission to emigrate, several of them for many decades.
 Four such dual nationals received permission to leave in
 1986.
 The rights of emigrants to return to the U.S.S.R., though
 guaranteed in international documents ratified by the Soviet
 Government, is usually not observed in practice. Soviet
 emigrants, leaving with an exit visa for a country with which
 the U.S.S.R. maintains diplomatic relations, generally retain
 possession of a Soviet travel passport. Some are allowed to
 return to the U.S.S.R. for short visits. Emigrants, mostly
 Jewish, departing the U.S.S.R. with exit visas for Israel
 (with which the Soviet Union has no diplomatic relations) are
 required to renounce formally Soviet citizenship prior to
 departure, thus effectively precluding their return as Soviet
 citizens. Some non-Jewish emigrants likewise have been
 stripped of their Soviet citizenship before being expelled
 (Orlov), while others have had their citizenship revoked for
 political reasons while abroad (Rostropovich, Nureyev).
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Ultimate political power is vested in the Communist Party,
 which is a self-selecting, self-perpetuating hierarchy
 controlling virtually every element of political expression at
 all levels.   The Constitution provides that the party is the
 "leading and guiding force of Soviet society and the nucleus
 of its political system, of all state organizations and public
 organizations." Ordinary citizens have little opportunity to
 influence the actions of the party. Actual power within the
 party flows from the top (the General Secretary, the
 Politburo, and the Secretariat), thus allowing relatively
 small groups of party officials and leaders to control the
 decisions of subordinate bodies. Elections to the Supreme
 Soviet (parliament) are based on a single list of
 party-approved candidates and are therefore a formality.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government contends that all internationally recognized
 human rights are fully protected. Soviet authorities normally
 reject foreign criticism of their human rights record as
 interference in Soviet internal affairs, despite the fact that
 the Soviet Unton is signatory to numerous international
 documents, including the Final Act of the Conference on
 Security and Cooperation in Europe, recognizing human rights
 as a valid subject of international concern.
 The authorities do not permit foreigners to investigate the
 status of human rights in the U.S.S.R. International human
 
 
 1068
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 rights organizations such as Amnesty International have
 frequently addressed communications to the Government
 concerning human rights, but the authorities have declined to
 reply in a substantive manner. The authorities have
 suppressed the Moscow chapter of Amnesty International and
 published attacks on the organization, alleging that it works
 with Western intelligence agencies against the Soviet
 Government.
 The Government has cooperated with the United States
 Government in investigating alleged war crimes committed
 during World War II by persons who are now citizens or
 residents of the United States. It has permitted the U.S.
 Government to take depositions from witnesses in the U.S.S.R.
 and has provided documentation for use in U.S. courts.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution guarantees the equal status of individual
 Soviet citizens, regardless of nationality, sex, or language.
 In reality, the Soviet leadership manipulates these factors in
 order to maintain control in the U.S.S.R. These factors,
 along with social status, affect a citizen's opportunities
 within Soviet society. Beyond that, the Soviet Union
 practices discrimination based on ethnic origin.
 The Soviets recognize more than 100 nationalities in the
 U.S.S.R. Many ethnic groups have territorial and
 administrative entities, the 15 Soviet republics representing
 the largest and most developed of the nationalities. Despite
 a professed commitment to the maintenance of national
 identity, actual Soviet policy continues the program of
 Russification first practiced by the tsars.
 Russification has taken on a variety of forms over the years.
 While mass resettlement of entire ethnic groups is no longer
 practiced, assimilation is promoted through more subtle
 means. The extent and effectiveness of this Russification
 policy, implemented to varying degrees in the different
 republics, is evident in most aspects of everyday life,
 including government, language, education, media, literature,
 economics, and even in the legal system. Universities accept
 students according to unofficial quotas and thus influence
 careers and advancement opportunities.
 Some party and government positions traditionally have been
 reserved for certain nationalities. For example, the Soviet
 leadership has projected Slavic influence in non-Slavic areas
 by reserving second secretary positions in republic and
 lower-level party organizations for Slavs while giving the
 first secretary positions to a member of the indigenous ethnic
 group. In December, however, the Gorbachev administration
 replaced the first secretary of the Kazakhstan Communist Party
 with a Russian. Nationalist rioting followed in the
 republic's capital, Alma-Ata.
 The Government implements an economic policy concentrating a
 disproportionate amount of heavy industry within the Russian
 Republic. This policy often contributes to limited and uneven
 economic growth in the non-Russian republics. This
 concentration of industrial facilities often requires the
 import of non-Russian labor, thereby forcing the economic
 migration to Russia of minorities from other republics. This
 migration speeds the process of Russification as the
 
 
 1069
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 minorities are separated even from the limited cultural
 institutions permitted in their native republics. The same
 result has been accomplished in Estonia, Latvia, and
 Lithuania, all of which have relatively small populations, by
 doing the obverse. There, the establishment of Soviet
 industries and the accompanying influx of Russian workers
 during the past 40 years have reduced the proportion of the
 indigenous nationality in the total population to an alarming
 extent.
 Certain ethnic groups, for example the Ukrainians, suffer
 particularly harshly from Soviet repression of human rights
 activists.
 The situation in the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic
 exemplifies the extent of Russification in the Soviet Union.
 The Ukrainian language is rarely used outside rural areas of
 the Western Ukraine, and use of the language is regarded by
 the authorities as a manifestation of "bourgeois
 nationalism." The number of Ukrainian-language schools has
 declined, particularly in the industrial southeast. Ukrainian
 history, culture, and religion are often ignored or
 distorted. Russification is also apparent in the publishing
 field; in a recent year, less than 3 percent of the books and
 brochures published in the U.S.S.R. were in Ukrainian, well
 under the 19 percent of the Soviet population living in the
 Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic. The development of the
 Ukrainian language has been further stunted by the almost
 exclusive use of Russian for scientific and technical
 publications. Finally, more Ukrainian political prisoners
 have died in the last few years than those of any other
 nationality group in the Soviet Union.
 Nationalities which do not have a territorial entity and
 members of those nationalities living outside their republics
 usually do not even possess the limited cultural and
 linguistic amenities available to republic and autonomous
 republic nationalities. In Azerbaijan, the Saingilo Georgian
 minority--mostly Orthodox Christian--suffers at the hands of
 the local authorities. In order to force this group to
 assimilate to the republic nationality, Azerbaijani
 authorities have closed Georgian language schools, changed the
 nationality line in the passports of local Georgians
 regardless of expressed preference, and discriminated against
 Georgians in hiring and promotion so that virtually no
 Georgians occupy positions of responsibility on their own
 national territory.
 The Crimean Tatars, a Muslim minority forcibly transported
 from their historic Crimean homeland to Uzbekistan in 1944,
 continue to seek repatriation despite harsh measures by Soviet
 authorities. Some Tatars were reportedly deported for a
 second time to Central Asia after resettling in the Crimea
 without proper residence permits. All evidence of a one-time
 Tatar presence in the Crimea has been deliberately destroyed.
 Despite official Soviet claims of defending the rights and
 cultures of all minorities, the Crimean Tatars remain under
 government pressure to integrate themselves with other central
 Asian cultures. In December a Soviet court freed Mustafa
 Dzhemilev, a Crimean Tatar who had served some 12 years in
 prison and exile for his activities. Three other Tatar
 leaders are still in prison for their activities.
 Most minorities in the Soviet Union suffer discrimination as a
 result of an official policy of Russification, or as a result
 
 
 1070
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 of opposition to that policy. The Jewish population, however,
 is subjected to systematic persecution based on ancestry.
 Soviet Jews, including persons of partially Jewish descent who
 are identifiable on the basis of physical appearance, last
 names, or official documentation, generally are denied access
 to the best Soviet educational institutions at both the school
 and the university level. This discrimination by extension
 prevents Jews from advancing into prestigious careers. Those
 Jews who in the past have overcome these impediments and
 advanced in their careers generally have been prevented from
 attaining the highest positions in their professions. Jews
 employed in economic institutions, for example, are almost
 never appointed to the highest position, the directorship,
 even when a Jewish candidate is the most senior and the most
 qualified.
 Soviet Jews are almost entirely excluded from careers in the
 party or state apparatus. There are no Soviet Jewish members
 in the Politburo or in any other bodies at the pinnacles of
 national and regional power.
 Soviet Jews are also subjected to harassment by official
 Soviet propagenda. The Soviet press occasionally features
 thinly veiled anti-Semitic articles, which often question
 Jewish loyalty to the Soviet State.
 At the same time, Soviet Jewish emigration has been
 drastically reduced, and the authorities have continued to
 attack Jewish consciousness through harassment and
 intimidation, the suppression of cultural activities, and the
 prosecution of persons for teaching Hebrew. Soviet Jews have
 been subject to arrests, beatings, and vilification, as well
 as dismissal from work and illegal searches.
 The crackdown on Jewish, primarily "refusenik," activists and
 Hebrew teachers continued in 1986. (A "refusenik" is a person
 who has been denied permission to emigrate.) Leningrad Jewish
 activist Vladimir Lifshits was arrested in January and
 sentenced in March to 3 years in a labor camp on charges of
 anti-Soviet slander. Meanwhile, Jewish activists like Leonid
 Volkovskiy and Iosif Berenshteyn, imprisoned in past years,
 remained in camps and prisons, many of them suffering from
 serious health problems.
 Women normally enjoy the same legal rights as men and are
 nominally accorded the right to participate in all areas of
 the social, political, and economic life of the Soviet Union.
 An extensive system of day-care service and maternity leave
 benefits, including up to a year and a half of paid leave from
 work, significantly enhances the ability of women to secure
 and retain employment. Virtually all Soviet women work
 outside the home. Overall, women hold less remunerative
 positions. Men occupy the great majority of leading positions
 in most professions, especially politics. At present, 12 of
 307 full members of the Central Committee of the Soviet
 Communist Party are women, and for the first time in two
 decades a woman was appointed a secretary of the Central
 Committee.
 Most members of the Soviet elite (the party, the military, the
 diplomatic service, the scientific-technical intelligentsia,
 and the cultural and sports establishments) are shielded to
 various degrees from social and economic hardships. They have
 greater access than the average Soviet to quality food and
 
 
 1071
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 consumer goods, special medical facilities, the best schools,
 foreign travel, automobiles, country houses, and paid
 vacations at choice resorts.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 The statutory minimum age for employment of children in 1986
 was 16, and the standard workweek was 40 hours. There is no
 indication of widespread violation of these norms. The
 minimum wage was set at $112 per month at the official rate of
 exchange. According to the latest Soviet official data, the
 average wage is about $272 per month. Soviet law requires, in
 general terms, healthy and safe working conditions, but they
 usually fall short of Western standards.
 
 
 1072