 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (U.S.S.R.) has been a
 one-party state, dominated by the leadership of the Communist
 Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU)-. That leadership has been a
 self-perpetuating elite which, with the assistance of a
 powerful secret police apparatus, attempted to direct all
 aspects of public life. Although the Soviet Union is a
 multinational state, political power has always been highly
 centralized in Moscow.
 The past year witnessed a remarkable opening up of the
 political process and improvements in human rights practices,
 although the Soviet Union has a considerable distance to go
 before it will meet the standards set forth in the Helsinki
 Final'Act. In March, elections of deputies to the newly
 created Congress of People's Deputies were the freest since
 November-1917. Many old-line regional party bosses and
 machine candidates lost to reformers, some of whom were not
 party members. The Congress elected a legislature, the
 U.S.S.R. Supreme Soviet, that has shown some independence in
 confirming ministerial appointments and drafting legislation.
 Though the Communist Party remains the sole recognized
 political party (with a few local exceptions), the leadership
 no longer rigidly controls all party members' expressions and
 actions. Clear differences between conservative and reformist
 party members have emerged in public. Party members in the
 Congress of People's Deputies and the Supreme Soviet have not
 voted a party line. Article 6 of the U.S.S.R. Constitution,
 which enshrines the Party's leading role in society, has come
 under fierce public attack.
 Some important reforms have been institutionalized, including
 the creation of new legislative bodies and an election process
 that in Many, if not all, cases allows a genuine choice
 between candidates. Local elections, scheduled for 1990, may
 contribute significantly to political decentralization. Legal
 reform, on the other band, has proceeded slowly (although
 major steps are promised for 1990). The-widely held view that
 President Mikhail Gorbachev's continued presence at the helm
 is critical to the success of reform suggests that the human
 rights improvements effected in recent years can still be
 reversed.
 The Committee for State Security (KGB), police authorities,
 and prosecutors' offices are charged by the party leadership
 with enforcing the population's compliance with policy
 decisions, directives, and legislation. In some parts of the
 country, they have sought to intimidate dissenters and
 potential dissenters through short-term detention and
 administrative sentencing of demonstrators, summoning persons
 selectively for warning conversations, and harsh press attacks
 on dissidents. Unlike other government agencies, the KGB has
 been subjected to only a modicum of glasnost (openness) and
 perestroika (restructuring), although a media campaign has
 attempted to clean up its image and portray it as an agency
 that observes the law and protects citizens' rights.
 In response to growing socioeconomic problems and in
 conjunction with a broader effort at reform, Soviet authorities
 have initiated the gradual decentralization of economic
 decisionmaking and authority. In October 1989, the Supreme
 Soviet took up a range of laws expanding earlier reforms and
 significantly revamping notions of property, land, and
 enterprise. This was aimed at introducing market elements into
 
 
 1275
 
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 the economy. While private enterprise remains highly
 circumscribed, new scope was provided under perestroika for
 quasi-private activity by independent farmers and cooperatives.
 In 1989, though the top leadership's approach to the exercise
 of power changed significantly, old authoritarian habits
 continued to pervade the governmental system at lower levels.
 There were frequent instances of the use of arbitrary
 authority, including the attempted intimidation of dissidents
 by the local police, particularly the KGB. The inability of
 these local officials to follow through with the ruthlessness
 that was once possible made their arbitrary actions
 increasingly ineffective.
 Subject to the foregoing limitations, there is now general
 respect for freedom of expression, freedom of association, some
 freedom of the press and of assembly, and freedom of religion.
 The Ukrainian Catholic Church, the last denomination to suffer
 severe repression, was permitted to register its congregations
 in December. Government interference in religion has now been
 substantially reduced, and the Government's official
 sponsorship of atheism is now on the -decline.
 This generally positive picture, reflecting the intentions of
 the reform leadership, is marred, however, by the inability or
 unwillingness of lower ranks of the bureaucracy to adhere to
 the new stabdards. Thus, while severe punishment for dissent
 is now a matter of the past, petty harassment of citizens who
 offend the sensibilities of local bureaucrats continues.
 Emigration from the Soviet Union increased dramatically during
 1989. Ethnic Germans, Jews, Armenians, and other Soviet
 emigrants totaled about 200,000 during 1989, more than any
 other year in recent memory. More liberal bills on freedom of
 conscience and the press are expected to be introduced in
 1990. Of the new laws adopted so far, one specifically allows
 strikes, although it forbids them in such key areas as
 transportation and energy.
 Abroad, the Soviet Union ended its illegal occupation of
 Afghanistan by meeting the February 15, 1989, deadline for
 withdrawing all its troops.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no known instances of political killing in 1989.
 However, Soviet security tro6ps on April 9 used clubs and gas
 in Tbilisi to break up a peaceful nationalist demonstration
 resulting in 19 deaths and over 200 injuries requiring
 hospitalization.
 b. Disappearance
 There-havebeen no known instances of prolonged or permanent
 disappearance in recent years.
 
 
 1276
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Many Soviet prisoners suffer both mental and physical abuse
 and mistreatment during interrogation, trial, and confinement,
 according to a wide variety of reliable sources. Life in
 prison or labor camps continues to be marked by isolation,
 poor diet and malnutrition, compulsory hard labor, beatings,
 frequent incarceration in punishment cells for violations of
 camp rules, inadequate medical care, and harsh restrictions on
 family visits and correspondence.
 Soviet officials report that violence, hostage-taking, and
 crime in Soviet prisons and camps rose sharply in 1989.
 However, numerous reforms on-a trial basis are reportedly
 under way within Soviet prisons and camps. These include
 furloughs, increased visiting privileges by family and clergy,
 better food, less crowding, greater restrictions on the use of
 punishment cells, and rewards for productive workers in the
 form of financial incentives and early releases. Many of
 these reforms are expected to be included in the new draft
 penal code.
 In March a team of U.S. psychiatrists and legal experts was
 permitted to visit Soviet psychiatric hospitals and examine
 patients. Prior to and during the team's visit, authorities
 released several psychiatric patients suspected of having been
 confined for political reasons. Since the visit, those
 patients wjom the tkamexamined and found healthy have been
 released. The U.S. delegation in its final report noted the
 continuation of practices that lend credence to continuing
 concerns about psychiatric abuse. The team's report, in
 addition to its discussion of the problem of psychiatric abuse,
 analyzed the state of psychiatry in the Soviet Union and
 offered recommendations. The Soviet authorities commented
 positively on the latter. Critics of past Soviet psychiatric
 practices,,,both within and outside the Soviet Union, have
 expressed concern that psychiatrists associated with  .o
 psychiatric abuse have remained in positions of professional
 leadership..
 There were no confirmed reports of new long-term
 hospitalizations of political dissidents. The year saw
 several instances of persons being temporarily confined in
 psychiatric hospitals for political reasons. All were
 released within a few months.
 Soviet authorities claim to have removed over 1 1/2 million
 persons from the register of mentally ill in 1989 and intend
 further reductions in its scope and size. Approximately
 6 million persons still remain on the register. Inclusion in
 the register of the mentally ill leads to many social and
 legal disadvantages, especially in obtaining residence permits
 and employment.
 d. 'Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 In 1989 Article 190-1, which outlawed "the dissemination of
 deliberately hostile fabrications defaming the Soviet State
 and social system," was repealed. Article 70, which outlawed
 "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda" without defining it,
 was amended in July by a decree of the Supreme Soviet. In its
 new form, the law outlaws only calls for the use of violence
 to overthrow the State.
 
 
 1277
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 In general, however, reform of the Soviet Criminal Code is
 lagging behind schedule. The Code still includes Articles 142
 and 227, which restrict the free exercise of religious beliefs.
 However, there were no known convictions under these religious
 articles in the last 3 years.
 Sverdlovsk activist Sergey Kuznetsov was tried and convicted
 in 1989 on charges stemming from participating in a December
 1988 rally marking International Human Rights Day. In early
 January 1990, Kuznetsov was released following a reduction of
 his 3-year sentence to time already served.
 Some human rights activists in 1989 were detained under the
 provisions of a Supreme Soviet decree on meetings and
 demonstrations (see Section 2.b.). While a number of large
 demonstrations have been permitted under the provisions of
 that decree, most notably in the Baltic states and the
 Caucasus, many have been forbidden.
 The Criminal Code provides Soviet authorities the power to
 detain citizens for 3 to 4 hours for questioning; after this
 period, detainees must either be charged or released.
 According to the Code of Criminal Procedure, pretrial detention
 can last as long as 9 months, and prisoners are not entitled
 to consult with a lawyer until shortly before trial. Prolonged
 pretrial detention thus can function as a form of preventive
 detention. Eleven members of the Karabakh Committee and two
 other leading Karabakh activists were detained without trial
 from December 1988 until their release in May 1989.
 Internal exile has almost disappeared in the Soviet Union.
 The December 1988 draft of the "Principles of Criminal
 Legislation" called for the elimination of internal (and
 foreign) exile, but the new law has not yet been formally
 adopted. Nonetheless, almost all exiled prisoners had been
 released by the end of 1988, and there have been no known
 instances of persons being exiled since then. Since the end
 of 1988, no known political or religious prisoners have been
 serving sentences solely under Articles 70, 142, 19Q-1, or 227.
 Questions remain about certain Soviet prisoners convicted on
 criminal charges whose actions would not now be considered
 crimes by the current Government, or where political
 considerations-may have contributed to their conviction Or
 sentencing. In July the Soviet Government accepted a U.S.
 proposal for an exchange of information on such criminal cases.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Communist Party control of society extends to the legal and
 judicial system and negates constitutional guarantees of the
 objectivity and independence of the judicial process. The
 Soviet press continues to expose problems in the Soviet
 judicial system. Some initial steps have been taken towards
 judicial reform. The Supreme Soviet passed a law aimed at
 increasing judicial independence which gives the judiciary
 control over the promotion of judges and establishes
 multicandidate elections for judges. In addition, the
 Government declared it will double judges' salaries.
 Since there were few political trials in 1989, it is difficult
 to judge how perestroika may have contributed to reform in
 this area. However, in the case of Sverdlovsk activist Sergey
 
 
 1278
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 Kuznetsov, Sverdlovsk court officials rejected two of his
 choices for lawyers and declared the trial closed to the
 public. Defense attorneys, like judges, are subject to
 political pressures and constraints applied by the security
 forces and the party. According to official statistics, about
 60 percent of attorneys are party members. In this area, as
 with the press, limits have expanded but restrictions remain.
 For example, there have been charges that attorneys must have
 special clearance to act as a defendant's counsel in cases with
 political aimplications, although this may not now be the case.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Government interference in personal life is pervasive.
 However, the authorities' view that it is a citizen's duty to
 inform on the unorthodox attitudes of family members, friends,
 and neighbors may be changing. For example, most government
 agencies now refuse to accept anonymous denunciations.
 Security forces routinely monitor the residences and
 telephones of certain Soviet citizens and foreigners, despite
 constitutional.guarantees of the inviolability of citizens'
 homes. The resolutions of the XIX Communist Party Conference
 specifically called for guaranteeing the privacy of private
 communications, but legislativqe changes in this area have not
 yet been accomplished. According to the law, no one may enter
 a home against the will of the resident "without legal
 grounds." In practice this provision has little restraining
 effect on investigative agencies. A new U.S.S.R. Supreme
 Soviet decree provides a legal basis for Ministry of Internal
 Affairs troops to enter private homes in pursuit of a suspected
 criminal. There were virtually no house searches for political
 materials reported in 1989 until the end of the year, when
 house searches were conducted in Leningrad, Tbilisi, Saratov,
 and Sverdlovsk.
 Through the control of mail and telqphone circuits, the
 authorities-can selectively restrict,,contact between citizens,
 intercepting mail or blocking telephone connections. While
 this has become much less frequent than in the past, it is
 still practiced when the authorities consider vital political
 interests to be affected. For example, Moscow-based human
 rights activists reported that they could not get calls
 through to their contacts in Tbilisi during the disturbances
 there in April and could not reach contacts in Ivanovo during
 the hunger strike there by religious activists.
 Despite laws still on the books intended to discourage
 contacts with foreigners, there has been a dramatic decrease
 in government interference with such contacts. For example,
 foreigners. who visited refuseniks or dissidents were harassed
 far less than in the past. It has also become much easier for
 Soviet citizens to invite American relatives and friends to
 visit the U.S.S.R. as private guests.
 All jamming of Radio Liberty in Russian and other languages
 was halted in 1989, thus vastly increasing the range of
 foreign broadcasting to which Soviet citizens have easy
 access. Voice of America broadcasts also are not jammed.
 
 
 1279
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution guarantees freedom of speech-and press to the
 extent that it is in accordance with the "interests of the
 people and the strengthening and development of the Socialist
 system." During 1988 and 1989 that last phrase was
 interpreted more broadly. The degree of glasnost and the
 range of acceptable opinion have expanded considerably.
 A dramatic and unprecedented example of glasnost in the Soviet
 -media during 1989 was complete television broadcasts of the
 debates in the Congress of People's Deputies and Supreme
 Soviet on a host of formerly taboo topics.
 Unofficial or independent publications continue to flourish in
 spite of occasional police harassment and a lack of access to
 reproduction supplies. Reportedly, there may be as many as
 600 independent publications in the Russian language alone,
 representing a wide spectrum of political, religious, and
 cultural views. Although the independent press tends to be
 concentrated in Moscow and Leningrad, there also are many
 publications in the republics. As in the past, any
 independent publication may be closed down at the whim of the
 authorities because it is not legally recognized.
 For the most part, the police look the other way when
 -independent publications are .distributed. From time to time,
 however, police have rounded up distributors of independent
 papers, as they did to several distributors-during the second
 week of September in Moscow's Pushkin Square.
 The new draft press law, currently under discussion in the
 Supreme Soviet, states: "The right to establish mass media
 belongs to state and public organizations, creative unions,
 religious, cooperative, and other affiliations of citizens
 created in accordance with the law, and also to work
 collectives and-citizens of the.U.S.S.R." Ostensibly, this
 means that anyone may start a newspaper, although an editor
 would-presumably have to register with local government     -
 authorities: According to the draft, any publication which
 "promotes war, racism, or the violent overthrow of the Soviet
 Government, or advocates religious or ethnic intolerance" may
 be suspended-by'the authorities.
 Working conditions for foreign journalists continued to
 improve in 1989, including access to-newsmakers and
 policymakers, greater ease in reporting and-transmitting news,
 and the virtual absence of harassment. There has been some
 limited travel by journalists to closed areas, but also
 restrictions or outright bans on travel to normally open areas
 in times of trouble, e.g., Tbilisi after the April massacre.
 Most universities and research institutes continue to be
 operated by the State or the party; however, Soviet academics
 are exerting considerable pressure for more autonomy from
 central authorities. Some universities have gained more
 freedom to determine their own curriculums, particularly in
 the area of social sciences and history. Archival access
 continues to open up for Soviet scholars, although perhaps not
 fast enough to satisfy the most progressive.
 
 
 1280
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 According to the provisions of the July 1988 Supreme Soviet
 decree on meetings, street marches, and demonstrations,
 organizers must apply to local officials 10 days before a
 meeting is 9cheduled, and officials must notify organizers of
 the decision at'least 5 days before the'scheduled date of the
 event. Civil and criminal penalties may be levied against
 those who participate in unauthorized demonstrations.
 The corresponding law on demonstrations in the Russian
 Federated Soviet Socialist Republic has stiff penalties:
 participation in unauthorized demonstrations is punishable by
 fines of up to $495 and/or administrative arrest for up to 15'
 days-. Repeat offenders may.be fined up to $1,650, arrested
 for up to 15 days per offense, and/or gentenced to corrective
 labor for 30 to 60 days with a deduction of 20 percent of
 their earnings. If criminal responsibility is established,
 the law provides for deprivation of freedom for up to 6
 months, dorrectivb labor for up to 1 year, and a fine of up to
 $3,300. While'many persons have received fines of up to $495
 and sentences of up to 15 days, no one is reported to have
 been sentenced to the stiffer penalties. (The Soviet monthly
 mean wage is about $220 to $225.)
 Implementation of the law on demonstrations varied widely
 between different regions in 1989. Authorities in the Baltic
 states gave permission to virtually all gatherings, including
 mass demonstrations on August 23 that marked the 40th
 annivsary of the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact.
 Large, unauthorized demonstrations were held with increased
 frequency in 1989. There were numerous mass meetings and
 marches in the Caucasus, major nationalist demonstrations in
 Ukraine and Moldavia in the second half of 1989 and throughout
 the ye'r in the Baltic states, and large unauthorized
 demonstrations by'supporters of Boris Yel'tsin in Moscow in
 March.
 NonetheleSs, local authorities in several cities, including
 Moscow, used the July 1988 law on Oemonstrations selectively
 to deny many groups permission to hold gatherings. For
 examplq, brganizations such as the Democratic Union, a group
 committed to the peaceful removal of the existing Soviet
 system of government, have consistently been refiosed
 permission to demonstrate, and their leaders hage been
 subjected to repeated administrative punishment for violating
 regulations on demonstrations.
 On April 9 in Tbilisi, Soviet security troops used clubs and
 gas to break up a peaceful nationalist demonstration, resulting
 in at least 19 deaths and over 200 injuries requiring
 hospitalization. An investigative commission of the Georgian
 Supreme-Soviet concluded that the troops used toxic gas. In
 October it published a detailed report of the incident which
 asserted that.the final decision to send in troops was made by
 Defense Minister Dmitri Yazov and former KGB Chief Viktor
 Chebrikov. The central Government has denied direct
 involvement in the incident. On December 24, Anatoliy Sobchak,
 Chairman of a speciol commission designated to investigate the
 Tbilisi incident, presented the commission's final report to
 the Second Congress of People's Deputies. The report concluded
 that the military had applied unnecessary force to put down
 the demonstration; had not acted with the authorization of
 
 
 1281
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 proper authorities; and had used improperly two types of riot
 control gases.
 On October 2 in L'vov, troops reportedly used plastic bullets
 against nationalist demonstrators, resulting in numerous
 injuries. The People's Front of Belorussia was forced to hold
 its founding conference on June 25 in Lithuania because
 Belorussian authorities would not allow the conference to take
 place in Minsk. On several occasions, interethnic violence in
 the Caucasus and Central Asia resulted in authorities
 declaring a state of emergency and banning all demonstrations.
 The Constitution grants citizens the right to associate in
 public organizations "in accordance with the aim of building
 communism." Previously, public associations were organized by
 the authorities or subject to their strict control, and the
 Government suppressed independent associations. Beginning in
 1987, thousands of unofficial or informal organizations were
 founded to provide a forum for discussion of political, social,
 ecological, and other issues. Many of these clubs produce
 journals or bulletins; most actively support perestroika.
 They exist in a legal twilight zone, however, if they are not
 registered with the State as required. Without registration--
 in some cases not sought and in others sought but not granted--
 a group may not have a bank account or a public meetingplace.
 In several areas, particularly in the Baltic states,
 unofficial groups act increasingly like political parties.
 Many People's Front organization candidates in the Baltic
 states won election to the new Congress of People's Deputies.
 So-called People's Fronts have also emerged in Ukraine,
 Belorussia, Moldavia, Georgia, Azerbaijan, Moscow, and
 Leningrad.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Soviet Constitution guarantees the "right to profess or not
 to profess any religion and to conduct religious worship or
 atheistic propaganda." The right to conduct religious worship
 and the right to make atheistic propaganda are not equivalent,
 however, since the former right does not include the right to
 conduct "religious propaganda," i.e., to engage in public
 defense of religious values or to rebut official attacks on
 religion. Moreover, extensive legislation and administrative
 regulations on "religious cults" place additional restrictions
 on freedom of religion. This legislation is now under review,
 and less restrictive legislation is expected to be introduced
 to the Supreme Soviet in 1990.
 The Government displayed a much more tolerant attitude toward
 religion in 1989 than in the past. Approximately 3,000 new
 Russian Orthodox institutions were registered, mostly parishes
 but also 10 monasteries and 2 new seminaries. Russian Orthodox
 priests were allowed to visit the ill in hospitals and the
 imprisoned in jails. Both the Russian Orthodox and the
 Baptists have become engaged in charity work, from which they
 were previously banned. Baptists report no problems with
 their ambitious new parish-building efforts.
 In Central Asia, greater glasnost is revealing that Islam
 still has a strong hold on at least parts of the population.
 Moslems have been granted permission to open a number of new
 
 
 1282
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 mosques and one theological school. A number of Moslems
 imprisoned for their religious beliefs were released in 1989.
 Registration with the Soviet Council on Religious Affairs is
 still required fQr religious groups of 20 adults or more. The
 Council reportedly has yet to respond to 5,000 requests for the
 registration of new Russian Orthodox parishes. The State's
 refusal to grant registration has sometimes been used to deny
 legal status to entire religious denominations. Once
 registered, religious congregations must still theoretically
 accept strict regulations which prohibit proselytizing,
 religious discussion and Bible study groups, charitable
 activity, and formal religious training for children.
 A number of groups of believers continue to refuse to register
 offiqially on the grounds that much of the legislation
 affecting "religious cults" contradicts the tenets of their
 religious beliefs. Unregistered believers, such as some
 Baptists, Jehovah's Witnesses, Seventh-Day Adventists, and
 Pentecostalists, are subject to repressive measures, including
 harassment at school or place of employment, denial of access
 to housing, and dismissal from work. The press has reported,
 however, that the Government is considering registering the
 Jehovah's Witnesses. Although Pentecostalists are still
 harassed, mainly in the form:of fines, such harassment
 decreased in 1989.
 In Deceiber the Ukrainian Council.for Religious Affairs
 attached to the Ukrainian Council of Ministers officially
 announced a policy of permitting Ukrainian Catholic
 congregations to register. This action ended the illegal
 status of Ukrainian Catholic believers that has lasted since
 1946. During 1989 Ukrainian Catholics had become much more
 assertive: they held a number of open-air masses attended by
 thousands of faithful, and some of their bishops and clergy
 came out of hiding. Several Ukrainian Catholic religious
 services were broken up by government forces, however, and
 Ukrainian Catholic priests continued to be fined for
 performing them, though to a lesser extent than in the past.
 By year's end, they reportedly controlled about 80 churches.
 The practice of religion still is discouraged in various ways,
 including limitations on the number of sacred books, such as
 the Bible or the Koran, which may be printed. Only a few
 religious publications of controlled content, such as the
 Vestnik of the Russian Orthodox Patriarchate, are officially
 allowed to be published; however, some unofficial Orthodox
 publications, including "Bulletin of the Christian Community"
 and "Choice," have so far-been tolerated.
 In 1988 customs regulations restricting the importation of
 Bibles and religious literature were abolished, although laws
 against speculation continued to limit the numbers that could
 be imported. In practice, this meant that registered
 religious groups were able to import large quantities of
 Bibles, while travelers carrying more than one Bible ran the
 risk of confiscation at the border on the pretext that the
 Bibles were intended for speculation. Persons reported the
 delivery of small quantities of Bibles and other religious
 books through the mail, although many such packages continue
 to be seized or stolen in the mail. The Hare Krishnas are
 currently protesting the decision of the Council on Religious
 Affairs to withhold approval for the importation of 200,000
 copies of Hare Krishna religious literature. The literature
 was impounded by Moscow customs officials in September.
 
 
 1283
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 The number of clergymen and places of worship today is only a
 small fraction of the number which existed before the October
 1917 Revolution. At the same time, Soviet officials recognize
 that over 70 million Soviet citizens adhere to some religion.
 Existing seminaries and other institutions of clerical
 education have been permitted to enroll a larger number of
 students, but they still do not provide a sufficient body of
 trained clergy for officially registered denominations,
 especially given the widespread interest in participating in
 religion observed in 1989.
 The Communist Party is, according to its rules, an atheistic
 organization. Membership in the party, considered incompatible
 with religious belief, is in effect a requirement for
 advancement to most positions of authority or prestige in the
 country. Thus, the authorities have largely excluded
 practicing believers from positions of power. However,
 believers are no longer rigorously excluded from public
 activities or from access to the media.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Freedom of movement is not guaranteed by law. Although
 citizens are generally free to move about within the country,
 travel in certain areas (e.g., frontier regions or areas of
 military significance) requires special permission. All adults
 are issued identity documents or internal passports which must
 be carried during travel and used to register visits of more
 than 3 days with the local authorities. Although approximately
 20 percent of Soviet territory is formally closed to travel by
 foreigners, most territory outside of major urban centers is
 in practice difficult to visit or inaccessible and is therefore
 closed in effect to travel by foreigners.
 The right to choose one's place of residence, although formally
 provided for by law, is subject to restrictions. Everyone is
 required to register his or her place of residence. The
 authorities limit the number of residence permits in several
 dozen large cities, including Moscow, Leningrad, and Kiev,
 where housing is at a premium.
 Soviet authorities, in response to U.S. representations, now
 allow Soviet citizens to obtain exit permission while
 continuing to live in their homes, work at their jobs, and
 keep their children in school. The final checkout from Soviet
 society that requires them to relinquish these basics now will
 be allowed by Soviet authorities only after the applicant has
 shown a permit from another country to take up residence there.
 To travel abroad, Soviet citizens must have a passport for
 foreign travel and an exit visa, usually valid for 6 months,
 specifying the destination for each trip. According to Soviet
 Foreign-Ministry officials, more than one-half million Soviet
 passports were issued for external travel in 1989.
 During 1989 many persons without relatives abroad were allowed
 to travel abroad to visit friends. However, Soviet citizens
 usually can travel on private visits to the West only if they
 receive an invitation from an individual who undertakes all
 financial responsibility for the trip. Currency regulations
 and requirements to purchase tickets in rubles also restrict
 travel opportunities, even if formal exit permission is
 granted.
 
 
 1284
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 During 1989 thousands of Soviet citizens residing abroad
 permanently as well as former Soviet citizens were permitted
 to return on short family visits or for other reasons. This
 trend, which began in 1987 and continued in 1988, grew rapidly
 during 1989-.
 Currently, Soviet law does not recognize the right of citizens
 to emigrate by choice. The Soviet system continues to restrict
 emigration (with notable exceptions for some ethnic and
 religious groups) to those citizens who married a foreigner or
 desire reunification with immediate relatives abroad. In 1989
 the Soviets drafted a new law on emigration which would provide
 broad legal guarantees on the right to travel abroad (with some
 restrictions). In November the draft law passed a first
 reading in the Supreme Soviet. Final passage is expected in
 1990.
 The most frequently used barrier to emigration, aside from the
 requirement of an invitation, is the requirement that
 prospective emigrants should have had no access to "secrets."
 In some cases, persons have been denied exit permission
 although they have had no access to "secrets" for more than 10
 years. In a few cases, denial has been based on mere
 possession of a clearance, although there was never any access
 to classified information.' The application of this restriction
 is ofte quite arbitrary.' In 1989 the Soviets lifted the
 security restrictions on many persons and permitted their
 emigration.
 Another barrier-tb emigration still in effect is the
 requirement that family members sign release forms for their
 children--meaning that they may refuse to release adult
 children from financial or moral commitments.
 In 1989 it was rare that a person not employed in security-
 related work lost his job when submitting an emigration
 application. The vast majority of those applying for visas
 for the first time were approved, and social ostracism eased
 considerably for would-be emigrants. Jewish emigration in
 1989 exceded 72,000, the highest yearly total since the
 pre-World War I era, up considerably over the 1988 total of
 19,292 and the 1987 figure of 8,155. The highest recent
 yearly total had occurred in 1979, when 51,000 Jews emigrated.
 During 1989'more than 9,000 Soviet Armenians emigrated to the
 United States. More than 98,000 Soviet ethnic Germans were
 permitted to leave the Soviet Union in 1989 for the Federal
 Republic of Germany. This figure, again, represents a
 dramatic increase over the previous year's 45,000 departures.
 Soviet authorities in 1989 continued to resolve a significant
 number of-divided family cases affecting the United States,
 France, the United Kingdom, and Australia.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Soviet citizens do not have the right to change their system
 of government, although the reforms instituted during the past
 year have opened the way to increased popular participation in
 the political process. Multicandidate elections, political
 campaigning, and the secret ballot are becoming the norm. The
 Congress of People's Deputies and the Supreme Soviet engage in
 open, frequently televised debate. Separation of party and
 
 
 1285
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 government has enabled special interest groups to exert more
 influence on government policy and structures.
 Divisions within the CPSU continue to be clearly visible, as
 are the competing views of other parliamentary groups.
 Differences within the CPSU between central party authorities
 and those in the republics have also emerged sharply. The
 threat-of the Lithuanian party that it may sever its ties with
 the CPSU and operate independently and the vote in two of the
 three Baltic states to eliminate the leading role of the CPSU
 severely test the ability of the CPSU to control all political
 decisionmaking. Furthermore, the threat of the Baltic states
 to declare their independence from the Soviet Union reflects
 the desire of their populations to seek by their own actions
 to change their system of government. The U.S. Government has
 not recognized the forcible incorporation of the Baltic states
 into the Soviet Union.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights.
 Soviet authorities have adopted a more forthcoming approach to
 foreign criticism of their human rights record, acknowledging
 problems and stating their desire to make their society more
 "humane." They have also acknowledged that the human rights
 situation in the U.S.S.R. is subject to discussion in official
 bilateral and multilateral contacts. During 1989 they held
 several meetings with U.S. officials on human rights issues.
 The Soviet Government in 1989 began to permit foreigners, on a
 very limited, controlled basis, to examine the status of human
 rights in the U.S.S.R. In August the Soviets permitted U.S.
 Congressmen Frank Wolf and Christopher Smith to visit Perm
 Labor Camp 35 and interview more than 20 prisoners. They also
 permitted staff members of the Congressional Helsinki
 Commission to meet freely with dissidents, refuseniks, and
 others. The Soviet Union committed itself to permit private
 persons and nongovernmental organizations access to the human
 rights conference of the Helsinki signatory states scheduled
 to be held in Moscow in 1991. The Soviet Union is a member of
 the United Nations Human Rights Commission.
 Unofficial Soviet human rights groups, however, complain that
 Soviet authorities ignore their inquiries on human rights
 issues and only answer questions posed by the Soviet Human
 Rights Commission, which officially is described as a
 nongovernmental organization but is clearly an officially
 organized body.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution provides for the equal status of all Soviet
 citizens, regardless of nationality, sex, or language. The
 Soviets recognize more than 100 nationalities in the U.S.S.R.,
 .and the Soviet federal system is based on nationality. Many
 ethnic groups have territorial and administrative entities.
 The 15 Soviet Republics, some of which were formerly
 independent countries, represent some of the largest and most
 developed nationalities. Other smaller nationalities have
 autonomous republics, oblasts, or districts, but some 55
 million Soviets live outside their nationality's
 administrative region or belong to a nationality that has
 none. The national rights of those Soviet citizens have not
 
 
 1286
 UNION OF,SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 been adequately addressed, as the party admitted at the CPSU
 Plenum on Nationalities in September.
 During the Brezhnev period, a quota system was used
 extensively throughout the Soviet Union as part of a broader
 nationality policy. Some ethnic groups benefited
 significantly from that policy, as they obtained more
 positions in universities and middle-class occupations than
 they would have if merit had been the main criterion. Other
 groups suffered. President Gorbachev has opposed the quota
 system, in part out of the belief that it has fostered
 deep-seated corruption in many parts of the country. At tne
 same time, those ethnic groups that benefited from Brezhnev's
 "affirmative action" program have begun to lose substantial
 privileges and opportunities;
 Most minorities in the Soviet Union have suffered official
 government discrimination as a result of the policy of
 Russification or as a result of opposition to that policy.
 Perestroika has involved the transfer of increased power to
 the republics to decide internal questions. The republics
 have responded by putting greater emphasis on their local
 cultural and linguistic heritage. Members of ethnic
 minorities, especially non-Slavs,.are rarely found at the
 highest level of nationwide organizations and academic or
 governmental-bodies, though minorities tend to dominate their
 own local organizations, including those at the republic
 level. Developments regarding the rights of national
 minorities are described below:
 Ukraine -- A number oftunofficial groups that foster the
 Ukrainian language and culture organized and met during the
 year. The Ukrainian Popular Front, "Rukh," held its founding
 Congress September 8-10 in Kiev. The Congress proceeded
 without interruption by the authorities, although afterward
 several participants were harassed and threatened with arrest.
 Unofficial Ukrainian groups continued to call for the
 establishment of Ukrainian as the official language of-the
 Republic, and a draft law declaring Ukrainian the official
 language was pbblished-in September. The Ukrainian Communist
 Party leadership opposed this demand. They also tended to
 repress religious and nationalist dissent more harshly than
 did leaders in other republics. Nevertheless, the authorities
 allowed greater scope for Ukrainian cultural activity and
 tolerated a number of Ukrainian samizdat journals. The
 central Soviet leadership sharply.criticized the Ukrainian
 leadership for its heavy-handedness, and, on September 20,
 Vladimir Shcherbitsky, a conservative holdover from the
 Brezhnev period of rule, lost his seat on the Politburo and
 his leadership of the Ukrainian party.
 Moldavia -- National activism continued during 1989 with
 innumerable, demonstrations against official government policy
 concerning cultural, economic, ecological, and religious
 rights.. In Iay several'unofficial groups formed the People's
 Front of Moldavia to protest the Moldavian Communist
 leadership's intransigence. Almost all unofficial groups were
 criticized by both the national and local official press.
 In August and September, numerous strikes and demonstrations
 by both Russians and Moldavians were held, each side advancing
 its view of the content of the Republic's language law. In
 September the Moldavian Supreme Soviet passed a language law
 declaring Moldavian the official language of the Republic and
 
 
 1287
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 Russian the language of interethnic communication. The
 Russians continued their strikes for weeks after the law was
 passed and was endorsed by a U.S.S.R. Supreme Soviet Commission
 which had been sent to Moldavia to investigate the situation.
 Armenia and Azerbaijan -- Violence continued between
 Azerbaijanis and Armenians over the Armenian enclave of
 Nagorno-Karabakh in Azerbaijan. In mid-September, an Azeri
 economic blockade against the Armenians resulted in severe
 shortages of food, fuel, and consumer goods.
 In May Soviet authorities released all 11 members of the
 Karabakh committee, who had been held without trial since
 December 1988. Two other leading Karabakh activists, Khachik
 Stamboltsyan and Aleksandr Akopyan, were also released from
 detention.
 In July a military order banning mass gatherings, meetings,
 and demonstrations was announced in Baku. Nevertheless, the
 Azerbaijan People's Front continues to organize regular mass
 rallies. .A demonstration organized by the unofficial group
 "Birlik" was broken up by police, and about 40 people were
 detained.
 Georgia -- The April 9 incident is described in Section 2.b.
 The Georgian Popular Front held its founding conference in
 Tbilisi in July. Violence broke out in August and September
 between Georgians and Abhkazians over the ethnic rights of
 Abhkazians. Tensions continue between the Christian Georgians
 and the Muslim Abkhazians and are increasingly acquiring
 religious overtones.
 Central Asia -- In June Uzbeks in the Fergana Valley began
 attacking the local Meskhetian Turk population. Reportedly,
 local policemen assisted in the persecution of Meskhetians by
 providing Uzbeks with addresses.
 In Kazakhstan, Tadzhikistan, and Kirgiziya, the Republic
 Supreme Soviets passed laws making the respective local
 languages the official language of each republic. Russian was
 declared the language of interethnic communication. These
 language laws will probably result in wider use of the local
 languages in everyday life. In Uzbekistan, a similar language
 law is currently under debate. Ethnically motivated attacks
 on local nonindigenous populations along with the language
 laws have led to a sizable exodus of Europeans and Caucasus
 peoples from these republics.
 Germans -- A society of Soviet Germans called "Revival"
 (Vozrozhdeniye) was established in Alma Ata in June. The
 society plans to chronicle events that concern Soviet Germans,
 coordinate activities of recently established German
 sociopolitical clubs, and act as a cultural center for Soviet
 Germans in Kazakhstan. A special Supreme Soviet commission on
 the German problem is currently investigating ways to satisfy
 some German ethnic concerns.
 Crimean Tatars -- In 1989 Crimean Tatars still encountered
 problems returning to their homeland, from which they were
 forcibly removed in 1944. However, their situation is
 improving somewhat, and a number of them have been able to
 return. Crimean Tatar activists were occasionally attacked by
 the official press. Recently, the Supreme Soviet officially
 exonerated this and all other ethnic groups deported by Stalin
 during World War II.
 
 
 1288
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 Jews -- Though the country's top leadership no longer fosters
 anti-Semitism and appears embarrassed by it, there has been a
 sharp increase in popular expressions of anti-Semitic
 attitudes. Jews have become increasingly concerned over the
 danger -of violence. They view the activities of organizations
 .-.ysuch as "Pamyat" as particularlydangerous.and are troubled by
 the failure.-of-theaeadership to speak.out against anti-
 Semi~ism. -On the other hand, the reform press has. condemned
 anti-Semitism strongly and repeatedly. Jews have welcomed
 their increasing cultural and religious freedom, which
 includes the opportunity to study Hebrew. Toward the end of
 the year, a broadly representative meeting of Jewish activists
 took place and a countrywide representative Jewish organization
 was-formpd, the first such meeting and organization since the
 October Revolution.
 Women nominally enjoy the same legal rights as men, including
 the right to participate in all areas of the social, political,
 and economic life of the SQviet Union. An extensive system of
 day-care service and maternity leave benefits allow women to
 retain employment after having borne children, which is a
 necessity as virtually all women have no economic choice but
 to work both inside and outside the home. Women bear the main
 brunt of the hardships of Soviet daily life, such as waiting
 in long lines-for food products. Women's rights activists
 report that only about 20 percent of the demand for
 -contraceptives is satisfied. The result is over 6 million
 abortions a year, with consequent dangers to women's health,
 given the poor hygienic conditions in most Soviet medical
 facilities.
 Women rights activists report widespread domestic violence
 against women.throughout all the republics of the U.S.S.R.,
 often involving widespread male alcoholism. Wife beatings are
 a particularly pressing problem in the Central Asian
 Republics, where several cases of women committing-suicide
 because of untenable living conditions with husbands and
 in-laws were reported in 1989. Statistics on this problem are
 as yet unavailable in the Soviet Union, though women activists
 are trying to compi-le them. The difficulty of women's lives
 in the Soviet Union vontinued to be discussed in the Soviet
 press in 1989.. The Council of Ministers has established a
 special branch (with a woman at its head) to study the
 problems of women. One of the first subjects to be discussed
 by the Supreme Soviet was safety conditions for women engaged
 in manual labor, including restrictions on weights women could
 be assigned to lift and night-shift work.
 Special privileges shield many members of the Soviet elite
 (the party, the military, the diplomatic service, the
 scientific-technical intelligentsia, and the cultural and
 sports establishments) to varying degrees from social and
 economic hardships. Privileges include access to better
 housing, schools, medical care, and foreign travel, as well as
 access to restricted stores with high quality food and
 imported consumer goods. The system of special privileges,
 already somewhat reduced in 1988 from earlier levels, came
 under sharp criticism in the new Supreme Soviet in the second
 half of 1989. Promises were made about reviewing and possibly
 closing the Health Ministry's so-called Fourth Department, "
 which provides health services to senior party and government
 officials. As market elements have been introduced and quasi-
 private enterprise has spread, money and not just political
 influence has begun to provide broader access to amenities.
 
 
 1289
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 Section 6   Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 In the Soviet Union, the right of association as defined by
 the International Labor Organization (ILO) does not formally
 exist, though in practice the authorities showed an
 increasingly liberal attitude toward the free association of
 workers in 1989. Approximately 30 functional trade unions,
 encompassing virtually the entire Soviet labor force, operate
 under the direction of the officially sponsored All-Union
 Central Council of Trade Unions (AUCCTU), a government
 umbrella mass organization which advances Soviet and Communist
 labor interests. The AUCCTU serves as a means of political
 indoctrination, propaganda, and management control of
 workers. It is not known ever to have taken an official
 position that differed significantly from the Communist
 Party's stand, and its officials work in close concert with
 their party counterparts at all levels. The AUCCTU funds and
 controls the Prague-based labor international known as the
 World Federation of Trade Unions (WFTU), which seeks to
 promote Soviet political objectives among workers around the
 world.
 Despite the AUCCTU's official omnipresence, independent
 organized labor activities emerged in 1989. In March workers
 began organizing a group which by summer became the "USSR
 Association of Socialist Trade Unions" (SOTSPROF), which
 loomed as an alternative all-Union federation to the AUCCTU.
 SOTSPROF has won limited legal status to conduct its
 activities. In early summer, two groups of independent
 workers groups met in Moscow, and an organizing committee
 emerged which reportedly seeks to pull together a congress of
 workers, with the goal of nominating candidates for local and
 republic elections in late 1989 and early 1990. In cities
 throughout the U.S.S.R., fledgling independent union movements
 have sprung up.
 Hundreds of thousands of Soviet coal miners in virtually every
 coal-producing region of the countky walked off the job in
 July for periods ranging from 1 or 2 days to much longer
 periods. Their demands included higher pay and better working
 and living conditions. Overnight, strike'committees formed
 spontaneously at individual mines, and these committees
 ultimately combined into city, regional, and interregional
 bodies. Regional strike committees gained formal recognition
 when negotiators representing the local Communist Party, local
 government, and the AUCCTU signed agreements. The strike
 committees won a continuing role overseeing fulfillment of the
 strike accords and of the coal industry as a whole. By
 contrast, the AUCCTU demonstrated its role in the Soviet
 system by siding with the party and the Government against the
 interests of the workers that the AUCCTU claims to represent.
 To avoid antagonizing the strikers, Soviet authorities have
 allowed these various nonofficial trade union activities to
 -proceed unhindered, and have provided both a measure of
 recognition and even support to some. The AUCCTU, in
 particular, provided facilities to SOTSPROF organizers and
 coal miners, strike committee leaders. Some regarded this as
 an effort by the AUCCTU to associate itself with, or even
 co-opt, independent activities. Some independent workers'
 groups also established international contacts.
 
 
 1290
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 In October the Supreme Soviet passed legislation on procedures
 for settling labor disputes. For the first time since 1917,
 this legislation formally established the right to strike for
 Soviet workers, albeit only after detailed and lengthy dispute-
 settlement procedures have been exhausted. The law also
 established a formal ban on strikes in transport, energy,
 communication, government, and the military services, and it
 included broad, undefined references to "essential services"
 which-could be used to block strikes in virtually any part of
 the economy. However, all workers apparently enjoy the
 protection of the law's labor dispute-settlement procedures.
 As it has in the past, the ILO's Committee of Experts in 1989
 examined provisions of Soviet law and the Constitution which
 establish a system of trade union monopoly and a leading role
 for the Communist Party. Restrictions were lifted on the
 right of workers to meet only after prior-authorization. But
 legislative measures do not exist which would ensure the right
 of workers to establish trade union organizations outside the
 existing trade union structure, and the right of workers'
 organizations to organize their activities and formulate their
 programs in full independence and without interference from
 the public authorities.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Virtually all Soviet workers automatically become members of
 an affiliate of the official trade union organization,, the
 AUCCTU. -Theie is no evidence that persons refusing to join the
 union have difficulty in finding jobs; although this was the
 case several years ago. Persons involved with SOTSPROF or with
 other new, independent labor organizations report no
 interference with their activities or discrimination against
 them at the workplace. Coal miners' strike committee leaders
 likewise report no adverse consequences. from their activities.
 Although reform legislation on organizing and collective
 bargaining is under consideration, it has not yet been
 passed. The Soviet Government has shown some willingness to
 deal with unofficiallabor groups when forced by circumstances
 to do so, as in the case of the coal miners' strikes. Most
 day-to-day.representation of Soviet workers' interests is
 conducted solely by officials ofthe.AUCCTU, who remain
 subordinate to 1Jie Government and to the Communist Party, and
 thus do not necessarily represent workers' interests fully.
 Factory and-enterprise Work Collective Councils also represent
 worker interests to a certain extent, but they exercise broad
 managerial functions and have not shown much inclination to
 challenge management or bargain for their members.
 Substantial progress has been made toward setting up special
 economic zones in at least three areas of the country to
 attract foreign investment, but the formal, legal steps to
 accomplish this have not yet been taken.
 c. -rohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Soviet law contains no prohibition on forced or compulsory
 labor; indeed, persons sentenced to deprivation of freedom are
 expected to work, Convicted criminals,- including those
 confined for political offenses, work, often under difficult
 conditions, in labor camps or in local projects to assist in
 the production of primary and manufactured goods. Prisoners
 are theoretically paid the same wage as factory workers, but,
 according to the Corrective Labor Code of the R.S.F.S.R., up
 
 
 1291
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 to 90 percent of this pay goes to prison authorities,
 supposedly to cover the costs of their maintenance.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Soviet law establishes a statutory minimum age of 16 for
 employment. No evidence of widespread violation of this law
 exists, though anecdotal reports have appeared of child labor
 in Central Asian Republics.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The government-established wage scale sets the base wage for
 the lowest level unskilled worker at $140. According to the
 Soviet State Statistical Committee, the average monthly wage
 for blue- and white-collar workers in mid-1989 was $373 and
 for collective farm workers $263 at the October 1989 official
 exchange rate. (The ruble is not a convertible currency, and
 its official value in terms of the U.S. dollar does not
 represent actual purchasing power for purposes of
 international comparison.) Soviet statistics put the mean
 wage at about $220 to $225 per month. Workers living in the
 harsh climates of Siberia and the far north, as well as those
 working in the Far East under similarly harsh conditions,
 receive bonuses doubling or even tripling their pay.
 The standard workweek in the Soviet Union is 40 hours. In
 addition, many workers are required to work Saturdays and
 additional overtime at the discretion of local management.
 Most must also "donate" a working Saturday once a year for
 which they receive no pay. For blue-collar workers, this
 means an unpaid day at the factory; white-collar workers are
 called to help clean up neighborhoods and perform other social
 services. Many white collar workers are also sent at harvest
 time, on a paid and unpaid basis, to work in the fields of
 local collective and state farms that need additional manpower
 for the harvest. Soviet law provides for annual paid holidays
 for all workers. The actual time varies, but most Soviet
 citizens receive 4 weeks or more of paid vacation each year.
 Soviet law establishes minimum conditions of workplace safety
 and worker health. These conditions are frequently violated
 and no effective mechanism for enforcing them exists.
 Workplace accidents are reportedly common. Workers file
 safety complaints mainly through their trade union
 organizations, which have proven relatively ineffectual in
 ameliorating conditions.
 
 
 1292
