Russia
While the 1996 report on Russia gives a comprehensive picture of the human rights violations that occurred during the year, it is undermined by one serious omission: there is hardly any discussion of the government's responsibility for the violations that are described in such detail, or of its failure to prevent them from taking place. As the report notes, the major sources of human rights violations in 1996 were the ongoing war in Chechnya, police brutality, the explosion in organized crime, and serious wage arrears in many industries. For the most part, the report avoids ascribing to the government the ultimate responsibility for these abuses, instead preferring to make observations such as: "Some members of the security forces continued to commit human rights abuses," "[o]rganized crime is active in many sectors of the economy," and "[wjage arrears were the cause of many strikes, including hunger strikes, and other forms of civil disturbance." Such formulations tend to diminish the responsibility of the Russian government for these events.
For the most part, the 1996 report refrains from discussing or evaluating the steps that the government took — or in some case from mentioning that it took no steps at all — to prevent human rights violations. Nowhere does the report state that by generally tolerating abuses by those under its control, the government effectively fosters a climate of impunity that bodes ill for the future of human rights and the rule of law in Russia. At the center of this critique is the fact that the report does not ascribe responsibility to the government for its sins of omission or commission, despite the State Department's own instructions directing drafters of the Country Reports to "render an opinion on. . .who appears to be responsible" and to say "whether the government has investigated, tried, and punished those found guilty, or whether it has allowed a climate of impunity."
Only twice does the report clearly attribute responsibility for human rights violations to the Russian government: once in the section on restrictions on freedom of movement, and the second time, in a discussion on the conduct by federal forces of the war in Chechnya. In just one sentence, the report dispenses with the government's responsibility for the numerous grave violations of human rights and humanitarian law by the Russian forces in Chechnya: "Final responsibility for the conduct of the
203
Critique 1996
war in Chechnya by the federal side rests with the military leadership and, ultimately, with President Yeltsin as Commander-in-Chief." This brief ascription of responsibility, obscured in the middle of the report, represents only a formal response to the criticisms of the 1994 and 1995 Critiques. In 1994 we wrote that the State Department "remains almost silent on the responsibility of the president and his ascendant conservative advisers and 'power ministries' for waging war as a solution to Chechnya's separatism." The following year's Critique complained that the 1995 report "[left] unmentioned the responsibility of the president and the conservative cabal of security, police, and military officials around him in Moscow." In the 1996 report. President Yeltsin is held responsible not for waging the war but only for the "conduct of the war" by the federal forces.
The discussion of the human rights situation in Chechnya is another place where the report alludes to the government's tolerance of human rights abuses by those in its service and the resulting climate of impunity that is evident in Chechnya and elsewhere. The report acknowledges that "[r]emarks in the press in July attributed to an unidentified major general typify the attitude toward accountability projected by the federal forces: 'since we are not waging war in Chechnya, we do not apply the law on criminal responsibility for crimes committed in war and combat."' It further acknowledges that "Human Rights Watch. . . reported that the Russian military procuracy was said to have convicted 27 servicemen for crimes against civilians, but that 'it failed adequately to investigate, let alone prosecute, the most glaring combat-related violations of humanitarian law.'"
Inasmuch as the report does ascribe responsibility at all to the government for its conduct of the war, it is an improvement over last year's treatment of the Chechen conflict. But in contrast to previous years, the 1996 report postpones the discussion of all human rights violations that took place during the conflict in Chechnya to the section on the "Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Conflicts." This is contrary to the State Department's instructions on preparing the report, which clearly indicate that this section "is not intended as a catchall for all human rights issues that arise during
204
Russia
domestic armed conflict. Generally, human rights issues should continue to be discussed under the appropriate sections (e.g., torture, etc.)." By not discussing the instances of torture and disappearance in Chechnya in the report's sections dealing with those violations, the drafters under-represented the incidence of such violations in Russia.
The tendency to minimize government responsibility for torture is also evident in the opening paragraph of the section on the conflict in Chechnya, which states that "Russian forces. . . mistreated detainees who may or may not have had any links with separatist forces... ." (emphasis added.) In a later and less prominently placed paragraph, the report admits to the existence of "a substantial number of credible accounts of torture and other cruel and inhuman or degrading punishment of Chechens by Russian military and internal security forces. .. ." The initial statement that Russian forces "mistreated" detainees thus clearly understates the reality of the documented torture by government forces of their detainees. To understand that this was not merely "mistreatment," one need only review some of the accounts. Amnesty International, for example, reported that methods of torture included beatings vsdth rifle butts and truncheons, electric shock and attacks by guard dogs.
The report's understatement of the Russian security forces' involvement in human rights abuses is also clear from the introduction, in which it states that "[s]ome members of the security forces continued to commit human rights abuses." (emphasis added.) The State Department's instructions indicate that the term "some members" is to be used only "in instances in which only a few members of the security forces were culpable" (emphasis added). Where the report itself states (notably, in a later section) that "Russian forces continued to commit numerous, serious violations of human rights and international humanitarian law [and] Russian forces used indiscriminate and excessive force without regard for the presence of noncombatants" (emphasis added), it is misleading to suggest earlier that only a few members of the security forces were culpable. Indeed, no observer of the situation in Chechnya has ever suggested that only a few members of the Russian security forces were responsible for the human rights disaster in Chechnya. Rather, the observers, including those from UN human rights mechanisms, the
205
Critique 1996
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and NGOs such as Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International, typically identified "Russian forces" collectively as responsible for the excessive and disproportionate use of force that led to grave human rights violations.
The report also minimizes the responsibility of the Russian forces for violations of humanitarian and human rights law when it states that "civilians — including women — were fired upon" while passing through humanitarian corridors in Chechnya. There is no reason to use the passive voice here: the civilians were not "fired upon" by unknown forces, but by Russian federal forces. The drafters knew this, as is clear from the text, and should have identified the Russian forces as the perpetrators instead of clouding the issue of responsibility through employment of the passive voice, which is discouraged by State Department instructions on preparing the Country Reports.
In its section on "Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Punishment" (as in every other section except for the two noted earlier), the report fails to ascribe responsibility to the government for its employees' acts of torture. The report does, however, provide an overview of torture and beatings committed by law enforcement and correctional officials. For example, it states that prison guards raped and severely beat inmates. It also cites information obtained by the Moscow Center for Prison Reform that law enforcement officials admit to using torture, such as cutting off oxygen with a plastic bag or gas mask, to coerce confessions from suspects. According to the report, "10,000 to 20,000 detainees and prison inmates died after beatings by security officials or due to harsh conditions," yet "there are no reports of any cases of law enforcement or correctional officers being punished for abusing detainees or convicts." Although this indicates the government's tolerance of human rights abuses, the report does not go on to address issues of responsibility and impunity. Not only does it fail to link the law enforcement and correctional officials' actions and the ultimate responsibility for them to the government, the report also does not conclude that the government fosters impunity through failing to investigate, prosecute and punish the perpetrators of the grave abuses.
206
Russia
A similar situation is evident in the discussion of the persistent practice of dedovshchina, the violent hazing of new recruits in the Russian armed forces: "Despite the magnitude of the problem, the national military leadership apparently made no moves to implement training and education programs to combat dedovshchina systematically, nor was there any apparent progress in establishing a military police force." Again, the report notes that there were abuses and acknowledges that the government did nothing to stop them.
The report cites the overwhelming evidence of inhuman conditions of detention in Russia, and lists the steps that the government took to improve the situation. It offers the following conclusion:
In January President Yeltsin approved the MVD's [Ministry of Interior] project to reorganize criminal procedures and the penal system in order to bring Russia's penal system in line with international standards. The President's Commission for Prison Reform monitors prison conditions and has prepared recommendations and legislation for reform. None of these efforts have made demonstrable progress.
This is also the conclusion of the UN Special Rapporteur on Torture, who has acknowledged the measures the government has taken to improve prison conditions, but concluded: "The fact remains that two years later these conditions seem to persist." The report should have gone further than it did to assert unambiguously that it is the government's responsibility to ensure that it treats those it imprisons in a humane manner.
The report's reference to "a lack of funding" that led to a further decline in health, nutrition and sanitation standards in Russia's penitentiary facilities does not excuse the government's failure to keep its prisoners in tolerable conditions. This is not the only place where the report points to funding limitations as an apparent rationale for human rights violations. With respect to the denial of a fair public trial, for example, the report states: "The Government's inability tojully fund the operations of the justice system further undermined the independence of the judiciary, preventing it from acting as an effective counterweight to
207
Critique 1996
the other branches of Government" (emphasis added). With respect to the well-being of children in state institutions, the report says: "Human rights activists allege that children in state institutions are poorly provided for (often because funds are lacking) and in some cases are physically abused by staff" (emphasis added.) Because the allocation of funds is a matter under the control of the government, a purported lack of funds in an area within the government's responsibility cannot be advanced or accepted as a valid excuse for the government's failure to protect human rights. In other words, if the government did not allocate sufficient funds, for example, for improving the conditions of detention, it cannot then raise the excuse of a lack of funds for the continuing violations of the human rights of detainees.
The responsibility of the Russian government for human rights violations is further clouded by a practice of which this Critique has repeatedly complained. This is the tendency to allude to "reports" of violations without offering an opinion on their veracity. Thus: "There were reports that law enforcement and correctional officials tortured and severely beat detainees and inmates." "According to press reports, some of the young men reported as missing had been rounded up and conscripted, for military service when they could not prove that they had performed their national service." "Some human rights organizations believe that the authorities have taken advantage of the system's procedural wealoiesses to arrest people on false pretexts for expressing views critical of the government." "Human rights activists maintain that Yuriy Shadrin was detained because of his intention to speak to Moscow jurists about abuses involving the judiciary in Omsk." (emphases added.) There are many such examples, in spite of the State Department's clear instructions to drafters to "render an opinion on whether reports of a pattern of abuse are credible. . . ." The instructions conclude: "Thus, it is not sufficient to say 'human rights monitors claim ...' or 'there are occasional reports of. . . .' Wherever possible, we must state whether we believe such abuses occurred and, if so, who was responsible."
Finally, the report's treatment of the situation of refugees in Russia is disappointing. It should not have relied virtually exclusively on UNHCR for information about this subject. While the report should be
208
RuSvSia
praised for turning to UN sources, it should not have done so unquestioningly, especially in view of UNHCR's position vis-à-vis the Russian government. Since 1995, the Russian Federation has been a member of the governing body of UNHCR, the Executive Council of the High Commissioner's Programme. Additionally, UNHCR has been seeking to establish its presence in Russia and to secure and maintain Russia's active participation in the 1996 Regional Conference to Address the Problems of Refugees, Displaced Persons, Other Forms of Involuntary Displacement and Returnees in the Countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States and Relevant Neighbouring States. It has thus not been in the interest of UNHCR to act vigorously upon its protection mandate, exposing Russia's noncompUance with the provisions of the Refugee Convention and its frequent disregard for other human rights obligations relevant to the protection of refugees.
The report's apparent reliance on UNHCR as a primary source of information in this area may explain why, despite State Department instructions to report whether "[b]ona fide refugees [are] forced to return to countries in which they fear persecution," the report omits any mention of Russia's ongoing practice of forcible deportation of asylum-seekers, particularly from the transit zone of Russia's principal international airport, Sheremetyevo-2 in Moscow. The report not only omits any mention of forced deportations, but also misrepresents the reality by asserting that "the Government provides first asylum." As many as ten refugees per week are forcibly deported from the Sheremetyevo-2 airport without being given a meaningful chance to apply for asylum in Russia. In fact, no asylum-seeker at the Sheremetyevo-2 airport has ever received asylum in Russia. The deportees are often sent with a Russian escort directiy to the countries from which they fled. This practice violates the international proscription of refoulement — involuntary return of a person to a place where s/he risks persecution.
While UNHCR did not once protest the «Russian government's forcible deportation of a refugee in 1996, Amnesty International has warned the Russian government against refoulement of refugees on several occasions. Not all cases of refoulement were from the Sheremetyevo-2 airport. A notable refoulement case came to light when the governor of a
209
Critique 1996
Russian far eastern province said at a May 27, 1996 news conference that the Russian authorities had forcibly returned a North Korean refugee to North Korea where, in the presence of Russian border guards. North Korean officers executed him.
This event highlights what Amnesty International called Russia's "general unwillingness to grant asylum to North Korean refugees and indeed, to any asylum-seeker from outside the former Soviet Union." Figures from the Russian Federal Migration Service support this statement; they show that from the beginning of 1994 to April 1996, Russian authorities granted refugee status to 138,714 asylum-seekers from the Commonwealth of Independent States and the Baltic States, but granted such status to only 67 asylum-seekers from outside the former Soviet Union. This situation had not changed much by the end of the year. By the end of 1996, the UNHCR office in Moscow has registered 30,311 asylum-seekers from outside the former Soviet Union. The Russian authorities' discriminatory practice of ordinarily allowing only refugees from the "near abroad" to apply for and receive refugee status leaves the vast majority of refugees from outside the former Soviet Union without legal status in Russia, and without the possibility of legalizing their stay there. These people consequently bear the burden of illegality and, along with problems such as closed access to public schooling, suffer maltreatment such as extortion, detention and beatings at the hands of the police.
Failing to mention any of these important facts of the situation of refugees in Russia, the report presents an inaccurate and misleading picture. For next year's report, it would be helpful to balance UNHCR's views of the situation of refugees in Russia vsath evidence from NGOs regarding Russia's compliance or noncompliance with its obligations toward refugees.
210
