Russia
In 2010 Russia demonstrated increased openness to international cooperation on
human rights, but the overall human rights climate in the country remained
deeply negative. President Dmitry Medvedev’s rhetorical commitments to human
rights and the rule of law have not been backed by concrete steps to support civil
society. The year 2010 saw new attacks on human rights defenders, and the perpetrators
of brazen murders in the previous year remained unpunished.
Civil Society
Despite the Kremlin’s repeated statements about the importance of normal working
conditions for NGOs, human rights defenders remain vulnerable to harassment
and attacks, and those working to end impunity in the North Caucasus are
especially at risk.
In September Oleg Orlov, chairman of the Memorial Human Rights Center, stood
trial for criminal slander, a charge that carries up to three years in prison. The
charge stems from Orlov’s statement that Ramzan Kadyrov, the leader of
Chechnya, was politically responsible for the July 2009 murder of Natalia
Estemirova, a leading Memorial researcher in Chechnya. No one has yet been
held accountable for Estemirova’s murder. It is unclear if the investigation has
examined possible official involvement or complicity in the crime.
Memorial resumed its activities in Chechnya in late 2009, following a six-month
suspension after Estemirova’s murder and threats against other staff. Under the
leadership of the Nizhny Novgorod Committee Against Torture, 12 Russian human
rights organizations established mobile groups that worked by rotation in
Chechnya throughout 2010. The groups assist Memorial in investigating human
rights violations in the republic and provide legal aid to victims.
In a May 2010 meeting with NGOs working on the North Caucasus, President
Medvedev urged local authorities to cooperate with civil society organizations.
However, Kadyrov and other high-level Chechen officials continued to make
threatening statements about rights groups. In a televised interview in July, Kadyrov described human rights defenders and Memorial activists as “enemies of
the state, enemies of the people, enemies of the law.” The Kremlin failed to react.
Rights activists in the republic of Dagestan, particularly the Mothers of Dagestan
for Human Rights, continue to receive threats. In June 2010, human rights lawyer
Sapiyat Magomedova was severely beaten by police in the city of Khasavyurt. The
alleged perpetrators, although identified, have not been held to account.
Human rights defenders working in other regions also faced harassment and
attacks. In February 2010 Vadim Karastelev, a human rights advocate in the port
city of Novorossiisk, served seven days of administrative detention for organizing
an unsanctioned demonstration in support of Aleksei Dymovsky, a former police
officer whose YouTube video exposé of police corruption received nationwide
attention. The day after Karastelev’s release, unknown assailants brutally beat
him, causing serious injuries.
Responding to public outcry about police violence and lawlessness, the government
pledged to undertake major reforms. However, the draft law on police proposed
in 2010 falls short of what is necessary to best prevent human rights violations
by law enforcement officials and ensure civilian oversight over policing.
In May 2010 a court in the Sverdlovsk region sentenced Alexei Sokolov, a prisoners’
rights advocate from Ekaterinburg, to five years in prison on spurious criminal
charges after an unfair trial. The charges appear to be in retaliation for his work
exposing police and prison abuse.
Throughout 2010, police continued to disperse, sometimes violently, the public
rallies held in large cities on the thirty-first day of each month in support of Article
31 of the constitution, which guarantees freedom of assembly. The year 2010
opened with the detention of Ludmilia Alexeeva, Russia’s leading human rights
defender, then aged 82, at a Moscow rally on New Year’s Eve. Prominent activist
Lev Ponomarev twice faced administrative detention in 2010 for participating in
rallies.
Yet there was also a breakthrough in autumn 2010, when the authorities allowed
an October 31 rally that drew at least 1,000 peaceful protesters to Triumfalnaya
Square in central Moscow. This development stands as a great victory for Russia’s civil society movement and its international supporters. Incidentally, the authorities
consented to this rally just as the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR)
issued a stinging rebuke to Moscow in the Alexeev v Russia ruling, saying that the
Russian authorities repeatedly denied activists the right to hold gay pride marches,
in violation of the right to freedom of assembly.
In June a Moscow court found the co-organizers of the Forbidden Art-2006 exhibition,
Yuri Samodurov and Andrei Erofeev, guilty of inciting religious hostility. The
court maintained that the artworks on display contained images offensive to
Christians, and fined Samodurov and Erofeev 200,000 (US$6,452) and 150,000
($4,839) rubles respectively.
NGOs and the media remain vulnerable to vague anti-extremist legislation, which
the authorities use to silence critics. In July 2010, new provisions to the law on
the Federal Security Service (FSB) were adopted allowing the FSB to issue warnings
to individuals, organizations, and media outlets. The warnings require individuals
or organizations to stop activities the FSB considers actually or potentially
extremist. In September 2010, the Moscow prosecutor’s office launched an
unprecedented wave of intrusive inquiries into foreign-funded NGOs.
The North Caucasus
The Islamist insurgency in the North Caucasus republics remained active in 2010.
In countering it, law enforcement and security agencies continued to commit
grave violations of fundamental human rights, such as torture, enforced disappearances,
and extrajudicial killings.
The use of unlawful counterinsurgency methods coupled with rampant impunity
for abuses, antagonizes the people of Chechnya, Ingushetia, and Dagestan, and
widens the gap between the public and the government. On March 29, for the
first time since 2004, a major attack was perpetrated in Russia’s capital. Two suicide
bombers from Dagestan exploded themselves in the Moscow metro during
morning rush hour, killing 40 and wounding dozens.
Despite the fact that their monitoring capacity is severely hampered by security
concerns, human rights groups continued to document abductions and extrajudicial
killings in 2010.
The Chechen government has brazenly adopted a policy of collective punishment.
In 2010, high-level Chechen officials, including the president, stated publicly that
insurgents’ families should expect punishment unless their relatives surrender.
Stopping short of directly instructing law enforcement agencies to destroy the
house of insurgents’ families and apply other collective punishments, such statements
encourage lawless actions by police and security personnel.
Violations of women’s rights in Chechnya intensified in 2010. Women not wearing
headscarves are harassed on the street. Local authorities unambiguously condoned
the pelting of unveiled women on the streets with paintball guns, which
resulted in the hospitalization of at least one woman in June. In a July television
interview, Kadyrov said that the women deserved such treatment for failing to
dress appropriately. The Chechen authorities have banned those refusing to wear
headscarves from working in the public sector or attending schools and universities.
In the republic of Ingushetia, despite President Yunus-Bek Yevkurov’s stated commitment
to uphold the rule of law and improve the working climate for human
rights NGOs, law enforcement and security agencies continue to perpetrate
abductions, torture, and killings. According to Memorial, 12 civilians were abducted,
three forcibly disappeared, and 11 were extrajudicially executed between
January and September 2010.
The year 2010 saw new insurgent attacks in Dagestan and new abductions of residents
by law enforcement and security officials. The appointment of
Magomedsalam Magomedov as the republic’s new president in early 2010 has
had no noticeable impact on the human rights and security situation in Dagestan.
Salafi Muslims are especially vulnerable to persecution in Dagestan because the
authorities suspect them of ties to the insurgency. In May seven Salafi men were
arbitrarily detained and severely beaten by Kazbekovsky district police officials;
one victim died of his injuries. Police torture is endemic beyond unlawful counterinsurgency
practices. In July, police detained a 14-year-old boy in the village of
Khotoba on suspicion of theft, and severely beat him, causing serious injuries
and the loss of hearing in one ear.
Cooperation with the European Court of Human Rights
In January 2010 – after years of delay – Russia ratified Protocol 14 to the
European Convention for Human Rights, becoming the last Council of Europe
(CoE) member state to do so. Protocol 14 streamlines the case review process at
the ECtHR and strengthens the enforcement mechanisms of the CoE’s Committee
of Ministers.
To date the EctHR has issued more than 150 judgments holding Russia responsible
for grave human rights violations in Chechnya. Russia continues to pay the
required monetary compensation to victims but fails to meaningfully implement
the core of the judgments, in particular conducting effective investigations and
holding perpetrators accountable. The Russian authorities have also failed to take
sufficient measures to prevent the recurrence of similar abuses and new complaints
are lodged with the ECtHR every year. The failure to fully implement the
court’s judgments denies justice to the victims and fuels the climate of impunity
in Chechnya.
Lack of Accountability for Laws of War Violations
Over two years since the Russian conflict with Georgia over South Ossetia,
Russian authorities have yet to ensure a comprehensive investigation into and
accountability for international human rights and humanitarian law violations by
their forces.
Russian forces used cluster bombs in areas populated by civilians in Georgia,
leading to civilian deaths and injuries. Russia also launched indiscriminate rocket
attacks on civilian areas, causing casualties. Russian forces in Georgia failed to
protect civilians in areas under their effective control whilst also preventing
Georgian forces from policing these areas.
Health Issues and HIV/AIDS
In 2010 the Russian government continued to violate the rights of hundreds of
thousands of drug users who are denied access to effective drug treatment and
HIV prevention. The government’s 2009 decision to shift funding away from HIV prevention services resulted in the closure of 42 health centers in August 2010. A
number of other sites operate under an extended grant from the Global Fund to
Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, but these programs also face closure. The
government’s opposition to drug treatment using methadone or buprenorphine
puts injection drug users at grave risk of HIV infection. Unnecessarily restrictive
narcotics laws unduly limit the accessibility of morphine for patients with pain
due to cancer, HIV/AIDS, and other illnesses, condemning many to severe suffering.
Migrant Worker Rights
Russia has between 4 and 9 million migrant workers, over 80 percent of whom
come from the region of the former Soviet Union. Forty percent of migrant workers
labor in construction, where they face abuses that include confiscation of passports,
denial of contracts, non-payment or delayed payment of wages, and unsafe
working conditions. Migrant workers have few effective options for redress.
Legislative changes adopted in May tie foreign workers more closely to their
employers and may discourage a worker from leaving an abusive employer. Other
legislative changes introduced a system for simplifying legal employment of workers
employed by private persons as nannies, contractors, and in other non-commercial
jobs.
To complete the large-scale construction projects necessary for Russia to host the
2014 Winter Olympic Games in Sochi, employers are hiring large numbers of
migrant workers from other parts of Russia and from other countries. Some workers
have reported employers’ failure to provide contracts, non-payment or severe
delays in payment of wages, and substandard employer-provided housing.
Expropriation of Property and Evictions in Advance of the 2014
Olympic Games
To make way for venues for the 2014 Winter Olympics, hundreds of families living
in the Adler region of Sochi will lose their property through state expropriations.
Some will also lose their livelihoods, such as small hotels and farms. Although
the regional government has in most cases promised compensation, serious concerns remain about the compensation amounts and procedures, and the means
of challenging official actions.
International Actors
In 2010 Russia showed some improved cooperation on human rights, but
Russia’s international partners did not do enough to encourage human rights
reform.
In February, after two years of stalled negotiations, Russia allowed a delegation
from the United Kingdom’s parliament to conduct a fact-finding visit to Chechnya.
In March Dick Marty, the rapporteur on human rights in the North Caucasus for
the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE), made a long-awaited
visit to Chechnya, Ingushetia, and Dagestan. Marty’s critical report on the lack of
legal remedies for victims of human rights violations was unanimously adopted at
the June session of PACE, marking the first time the Russia delegation voted in
favor of a critical report on the North Caucasus.
The European Union held two rounds of human rights consultations with Russia.
While the consultations provide an important forum for working-level discussions
on human rights, the lack of follow-up mechanisms, isolation from high-level
political meetings, and the absence of high-level Russian participation undermine
their effectiveness. The EU continued negotiations on its Partnership and
Cooperation Agreement with Russia, which expired in 2007.
The United States and Russia initiated a civil society working group for government
representatives and civil society experts to discuss thematic issues in both
countries. The working group convened in Washington, DC in January to focus on
corruption and children’s rights. It met in May in the Russian city of Vladimir to
discuss prison reform and migration. The meetings, while providing a good platform
for discussion, have not had any practical outcome to date.
The Office of the Prosecutor at the International Criminal Court continued its preliminary
examination of the 2008 armed conflict between Russia and Georgia
over South Ossetia and sent delegations to Russia in March 2010 and to Georgia
in June to obtain additional information on domestic remedies and proceedings.