UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
Because the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics formally ceased to exist in 1991, this State Department report is the last on human rights conditions in the now-deftinct Soviet state. The 1991 report is perhaps a fitting tribute to the conclusion of U.S. human rights policy towards the Soviet Union during the era of perestroika. While the report provides much valuable and accurate information about human rights conditions, its perspective reflects the strongly pro-center policies which the U.S. government pursued in 1991. It gives kaleidoscopic detail on many human rights issues in many regions of the former Soviet Union. But even in a report published after the collapse of the Soviet Union, the State Department fails to fully acknowledge the role of the Soviet central government in human rights violations in 1991.
Up until the attempted August coup which led to the collapse of the Soviet Union, President Bush emphasized the key importance of good relations between the United States and the Soviet Union and between President Gorbachev and himself personally. For instance, in mid-August, President Bush explained in Kiev:
President Gorbachev has achieved astonishing things, and his policies of glasnost, perestroika, and democratization point toward the goals of freedom, democracy, and economic liberty. We will maintain the strongest possible relationship with the Soviet Government of President Gorbachev. . . .
Overriding U.S. support of the central government and President Gorbachev led the U.S. to gloss over Soviet human rights issues both in its policies during 1991 and in this report. The distorted assessment of the Soviet central government's human rights performance stems from omissions of pertinent information and the failure to draw reasonable inferences firom the information presented. This critique focuses on the role of the central government and does not touch on many of the well-documented and thorough areas of the report.
391
USSR
The most critical example of the U.S. government's failure to hold the Soviet government fully responsible was in the violent crackdown by the central government against the Baltic republics in 1991. While the report acknowledges that Soviet security forces provoked numerous violent incidents in the Baltic states in the first half of 1991, it fails to place direct responsibility for these actions on the central government.
The massacres which occurred in January 1991 in Vilnius and Riga were not isolated incidents in Soviet policy toward the Baltic states or aberrant episodes in the use of excessive force against civilians under the leadership of President Gorbachev. Since 1985, the Soviet army had been used to kill peaceful demonstrators in at least five other republics, leaving more than 200 people dead. The evidence strongly suggests that while world attention was diverted toward escalating tensions in the Persian Gulf, the central government prepared a plan with President Gorbachev's approval to overthrow the popularly elected governments in the Baltic states and to impose presidential rule firom Moscow.
After Lithuania declared independence in March 1990, the Soviet government imposed an economic blockade against it, and threatened the use of force if Lithuania failed to respect the authority of the central government. In a meeting on January 8, 1991 with the Prime Minister of Lithuania, Kazimirera Prunskiene, President Gorbachev refused to promise that he would not send troops to intervene in Lithuania. On January 10, President Gorbachev sent a message to Lithuania's Parliament in which he threatened to impose presidential rule unless the republic revoked its pro-independence laws. At 1:30 a.m. on January 13, 1991, armed forces encircled and stormed the television tower in Vilnius, killing unarmed civilians in the process. Later that day, when Lithuanian President Vytautas Landsbergis telephoned President Gorbachev, he refused to speak with Landsbergis. While President Gorbachev claimed that he had not authorized the troops to attack Lithuania's press center and national defense building, he never condemned their actions.
392
USSR
There was no justification under Soviet or international law to use force to seize buildings in Vilnius, Kaunas or Riga. The Soviet military actions violated Articles 4, 6, 9 and 22 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), to which the Soviet Union is a party, and violated rights declared in the Soviet Constitution.
The failure of the report to devote significant attention to the use of excessive force in the Baltics is consistent with U.S. policy during the crisis. Although threatening political and military maneuvers occurred for several days, President Bush did not react publicly to events in the Baltics until after 14 people had been killed in Vilnius. At that time he "ask[ed] the Soviet leaders to refrain from further acts that might lead to violence." President Bush's criticism pointedly avoided holding President Gorbachev accountable, and the administration rejected public calls to postpone a February Bush-Gorbachev summit as a show of protest. When the summit was finally postponed, use of excessive force in the Baltics was not among the reasons for the delay.
The Soviet central government not only failed to accept responsibility for the human rights violations of its armed forces in January, it failed to investigate them seriously. As the report notes, the General Procurator of the Soviet Union, Nikolai Trubin, issued a statement on the official investigation on June 3, denying that any victims of the January 13 attack were killed by Soviet troops. The report does not point out, however, that an independent military reform group. Shield, released an investigation of the crackdown in Vilnius which directly implicated the Communist Party and President Gorbachev. On February 12, as the Shield investigative commission was departing from Vilnius, Soviet army and KGB officers detained three members of the investigative team and beat two of them. Furthermore, the report omits mentioning that alleged secret Conununist Party documents published in late January contain credible evidence that a plan for overthrowing the governments of the Baltic states had been approved by the Communist Party Politburo, of which President Gorbachev was a member, as early as August 1990.
393
USSR
Although the report mentions that there were episodes of extrajudicial killings in Lithuania later in 1991, it fails to present the continuing pattern of use of excessive force by the Soviet central government. Soviet paratroopers arbitrarily detained more than 20 people in Lithuania in the first part of 1991, and there were several reports of beatings during detention. The principal perpetrators of violence, though, were special forces units which attacked, occupied, destroyed or closed over 30 customs posts set up by the Lithuanian, Latvian and Estonian governments. At least eight people were killed and 21 injured in these attacks. In public statements, the now-deceased Soviet Minister of Interior Pugo denied special forces' participation in the attacks and President Gorbachev claimed no prior knowledge.
President Bush was in Moscow when special forces attacked a customs post at Medininkai on July 31, killing seven Lithuanian officials and critically wounding another. Appearing at a press conference with President Gorbachev that day, President Bush minimized the Soviet government role, calling it the result of "cross-border violence on both sides." When asked specifically if he thought there was a connection between the incident and the Baltic republics' drive for freedom, he said, "[wjell, I don't think there's a connection." He then appeared to further shield President Gorbachev from any responsibility for the Medininkai incident by saying, "[t]he President [Gorbachev] immediately got on this [the murders] and said they're conducting an investigation." Although President Bush sent a letter to the Lithuanian Prime Minister two weeks later saying that the United States held Moscow ultimately responsible for the actions of its personnel, the initial U.S. response failed even to acknowledge a connection. The report, in similar fashion, contends that the incident came "after months of violent actions by hard-line Communist elements." It notes that "who ordered or authorized the murders has not been established."
The report accurately notes that the central government played a key role in abetting the inter-ethnic violence in the conflict between Armenia and Azerbaidzhán over Nagorno-Karabakh, a small territory in Azerbaidzhán historically populated by Armenians. The Soviet military joined with Azerbaidzhani forces to deport more than ten thousand
394
USSR
Armenians from the Nagorno-Karabakh region. The Soviet title for the military operation was "Operation Ring," because Soviet and Azerbaidzhani forces surrounded and shelled villages, and then entered the villages to interrogate, make arrests, kill and brutalize people, permit looting of their property and to burn their villages or simply force the villagers to flee. The conflict between Armenia and Azerbaidzhán continues, although now without the participation of Soviet troops.
The report fails to address several laws and decrees passed in 1991 which grant to the Soviet armed forces the right to use excessive force and to abrogate several internationally recognized due process rights. The report does not address sufficiently two presidential decrees issued in late January to "fight crime": the January 29 Decree on Joint Army-Militia Patrols and the January 26 Decree on Economic Sabotage,
The Decree on Joint Patrols permitted units of the militia, the armed forces of the Ministry of Interior and the army to jointly patrol the cities to keep public order. Without doing so explicitly, the decree de facto granted state of emergency powers to the government, allowing joint units to patrol the streets 24 hours per day. This decree on its face violated ICCPR Articles 4 and 21 regarding the right to freedom of assembly and appropriate measures in time of public emergency.
The Decree on Economic Sabotage permitted the militia and the KGB, at their discretion, to enter any enterprise, institution or organization without any search warrant. It also permitted the militia and the KGB to enter private residences used for entrepreneurial activity to conduct searches. These provisions violated the right to privacy stated in ICCPR Article 17. Although the decree was issued as a temporary measure until three laws were subsequently adopted, those later measures were never passed.
On May 16 the U.S.S.R. Supreme Soviet passed the law on the KGB which further encroached on the rights to privacy and procedural due process guaranteed under ICCPR Article 17. The law explicitly permitted the KGB to conduct telephone tapping, eavesdropping and monitoring of correspondence without a prior warrant from the
395
USSR
procuracy; it was sufficient for the KGB to obtain a warrant ex post facto. TTie law furthermore granted a KGB agent the right to demand a citizen's identity papers at any time if the agent had reasonable suspicion that the individual committed a crime. The law offered no definition of "reasonable suspicion." The law also granted the KGB "unimpeded access" to any institution or residence at any time of day if the KGB officer was in hot pursuit of a criminal suspect or if there were other "exceptional circumstances that threaten[ed] state security."
The report neglects to mention several personal efforts by President Gorbachev to curtail civil liberties as well. While the report notes central government actions which "violated the spirit of the U.S.S.R. law on the press," it fails to note that President Gorbachev himself, angered by independent news coverage of the January events in the Baltics, recommended to the U.S.S.R. Supreme Soviet on January 17 that the press law be suspended. Although he retreated in the face of outspoken opposition. President Gorbachev succeeded in establishing a "glasnost commission" to "insure objectivity" in future news coverage. And while the report acknowledges that the press came under particular attack in the crackdown in the Baltics, it does not point out clearly that the drive against freedom of expression extended throughout the U.S.S.R. as a result of the January events in Lithuania and Latvia. The central government media distorted the January events and censored contrary coverage in the media which it directly controlled.
In late March, President Gorbachev directly violated the right to freedom of assembly. He issued a decree banning demonstrations in Moscow for 20 days and placed the Moscow police under central government control during an emergency session of the Russian Parliament. Supporters of Boris Yeltsin had called demonstrations to counter an attempt by Communist Party members within the Russian Parliament to oust him. Both the Moscow City Council and the Russian Parliament adopted resolutions stating that President Gorbachev's actions were an illegal and unjustifiable usurpation of power and called for the demonstrations to proceed. On March 28, 50,000 troops including police. Ministry of Interior and KGB forces lined the streets of Moscow in a riot control operation unprecedented in modern Soviet history.
396
USSR
Ignoring the ban, peaceful demonstrators congregated in the police-lined streets and called for President Gorbachev to resign, but no violence occurred.
In discussing freedom of religion in the U.S.S.R., the report correctly points out that local officials have abused the registration requirement for religious congregations as a form of harassment. While it mentions in passing the issue of "favoritism" toward the Russian Orthodox Church, it does not identify the emerging problem of a lack of separation between church and state. Priests of the Moscow Patriarchy led prayers during the summit meeting between Presidents Bush and Gorbachev and at Boris Yeltsin's inauguration as President of the Russian Federation; Russian Orthodox Christmas was declared a national holiday, and the Russian Orthodox Church in various locales, including Moscow, had preferential access to church buildings and state-controlled resources, such as television air time. Governmental affiliation with the Moscow Patriarchy is particularly troublesome because of the Patriarchy's past close collaboration with the KGB.
The report notes that young men who refused to serve in the army because of their religious convictions continued to be criminally punished. Throughout 1991, the failure to report for military service continued to be punishable by five to seven years' imprisonment. Although the Ministry of Defense announced in February that it would submit a draft bill providing civilian service, no such legislation was ever introduced. Individual republics made provisions for alternative service, but they were not recognized under U.S.S.R. law.
The report appropriately notes the continuing enforcement of the residence permit, or prospiska system, which violates the right to freedom of movement under ICCPR Article 12. In discussing the May 1991 law to permit entry and exit from the Soviet Union, the report points out some of its shortcomings. It notes the continuing requirement of an exit visa, and restrictions against those with access to state secrets and draft-age men. It does not mention other novel loopholes which the law provided.
397
USSR
While President Bush heralded the May law in Moscow as "a major step forward - a victory for all who value human rights," the law on its face violated the narrow restrictions on freedom of movement permitted by ICCPR Article 12 and Principle 9.5 of the Concluding Document of the June 1990 CSCE Copenhagen Meeting of the Conference on the Human Dimension, which the U.S.S.R. signed. The May law provided eight separate grounds for temporary denial of exit visas, including access to secret "contractual or formal commitments" and the existence of pending civil litigation against the person seeking to leave the country. While this law never came into effect, the report correctly notes that the newly independent states continued to permit high levels of emigration by the end of the year and that many former Soviet citizens who lived abroad were allowed to return to visit.
In discussing the legal system, the report is certainly correct when it points out that the judiciary was neither independent nor empowered to act as a guarantor of human rights by the end of the year. Despite the central government's proclaimed commitment to create a state based on the rule of law, it took few concrete steps to improve the judicial system. Instead, it took several steps backwards by further diminishing the opportunities for fair administration of justice. As discussed above, the January 26 Decree on Economic Sabotage expanded the KGB's and militia's right to conduct warrantless searches. The law on the KGB codified its right to wiretap, eavesdrop and seek a warrant after the fact.
As in the past, the procuracy acted as both the accuser and the judge in the pretrial phase of a criminal case. It managed prosecutorial ftinctions, such as issuing warrants, conducting interrogations and investigations, and at the same time ostensibly ensured due process. There continued to be no right to appeal an arrest or detention to an impartial tribunal, but only to a higher level within the office of the procurator, a violation of ICCPR Article 9.
The police continued to have no duty to inform those in custody of their right to counsel or their right to remain silent. Under amendments to the Fundamentals of Criminal Procedure adopted in April
398
USSR
1990, all defense attorneys were denied access to defendants during the first interrogation of an accused. While defense attorneys have enjoyed expanded access to clients during preliminary investigations since 1990, the stricture against defense counsel participation in the first interrogation significantly limited their effectiveness.
The lack of an functioning bail system forced most people awaiting trial to be detained in custody for an average of four to six months. As the report correctly notes, a person awaiting trial may be held up to 18 months in custody without ever being brought before a judge. Conditions in pretrial detention were appalling, in general far worse than in labor colonies, with extreme overcrowding and in practice almost no permitted contact with the outside world.
The report accurately notes the effective presumption of guilt against Soviet defendants. Fewer than one percent of all criminal defendants in the Russian Federation were acquitted in 1991. Furthermore, in more than 10% of criminal cases, the judge sent cases back to the procurator's office for "additional investigation," possibly leading to new charges against the defendant.
Despite a great deal of talk about criminal law reform, few changes in the law were made, and crimes such as illegally crossing the U.S.S.R. border, leading a parasitic lifestyle, selling substandard products and speculation (buying and reselling goods for profit) remained on the books. In addition to these crimes which invited arbitrary enforcement, the report demonstrates through its discussion of specific cases that fabricated criminal charges were still used against political opponents as well.
Judges continued to have the right to place people under "administrative arrest," whereby a single judge could incarcerate a person without right of appeal for up to 15 days for taking part in unsanctioned meetings or for distributing leaflets.
The report accurately notes the adoption of a law in the Russian Republic in July to create a Constitutional Court. While the creation of
399
USSR
a Constitutional Court is a critical step toward the establishment of an independent judiciary in Russia, it is noteworthy that in the election of Judges which took place during the Fifth Congress of People's Deputies in October, prospective judges were given five minutes to speak. This gives some measure of the legislature's initial perception of the Court's importance.
The report does not mention new developments regarding the death penalty. In July, the U.S.S.R. Supreme Soviet adopted legislation to reduce the number of peacetime crimes punishable by the death penalty from 18 to five. The death penalty was retained for treason, premeditated murder with aggravating circumstances, rape of a minor with aggravating circumstances, kidnapping of a minor with especially grave consequences and crimes against humanity. It exempted women and those under the age of 18 from the death penalty.
In 1991 the Soviet Ministry of Justice published statistics on executions for the first time since 1934. In 1990, there were 445 death sentences with 29 commutations. In 1992, the Russian Ministry of Justice released information showing that in Russia the number of those executed declined for the third year in a row. While the number of those found guilty of crimes potentially carrying the death penalty in 1991 rose from 2,814 in 1989 to 4,977 in 1991, the number of those put to death in Russia dropped firom 93 in 1989 to 59 in 1991.
After the attempted coup, the Soviet central government attempted to strengthen individual rights and the judicial system as an interim measure until a new Soviet Constitution came into effect. The report notes that the U.S.S.R. Congress of People's Deputies adopted the Declaration of Human Rights and Freedoms in September. But even after the coup attempt, the efforts of the Soviet central government to guarantee rights were too little too late. This document, which has had limited legal effect in some of the successor republics, is extremely flawed. It declares the right to assemble peacefully "in accordance with the legislation of the U.S.S.R.," the right to be free from warrantless searches except "in accordance with the law," the right to privacy of
400
USSR
correspondence and telephone conversation other than "exceptions . . . envisaged by the law," and so forth.
The report correctly notes that there are no known political prisoners serving terms under the explicitly political and religious articles of the republic criminal codes (RSFSR Criminal Code Articles 70, 142, 227 and 190-1). But Cronid Lubarsky, who has for 13 years published monthly reports on political prisoners in the Soviet Union, stated that as of October 31, 1991, there were still as many as 157 political prisoners in the former U.S.S.R. Many of them were convicted solely for political acts, such as attempting to emigrate, mocking the national emblem or flag, or active participation in group actions disrupting public order.
The report notes the continuing problem of psychiatric abuse. Throughout 1991, no new laws were enacted to better protect the rights of psychiatric patients. There were no efforts in 1991 to formally acknowledge past abuse, penalize past abusers or to compensate those who wrongly suffered.
In discussing worker rights, the report mentions in passing the May 1991 Law on the Resolution of Collective Labor Disputes which outlawed political strikes. Like several of the other Soviet laws passed in the first half of 1991, this law restricted rather than expanded civil rights ~ it ostensibly recognized the right to strike, but in fact restricted it. The law explicidy prohibited strikes in several key industries and limited the right in all other industries to strikes regarding disputed contract terms. Furthermore, the law gave the President and other high-level Soviet officials the right to postpone strikes for up to two months. As the report notes, in practice this law did not deter the hundreds of thousands of workers who carried out strikes after the law's adoption.
The report notes at the beginning that President Gorbachev "continued to bow to growing pressure ... to reassert the authority of the internal Soviet security apparatus." While this is true, it does not capture the extent to which tJie central government in 1991 actively violated human rights or passively failed to protect them. In 1991 the central government used excessive force against civilians, and initiated
401
USSR
a series of decrees and laws to curtail procedural due process, the right to privacy, the right to freedom of assembly and the right to strike. Similarly, the central government failed to check human rights violations by not aggressively pushing to reform the judicial system, the prison system or the residence permit system. The failure of the central government to advance the cause of human rights in 1991 explains one of the important reasons for the union's collapse.
402
