	RUSSIA
The State Department's 1994 report on Russia discusses many of the most troubling human rights concerns in Russia today, concluding that the "overall human rights record... in 1994 remained uneven." The report is in some important respects an improvement over its immediate predecessor. For instance, while the plight of homosexuals in Russia has historically received little or no attention, the 1993 report singles out this issue for particular mention in two areas (with respect to the treatment of homosexuals in prisons and psychiatric hospitals and the imprisonment of homosexuals, notwithstanding the repeal of the sodomy law in 1993). The report also provides a much-improved and interestingly written brief on the condition of the judicial system in Russia, particularly regarding the independence of judges, the introduction of the jury trial, and the persistent obstacles to humane and impartial pre-trial and trial procedures.
The report fails in other respects, however, to communicate a complete picture of the human rights situation in Russia:
•	it fails to criticize the Yeltsin government for its handling of the situation in Chechnya;
•	it fails to convey adequately the dramatic shift in the political, economic and social climate during 1994. Most observers have noted the increasing influence of hard-line advisers in the Yeltsin government and the steady loss of influence of the reformers. This shift threatens the constitutional order and Russia's achievement of the ideal of a state based on the rule of law;
•	it understates the degree of penetration of organized crime in everyday life and the pervasive influence of the crime bosses and racketeers. Both the phenomenon of organized crime itself and, ironically, the methods proposed or adopted to combat it, including the invasion of Chechnya, threaten the advancement of human rights; and
187
CRITIQUE 1994
• while it cites many significant facts and events, the report provides insufficient analysis and evaluation of this data, leaving the reader with an incomplete understanding of the overall social and political environment in Russia in 1994.
Sergei Kovalev, who has served as the first president of the constitutionally mandated Human Rights Commission of the Russian Federation, issued a comprehensive and unprecedented report on the human rights situation in Russia in June 1994. It concluded that in Russia "serious, and at times widespread violations of civil, political, and especially social and economic rights and freedoms occur, creating social tension in society [and] nurturing antidemocratic attitudes." Kovalev's June 1994 report added that "statistics and specialists' evaluations show that the human rights situation has shown no recent tendency to improvement." The report of the Human Rights Commission was completed well before the events in Chechnya at the end of the year. Perhaps the failings of the State Department report, mentioned above, explain in part the discrepancy between its conclusions and those of Kovalev's Commission.
Last year's Critique disparaged the 1993 report on Russia for its failure to criticize the conduct of the Yeltsin government during the events of late 1993 (especially the president's dissolution of the Congress of People's Deputies and the violent assault on the White House in October of that year). The most politically sensitive event in Russia in 1994 turned out to be the detachment of Russian troops to the Chechen Republic in December to unseat the Chechen leader, Dzhokar Dudayev, and install a republican government that would withdraw Chechnya's bid for independence and become a pliant member of the Russian Federation. The Clinton administration refused to condemn the Yeltsin government's intervention in Chechnya, calling it an "internal matter."
As the events of December 1994 unfolded, it became clear that the Russian forces acted with impunity and with little or no regard for the lives or property of civilians or for the obligations imposed by international humanitarian law. The seeming acquiescence of the Clinton administration
188
_RUSSIA
in these actions met with vocal opposition within Russia itself, in Europe, and among the international human rights community. The State Department report measures up to the challenge of unbiased reporting on Chechnya in some respects but fails in others. First, it is notable that the report does not merely narrate the invasion and deflect criticism by calling it an "internal matter." Instead, it conscientiously describes the artillery bombardment, the loss of life and property, and the "hundreds of thousands of internally displaced persons" and states unequivocally that those "actions were in conflict with a number of Russia's international obligations, including those concerning the protection of civilian noncombatants and notification of troop movements." Later on, the report conveys more detail on the atrocities and begins to recite the international reaction by mentioning the denunciation of the Russian government by the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights. The report also refers to the activities of Yeltsin's own Human Rights Commissioner, Sergei Kovalev, who spoke out strongly against the invasion and against the conduct of the Russian military command and troops.
Along with this coverage, however, the report should have delved more deeply into the background of the invasion, the legality of the Yeltsin government's actions, and the international reaction to the assault on Chechnya. None of this would have obliged the State Department to discuss the moral or legal justification for the secessionist claims of the Chechen Republic.
The background to the invasion is relevant for at least two reasons. First, President Yeltsin's own justifications for the invasion completely undermine his claim that his government is committed to the cause of human rights. Second, some background is required to show that Yeltsin had several options that would not have involved the loss of life and curtailment of human rights.
Leading up to and during the Chechen campaign, the Yeltsin government carried on a steady policy of propaganda and disinformation, fanning the latent racism of many ethnic Russians toward the people of the
189
CRITIQUE 1994
Caucasus. The legitimation of the invasion and the subsequent military operation was based on ethnic hatred. Sergei Kovalev described the government's campaign as a "chain of lies." Ironically, Chechnya — and in particular the Chechen capital, Grozny — has a substantial percentage of ethnic Russians among its population.
The alternatives that existed to the use of military force are a matter of fierce debate. Many reliable sources allege that Yeltsin passed up legitimate overtures to reconciliation in order to shore up his standing among hardliners and nationalists. Others say that these elements forced Yeltsin to take the military option. In either case, it is important to note that the voices of the reformers — who were in most cases opposed to the use of military force — were drowned out in a test case for human rights. It would be naïve to think that Chechnya is an exception either with respect to human rights or to Yeltsin's susceptibility to the arguments of conservative forces.
While international humanitarian standards are mentioned in the report, greater specificity may have been appropriate in this case. The Russian Human Rights Commissioner himself and other legal commentators have argued that the Russian Federation has violated numerous provisions of Protocol II (1977) to the Geneva Conventions of August 12, 1949. Russia is a party to Protocol II and should be held to its standards. The same comment applies to international human rights standards. The report should have stated specifically that Russia's actions in Chechnya constituted large-scale and repeated violations of the ICCPR.
In addition to these violations of international standards, the report fails to discuss the legality of the government's actions in Chechnya under Russian law. A strong case can be made that Yeltsin violated numerous provisions of the Russian Constitution and of Russian internal law in his deployment of troops to Chechnya. The president never declared, and the Federation Council never confirmed, a state of emergency in Chechnya. Only through such a procedure could any guaranteed rights be suspended — and even then, many constitutional rights may not be circumvented at all [see Arts. 56, 88, and 102(c) of the Russian Constitution]. (The
190
_RUSSIA
declaration of an official state of emergency is also a prerequisite for states wishing to derogate from their obligations under the ICCPR.)
Other provisions of Russian law may also be adduced to question the legality of the Yeltsin government's acts. For instance, the use of the army to resolve an internal conflict arguably violates the Russian Law on Defense. Provisions of other laws protecting person and property from encroachment may also have been infringed. The report does not adequately set out the legal foundation for principled opposition to the Chechen events.
In Russia, as noted above, numerous important national political figures — in addition to Sergei Kovalev — opposed the invasion, in most cases quite vocally. The report mentions Kovalev's criticisms but does not discuss the harsh treatment and abuse that Kovalev suffered as a consequence. A report issued by Kovalev on January 10, 1995 concluded that "violations of human rights in the Chechen Republic are widespread and serious in nature. At the present moment, the fundamental reason for this situation is the unlawful military actidns of the Russian Armed Forces. Both sides are guilty of human rights violations, but the scale of their violations cannot be compared."
Elena Bonner, widow of Andrei Sakharov and one of the most respected human rights activists in Russia, resigned in February 1995 from President Yeltsin's Human Rights Commission over the war in Chechnya, calling it "a clear demarcation, the turning of Russia back to totalitarianism." Kovalev himself was removed by the State Duma from his position as Human Rights Commissioner, or Ombudsman, in March 1995. Although this action clearly falls outside the time frame for the 1994 report, the harsh attacks on Kovalev as a result of his outspoken criticisms of the war during a visit to Grozny in December 1994 clearly presaged his dismissal in March, and should have been mentioned in the report.
In reaction to the outcry, the Russian government has generally denied the existence of human rights abuses, denied violations of
191
CRITIQUE 1994
international law, and obstructed the information-gathering activities of organizations whose purpose was to monitor the claims of the Russian government. The State Department report mentions an official reaction to Chechnya, but only toward the end in a short section on governmental attitudes toward independent human rights investigations. The effect of this is clearly to downplay criticism both of President Yeltsin's actions and of his justification for the actions.
President Yeltsin and his policies, particularly his military policies, have come under increasing attack from all sides, leading many human rights advocates and liberal politicians within Russia to question whether the current government is able or willing to protect the human rights guaranteed by the Constitution. The tone of the State Department report, however, does not acknowledge this growing concern, but instead appears to imply that support for Yeltsin is still synonymous with democracy and reform. In reality, 1994 saw a dramatic shift from liberal to conservative views within the Yeltsin government, as the Chechen invason and the bombing of Grozny demonstrated. While many have commented on these ominous developments, and the report itself refers to some of the relevant events, it does not sufficiently highlight the change or its implications for the observance of human rights. Relevant facts in this regard include:
•	the failure to punish those responsible for the bloodshed and loss of life that occurred during the October 1993 events which culminated in pitched battles at the Russian Wh ite House and at the Ostankino TV broadcast headquarters. In fact, one of the first acts of the State Duma in 1994 was to declare a general amnesty for those involved in the anti-government riots as well as for those involved in the failed coup of August 1991;
•	the near total exodus of reformers from the government; the fragmentation of democratic reform parties in Parliament and around Yeltsin, and the increasing influence of nationalist, agrarian and neo-communist parties; and
192
_RUSSIA
• President Yeltsin's recourse to extrapoHtical and arguably extraconstitutional advisers and enforcers (he failed, for instance, to consult several key bodies, including the Federation Council and the State Duma, before making his decision to send troops into Chechnya. Instead, the decisions were made by Yeltsin and what one report called "a kitchen cabinet" that included, among others. Defense Minister Pavel Grachev and Yeltsin's bodyguard, Alexander Korzhakov).
While the report attaches some significance to each of these problems — except for the amnesty, which it inexplicably ignores — it does not provide the analysis necessary for the reader to understand how such events will affect human rights. For instance, the role of Yeltsin's informal advisers affects much more than the decision over intervention in Chechnya. Yeltsin's bodyguard, Alexander Korzhakov, is also commander of the Presidential Security Service. This reportedly numbers more than 4,000 officers, three times the number assigned to any leader during the Soviet era. The report should have alluded to the danger of the misuse of such a force for illegal or extraconstitutional ends.
The fact that the Security Service is no longer subordinate to the national security service is cause for further alarm because there are no real checks on the use of these forces. The report does allude to this problem when it mentions the December 2 incident at the Most Bank. It does not provide the complete story, however, and may in fact be misleading in suggesting that the raid was an innocent attempt to protect businessmen from the mafia. In Russia, credible news reports have suggested two other likely motives. First, the raid may have been a warning to the bank's president, Vladimir Gusinsky, to stop "nurturing the presidential ambitions" of his friend Yury Luzhkov, the mayor of Moscow and one of Yeltsin's most visible detractors. Second, Gusinsky's group also owns NTV, one of the foremost independent television stations in Moscow, and an open critic of Yeltsin and his policies. During the Chechen invasion and the bombing of Grozny, NTV broadcast accurate and powerful reports of
193
CRITIQUE 1994
the actions and abuses of the Russian military. Last, even if the attack was legitimately intended to protect business from organized crime, the report might have questioned why the Security Service was involved.
The most glaring example of the report's fragmentation and the resulting understatement of the importance of an issue is its treatment of organized crime. Discussing the increase in the number of contract killings of bankers and businessmen, the report cursorily addresses the domination of Russia's commercial and financial markets by organized crime. However, the report does not adequately address the extent of this control or the threat that it poses to the stability and integrity of the Russian government and the welfare of those living within Russia's borders.
According to US press reports, there are more than 5,600 organized crime groups in Russia, a tenfold increase since 1990. Even the government admits, according to a New York Times report, that "organized crime has Russia by the throat, squeezing the life out of the fledgling private sector and holding the government itself hostage." According to the government's own figures published in early 1994, 70- to 80% of private enterprises are paying between 10- and 20% of their profits to organized crime gangs. In all, the government estimates that organized crime controls 40,000 businesses, including 2,000 in the state sector. The banking industry and newly privatized industries have been particularly susceptible to infiltration by organized crime. The head of the Interior Ministry's section on organized crime. Col. Dmitri Medvedev, estimates that 20% of Russian bank loans are, in fact, nothing more than payments of various forms of protection money to criminal organizations.
The amount of money that Russian businesses must pay in bribes and payoffs is draining vital capital from the system and contributing to inflation. This is particularly critical given that organized crime funnels large amounts of its earnings abroad — about one billion dollars a month according to some reports. Until organized crime's grip on the Russian economy is loosened, the constitutional provision guaranteeing that "everyone has the right to the free use of his or her capabilities and property for entrepreneurial or other economic activity not prohibited by
194
_RUSSIA
law" will remain an empty promise.
Organized crime has done much more than damage the economic well-being of Russians; it has created a pervasive climate of fear. As many as 91% of Muscovites report that they experience fear of crime in their daily lives, and one in three reports having been in a life-threatening situation in the past year. This finding is not surprising given that the rate of murder, rape and robbery all rose by 40% or more in 1994. The Yeltsin government's response to this unbridled criminality has been an Anti-Crime Decree that is itself the subject of human rights concerns, as the report correctly notes.
The report does not elaborate on the extensive connections among the government, the military, local law enforcement and organized crime. Infiltration by organized crime into Russia's economic, military and political structures undermines the concept of a state based on the rule of law at every turn. The report fails to mention that two members of the State Duma were killed in 1994, and another was involved in a killing, with suggestions that organized crime played a. role in all three cases.
Duma member Andrei Aizderdzis, who published a newspaper that printed the names of organized crime leaders, was killed by a shotgun blast to the throat as he returned home from work in April 1994. His death is credibly viewed as the result of his opposition to organized crime. Duma member Valentin Martemyanov, on the other hand, was killed in November 1994 in an apparent robbery. The links to organized crime are more speculative in his case. A third member of the Duma, Sergei Skorochkin, actually killed an organized crime leader in 1994. He argued that he had acted in self-defense and was not prosecuted, but in early 1995 (and thus outside of the State Department's 1994 reporting period) Skorochkin himself was killed in an apparent revenge attack. In addition to raising legitimate and troubling questions about the extent of the connections between organized crime and government, these killings have understandably rekindled fears of violent reprisals for opposition to or involvement with organized crime. Such fears are certain to have a
195
CRITIQUE 1994
detrimental effect on the development of democracy and other reform measures.
The State Department report should also have addressed the danger of organized criminal groups gaining access to nuclear materials — a threat that was considered sufficiently alarming to prompt the United States to set up its first FBI office in Moscow. In 1991, German police investigated 41 reported offers by Russians to sell nuclear weapons. In 1994, they investigated 267 and described the situation as a "security threat." Former Russian Defense Minister Yuri Kalmykov also warned that organized crime might be attempting to obtain weapons-grade nuclear material.
There have been a number of official and unofficial responses to the organized crime crisis, with both likely to undermine respect for human rights and breed further violence and corruption. The unofficial response includes a massive proliferation of well-armed security guards, recourse to vigilante justice and private reprisals, and an overwhelming distrust in the law and in the enforcement and judicial process. The Chief of Police of Moscow was recently quoted as saying that 95% of his police officers in effect receive their salaries directly from crime bosses. The private security business is thriving in Russia. Many of the guards are retired Soviet soldiers, with the most sought-after being former crack troops of the Interior Ministry's special forces (OMON) or those who have combat experience in Afghanistan. For example, the Most Bank group, already mentioned above, employs around a thousand men armed with machine guns and anti-artillery rockets. In October, 12 Russian banks sponsored the "Kriminal Show 94," replete with spectacular displays of high-tech weaponry, to persuade private businesses of the virtues of self-defense rather than reliance on the government for protection from criminals. This explosion of heavily armed private security forces poses the gravest threat to the preservation of human rights and the rule of law.
As for the official response to organized crime, the report accurately states that Yeltsin's June 14 decree "On Urgent Measures to Protect the Population from Banditry and Other Manifestations of Organized Crime" gives law enforcement authorities the power to detain
196
_RUSSIA
suspects without providing formal charges or access to a lawyer and the power to conduct warrantless searches and seizures. The report understates the overall importance of the decree, however, when it notes merely that law enforcement officials have relied on the decree to "avoid abiding by relevant constitutional provisions."
First, it must be noted that the decree violates not only constitutional principles but also provisions of ordinary legislation (the current Code of Criminal Procedure), as well as relevant international standards binding on Russia, such as those embodied in the ICCPR. Moreover, by choosing to act on the basis of a presidential decree, Yeltsin evaded parliamentary scrutiny in a manner that foreshadowed the invasion of Chechnya. Consequently, it is Yeltsin himself and not the law enforcement authorities who must first be faulted for the excesses of the anti-crime decree. The report fails to make this clear.
Second, the report should have mentioned that the State Duma did debate the decree and even published a list of eight specific instances in which it violates the Russian Constitution. Also, Yeltsin's own Human Rights Commissioner described the decree in his June 1994 human rights report as "creat[ing] the conditions for the imparting of an air of legitimacy to a wide spectrum of violations of rights and freedoms of the person, to the practice of neglecting those rights and to an escalation of violations of laws in the activities of government organs." The report does not describe these criticisms.
In conjunction with Yeltsin's announcement that he wanted to eliminate "criminal filth," Russia's top law enforcement officials announced a $2.6 billion program to combat organized crime. The plan calls for the resurrection of the former KGB's team of 700-800 special investigators as well as the creation of a new team of elite crime fighters to be controlled by the KGB's successor, the FSK. Additionally, the Russian Army has been ordered to take part in the anti-crime measures, and some regular troops and military bases will reportedly be under police control. Some of Yeltsin's aides have contended that these measures do not
197
CRITIQUE 1994
violate civil rights, insisting that walking the streets in safety is also a human right
Other officials, however, do not even attempt to claim that such measures as the Anti-Crime Decree are consistent with human rights principles. Commenting on the new anti-crime measures, then-head of the FSK Sergei Stepashin stated, "I'm all for the violation of human rights if the human is a bandit or a criminal." Ultra-nationalist politician Vladimir Zhirinovsky praised the decree as a good first step to combatting organized crime but argued that he would go further by introducing military field courts to go into the streets and render immediate verdicts so that gang members could be executed on the spot. Similar views have been expressed by Vladimir Kolesnikov, head of the criminal investigative division of the Interior Ministry.
The human rights situation has continued to deteriorate since the Anti-Crime Decree was promulgated. For example, soon after the decree, police in the southern town of Novokuibyshevsk arrested Yuri Y. Shustanov, a teacher and vocal human rights advocate, allegedly because he defied a court summons over a 1992 slander suit. His daughter explained, "[t]he decree has untied their hands. The police have become bold again and feel they can get away with anything." The report only hints at such abuses when it mentions the "heavyhanded practices" engaged in by law enforcement officials "during arrest and incarceration" in the battle against crime.
The 1994 report is for the most part quite conscientious in its survey of significant human rights-related facts and events. Nevertheless, it fails to provide sufficient context and analyses in respect of key issues. Coverage of the events in Chechnya, the problem of organized crime, and the promulgation of the June Anti-Crime Decree all illustrate this problem. In addition, the inability of the Constitutional Court to operate for the whole of 1994 is another example of where additional context and analysis would have enhanced the value of the report.
President Yeltsin suspended the operations of the Constitutional
198
_RUSSIA
Court in October 1993 after it had found his September dissolution of the Congress of People's Deputies to be unconstitutional. During the suspension of the court's activities, the president was able to take numerous actions of doubtful constitutionality without any judicial oversight, including the invasion of Chechnya and the signing of the Anti-Crime Decree. The report merely remarks in two places that the Constitutional Court did not fiinction during 1994. However, it fails to describe the broad consequences of this inactivity for the enforcement of the Constitution and respect for human rights. This is an important omission. As the Lawyers Committee noted in a March 1995 report on the Constitutional Court, "[t]he gap between the words of the Constitution and reality will continue to grow until the Constitutional Court takes the role that was envisioned for it in the new Constitution."
The reasons for the State Department's failure to discuss the Constitutional Court are not clear. The report also omits any mention of the passage of a new Law on the Constitutional Court in June 1994. This law, which entered into force in July 1994, has important human rights repercussions. First, it replaces life tenure with 12-year terms, thereby reducing the independence of the judiciary. Second, the court will no longer be able to grant jurisdiction on its own initiative as was previously the case. This restriction may render certain cases non-justiciable if the parties with the power to invoke the court's jurisdiction fail to bring a case. Third, if interpreted narrowly, citizens have standing to challenge only parliamentary laws and not constitutional violations that emanate from a different source, such as a presidential decree or government decision. This is a potentially crippling limitation since many major state actions are taken solely by decree or decision, including the Chechnya intervention and the Anti-Crime Decree. Finally, the law does not expressly grant non-Russian citizens and stateless persons the right to bring cases before the court. This represents a retreat from the former law governing the Constitutional Court. The change may be particularly significant in an era characterized by overt discrimination against foreigners and stateless persons.
199
CRITIQUE 1994
The report could also have been strengthened by some additional context and commentary on the role of the Orthodox Church in Russian society, especially with respect to the relationship between the Church and the military. Article 14 of the Russian Constitution provides that the "Russian Federation is a secular state" and that "no religion may be established as the state religion or a compulsory religion." Nevertheless, Defense Minister Pavel Grachev and Patriarch Alexei II, the head of the Russian Orthodox Church, signed an accord in March 1994 to strengthen the relationship between the army and the church. The ostensible purpose of the accord is to revive spiritual and patriotic traditions in the army. In November, church and military leaders again met to discuss further collaboration "in the ideological vacuum left by the collapse of communism." Following the meeting, Alexei II stated that "Orthodox priests could take a more active part in raising the prestige of military service." As part of this new cooperation, the church has ordered that prayer books be distributed among the troops and has told its priests to expand their contacts with the military. In an even bolder move, the church offered to encourage reluctant draftees to join the army ranks, an offer that no doubt is attractive to military officials given that as many as 70,000 recruits failed to report for service in one recent 12-month period. Such developments should be viewed with a critical eye not only because of constitutional restrictions but because of the historical problem of intolerance within the Russian Orthodox Church for other faiths.
While the report's discussion of press freedom is generally commendable, there are several important omissions. In general, the report does not convey adequately the continuing struggle between the Yeltsin administration and parliament for control of mass media. This struggle has involved not only reprisals against media that espouse dissenting opinions but also financial support for media that are favorable to the policy positions of one or other branch of government.
The problem of control through subsidy can be illustrated by the dramatically different treatment of Nezavisimaia Gazeta and Rossiiskaia Gazeta. One of the best independent newspapers in Moscow, Nezavisimaia Gazeta was almost forced to close down because the Ministry of
200
_RUSSIA
Communications required it to pay in advance at the beginning of 1994 for a whole year's supply of newsprint. {Nezavisimaia Gazeta, which followed an independent editorial line, offering space to many diverse points of view and often criticizing Yeltsin's positions, was eventually forced to close in June 1995 because of its financial difficulties.) On the other hand, Rossiiskaia Gazeta, which has become a mouthpiece for the Yeltsin Administration, received a large state subsidy for 1994. Rossiiskaia Gazeta has published anonymous diatribes against such opponents of Yeltsin's policies as Human Rights Commissioner Sergei Kovalev and Vladimir Gusinsky, who controls the independent NTV. In fact, the article vilifying Gusinsky came out just prior to the above-mentioned December 2 raid on Most Bank by the president's Security Service.
Some of the report's omissions in the area of media freedoms are important to rectify. First, the report relates the assassination of Dmitri Kholodov but does not mention the killing of two other journalists, Sergei Dubov and Yuri Soltis, both of whom, according to reliable reports, may have been killed by organized crime groups as a result of their reporting. Second, there is no discussion of the transfer of control of the state television station, Ostankino, or of the controversy sparked by its lack of journalistic independence from the Yeltsin Administration. Also, while the report mentions the extraordinary pressures brought to bear on journalists outside of Moscow and St. Petersburg, it should have noted that such pressures have included known instances of torture, threats of violence, paper closings and firings.
Finally, the report does not discuss the Judicial Chamber for Information Disputes that was created by decree at the end of 1993 and operated throughout 1994. The Judicial Chamber evolved out of another quasi-judicial body that had been set up by Yeltsin to monitor the fairness and objectivity of media coverage during the December 1993 elections. The new Judicial Chamber is charged with several important functions, including:
201
CRITIQUE 1994
•	assisting the president in defending the rights and freedoms of the mass media;
•	ensuring the authenticity and objectivity of news reporting;
•	ensuring the protection of morality;
•	guaranteeing the principle of plurality; and
•	correcting factual errors.
It is clear that any of the above could be used as a pretext to misuse the media for political ends. While the Judicial Chamber may currently be serving a worthwhile function and operating fairly, it nevertheless remains under the control of the Yeltsin administration and is, in fact, part of the administration's "working apparatus." The report should at least have raised the question of the potential misuse of such a body.
202
