SOVIET UNION
For the most part, the report on the Soviet Union is a thorough and ac-ciu'ate presentation of human rights conditions. The authors have understood correctly the essence of the continuing human rights problem of the Soviet Union, even under glasnost:
Reforms are taking place at the direction of the part)^ increased freedoms have come mainly as the result of poUtical decisions. Most of the current reforms have yet to be reinforced by the adoption of laws...that wiU ensure the rights of individual citizens.
Despite this admirable effort, the report suffers from several flaws. These are: 1) a failure to scrutinize sufficiently the situation outside Moscow, particularly in the southern repubUcs; 2) a tendency to ^ve the benefit of the doubt to official declarations of intent to improve hiunan rights, even when these have not been implemented, as weU as a tendency to substitute reporting of such intentions for actual field analysis; 3) a lack of attention to international legal instruments as a standard for judging human rights practices; 4) insufficient coverage of numerous beatings of demonstrators and restrictions of civil rights that affect ordinary citizens other than prominent dissidents; and 5) a failure to grasp and acknowledge the persistent problems of psychiatric abuse.
Although the report cites mass demonstrations in Armenia and the Baltic repubUcs as evidence of expanded boundaries for dissent, it continues to claim that "changes are most evident in Moscow and Leningrad." That claim reflects a failure to realize that, in human rights terms, the roles of the "capital" and the "provinces" have been reversed; Moscow is now considered the "periphery" in terms of the exercise of liberties, a backwater in comparison to the mass movements in other areas. And the crackdowns en^eered by the center, which are noted in the report, are hardly the last word in Ught of the popular forces that have been unleashed outside the capital.
169
Critique
The Sovietologists in the State Department have also not managed entirely to avoid the tendency to become so dazzled by positive official pronomi-cements and statements of good intention as to miss contradictory actions ~ although usually the State Department does an admirable job of sticking to the facts. An example of this occasional blindness to reality is the report's adoption of official Soviet rhetoric by referring to the Gorbachev presidency as an elected position. This is hardly the case, since the elite of a ruling party appointed Gorbachev first to the office of General Secretary of the Communist Party and then to the Presidency. Other instances of this phenomenon are the following:
•	Scattered throughout the report are references to Gorbachev's speeches or the decisions of the XIX Communist Party Congress as indicators of human rights process. For example, in reviewing the issue of reli^ous freedom, the report notes that at a speech during the Millenium of the Christianization of Rus, Gorbachev "remarked that believers are patriots and not second-class citizens, leading some to hope that restrictions on religious activities may be reduced." The report then adds that the Millenium ceremonies were carried on television and that articles on religious matters were more frequent in the press. While these signs of an improved atmosphere for religious tolerance are welcome, they are not the same as tolerance itself, let alone as legally enforced tolerance, and they offer little solace to the many religious communities that still suffer heavy persecution in the USSR.
•	In addressing freedom of movement, the report notes that while it is not guaranteed in law or practice, Gorbachev said on December 7 "that a new law on emigration will substantially improve movement abroad." This promise, floated at each major East-West meeting, had still not led to enactment of a law as this report went to press.
•	The report mentions the decree passed in July 1988 which rescinded a paragraph of the Soviet Corrective Labor Cede regulating conditions in confinement (the report incorrectly cites this as the Penal Code, a separate body of legislation). The paragraph authorized Standard 9B, a form of punishment consisting of a starvation diet. The report notes without citing Soviet officials (although Soviet officials have made the claim to Heldnki Watch as well) that the offending statute was removed to bring Soviet domestic legislation into line with the Soviet Union's commitments as a signatory of the International Convention Against
170
Soviet Union
Torture. But the report fails to note whether the practice has changed in reality. This omission is significant because many Soviet decrees are never acted upon. Both ex-prisoners and officials have told Helsinki Watch that the practice appears to have been discontmued, but one official cautioned that the Corrective Labor Code itself is still being redrafted and has not yet been ratified by the Supreme Soviet. The draft is not esq^cted to be published for at least a year. Thus a reversal of the decree is still possible.
• As the report notes, bugging of telephones and opening of mail are notorious and widespread in the Soviet Union. Citing Gorbachev's speech at the XIX Communist Party Conference, however, v^ere he called for guarantee of the privacy of private communications, the report speculates that "major changes in this area may be in the offing." The new power of Ministry of Internal Affairs (MVD) troops to enter homes without a warrant ~ granted one month after Gorbachev's speech ~ should have tempered that speculative optimism.
Part of this tendency to accept statements of intention to improve rights practices at face value rather than to probe and evaluate whether actual improvements in those practices have occurred seems to stem from the ongoing negotiations between the State Department and Soviet officials over Sowet human rights practices. The State Department evidently feels that it must give credit to the Soviets for some positive statements to sustain the negotiating process. For example, in discussions wih foreigners, Soviet officials often say they have lifted the requirement that priests register all baptisms with the state, implying that people are freer to baptize their children. The report repeats this statement. In fact, it is widely reported that, in the course of baptizing children, parents must show their internal passports to clergy. Since the Conmiittee for State Security (KGB) closely monitors the churches, the eftfect is continued intimidation of those who wish to perform this religious rite. This contmuing restraint on religious rites would have been apparent if the authors of the report had interviewed believers and clergy in a representative sample of religions and republics rather than accepting at face value the claims of officials in bilateral talks.
In the past, before such bilateral talks were as common. State Department observers stated more categorically that rights were or were not being
171
Critique
respected. For example, each year the offîdal ban on the Uniate Church was noted, and the many \ictims of that policy among clergy and laity were given prominence in the report. This year, the report notes that while "Uniates are still subject to severe repres^on...So\iet ofGdals in Moscow claim that their legal status is under re>iew." The statement of Soviet intentions tempers the report of severe repression when no substantial change has occurred. In the Ukraine, for example, repression continues and no Uniate Catholic Church has been permitted to register, although some communities reportedly have been recognized if they call themselves "Christian churches." Moreover, by treating the statement of Soviet officials in the vacuum of the negotiating room — a natural but unfortunate fault on the part of those involved in the negotiations -- the report neglects the popular pressure that has, in large part, accounted for the small improvements that have taken place. In Lithuania, for example, mass movements have forced Communist authorities to free political prisoners and return to believers church buildings that had been used for atheism museums or concert halls. Reference to the popular pressures that have often accompanied positive human rights developments would have provided the reader with a better sense of when official pronouncements are likely to be translated into practice.
Two areas of persistent human rights problems receive insufficient and even misleading coverage in the report: psychiatric abuse and the enhancement of the powers of the special MVD troops (the troops involved in the April 1989 killing of demonstrators in Georgia). Without providing a basis for its claim, the report asserts that while conditions in psychiatric hospitals have not changed, beatings are fewer. There is not sufficient evidence to make this claim. A few people recently released from psychiatric confînement have reported that beatings for them had lessened, but those about to be released, because of their probable contact with human rights monitors, are precisely those most likely to receive better treatment.
The report also notes that under a law enacted in March 1988, psychiatrists can be sued for knowingly committing healthy persons to psychiatric institutions. The report fails to note, however, that no suits have been brought under the new law, even though sane [}ersons remain in detention. Nor
172
Soviet Union
does the report note th^ because under the terms of the law collective decisions cannot be contested, psychiatric officials could easily hide behind collective decision-making mechanisms -- such as the collective medical commissions which examine patients every six months -- to escape individual responsibility for abuse.
The report further notes as a sign of progress that "chief psychiatrists are given increased responsibility for determining that persons committed are genuinely mentally ill." This remark reflects a failure to appreciate the Soviet psychiatric system which, even according to the ofGdal Soviet press, is corrupt and closed. The only remedy for abuse that is likely to be effective in the long run is one that steps outside this system and involves the courts. Appeal to the courts now can be made only after appeal to a chief psychiatrist ~ a lengthy process. And given the persistent fear of lawyers to take up politically sensitive cases, let alone to pursue them vigorously, even judicial review is not a short-term remedy.
The report also gives an incomplete account of the new psychiatric regulation. The report quotes Ministry of Health officials to the effect that confinement to mental hospitals "could take place only when a person was a danger to himself or others." But the text of the regulation, which has been published in the Soviet press, empowers law-enforcement officials to commit citizens to psychiatric institutions if they "violate the rules of socialist community" and are found to be a danger to society — both vague and easily manipulated formulations.
The report cites Western human rights observers on the number of political prisoners released from psychiatric hospitals in 1988 (approximately 50), but neglects to cite the estimates of these same groups on the number of such prisoners who remain. (Helsinki Watch has a list of approximately 50 who remain.) Instead, the report says this figure is "not known."
On the question of the enhanced powers of the special MVD troops, the report claims that "new militia imits set up for dispersing demonstrations appeared to operate efficiently and with a minimum of force when it was used." The report fails to clarify whether it is referring to units that remain within the militia (the police) which is under MVD jurisdiction, or other, newly em-
173
Critique
powered spedal MVD troops, ^i^ch are separate units similar to the U.S. National Guard. The report implies that the "new militia units" have not used unnecessary force, but there have been a number of reports of beatings and hospitalizations from injuries inflicted by both militia and MVD troops. For instance, the militia brutally dispersed the Moscow pacifists* demonstration on the twentieth anniversary of the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia -- brutality which was eventually condemned even in the official Soviet press.
At times, the State Department loses sight of the fact that it should be measuring Soviet r^ts practices by international law. For example, in discussing freedom of speech, the report notes that "the degree of glasnost and the range of acceptable opinion have expanded considerably, even if they do not compare to Western c^teria."
The report cites as an ^cample of improvement in free speech the XIX Communist Party Conference, during which 5,000 delegates "sharply debated proposals," "television coverage was extensive" and "viewers were treated to a passionate confrontation between Politburo member Yegor Ligachev and former Moscow party boss Boris Yeltsin." But an example of expanded freedom within a closed, elite body of the Communist Party is a weak example at best when free speech continues frequently to be repressed if voiced in the streets or outside official journals. By highlighting its observations on intra-Party debate at the beginning of the section on free speech while relegating its discussion of ongoing restraints on the independent press to the end of the section, the State Department has tacitly adopted the Party's perspective of "democratic centralism."
Further, when describing the independent press, the report fails to note the widespread independent press activity in the Baltic and Caucasian Republics and the Ukraine. (The Baltic republics are treated in separate chapters because the U.S. does not recc^nize their incorporation into the Soviet Union, but their frequent role as the site for meetings of independent journalists and clubs from other republics who are seeking temporary "political asylum" under the more lenient governments of these republics should have been mentioned in the Soviet chapter.)
174
Soviet Union
The report incorrectly states that "there were no known instances in 1988 of preventive detention." This mistake was made because, although Appendix A of the Country Reports, which sets forth the sco[}e of the report, makes clear that the rights of poUtical and nonpolitical detainees should be addressed, the State Department in the case of the Soviet Union focused only on political cases, largely neglecting the rights of defendants in criminal cases, which are also grossly abused. The Soviet press and Western observers have reported niunerous incidents of preventive detention in CTiminal cases. Moreover, even in poUtical cases, the persons cited by the report (Paruyr Ayrikyan, for example) in fact did spend time in preventive detention. While under the Soviet system no one can be held for more than three days without charge, at that point they are not arraigned on specific charges but are notified only of the charges under investigation and, depending on the severity of the offense, placed in investigation-isolation detention, which amounts to preventive detention. The procurator (the investigating agency) has sole discretion to impose and extend such detention, without intervention by the courts. The Karabakh Committee, for example, was investigated imder at least three charges for she months. (They were released pending trial in Jime 1989.)
The report continues to translate criminal codes incorrectly. Article 190-1 deals with "false" propaganda, not "hostile" propaganda. Article 190-3 is incorrectly quoted as prohibiting organization or active participation in "a group actively violating pubUc order;" the correct translation is organization or active participation in "group actions that grossly violate public order." The former was frequently used to suppress free speech; the latter is now used to suppress le^timate peaceful assembly.
In assessing judicial reform, the report distorts the situation by analyzing only poUtical trials, which are not the sole examples of the lack of judicial independence. Moreover, even in the poUtical trials discussed, the report omits significant context. It cites a Vilnius judge who acquitted eight demonstrators, but fails to note the enormous mass movement in Lithuania, which no doubt has reduced the level of pubUc tolerance for jailings of demonstrators. It is thus premature, if not wrong, to conclude from such examples that perestroika "seems to have contributed somewhat to the independence of individual judges."
175





:. .t^-i.ii • ™




iivli
•A
» J:"


boáy oí ti» CiiUMI iiimìln
i wioùiaà#s*» U iiobc
«»•"iWv'ïiï'!:
.ri"

-SM li (SaOittaiiq


■m
