 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 The Soviet Union is a one-party dictatorship, dominated by the
 leadership of the Communist Party. That leadership is a
 self-perpetuating elite which, with the assistance of a
 powerful secret police apparatus, attempts to direct all
 aspects of public life and to prohibit the development of
 independent centers of political or ideological influence.
 Although the Soviet Union is a multinational state, political
 power has always been highly centralized in Moscow.
 The Committee on State Security (KGB), police authorities, and
 prosecutors' offices are charged by the party leadership with
 enforcing the population's compliance with policy decisions,
 directives, and legislation. They do so by seeking to
 intimidate dissenters and potential dissenters and, when
 necessary, by meting out punishment, including long-term
 imprisonment or exile.
 On the economic front the Communist Party bolsters its
 monopoly on power through state ownership of the means of
 production and government administration of all significant
 economic activity. In 1987 the Soviet leadership broadened
 somewhat the limits of legal private enterprise, and
 elaborated a comprehensive economic reform program aimed at
 streamlining and decentralizing economic management. However,
 these reforms, even if fully implemented on schedule between
 1988 and 1991, seem at this point unlikely to eliminate all
 the basic features of the Stalinist "command economy."
 This year saw some change in the Soviet handling of dissent.
 The limits of permissible dissent were expanded, and those who
 exceeded them usually were not subjected to imprisonment or
 exile. Instead, authorities used other means of intimidation
 short of court trial. These changes, although evident in
 Moscow and Leningrad, were barely felt elsewhere. Official
 attitudes toward dissent also seemed to harden as the year
 progressed. Unlike other government agencies, the KGB has
 largely been exempted from the policy of "glasnost'"
 (openness), and there is no indication of movement toward
 reform of that agency. Even in Moscow, the city where the
 most notable changes occurred, most dissident sources
 described the changes as primarily in the sphere of what it
 was possible to say and much less in what it was possible to
 do.
 Reforms are taking place at the direction of the party and are
 primarily the product of political decisions, not the result
 of legal reform. The improvements in Soviet human rights
 performance which took place in 1987 have yet to be reinforced
 by reform laws, administrative regulations, and bureaucratic
 procedures which would help ensure that the rights of
 individuals are respected. Soviet authorities currently are
 reviewing their entire set of interlocking criminal codes, and
 Soviet officials have said repeatedly that significant reforms
 are expected. Their effect on the human rights of Soviet
 citizens will not be clear until the revised criminal code
 appears and is implemented.
 Under current laws, those who exercise their rights continue
 to face the possibility of arrest, trial, and imprisonment;
 internment in a psychiatric hospital; or, more commonly, the
 loss of their jobs and opportunities for education, housing,
 and even medical treatment. Fear of these possibilities
 restrains the vast majority of people in the Soviet Union from
 
 
 1046
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 attempting to exercise the basic rights of freedom of speech,
 assembly, or religion.
 Nevertheless, a small but apparently growing number of Soviet
 citizens have begun to organize unofficial groups and issue
 unofficial publications that provide a forum for public
 discussion of political, social, ecological, religious, and
 other current issues. At the same time, the official press
 has provided more open discussion of some historical,
 economic, social, and--to a lesser extent--political issues.
 While freedom of expression has been expanded and censorship
 relaxed, controls remain in place, and the current trends are
 neither stable nor legally defined. Direct attacks on the
 leadership or party directives or serious calls for a
 developed political opposition, including multiple parties,
 are beyond the pale.
 Jewish, ethnic German, and Armenian emigration increased
 markedly, in contrast to the last several years. By the end
 of 1987, monthly average departures for ethnic Germans and
 Armenians compared favorably with those of the late 1970's and
 early 1980's; however, Jewish monthly average departures in
 1987 were less than half those of the 1970's and far below the
 peak of 1979. Emigration of members of other ethnic groups
 remained negligible.
 In January new Soviet regulations for travel abroad went into
 effect. In making family reunification the only legal basis
 for emigration, the regulations codified Moscow's longstanding
 refusal to recognize the "right to leave," a right included in
 the Universal Declaration of Human.Rights which was
 incorporated into the Helsinki Final Act. Soviet performance
 in resolving longstanding family reunification cases was
 significantly better than in previous years. Approximately 75
 such cases on a U.S. Government list of families seeking to
 join relatives in the United States were resolved in 1987 or
 were in the process of being resolved. However, 106 cases
 remain unresolved.
 Abroad, the Soviet Union continues its occupation of
 Afghanistan and its support of the Vietnamese occupation of
 Cambodia, which have resulted. in widespread and flagrant human
 rights- violations. There has-been evidence, in previous years
 that the Soviet Union has been responsible for the use of
 chemical warfare in Afghanistan, Laos, and Cambodia.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 On December 26, 23-year-old Sarkis Ogadzhanyan, a Hare
 Krishna, died of malnutrition in a labor camp near Orenburg,
 only weeks before his scheduled release. Ogadzhanyan was-
 arrested in January 1986 under religious Article 227 of the
 criminal code of the Russian Soviet Federated Socialist
 Republic (R.S.F.S.R.), or Article 224 of the Armenian code.
 Another case of death under suspicious circumstances that
 became known in 1987 was that of Aleksandr Petrovich Mironov,
 a 40-year-old engineer-economist employed by the Tatar branch
 of TSINOTUR (Tsentral'nyy Institut' Nauchnoy Organizatsii
 
 
 1047
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 Truda, Upravleniya i Ratsionalizatsii) in Kazan'. He traveled
 to Moscow in August 1986 on his own and his coworkers' behalf
 to complain of official corruption in Kazan'. He apparently
 threatened to demonstrate if the problem was not corrected.
 On his return home, he was detained by militia and on August
 28 placed in a mental hospital. On September 9, 1986, his
 mother was informed that he had committed suicide by jumping
 from a third-floor window. Photographs of the mutilated,
 disfigured corpse, however, show clear signs of torture.
 Soviet law provides for the imposition of capital punishment
 for some economic crimes (e.g., fraud, corruption) which are
 not generally considered capital offenses outside the
 U.S.S.R. There are no official statistics available regarding
 its imposition, but official confirmations sometimes appear.
 For example, A.K. Karimov, first secretary of the Bukhara
 Oblast' Committee, was executed in the spring for his role in
 inflating cotton output figures for his oblast'. Soviet
 officials have said, however, that among legal reforms
 currently being considered is the elimination of the death
 penalty for economic crimes.
 b. Disappearance
 There have been no known instances of prolonged or permanent
 disappearance in recent years. However, it is not unusual for
 people to be arrested or confined in psychiatric facilities
 without next of kin being notified. Concerned relatives are
 expected to initiate an inquiry with the authorities to find
 out if and when their family member was arrested and where he
 or she is being held. Press articles critical of this
 practice appeared in 1987. In 1987 Soviet officials were
 willing to respond to questions concerning Raoul Wallenberg,
 the Swedish diplomat and honorary American citizen who was
 apprehended by the Soviets at the end of World War II. Their
 responses, however, provided nothing beyond the limited
 information already known about Mr. Wallenberg's fate.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Many Soviet political prisoners suffer both mental and
 physical abuse and mistreatment during interrogation, trial,
 and confinement, according to a wide variety of reliable
 sources. Eighteen-year-old Jehovah's Witness Yaroslav
 Zazhitskiy was so badly beaten during pretrial detention that
 his September 1987 trial for refusal to perform military
 service on religious grounds had to be delayed. On May 4,
 militia raided a locality on Gogol Boulevard in Moscow, where
 nonconformist youth gather, and detained 50-60 people. Some
 had sacks paqed over their heads to muffle cries, and three
 were beaten Sol severely they had to be hospitalized. In a
 show of glasnost', the July 3 Komsomolskaya Pravda criticized
 the militia's handling of the event and reported that those
 responsible had been punished.
 Prison and camp conditions have not improved this year; they
 may have grown worse, owing to more consistent implementation
 of regulations, which are harsh. Life in prison continues to
 be marked by isolation, poor diet and malnutrition, compulsory
 hard labor, beatings, frequent illness, and inadequate medical
 care. The 13 political prisoners in Special Regimen Camp
 36-1, who in December were reportedly transferred to Special
 Regimen Camp 35, suffered under most brutal conditions of any
 labor camp in the U.S.S.R. Many political prisoners,
 
 
 1048
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 including four Helsinki monitors, have died in Perm' 36-1
 within the last 4 years. Of the 13 most recent inmates--9
 Ukrainiahs, 2 Estonians, 1 Latvian, and 1 Russian--7 are
 Helsinki Monitoring Group members. Ukrainian Ivan Skalch, who
 is gravely ill with bone tuberculosis, has been temporarily
 moved to a hospital, but some fear he has died. Hryhorii
 Prykhodko, who also suffers from tuberculosis, remains under a
 special regimen, which endangers not only his own life but
 also the lives of his cellmates.
 The Government continued to place selected political and
 religious activists in psychiatric hospitals, some of which
 fell under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of the Interior
 and not of the Ministry of Health, although, as described
 below, the Interior Ministry may be giving up this
 jurisdiction.   These patients are often subjected to the
 painful, forced administration of sedatives, antipsychotics,
 and other mind-altering drugs.
 Several demonstrators suffered psychiatric confinements in
 1987. Igor Baryl'nik of the Group to Establish Trust Between
 East and West was placed in a psychiatric hospital September
 11, apparently to prevent him from participating in a
 September 13 demonstration on behalf of Matthias Rust, the
 young West German who landed his small plane in Moscow's Red
 Square. He remained there until October. Serafim Yevsukov
 was placed in a mental hospital February 27 after
 demonstrating for permission to emigrate. Yuriy Makhov has
 been placed in mental institutions four times because of his
 desire to emigrate to the United States--the last time from
 September 24 to October 17.
 Armenian human rights activist Sirvard Avagyan, a former
 political prisoner who has twice been confined to mental
 ,hospitals, was again forcibly confined in a mental institution
 outside Yerevan in April or May. In a tape played at a Moscow
 human rights activists' press conference October 20, Avagyan
 described forced drug treatments and beatings.
 Vasiliy G. Shipilov has reportedly been held in mental
 institutions for 38 years and spent time in Stalin's labor
 camps before that because of his opposition to communism on
 religious grounds." According to Western sources, 64 political
 prisoners were released from psychiatric hospitals in 1987,
 including Nizametdin Akhmetov, Vladimir Klebanov, Aleksandr
 Riga, Aleksandr Skobov, Anna Chertkova, and Algirdas
 Statkevicius. Between 65 and 95 known political prisoners
 remained in Soviet psychiatric hospitals at the end of the
 year, including Ukrainian human rights activist Hanna
 Mikhailenko. Nina Kovalenko, a former Trust Group member who
 was released from a psychiatric hospital in December 1986, was
 permitted to emigrate in January.
 The official press has begun to devote attention to the
 problem of psychiatric abuse, with a major -article in
 Izvestika in July, another important "expose" in Moscow News
 in October, and a third in Komsomol'skaya Pravda in November.
 The relationship between psychiatric abuse and control of
 political dissidence is, however, a subject that is still not
 discussed openly.
 In late summer, TASS announced that all psychiatric
 institutions were'being placed under the control of the
 Ministry of Health. This appears to be an attempt to blunt
 Western criticism and to eliminate the abuses that occurred at
 
 
 1049
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 institutions run by the Ministry of the Interior. Nonetheless,
 there is little indication of change at those institutions, as
 most personnel remain in their positions. The abuse of
 psychiatry reportedly still occurs.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, Exile, or Forced Labor
 Government spokesmen insist that prosecution occurs only in
 cases in which persons commit acts prohibited by law. But the
 provisions of laws under which prosecutions have occurred
 themselves violate internationally recognized human rights,
 including freedom of expression and freedom of association.
 Among these provisions are:
 --Article 70, "Anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda,"
 which carries a maximum penalty of 7 years' imprisonment and
 up to an additional 5 years in internal exile.
 --Article 142, "Infringement of the laws on separation of
 the church from the State and of the school from the church."
 --Article 190-1, "The dissemination of deliberately
 hostile fabrications defaming the Soviet State and social
 system." This article, introduced in 1965, carries a maximum
 penalty of 3 years' imprisonment.
 --Article 190-3, "The organization of, or active
 participation in, a group actively violating public order,"
 which carries a maximum penalty of 3 years' imprisonment.
 --Article 227, "The infringement of the person and the
 rights of citizens under the appearance of performing
 religious ceremonies," which carries a maximum penalty of
 5 years' imprisonment.
 In addition to these provisions, the authorities continue to
 use criminal code provisions against "parasitism,"
 "hooliganism," and "illegal commerce" or "speculation" to
 harass persons for political activity.  Dissidents are
 sometimes fired from their jobs, then threatened with arrest
 or even in some cases arrested for "parasitism" because they
 have no jobs. The authorities also reportedly fabricate
 charges for criminal offenses, such as the possession of drugs
 or weapons, or even more extreme crimes, such as rape. It was
 reported in September, for example, that Valentin Yaroshchuk,
 a Hare Krishna, faced trumped-up criminal charges in Riga of
 resisting the militia.
 Overall, however, there was a substantial decrease in the
 application of the "political" articles in the course of the
 year. These articles reportedly are being reviewed as part of
 the general process of revision of the criminal code, but have
 not been revised to date.
 Soviet criminal codes also permit administrative jailing for
 periods of up to 15 days. In practice, such incarcerations
 are often used to punish demonstrators and political and
 religious activists under the guise of "hooliganism" or
 "disturbing the peace." The criminal codes also provide
 Soviet authorities power to detain citizens for 3 to 4 hours
 for questioning; after this period, detainees must either be
 charged or released.
 There were numerous reports in 1987 of groups or individuals
 who held unofficial demonstrations in support of various
 
 
 --.UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 causls; most were either detained for-a few hours or, in some
 cases, given jail sentences of 10-15 days. Many managed to
 carry out"large public protests, however, in a notable change
 from the past. The authorities' toleration of demonstrations
 by the Crimean Tatars in Moscow in July and by nationalists in
 the Baltic republics in June and August were the most
 prominent examples. Nevertheless, participants in those
 demonstrations and others were sometimes subjected to
 beatings, arbitrary dptention, and house arrest. In most
 cases of arbitrary detention, detained persons are released
 within a f6w hours. Toward the end of the year, Soviet
 tolerance for such demonstrations rapidly dwindled, and most.
 were broken up by force or prevented from occurring altogether,
 According to the code of criminal procedure, pretrial..
 detention. cn last as long as 9 months, and prisoners:are not
 entitled to consult with-a lawyer until shortly before trial.
 Prolonged pretrial detention thus functions as a form of
 preventive detqntion, although there were no reports of its
 usein this way in 1987.
 Most political prisoners, as well as most ordinary criminals,
 are confined~tQ camps where they are forced to labor, often
 under'harsh and degrading conditions, on Soviet developmental
 projicts and to assist in the production of large amounts of
 primary and manufactured goods. Goods are manufactured on
 behalf of nearby factories and are included in those factories'
 quotas and pr6duction statistics. Prisoners are thegretically
 paid the same wage as factory workers, but up to 90 percent of
 their pair goes to prison authorities, supposedly to cover the
 cost ,oftheir maintenance, according to the Corrective-Labor
 Code 6f the R.S.F.S.R.    -.                         -
 Soviet psychiat'ric institutions are -also used to-detain and
 confine dissidents arbitrarily. A Soviet Ministry of Health
 directive, issued in August 1971, authorizes the psychiatric
 confinement of persons who pose a "social danger," without
 providing an identifiable list of suspect symptoms. In effect,
 individuals can be confined, with the assistance of the police
 and the agreement of three psychiatrists, without their consent
 or'that~of their families. The length of the-detention can
 vary gr.Patly, and doctors often refuse to give a diagnosis or
 set a release date. Patients committed under criminal
 confinemient procedures may lose the right to be informed about
 the charges brought against them and the right-to mount their
 own defense. Soviet authorities have said, however, that
 there' will be'a reform of psychiatric hospitals and that steps
 are being taken to make psychiatric commitments subject to
 judicial review.
 In September 1983, the authorities approved an addition to the
 le.S.F.'.R. cilminal cbde dealing with "malicious disobedience
 to the administration of corrective labor institutions."
 Under this provision, prisoners who disobey camp authorities
 or who have spent time in solitary confinement during the
 course of the p~evious year may be sentenced to an additional
 3 years. This provision was applied only infrequently in
 1987. In March Vladimir Kustrya was sentenced to an
 additional 2 years, 8 months under article 188-3; also in
 March, .longtime political prisoner Pyotr Saranchuk was
 sentehced to 3 years in a special-regime camp under article
 188-3.
 In 1987 the authorities continued the practice, which dates
 back to tsarist times, of exiling political dissenters. Exile
 
 
 1051
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 often follows prison and, in practice, means confinement in a
 remote v~llage, far away from homeland and family, where
 climatic conditions are usually severe, fresh food is scarce,
 and isolation is an additional burden. These conditions are
 mitigated only by the privilege of receiving food parcels from
 family members, moving about within a limited area, finding
 work (usually menial), and arranging one's own (often
 primitive) accormmodations. The families of exiles are usually
 permitted to live with them, although it may take several
 months to receive the required peripits. In November, however,
 the Government announced that it was planning to end the use
 of internal exile as a form of punishment. When implemented,
 this decree should free about 25 known prisonerz in exile and
 will benefit others who are scheduled to be sent into exile
 after finishing their labor camp terms.
 Persons released from exile often are not allowed to return to
 their former places of residence. Some are forced to live in
 other areas of the Soviet Union, in reality ensuring continued
 separation frum their homes. Others, having nowhere to go,
 return lo the-ir old homes without residence permits, where
 they risk arrest for 7iolating residence laws. In August
 1985, the Council of Ministers issued decree no. 736, as yet
 unpublished, which severely limits the right of many former
 prisoners to reside in or visit Moscow or its suburbs. In
 November Pentecostal emigration activists Galina and Vasiliy
 Barats were forcibly expelled from Moscow to Trans-Carpathia.
 The authorities also have utilized external exile or
 "voluntary" departure as a method of eliminating dissent.
 In 1987 the Soviets released over 300 political prisoners; a
 number of them, however, had already completed their terms. A
 substantial number of the best-known prisoners were forced to
 emigrate, with the implicit or explicit understanding that the
 alternative was an eventual return to the labor camps or
 mental institutions from which they had just been released.
 With few exceptions, all were forced to leave on exit visas to
 Israel, which meant they were deprived of Soviet citizenship.
 Those who left included Latvian activists Roland Silaraups and
 Janis Rozkalns, Estonian activist Tiit Madisson, and Russian
 activists Sergey Khodorovich and Vladimir Titov. A number of
 former Helsinki monitors, or members of human rights groups
 associated with the Helsinki process, also departed, including
 Tanya Osipova, Ivan Kovalev, Viktor Nekipelov, Anatoliy
 Koryagin, Eduard Gudava, Tengiz Gudava, losip Terelya, and
 Vytautas Skuodis. Danilo Shumuk, who had served 42 years in
 Polish, Nazi, and Soviet prisons, also left the Soviet Union
 in 1987.
 A number of released Helsinki monitors remained in the Soviet
 Union, including Merab Kostava, Gleb Yakunin, Myroslav
 Marynovich, and Vasyl Smiltsiv. Thirteen Helsinki monitors
 remained in prison, labor camp, exile, or psychiatric
 hospitals as of the end of the year. They included Lev
 Lukyanenko, Ivan Kandyba, Mart Niklus, Yuriy Shukhevych,
 Viktoras Petkus, Alfonsas Svarinskas, Sigitas Tamkevicius, and
 Vasyl Ovsyenko.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Communist party control of society extends to the legal and
 judicial system and is exercised in political cases to negate
 constitutional guarantees of the objectivity and independence
 of the judicial process. Soviet authorities generally ensure
 -that political trials are closed to the public by requiring
 
 
 1052
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIAIIST REPUBLICS
 .admission passes, packing the courtroom, and harassing or
 detaining observers outside. The location and date of a trial
 are often announced on short notice and may be changed with
 little warning. Western journalists and diplomats are
 xegularly denied-access to political trials as well as
 perriission to visit cities outside Moscow where trials are
 tiking place.
 Defense attorneys, like judges, are subject to political
 pressures and constraints applied by the security forces and
 the party. According to official statistics, about 60 percent
 of attorneys are party members, and this proportion rises with
 -the seniority of the position.  Moreover, attorneys must have
 spegial clearance to-act as defendant's counsel in a political
 case. Attorneys who overstep their assigned role of providing
 a perfunctory defense risk losing their clearance and even
 destroying their careers. Even the most honest and vigorous
 defense is of limited utility since results indicate that the
 outcome of political trials is determined beforehand by the
 authorities.. Appeals, although permitted, are usually a
 formality.
 Since data on political prisoners is regarded as a state
 secret, estimates about the number vary considerably. One
 list of political prisoners whose names are known, compiled by
 Soviet emigre and former political prisoner Kronid Lubarsky,
 includes about 400 persons. It is believed that the number of
 political prisoners is much higher, however, although their
 identities are not known. Although prominent political and
 religious figures are segregated and kept in special labor
 camps, many lesser known activists are tried-on nonpolitical
 criminal charges (e.g., speculation, parasitism, hooliganism,
 resisting arrest) and are treated as ordinary criminals, and
 therefore might not be included in statistics on political
 convictions.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Goyernment interference in personal life is pervasive. The
 authorities regard it as a -citizen's duty to inform on the
 unorthodox attitudes of family members, friends, and
 neighbors. The electronic monitoring of the residences and
 telephones of certain Soviet citizens and foreigners -is done
 routinely, despite constitutional provisions assuring the
 inviolabii-ty of citizens' homes. According to law, no one
 maX enter a home against- the will of the resident "without
 legal grounds." In practice, this provision has little
 restraining effect on investigative agencies.
 Nevertheless, the number of house searches for political
 materials was reduced this year. There were none reported in
 Moscow and Leningrad (although materials related to the
 reported destruction by the Soviet Supreme Court of files on
 1930's purge victims disappeared from Dmitriy Yurasov's Moscow
 apartment September 7, and dissident sources assumed the theft
 was the work of government agents). They continued outside
 Moscow and Leningrad but on a reduced basis.
 Through the control of mail and telephone circuits, the
 authorities often selectively restrict contact between
 citizens and foreigners, often intercepting mail or cutting
 off telephone conversations. On June 1, four Moscow women
 refuseniks arranged meetings with refuseniks in their homes
 and asked Western supporters to call them to commemorate
 
 
 1053
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 International Children's Day and remember refusenik children.
 During the hours of June 1 arranged for the calls, all four
 had their telephone service interrupted and were unable to
 receive the calls. Political activist Valery Senderov's
 telephone was also reported to have been disconnected, and
 telephone calls between divided spouses and families were
 occasionally interrupted. Nevertheless, in most cases, the
 authorities do not interfere with telephone contact between
 refuseniks and dissidents and friends or family in the West.
 It has now become common practice for Soviet human rights
 activists to telephone Western human rights organizations with
 news on the human rights situation in the U.S.S.R.
 Contacts with foreigners had been further discouraged with the
 issuance of a decree in 1984 which mandated fines for Soviet
 citizens who provide foreigners with "accommodation or
 transportation or have rendered them other services in
 violation of established rules." There was only one reported
 case in which fines were imposed during 1987. That occurred
 in Rostov-on-Don this fall when two Soviet citizens were fined
 50 rubles apiece (about $80) for driving several United States
 Information Service exhibit guides outside the city limits.
 There has also been less harassment of foreigners who visit
 refuseniks or dissidents. Refuseniks and dissidents are
 sometimes criticized in the press for their ties and contacts
 with the West. For example, Serafim Yevsukov, an ethnic
 Russian who succeeded in emigrating to the West in 1987, was
 attacked by Moskovskaya Pravda March 5 and called a "tool of
 anti-Soviet elements in the West." This epithet is also
 commonly used against Jewish activists, such as Iosif Begun.
 Glasnost' editor Sergey Grigor'yants was attacked in the
 September 15 Vechernyaya Moskva for his contacts with Western
 journalists. Press attacks on persons who seek to emigrate or
 agitate for human rights continue, although less frequently in
 1987 than in the past.
 Foreigners who decide to marry Soviet citizens are sometimes
 prevented from returning to the Soviet Union for the required
 registration of the intention to marry or the marriage itself,
 resulting in a "blocked marriage." A number of spouses of
 U.S. citizens have not been permitted to emigrate. During
 1987 a number of such cases were resolved, and fewer new cases
 arose. In November, however, the authorities began to insist
 that a special "guest" visa be obtained by travelers going to
 the Soviet Union for the purpose of marriage. This may
 represent a step backward, since such visas have traditionally
 been difficult to obtain.
 The Government continues to jam some Western radio broadcasts,
 including those of Radio Liberty in Russian and other Soviet
 languages, Deutsche Welle, and the Voice of Israel. These
 actions are inconsistent with the provisions of the Helsinki
 Final Act. Islamic (mostly Iranian) broadcasts into Central
 Asia also are jammed. Most jamming of Voice of America
 broadcasts was ended in 1987, and broadcasts in English and
 other Western European languages generally are not jammed.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution provides for most internationally accepted
 political liberties but requires that their exercise be in
 accordance with the "interests of the people and the
 strengthening and development of the Socialist system." In
 
 
 1054
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 practice, this has generally meant that the good of the State
 comes-before that of the individual.
 All official information media are controlled by the party and
 the Government. According to Soviet officials, this year
 marked the end of the requirement to submit all publications,
 films, and radioand televii-ion scripts for censorship to the
 Main Administration for Safeguarding State Secrets in the
 Media. Instead,, it is now the responsibility of individual
 editors to assure that their publications are in line with
 party policies and directives. This has meant a broadening of
 discussion of historical, social, economic, and--to a lesser
 extent--political issues in the official media. There remain
 strict limits, however, on what can be published. Editors who
 have'published articles pushing those limits have been
 reprimanded by party officials, but there was no reported
 instance in 1987 in which an editor was fired for that
 reason. Thus, some publications have developed distinctive
 perspectives on issues, and there have been open debates on
 the "correct" approach to "perestroyka" (restructuring),
 -glasnost' (openness), Soviet history, and other public issues.
 Openly dissident views on important questions of policy--e.g.,
 the wisdomof party guidelines or of the leadership--have
 begun to appear in the official media, usually in the form of
 letters to the editor. Debate within the leadership is often
 reflected in. published texts where sophisticated polemics and
 criticism, expressed-in veiled language, allow experienced
 readers to identify policy trends and controversial issues.
 Open polemics have occasionally emerged between advocates of
 different lines of policy, as was the case in the summer when
 several of the most prominent Soviet literary publications
 openly and vigorously criticized each other over official
 cultural policy Media debate over economic policy is now
 commonplace.
 Soviet journalists are subject to the discipline of the
 Communist Party and subordinated to the directives of their
 editorial superiors, themselves trusted members of the party.
 As such, they have been spokesmen for official policies rather
 than journalists in the Western sense. Now, however,
 journalists are more frequently able to voice their own
 opinions in signed articles for which they are held
 responsible. The policy of glasnost' has contributed to the
 development of investigating journalism, much to the
 discomfiture of local and economic officials.
 The most significant development in this area has been the
 proliferation of unoffiqial publications (samizdat, or
 self-published material). Unlike past samizdat journals,
 current journa lsf, e written and edited by persons who do not
 hide their identities. These publications exist in a gray
 area--they are neither explicitly permitted nor prohibited.
 In the past, many of their editors and contributors would have
 been convicted for "anti-Soviet activity," thus effectively
 stoppind the publications. Under present conditions, the fate
 of these publications is unclear, given the Government's
 effort to stimulate private initiative and unwillingness to
 try persons in Moscow or Leningrad on grounds of "anti-Soviet
 activity," particularly in light of the current government
 review of the legal articles banning "anti-Soviet activity."
 Editors and contributors for the more outspoken periodicals
 have been harassed--some have lost their jobs, been detained,
 visited repeatedly by militia, threatened with prosecution for
 illegal use of government reproduction facilities, and
 
 
 1055
 
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 attacked in the official media. Sergei Grigor'yants, editor
 of the unofficial journal Glasnost', has been repeatedly
 attacked in the press; 70 copies of his journal were
 confiscated in September; and he and two other editorial board
 members were detained and beaten on several occasions. The
 editor of the underground journal Ukrainian Herald Vyacheslav
 Chornovil, has been pressured to leave the U.S.S.R. Samizdat
 publications by the Ukrainian Catholic and Lithuanian Catholic
 Churches and by unregistered Protestant denominations, such as
 some Baptists, continue to be the object of particular
 government repression. House searches for these types of
 materials, which are generally confiscated when found,
 continue.
 The Government has relaxed somewhat the obstacles to the work
 of foreign journalists. Official press conferences have
 become a regular feature of life, and most Western journalists
 maintain that their access to Soviet officials has been much
 improved. Some Western journalists have been allowed to
 travel to and conduct interviews in closed areas. The
 Government continues to circumscribe the circulation of
 non-Communist foreign newspapers, which are rarely available
 to average Soviet citizens. Overt censorship of wire and
 satellite transmissions of news stories out of the Soviet
 Union is rare, but the authorities sometimes harass selected
 foreign journalists, especially those who maintain close
 .contacts with dissidents and refuseniks.
 .All universities and research institutes are operated by the
 State or party; teaching and research must conform to official
 r9quirements. In areas such as foreign policy and
 contemporary Soviet history, requirements on research and
 teaching reportedly are being relaxed. Although previously
 forbidden areas are becoming more and more open to researchers
 (particularly in the field of Soviet history), academic
 freedom in the Western sense does not exist. Freedom of
 expression expanded in 1987, although there remained subjects
 which were politically sensitive and had to be treated
 cautiously. The Government's range of political sensitivities
 remains broad, and censorship standards can be applied in an
 arbitrary and capricious manner. Nevertheless, the realm of
 the permissible in literature, scholarship, and culture
 continued to expand. A significant number of previously
 banned books and plays were published or staged, including
 Rybakov's "Children of the Arbat" and Bulgakov's "Heart of a
 Dog." Political satire by Soviet comedians became sharper,
 although generally within officially approved limits--for
 example, satirizing official corruption, mismanagement, or
 inertia. Soviet news media published or broadcast information
 on internal events, such as demonstrations, that was previously
 forbidden. There has been increased discussion of government
 policies, such as price reform, removal of subsidies, and
 various ecological issues.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 'During 1987 the Government was more willing to tolerate
 demonstrations, both by groups and individuals.
 Demonstrations have been used primarily by emigration
 activists, but 1987 saw many demonstrations by Soviets
 interested in remaining in the Soviet Union and agitating for
 changes of various kinds. National minorities, including the
 Crimean Tatars, Latvians, Estonians, Lithuanians, and
 Armenians, staged major demonstrations.
 
 
 1056
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 Efforts to eliminate such open expressions of discontent
 persisted, however. Demonstrators often have their placards
 seized and are then detained for short periods, harassed,
 attacked in the press, or occasionally sentenced to jail
 sentences of 10-15 days. The newspaper VechernyVaya Moskva
 attacked the unofficial seminar "Democracy and Humanism" for
 organizing a demonstration in support of political prisoners.
 Their demonstration was prevented in Moscow by the roundup of
 35 people suspected of organizing the demonstration. In
 Leningrad they managed to demonstrate, but several were
 sentenced to 10 days in jail, and many were detained. An
 October 31 Vecherniy Leningrad article criticizing the
 demonstration commented that it should be understood that
 democracy was subordinate to the need to maintain order. Some
 demonstrators continue to be beaten. During U.S. Secretary of
 State Shultz's visit to Moscow October 22-23, Andrey Zhdanov
 and Galina Gerasimova were beaten and forced into militia cars
 when they attempted to demonstrate in front of the American
 Embassy. Subsequently, however, they received permission to
 join their daughter (who defected several years ago) in the
 West.
 Rules introduced in Moscow and Leningrad in 1987 regulating
 demonstrations, despite stiff restrictions on locale, would
 seem to legitimate them, but in no known instance was an
 application for a'protest demonstration approved. Authorities
 approved a September 27 commemoration of Babi Yar, which was
 attended by leaders of the official Anti-Zionist Committee, as
 well as unofficial activists. One applicant for permission to
 demonstrate was told it was only legal to demonstrate "for"
 som6thing, not "against."
 Despite the release of over 300 political prisoners in 1987,
 many remain incarcerated for their participation in unofficial
 groups. Thirteen former Helsinki monitors were still confined
 at the end of the year. Persons who are "too active" in
 their protests continue to be threatened with confinement in
 mental institutions. Igor'Baryllnik, a member of the
 Leningrad trust group, was placed in a Leningrad Mental
 Hospital September 11, apparently in order to prevent him from
 pqrticipatiig  in a September 13 demonstration in Moscow on
 behalf of Matthias Rust. Other demonstrators weke seized
 September 13 when they began trying to collect signatures in
 downtown Moscow supporting Rust's release and were detained
 and interrogated for several hours. Also on September 13, 18
 Moscow Jews were detained for several hours in order to
 "prevent" a demonstratipn agadnst anti-Semitism that had
 already been canceled by the organizers after they were
 refused pdrmission to demonstrate and attacked repeatedly in
 the press, television, and radio.  Official attitudes towards
 demonstrations seemed to. harden further later in the year.
 Demo'nstrations in Riga in June and August took place despite
 official attempts to discourage them; in November demonstrators
 in Riga were met with beatings and detentions. On December 6
 a demonstration in Moscow protesting emigration policy was
 disrupted by the pushing and shoving of groups of young men
 and some of the demonstrators taken into custody. A late
 December demonstration marking the eighth year of Soviet
 occupation in Afghanistan was broken up by force, and several
 demonstrators were detained.
 The Constitution grants citizens the right to associate in
 public organizations "in accordance with the aim of building
 communism." In practice, public associations are organized by
 the authorities or are subject to their strict control, and
 
 
 1057
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 the Government suppresses attempts to function independently
 of its supervision. Nevertheless, current conditions have
 fostered the growth of a large number of unofficial or informal
 organizations that provide a forum for discussion of political,
 social, ecological, and other issues. Many of these clubs
 produce journals or bulletins. Most actively support
 perestroyka. Both Moscow and Leningrad have developed
 umbrella organizations that represent a number of these clubs;
 in Moscow, the "Social Initiatives Group" and in Leningrad,
 "Epitsentr." Other cities, including Kiev, Kazan', Sverdlovsk,
 Ulyanovsk, and.Brezhnev, have developed their own clubs. Some
 clubs are trying to register as official organizations, for
 example, the Perestroyka Club in Moscow. The proliferation of
 these groups, with the opportunity they provide for public
 discussion, is one of the most significant developments in the
 human rights situation in the U.S.S.R.
 In October a group of Moscow activists announced the formation
 of the Moscow branch of the Frankfurt-based International
 Society for Human Rights. On October 20, the group held a
 press conference on the problem of psychiatric abuse in the
 Soviet Union. Russian, Ukrainian, Armenian, and Georgian
 committees for the defense of political prisoners have been
 formed. On International Human Rights Day, the unofficial
 organization "Press Club Glasnost'" held an international
 human rights seminar, but not without some'detentions and
 other problems. This is one of several relatively recent
 examples of attempts at open, visible discussion of human
 rights problems. At the same time, greater openness has
 provided a public forum for some of the more unattractive
 sides of Soviet life, such as anti-Semitism. The organization
 "Pamyat'", which began as an organization dedicated to
 preserving historical monuments, has developed a faction in
 the R.S.F.S.R. that is rabidly anti-Semitic. Despite criticism
 of "Pamyat'" by Soviet media, the regime has treated it
 cautiously, suggesting that it enjoys some support in official
 quarters.
 Trade unions are strictly subordinated to the Communist Party
 and act as agents of the Government in implementing economic
 policy and ensuring labor discipline. The unions do not act
 as collective bargaining agents. The International Labor
 Organization's Committee of Experts has noted that the Soviet
 Union has contravened the Convention on Freedom of Association
 and Protection of the Right to Organize by imposing a
 constitutional link between the Communist Party and trade
 unions, which restricted the right of the unions to organize
 their own activities and formulate their own programs.
 The right to strike is not recognized, and strikes are rare.
 Local authorities sometimes make concessions when confronted
 with a spontaneous strike over a local, limited grievance.
 Bus drivers in the town of Chekhov, for example, held a strike
 September 14 to protest a new regulation that would dock their
 pay if they did not keep strictly to their timetable. Their
 demands were met. There were other unconfirmed reports of
 "work stoppages" that occurred thro'ghout the U.S.S.R.
 There were no reports of independent labor activity in the
 U.S.S.R. during 1987, although the Free Inter-Professional
 Union of Workers (SMOT), which had been decimated by arrests
 and forced emigration, has reportedly begun a very limited
 level of activity. SMOT activist Fedor Finkel vas permitted
 to emigrate to the United States.-
 
 
 1058-
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The _Constitution provides for the "right to profess or not to
 profess any religion and to conduct religious worship or
 atheisti.c propaganda." The right to vonduct religious worship
 and the right to make atheistic propaganda are not equivalent,
 however, since the former right does not include the Tight to
 conduct "religious propaganda," t.e., to engage in public
 defense of religious values or to rebut official attacks on
 religion. Moreover, extensive legislation and admlhi-strative
 regulations on "religious cults' place additional restrictions
 on freedom, of religion. On balance, religious believers have
 benefited less frompolicies of glasnost-and perestroyka than
 other social groups.
 Registration with the Soviet Council on Religious Affairs is.
 required for religious groups of 20 adults or more. The State
 is able to ,limit the number of congregations since the
 authorities-reserve the right to grant or withhold
 registratign. Their refusal to grant registration has been
 used to deny.-legal status to entire religious denominations,
 for example, to tbe Ukrainian Catholic (Uniate) Church since
 1946. Once registered, religious congregations must accept
 strict regulations which prohibit-proselytizing, religious
 discussion and Bible study groups, charitable activity, and
 formal religious training for children. Existing seminaries
 and other,,institutionsof, clerical education and the numbers
 of students permitted to.pursue a religious-vo'ation-do not
 provide a sufficient-body of trained clergy for officially
 registered.denominations. In one positive development in
 lq7,_puthorities rescinded-the requirement that priests
 register all baptisms with the State. In many areas outside'
 Moscow and Leningrad, however, priests-continue to register-
 baptisrps.
 Many groups of believers refuse to register officially on the
 grounds that much of the legislation affecting "religious
 cults" contradicts the tenets of their religious beliefs.
 Others, such as-the Hare Krishna, are refused the right to
 register. Unregistered believers, such as some Baptists,
 Jehovahs Witnesses, Seventh-Day Adventists, Pentecostalists,
 and Hare Krishnas, are subject to repressive measures,
 including harassment at school or place of employment, denial
 of access to housing and educational and job opportunities;
 dismissal from work, and imprisonment. One reliable list of
 dissidents counts approximately 204 religious activists who
 are currently serving prison sentences on charges related to
 their religious beliefs.
 Pentecostalist Presbyter Vasiliy Boyechko was released early
 from a 3-year labor camp sentence in April but was threatened
 with rearrest in September if his congregation did not
 register. Pentecostalist Leonid Litvinenko was rearrested in
 camp and sentenced to another 3 years in a strict-regime
 camp. The small Pentecostalist community in Chuguyevka in the
 Soviet Far East continued to face repression during 1987. No
 member of the community has been permitted to hold a job for 4
 years, with consequent extreme economic hardship. Eight
 members are still imprisoned, including their pastor, Viktor
 Val'ter. While the family of imprisoned Chuguevka
 Pentecostalist Nikolay Wiens was permitted to emigrate to the
 Federal Republic of Germany, Wiens himself remained in a labor
 camp. Also,.Leningrad Pentecostalist Vladimir Markov was
 permitted to emigrate in September.
 
 
 1059
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIAl.IS' REPUBLICS
 .Among unregistered ?aptists, Anna Chertkova was confined in a
 special psychiatric hospital but has now been released. In
 February Baptist Viktor Litovchenko was sentenced in Kiev to 3
 years' strict-regime labor camp under article 190-1. Baptist
 prayer meetings continue to be broken up. On the positive
 side, a number of Baptist prisoners were released early,
 including Lidiya Doronina-Lasmane. Baptist Vladimir Khaylo
 was released from a mental institution aed permitted to
 emigrate with most members of his family.
 The ttadi ional religious affiliation of ethnic Russians is
 the Russian Orthodox Church, which, according to wany dissident
 church sources, is subjected to hea;y' interrerenc? 4n its
 intecnal affairs by the authorities, including t -' KGB. The
 church hierarchy is often called on to support government
 initiatives publicly, part~cularly on disarmament. While
 tolerating the existence Df this church;, largely for
 International propaganda pitrposes, the iuthnrities discourage
 the population's interest, participation, and involvement in
 church affairs.  in Moscow, authorities permit only about 50
 churches to function. At Easter, the Russian Orthodox
 Church's most important religious. holiday, police often
 blocked or denied access to the crowds trying to attend
 services.
 The independent Ukrainian Orthodox Aucocephalous Church was
 liquidated by the Soviets in the 1920's and 1930's by means of
 massive repressive measures, including executions of the
 church hierarchy, and remains forcibly incorporated into the
 Russian Orthodox Church.
 Soviet officials in 1987 generally demonstrated a slightly
 more tolerant attitude toward Christianity in general and
 Russian Orthodoxy in particular. Released prisoner Father
 Gleb Yakunin was given his first parish (in Shchelkovo) in 20
 years, but only after warnings not to engage in political
 activity. Konstantin Kharchev, chairman of the Council on
 Religious Affairs, stated that legislation on religion is
 being reviewed and promised that there would be no religious
 prisoners by the end of November; however, the Soviets have
 failed to fulfil the latter. Moscow News and Literaturnaya
 Gazeta have carried articles encouraging tolerance of
 religious believers, although regional newspapers still seem
 to be following the old antireligious line. Two unofficial
 Russian Orthodox journals appeared this year--Bulletin of the
 Christian Community and Choice--along with the officially
 permitted Vestnik of the Patriarchate.
 Believers active in other than officially sanctioned church
 rituals are often punished, although 1987 saw an improvement
 in this area. Still, Russian Orthodox Deacon and Historian
 Vladimir Rusak remains in Perm' Labor Camp 35 on charges of
 anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda because he criticized the
 Russian Orthodox Church hierarchy's cooperation with the
 Communist Government; in September he was reported to be held
 in the camp's internal prison.
 In Ukraine, a group of more than 200 Ukrainian Catholic
 bishops, priests, and lay people issued an appeal to the Pope
 and to General Secretary Gorbachev to help them gain legal
 status for their church and announced that they were formally
 "coming out from the underground." In the wake of the appeal,
 a number of signatories were harassed, and 38-year-old
 Mykhailo Hawryliw was called up for reserve duty. Since this
 appeal, two more petitions with over 2,500 signatures have
 
 
 1060
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 been forwarded to the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet. It was
 reported that authorities forcibly broke up a number of
 Ukrainian Catholic Christmas celebrations. Ukrainian Catholic
 activist Iosip Terelya was permitted to emigrate to Canada
 with his family in September. Persecution of Catholic
 activists also continued. The homes of Lithuanian Catholics
 involved in producing the Lithuanian Catholic Chronicle were
 repeatedly searched and copies of the Chronicle confiscated.
 Lithuanian Catholic priests Alfonsas Svarinskas and Sigitas
 Tamkevicius remain in a labor camp.
 Harassment of religious Jews decreased in 1987. A ritual bath
 in Moscow's one Hasidic synagogue was restored by government
 authorities who had destroyed it in 1987. Chairman of the
 Council on Religious Affairs Konstantin Kharchev told U.S.
 Rabbi David Hollander in May that six young Soviet Jews would
 be permitted to study at rabbinical seminaries in the United
 States, although this has not yet taken place. Small numbers
 of Hebrew Bibles and prayer books provided by Western donors
 appear to have reached Moscow in 1987. In general, however,
 it remained next to impossible for religious Jews to obtain
 Hebrew prayer books and other religious items. Although there
 were reports toward year's end that Hebrew classes in one
 locality were being tolerated, the teaching of Hebrew remains
 illegal.
 Although only a small number of mosques are open for use in
 the Muslim regions of Central Asia and Azerbaijan, Islam
 appears to retain a strong hold on the population. Unofficial
 mullahs, who function without government permission, are the
 subject of nearly constant pressure. Soviet press
 condemnations of foreign (mostly Iranian) Islamic radio
 broadcasts and continued jamming of these broadcasts reflect
 considerable anxiety on the part of the authorities. Official
 propaganda efforts are tailored to bolster atheism among the
 Muslim peoples of the U.S.S.R. and advocate secular Soviet
 ceremonies as substitutes for religious observances on the
 occasion of births, marriages, and deaths. The unauthorized
 printing and distribution of religious books continues to be
 met with harsh punishment.
 According to reliable Soviet dissident sources, there are at
 least 17 Muslims imprisoned on religious grounds. At the end
 of 1986 or beginning of 1987, a number of Muslims were
 sentenced to prison terms, including 32-year-old Rajabali
 Shaev, an unregistered mullah, who was sentenced to 3 years in
 a labor camp under articles 142 and 227, and Akhmadkan
 Azizkhodzaev, imam at Makhmud-Ishan mosque in Namangan,
 Uzbekistan, who was sentenced to 5 years' deprivation of
 liberty for trading in religious literature and posters
 depicting Mecca.
 Very small religious groups were not immune to severe
 pressure. Harassment, arrests, and trials of Hare Krishna
 followers in the Baltic area, Ukraine, the R.S.F.S.R., and the
 Caucasus'continued. One Hare Krishna follower remained in a
 mental institution and several in labor camps. It became
 known in 1987 that Krishna follower Znaikochyan was forcibly
 confined to a Yerevan Mental Institution in November 1986 and
 died after 5 days of treatment with haloperidol and tizerzine.
 Armenian television in June 1987 reported that he had died
 after a hunger strike. Lev Chernyak was detained, beaten, and
 in August sentenced to 15 days. A Krishna demonstration in
 Moscow August 29 was broken up by the militia, who detained
 about 50 of the approximately 100 Hare Krishna followers who
 
 
 1061
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 were demanding the release of imprisoned coreligionists and
 the registration of their group as a religious congregation.
 A number of demonstrators were severely beaten.
 The authorities exert wide-ranging pressure, including through
 the official media, to discourage religious belief in general
 among its citizens. The Communist Party is, according to its
 rules, an atheistic organization. Membership in the party,
 considered incompatible with religious belief, is in effect a
 requirement for advancement to most positions of authority or
 prestige in the country. Thus the authorities have virtually
 excluded practicing believers from attractive educational
 opportunities and desirable careers. At the same time,
 Ukrainian Catholic, Lithuanian Catholic, and Baptist
 unofficial journals continue to be repressed. The number of
 sacred books, such as the Bible or the Koran, which may be
 printed or imported is strictly limited, although Soviet
 officials announced 100,000 Baptist Bibles would be imported
 in 1987. Non-Russian language Bibles are in particularly
 short supply. The number of clergymen and places of worship
 today is only a small fraction of the number which existed
 before the October 1917 revolution. At the same time, Soviet
 officials recognize that up to 70 million Soviet citizens
 adhere to some religion.
 e. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Freedom of movement is neither assured by law nor respected in
 practice. Although citizens are generally free to move about
 within the country, travel in certain areas (e.g., frontier
 regions or areas of military significance) requires special
 permission. All adults are issued identity documents or
 internal passports, which must be carried on their person
 during travel and used to register visits of more than 3 days
 with the local authorities. Approximately 20 percent of
 Soviet territory is formally closed to travel by foreigners,
 and except for major urban centers most of the remaining
 territory is in practice difficult to visit or inaccessible.
 The right to choose one's place of residence, although
 formally provided for by law, is subject to restrictions.
 Everyone is'required to register his or her place of
 residence. The authorities limit the number of residence
 permits in an increasing number of large cities, including
 Moscow, Leningrad, and Kiev; where housing is at a premium.
 An unpublished directive issued, by the U.S.S.R. Council of
 Ministers in August 1985 (the text became available from
 unofficial sources in 1986) excludes citizens convicted of
 certain offenses, including all the "political" articles of
 the criminal/,code, from residing in Moscow unless the person
 has been pardoned or granted amnesty. Its apparent purpose
 was to reduce contacts between released activists and either
 other Soviet human rights activists or foreigners resident in
 Moscow. A number of recently released prisoners, including
 Aleksandr Ogorodnikov and Vasiliy Barats, have not been given
 residence permits in Moscow because of this directive. They
 have been repeatedly harassed and threatened with prosecution.
 Barats and his wife were finally expelled by force from
 Moscow. Many recently freed prisoners of conscience are
 compelled to live with others and are not able to work.
 
 
 1062
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 To travel abroad, Soviet citizens must have a passport for
 foreign travel and an exit visa specifying the precise
 destination for each trip. In 1987 the amount of travel both
 on officially sponsored trips (for business, academic exchange,
 or plain tourism) and on private visits has increased
 significantly--in the case of private visits to the United
 States, from 1,981 in 1986 to 5,764 in 1987. However, while
 Soviet authorities claim that they are encouraging those who
 have the time off from work and the financial resources to
 travel to the West to visit relatives or friends, permission
 to travel abroad remains difficult to obtain. Lengthy
 formalities, an unresponsive bureaucratic infrastructure, and
 arbitrary denials for reasons of security continue to
 discourage many from attempting a private trip. In one
 instance, a 67-year-old Ukrainian woman who was told she would
 be permitted to travel to the United States to visit her
 husband, from whom she had been separated since World War II,
 was arrested and sentenced to 3 years' "deprivation of
 freedom." Prohibitive costs and the Soviet Union's lack of a
 convertible currency also ensures that travel will continue to
 be restricted for most ordinary persons.
 The right to emigrate is restricted, as Soviet law does not
 recognize the right of citizens to emigrate by choice. The
 Soviet Union has signed the Helsinki Final Act and has thereby
 agreed to act in conformity with-the Universal Declaration of
 Human Rights, which states that, "Everyone has the right to
 leave any country, including his own." However, the Soviet
 system continues to restrict emigration (with very few
 exceptions) to those citizens desiring family reunification
 with immediate relatives abroad, and even those with immediate
 relatives abroad are often not permitted to emigrate. The
 entry-exit regulations which came into effect on January 1,
 1987, codify this restriction, although during 1987 many
 longtime refuseniks were permitted to emigrate without regard
 to this requirement. A number of political prisoners released
 in 1987 were given the option of emigrating, or were forced to
 emigrate, although they had no claim to family reunification.
 Other barriers to emigration are the requirement that family
 members sign forms on financial liability for their
 children--meaning that they may refuse to release an adult
 child from financial or moral commitments--and the widespread
 use of alleged "knowledge of state secrets" to deny
 emigration, even though the person never had access to state
 secrets or had not been involved in security-related matters
 for more than a decade.
 Many Jews have waited in vain for 10 years or longer for
 permission to emigrate. Official Israeli sources estimate
 that there are approximately 370,000 Soviet Jews who have
 requested the letters of invitation (vyzovs) necessary to
 apply to emigrate, and that many more Jews would eventually
 leave if emigration restrictions were lifted. However, a
 variety of administrative and extralegal sanctions, including
 loss of employment, harassment, social ostracism, and long
 delays, dissuade many Jews from even attempting to submit an
 emigration application.
 Jewish emigration in 1987 totaled 8,155, up substantially from
 914 in 1986, and the highest yearly total since 1981, when
 9,447 Jews emigrated. During the 1970's, however, over 2,000
 Jews per month were permitted to depart. In the peak year of
 1979, 51,320 emigrated. A number of longtime prominent
 refuseniks received exit permission, including Vladimir and
 Mariya Slepak and Ida Nudel. Many longtime refuseniks
 
 
 1063
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 continued to be refused on grounds of security, however. The
 Supreme Soviet Presidium reportedly formed a commission to
 review security refusals, and a number of Soviet Jews,
 previously refused on security grounds, have been permitted to
 emigrate. Repeated refusenik requests for names of commission
 members or appointments with the Commission have been rebuffed,
 however, leading to some public skepticism about the
 Commission. Over 14,000 Germans and over 3,000 Armenians left
 the U.S.S.R. in 1987. About 5,000 additional Armenians
 received exit permission but had not yet departed. These
 figures represent a sizable increase over the 1986 figures of
 793 Germans and 247 Armenians and are higher than figures for
 the peak years of the late 1970's and early 1980's. Soviet
 authorities in 1987 resolved a significant number of divided
 family cases affecting the United States, France, the United
 Kingdom, and Australia. Currently, 106 Soviet families,
 numbering about 450 individuals, are on a United States
 government list of families who are actively seeking to join
 relatives in the United States and who have been refused exit
 permission by the Soviet Government. Of 12 cases on the U.S.
 list of separated spouses at the beginning of 1987, 9 were
 resolved during the course of the year, while no new cases
 were added. There were four "blocked-marriage" cases on the
 representation list at the beginning of the year, three were
 added and four resolved. At least 17 U.S. citizens, who also
 hold Soviet citizenship and who are living in the Soviet
 Union, are still being denied permission to emigrate, several
 of them for many decades. Seven other dual nationals received
 permission to leave in 1987.
 In 1987 there was evidence that Soviet authorities had
 departed from their previous practice of refusing most
 emigrants the right to return to the U.S.S.R. Since the end
 of 1986, at least 250 Soviet emigres have returned permanently
 to the U.S.S.R., and Soviet officials indicated that at least
 that number of cases were being considered for repatriation.
 During 1987 a significant number of Soviet citizens residing
 abroad permanently as well as former Soviet citizens were
 permitted to return on short family visits, many of whom had
 previously been denied permission to visit.   Some, however,
 continue to be denied visas to visit the Soviet Union,
 including those denied emergency visas to return for funerals
 or to visit seriously ill relatives or experienced long delays
 in receiving these visas, although according to the regulations
 on entry and exit they are to be granted within 3 days.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Soviet citizens are not free to change the system of
 government. Ultimate political power is vested in the
 Communist Party, which is a self-selecting, self-perpetuating
 hierarchy controlling virtually every element of political
 expression at all levels. The Constitution provides that the
 party is the "leading and guiding force of Soviet society and
 the nucleus of its political system, of all state organizations
 and public organizations." Ordinary citizens have little
 opportunity to influence the actions of the party. Actual
 power within the party flows from the top (the General
 Secretary, the Politburo, and the Secretariat), thus allowing
 relatively small groups of party officials and leaders to
 control the decisions of subordinate bodies. Elections to the
 Supreme Soviet (parliament) are based on a single list of
 party-approved candidates and are therefore a formality. This
 
 
 1064
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 system continues to obstruct the individual initiative that
 General Secretary Gorbachev is now seeking in his efforts at
 perestroyka and gives opponents of perestroyka the power to
 resist change. This situation has led to calls for electoral
 reform, including secret balloting and multiple-candidate
 elections. Some local government organizations (the "soviets")
 and enterprises have already introduced multiple- candidate
 elections. Preliminary reports indicate that many candidates
 are handpicked by the body's leadership (by management in
 factories), and voting is public.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations.
 of Human Rights
 The Government contends that all internationally recognized
 human rights are fully protedted. Soviet authorities have
 adopted a-more forthcoming approach to foreign criticism of
 their human rights record, acknowledging problems'and stating
 their desire to make their society more "humane." While they
 have also acknowledged that the human rights situation in the
 U.S.S.R-is subject to discussion in official bilateral
 contacts, they continue to insist that these are internal
 political problems, and they have not permitted foreigners to
 inve~tigate the~status'of human rights in the U.S.S.R. The
 Soviet Government did extend an invitation to several members
 of the International Helsinki Watch organization late in 1987
 to visit the Soviet Union, and they arrived in January 1988.
 International human rights organizations such as Amnesty
 International have frequently addressed communications to-the
 Government concerning human rights, but the authorities have
 declined to reply in a substantive manner. The authorities
 have suppressed the Moscow chapter of Amnesty International
 and published attacks on the organization (including in 1987),
 alleging that it works with Western intelligence agencies
 against the Soviet Government. On the other hand, authorities
 did permit Helsinki Watch Executive Director Jeri Laber to
 attend the Moscow Book Fair after many previous refusals. The
 Soviets also permitted a number of representatives of Western
 nongovernmental organizations to attend the December
 unofficial human rights seminar organized in Moscow by the
 Press Club Glasnost', but several key human rights activists
 were refused a Soviet visa. Although the seminar, which
 attracted over 400 Soviet and-foreign participants, was not
 broken up, the organizers were harassed, many potential
 participants, including Vyacheslav Chornovil, Mihaylo Horyn,
 Bohdan Hell, and Paruyr Hayrikyan, were forcibly prevented
 from traveling to Moscow for the seminar, and Soviet
 authorities purposely complicated the logistics. Soviet
 officials have indicated willingness to permit nongovernmental
 representatives to attend an official human rights conference
 in Moscow, if one is held.
 The Soviet Government has cooperated with the United States in
 investigating allegations that war crimes were committed
 during World War II by persons who are now citizens or
 residents of the United States. It has permitted the U.S.
 Government to take depositions from witnesses in the U.S.S.R.,
 has submitted lists of alleged war criminals, and has provided
 documentation for use in U.S. courts. There have been
 complaints, however, of KGB interference in the depositions,
 and possible disinformation in the lists.
 
 
 1065
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution provides for the equal status of individual
 Soviet citizens, regardless of nationality, sex, or language.
 In reality, the Soviet leadership manipulates these factors in
 order to maintain control in the U.S.S.R. These factors,
 along with social status, affect a citizen's opportunities
 within Soviet society. Beyond that, there is pervasive
 discrimination based on national origin, practiced both by
 individuals and the Government.
 The Soviets recognize more than 100 nationalities in the
 U.S.S.R. Many ethnic groups have territorial and
 administrative entities: the 15 Soviet republics, many of
 which were formerly independent countries, represent some of
 the largest and most developed of the nationalities. Despite
 a professed commitment to the maintenance of national
 identity, actual Soviet policy continues the program of
 Russianization, which has taken on a variety of forms over the
 years. While mass resettlement of entire ethnic groups is no
 longer practiced (although resettled groups have in most cases
 not been permitted to return to their original homelands),
 assimilation is promoted through more subtle means. The
 extent and effectiveness of this policy, implemented to
 varying degrees in the different republics, is evident in most
 aspects of everyday life, including government, language,
 education, media, literature, economics, and even in the legal
 system. Universities often accept students according to
 unpublished quotas and thus influence careers and advancement
 opportunities.
 Some party and government positions traditionally have been
 reserved for certain nationalities. For example, the Soviet
 leadership has projected Slavic influence in non-Slavic areas
 by reserving second secretary positions in republic and lower
 level party organizations for Slavs while giving the first
 secretary positions to a member of the indigenous ethnic
 group. In December 1986, however, the Gorbachev administration
 replaced the First Secretary of the Kazakhstan Communist Party
 with a Russian. Nationalist demonstrations took place in the
 republic's capital, Alma-ata. Official Kazakhstan sources
 stated that up to 3,000 persons had demonstrated; 2 persons (1
 student and 1 voluntary militia) were killed, and 200 wounded.
 At least 13 persons were convicted in 1987 of crimes
 associated with the demonstrations. Several persons were
 convicted on charges of rioting, and in some instances,
 additional charges. Their sentences were unusually harsh.
 Some 2,000 additional people received various forms of
 administrative punishment. Five workers were convicted of
 "arousing national enmity" but were released because they
 "repented." Their factory collective has responsibility for
 punishment.
 Heavy industry and overall investment remains
 disproportionately targeted at areas within the R.S.F.S.R.
 This policy has contributed to limited and uneven economic
 growth in the non-Russian republics and required the import of
 non-Russian labor, thereby forcing migration to the Russian
 republic of minorities from other republics.
 This migration speeds the process of Russianization as the
 minorities are separated even from the limited cultural
 institutions permitted in their native republics. The same
 result has been accomplished in Estonia, Latvia, and
 
 
 1066
 4UNIONWOF-SOVIET SOCIALIST-REPUBLICS
 Lithuania, all of which have relatively small populations, by
 doing the reverse. There, the establishment of Soviet
 industries and the accompanying influx of Slavic workers
 during the past 40.years have-reduced the proportion of the
 indigenous nationality in the total population to a
 conaiderable-extent.   .
 Certain ethnic groups suffer particularly harshly from Soviet
 repression of human rights activists. The situation in the
 Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic exemplifies the extent of
 Russianization. In a 1987 article in Literaturna Ukraina,
 Ukraine's capital, Kiev, was reported to have only 34
 Ukrainian-language-schools, compared with 152 Russian-language
 schools; in historically important Zaporizhia, there are 95
 Russian-language schools and only one Ukrainian-language
 school; in the cities of Donetsk, Voroshilovgrad, Nikolayev,
 and Chernigov, there are no Ukranian-language schools at all.
 Ukrainian history,-culture, and religion are often ignored or
 distorted.. Russianization is also apparent in-the publishing
 field; in a recent year, less than 3 percent of the books and
 brochures published in the U:S.S.R. were in Ukrainian, an
 -insufficient number to serve the,19 percent of the Soviet-
 populatkoltiVing in the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic.
 The development -of the Ukrainian language (as well as'all-
 other non-Russianljenguages in the U.S.S.R.) has been furthef
 ,stunted-by the almost exclusive use of-Russian-for scientific
 and technical publications.
 The Crimean Tatars, a Muslim minority-forcibly transported  -
 from-their-historic Crimean homeland to Uzbekistan in! 1944j,
 continue to seek repatriation despite harsh measures by Soviet
 authorities. Tatar representatives came to Moscow in June and
 July.to press;for-,reestablishment of a Crimean Tatar autonomous
 repxiblic." Senior-Soviet officials, including Politburo'member
 Andrey_Gromyko, who is also Chairman of-the Presidium of the
 Supreme Soviet, and Politburo candidate member Pyotr Demichev,
 received Tatar-representatives. On July 9 a commission headed
 by Gromyko-was formed to examine the problem., The Tatars -
 ,demonstrated on -ornear-Red Square on at least three occasions:
 July 6, July 23, and July 25-26. The last occasion included
 an attempted march to Red Square, which was blocked by Soviet
 militia, who acted-with-restraint.
 After a meeting withGromyko on July 27, the Tatars in Moscow,
 numbering between 800-1,000, were forcibly returned to their
 homes. A subsidiary commission was established in Tashkent to
 assist the Gromyko commission, but none of the Tatar leaders
 who had been in Moscow was permitted to participate. Regular
 meetings and demonstrations have been held in a number of
 cities with large Tatar populations. On September 8, the
 official Tashkent commission reportedly sent to the Gromyko
 commission the results of a poll of Tatars in Uzbekistan that
 revealed republic-wide Tatar support for returning to the
 Crimea and establishing an autonomous republic.
 A protest march that was planned to leave Taman' on October 10
 and arrive in Simferopol, in the Crimea October 18 (the day of
 the formation of the Crimean Autonomous Republic) was prevented
 by the~authorities. A number of Soviet newspapers, including
 Pravda Vostoka and Moscow News, criticized the attempted march.
 However, the Soviet authorities in the Kuban and southern
 Ukraine reportedly made some concessions to the Crimean
 Tatars. Some from Central Asia were allowed to register in
 Taman' (almost unprecedented) and Tatar-language schools,
 papers, and a folklore troupe have reportedly been established.
 
 
 1067
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 Most minorities in the Soviet Union suffer official government
 discrimination. Few ethnic minorities are seen in the highest
 levels of nationwide organizations, academic, or governmental
 bodies though they tend to dominate their own local
 organizations, including at the republic level. Jews live for
 the most part assimilated into Russian and Ukrainian cities
 and towns but are largely absent from positions of leadership.
 Government "anti-Zionist" campaigns have served to aggravate
 anti-Semitism. Books such as Aleksandr Romanenko's "Class
 Essence of Zionism," which appeared in bookstores in January
 1987, put forward a crudely anti-Semitic line; in a country in
 which all publishers are government controlled and censored,
 this can only be interpreted as government condoned.
 Unpublished quotas have restricted Jewish entry into
 institutions of higher education; these quotas became
 especially restrictive after large numbers of Jews began to
 emigrate in the 1970's. Closing off avenues to higher
 education effectively closed off professiQnal careers for many
 Jews. At the same time, Soviet authorities took some steps
 against anti-Semitism. In the past, Soviet authorities
 generally have denied that anti-Semitism existed at all; this
 year Gorbachev appealed at the January Central Committee
 plenum to repulse all manifestations of anti-Semitism, and
 Soviet newspapers, including Izvestiya, Sovetskaya Kultura,
 and Komsomol'skaya Pravda carried articles strongly critical
 of anti-Semitism. The Russian nationalist "Pamyat'" society,
 some of whose members have made anti-Semitic remarks, was
 attacked by some government leaders and in the press, though
 it was rumored that some Russian officials supported its
 goals. Restrictions on Jewish entry to institutions of higher
 education reportedly were eased in 1987.
 All imprisoned Hebrew teachers were released this year, some
 ahead of schedule and others at the end of their terms. Those
 released included Yuliy Edel'shtein, Vladimir Lifshits, Leonid
 Vol'vovskiy, Iosef Zisels (also a member of the Ukrainian
 Helsinki Group, and Aleksey Magarik. Hebrew teaching generally
 remains forbidden, however.
 There were increasing numbers of demonstrations and public
 appeals by refuseniks; some resulted in detentions, beatings,
 and press vilification. On September 13, a demonstration
 against anti-Semitism was prevented by the detention of 18
 Moscow Jews. A demonstration on December 6 by refuseniks was
 disrupted.
 Women normally enjoy the same legal rights as men and are
 nominally accorded the right to participate in all areas of
 the social, political, and economic life of the Soviet Union.
 An extensive system of day-care service and maternity leave
 benefits enhances the ability of women to retain employment.
 Virtually all women have no choice but to work both inside and
 outside the home, with women bearing the main brunt of the
 hardship of daily life, such as waiting in long lines for food
 products. Women hold a disproportionate percentage of
 low-level jobs, such as street-sweeping. The difficulty of
 women's lives in the Soviet Union has begun to be discussed in
 *the Soviet press. Men occupy the great majority of leading
 positions in most professions, especially politics. At
 present, 12 of 307 full members of the Central Committee of
 the Soviet Communist Party are women, and for the first time
 in two decades a woman was appointed a Secretary of the
 Central Committee.
 
 
 1068
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 Most members of the Soviet elite (the party, the military, the
 diplomatic service, the scientific-technical intelligentsia,
 and the-cultural and sports establishments) are shielded to
 various degrees from social and-economic hardships. They have
 greater access than the average Soviet to quality food and
 consumer goods, special medical facilities, the best schools,
 foreign travel, automobiles, country houses, and paid
 vacations at choice resorts.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 The.,statutory minimum age for employment of children in 1986
 was 16, and the standard workweek was 40 hours. There is no
 indication of widespread violation of these norms. The minimum
 wage'was set at $112 per month at the official rate of
 exchange. According to the latest Soviet official data, -the
 average-wage is about $272 per month. Soviet law establishes
 minimum conditions of health and safety. According to the
 Soviet press, the laws on maximum hours of work and health and
 safety standards are widely ignored.
 
 
 1069
