 RUSSIA
 The Russian Constitution establishes democratic governance through three
 branches of power with checks and balances: the Presidency and the Government,
 headed by the Prime Minister a bicameral legislature, or Federal Assembly, consist-
 ing of the State Duma and Federation Council; and the courts. The Constitution
 also lays a comprehensive groundwork for observance and enforcement of human
 rights set forth in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
 The constitutional referendum of December 1993, which was concurrent with par-
 liamentary elections, strengthened President Boris Yeltsin's position vis-a-vis the
 legislature. He continued to proclaim his commitment to political reform and the
 transition to a modern market economy. Nevertheless, the process of institutionaliz-
 ing democracy and a modern market economy lagged due, in part, to the slow enact-
 ment of laws and development of regulatory institutions, widespread unfamiliarity
 with democratic and markeL, principles, and a reaction against 'democrats" and free
 market advocates because of social dislocation.
 The Federal Counterintelligence Service (FSK) is responsible for internal security
 issues, including foreign intelligence activity in Russia, drugs, terrorism, and state
 corruption. The Federal Border Service is broadly responsible for the security of
 Russia's external borders. The Minist  of Interior (MVD) is responsible for the  -
 lice, prison system, and paramilitary forces used to maintain public order., Legisa-
 tive oversight of these organizations is tenuous at best, and some MVD prison and
 police personnel have committed human rights abuses.
 Russia is a vast country with a wealth of natural resources and a diverse indus-
 trial base. It made significant progress in 1994 in its ongoing transformation from
 a centrally planned economy to a market-based one. Over 70 percent of enterprises
 are now privatized, and the majority of workers are employed outside the state sec-
 tor or in both the private and state sectors. However, by official measurement, gross
 domestic product continued to fall and unemployment to rise, and the Government
 continued to battle inflation and deficit spending.
 The overall human rights record in Russia in 1994 remained uneven. The concept
 of the rule of law has yet to be institutionalized and implemented. In his desire to
 combat rapidly increasing crime, President Yeltsin signed two decrees in June,
 which contradict constitutional rights to protection against arbitrary arrest and ille-
 gal search, seizure, and detention. The Constitutional Court, the only body having
 the authority to settle constitutional disputes, remained inoperative because of gov-
 ernmental inability to fill vacancies. Courts of general jurisdiction, with several no-
 table exceptions, remained timid in asserting their authority. Moreover, edges gen-
 erally feel uncomfortable with the idea of having the duty and responsibility to de-
 clare actions taken by the executive branch and regional authorities as unconstitu-
 tional.
 In August Sergey Kovalev, the Human Rights Commissioner, (a position provided
 for in the Constitution), published a highly critical report on the human righ at -
 ation in 1993, noting that law enforcement officials reportedly beat and physically
 abused detainees; military officers failed to discipline those who engaged in
 "dedovshchina," the violent hazing of conscripts, which led to numerous deaths and
 injuries; and prison officials appeared unable to correct life-threatening situations
 in pretrial detention centers.
 Claiming the need to prevent Chechnya's secession from Russia, Russian troops
 crossed into the Russian Federation's Republic of Chechnya on December 11. Begin-
 ning in late December following major Chechen resistance, there was massive aerial
 and artillery bombardment of Checfnya's capital, Groznyy, resulting in a heavy loss
 of civilian life and hundreds of thousands of internally displaced persons. These ac-
 tions were in conflict with a number of Russia's international obligations, including
 those concerning the protection of civilian noncombatants and notification of troop
 movements. In late December, Human Rights Commissioner Kovalev accused Rus-
 sian troops of violating human rights on a "massive scale" in Chechnya. The inter-
 national community and human rights nongovernmental organizations (NGO's)
 called upon both parties to respect international humanitarian law and the human
 rights of noncombatant civilians.
 Although freedom of speech and press is widely respected, there were physical at-
 tacks on journalists by unknown persons and at least one killing. Journalists report-
 ing on the conflict in Chechnya were harassed and threatened. Other human rights
 abuses include official and societal discrimination against people from the Caucasus,
 some continuing societal discrimination against Jews, violence against women, lack
 of attention to the welfare of children and the handicapped, and bureaucratic obsta-
 cles to the development of independent labor unions.
 
 
 935
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no known political
 killings by agents of the Government, but the line between politically motivated
 killings and criminal activities has become difficult to dsinguish .
 Dmitriy  holodov, an investigative reporter for the newspaper Moskovsky
 Komsomolets who was to testify in the State Duma on corruption in the Russian
 army in East Germany, was killed on October 17 when he opened a package alleg-
 edy containing documents on the army's illegal arms sales. Many journalists charge
 complicity in the killiby high-level Defense Ministry officials (see Section 2.a.).
 Law enforcement authorities have been unable to stem an upsurge in contract
 killings and extortions aimed at Russian businessmen (especially biinkers). These
 criminal activities are in part a result of the ongoing struggle for commercial and
 financial markets in which there is deep Mi    and sometimes Mafia and govern-
 ment) involvement. On December 2, elements of the President's Security Service
 staged a raid on the headquarters of "Most" bank in central Moscow, injuring sev-
 eral bank security guards. While results of the Government's inquiry into this inci-
 dent were pending at year's end, businessmen expressed concern about the authori-
 ties' inabflity to provide protection and stability and to curb Mafia intimidation.
 The violent hazing and cruel treatment of new recruits by soldiers [dedovshchina]
 continued to cause a number of deaths which the Committee of Soldiers' Mothers,
 a human rights group, asserts have been covered up by military authorities as sui-
 cides or accidental deaths (see Section 1.e.).
 At year's end, Russian military forces attacking the city of Groznyy, the capital
 of the breakaway Russian Republic of Chechnya, utilized disproportionate force and
 inflicted heavy civilian casualties. (See Section 1.g. for a fuller description of viola-
 tions of humanitarian law regarding internal conflicts.)
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of disappearances.      _ o
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment-
 Article 20 of the Constitution specifically prohibits torture and other cruel, inhu-
 man, or degrading treatment or punishment. A series of laws passed since 1991 es-
 tablish internationally accepted standards for the treatment of persons suspected of
 crimes.
 Practices and conditions worsened in the prison system (including both pretrial
 detention centers and prison camps) because of overcrowding and the failure to ex-
 pand capacity, the Government's lack of sufficient funds for the care and feeding of
 inmates, inadequate supervision by law enforcement and correctional facility per-
 sonnel, and the lack of individual or institutional accountability for violations. The
 lack of funding has also resulted in many prison personnel not being paid, exacer-
 bating prison conditions, particularly in rura areas. The Government is considering
 transferrng responsibility for administration of the prison system from the MVD to
 the Ministry of Justice.The Duma has created a committee to investigate abuses
 in prisons, including those that occur during pretrial detention.
 Overcrowding is becoming severe. A Moscow prison built with a capacity for 8,500
 inmates now houses well over 17,000 and is stil considered better than mot pris-
 ons in the regions. Many prisons were built in the 1930's and have never been ren-
 ovated According to Russian and international human rights groups, many are
 unfit for human habitation as a result of deterioration and-lack of sanitation sys-
 tem adequate for the number of prisoners housed.
 Observera claim that some prisons have stpped feeding prisonera for months at
 a time, relying on inmates' friends and relatives to bring in rations which are
 shared among all inmates. According to the Society for the Guardianship of Peniten-
 tiary Institutions, the lack of funding has also led to a crisis in which inmates re-
 ceive medical care and medications only when they are suffering from a life-threat-
 ening condition. Prisoner with infectious diseases are sometimes not separated
 from more healthy inmates, and tuberculosis is widespread.
 Conditions in Russian pretrial detention centera are particularly bleak. One such
 facility in Moscow, Butyrakiy prison, was originally built in the 18th century. MVD
 peronnel have publicly, warned that overcrowding and inhuman conditions under-
 mine the Ministiys ability to guarantee security in such institutions. In some cases,
 detainees lack even the room to sit down, must stand shoulder to shoulder, and
 sleep in two or three shifts. Many detainees suffer from infectious diseases. Many
 of the most severe reported cases of beatings occur in pretrial detention centers
 where officials resort to extreme measures to punish minor infractions of the rules
 as a means to ensure discipline and guarantee their own personal safety.
 Detainees in pretrial detention centers face much worse conditions than convicted
 criminals in prison camps. Moreover, although existing law allows authorities to
 
 
 936
 hold suspects up to 18 months in investigative detention, in practice, thousands are
 held for much longer periods. In some cases, the time a detainee serves in pretrial
 detention is as long as the term he would have served in prison if found guilty.
 Given these circumstances, some detainees choose to confess to crimes they     not
 commit in order to escape the harsh conditions of pretrial detention centers.
 There are widespread, credible reports of beatings by law enforcement officials
 during arrest and by prison personnel during detention and incarceration. Pressure
 on law enforcement officials from the central Government local government, and so-
 ciety to deal with the rapidly increasing crime rate in Russia has led officials to
 overlook heavyhanded practices during arrest and incarceration. Russian human
 rights monitors claim that law enforcement officials are rewarded for bringing cases
 to quick closure and thus routinely deny suspects their right to an attorney and beat
 and intimidate them during questioning to extract a quick confession to a crime. Au-
 topsies are rarely performed to determine the cause of prison deaths.
 The Moscow Center for Prison Reform has spoken with prisoners who have wit-
 nessed abuse and rape of female detainees, but rape and abuse victims seldom reg-
 ister official complaints.
 Police, labor camp, and prison officials harass and abuse persons on the basis of
 sexual orientation. Gay men are particularly targeted for abuse in prisons and labor
 camps. The Society for the Guardianship of Penitentiary Institutions claims there
 are approximately 1,000 gay men in Moscow pretrial detention centers who have not
 been frrmally charged with crimes. The Society also alleges that gay men are sub-
 jected to sexual and nonsexual physical abuse on the part of fellow inmates and
 prison officials and are routinely given low priority in access to services such as
 medical care.
 While the law does not criminalize lesbian relations, it is widely regarded as a
 form of mental illness, and police frequently place lesbians against their will into
 psychiatric hospitals after receiving requests from family members or friends to
 commit the "patient" to an institution for treatment. The Moscow Society for Les-
 bians, Literature and Art alleges that medical textbooks in Russia still include ma-
 terials on clinical treatments for homosexuality as a mental illness. In psychiatric
 hospitals, chemical treatments are prescribed, and lesbians are sometimes beaten if
 they refuse treatment, according to the Society which claims the only way to be dis-
 charged is to renounce their sexual orientation. (See Section 1.e. for a discussion of
 gay men who continue to be imprisoned even though the sodomy laws were repealed
 m 1993.)
 Officers of the armed forces continue to permit, even encourage, dedovshchina, the
 violent and cruel hazing of young recruits which, at best involves forcing recruits
 to perform menial tasks, often outside official duties, and, at worst, leads to beat-
 ings, murder, and suicide. The national military leadership made no moves to imple-
 ment training and education programs systematically to combat dedovshchina, nor
 has the concept of a military police force advanced much past the discussion phase.
 The Committee of Soldiers'Mothers in Moscow and other human rights groups
 note with grave concern that dedovshchina-viewed during the Soviet era as a rite
 of passage-remains a key form of discipline for some military officers. Widespread
 publicity and human rights groups' efforts to eliminate dedovshchina have been suc-
 cessful in individual cases and are very much dependent on local commanders.
 Without effective leadership training and a viable noncommissioned officer corps,
 dedovshchina can be expected to persist. Given current financial difficulties, unit of-
 ficers are often too preoccupied maintaining barely adequate living conditions (or
 taking second jobs to make ends meet) to devote much attention to their troops. The
 Committee claims that the military often covers up deaths due to dedovshchina as
 suicides or accidental deaths. During the first halfof 1994, according to a July re-
 port by Ministry of Defense officials to the Russian legislature, 518 deaths were re-
 cordedin the armed forces, including 74 officers. Of these, 57 percent were due to
 "violations of safety regulations"; 5 percent to "barracks violence"; 8 percent to "pre-
 meditated murder"; and 25 percent were determined to be suicides.
 In addition, the military leadership has yet to address the worsening problems of
 dangerous sanitary conditions, poor food rations, and the use of conscript labor for
 personal or private gain. There is credible evidence that inhumane care and treat-
 ment of soldiers, including lack of suitable housing or shelter, poor nutrition, and
 unsanitary conditions have resulted in outbreaks of disease, notably hepatitis and
 dysentery.
 Officers have subjected soldiers to inhuman and cruel punishment. Acting Pros-
 ecutor General Aleksey Ilyushenko described to the press in September one incident
 in which the commander of the Northern Fleet cruiser "Admiral Gorshkov" pun-
 ished violators of discipline by locking them into a metal pit, some for as long as
 370 days. Seven sailors, who had been incarcerated in a room measuring 4 square
 
 
 937
 meters, were killed when a steam pipe burst in February. This makeshift brig was
 not monitored, and no one else on the ship was aware of the accident until it was
 too late to rescue those confined.
 There have also been allegations of forced labor in the armed forces inuring to
 the private gain of corrupt senior officers. Young conscripts appear to be often used
 as forced labor by senior officers on personal building and construction projects.
 Moreover, the Committee of Soldiers' Mothers claims to have assisted several fami-
 lies whose sons were sold into servitude during their military service. In one case,
 Mikhail Fedotov a Russian soldier serving inethe Russian army in Uzbekistan, was
 allegedly "sold" by a superior officer to local Uzbek inhabitants and forced to work
 from December 1992 to April 1993, after which he was hospitalized for psychiatric
 reasons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exie.--Article 22 of the Constitution states that
 arrest taking into custody, and detention of persons suspected of crimes are per-
 mitted only by judicial decision. Criminal suspects must be arraigned before a judge
 within 48 hours of their arrest. Detainees have the right to have an attorney
 present during questioning following arrest and throughout proceedings up to and
 including arraignment. Detainees have the right to request a court evaluation of the
 legality of detention. If the court finds the detention illegal, the judge has the power
 to order immediate release.
 Nevertheless police make arrests without judicial warrants and detain persons
 without judicia permission beyond the 48-hour time period. In September a member
 of the President s legal advisory board estimated that several thousand people had
 been arrested illegally over the previous 2 years, that one out of every three persons
 arrested was demed the right to legal services, and that 70 percent of detainees
 were held for terms three to five times longer than necessary while awaiting sen-
 tencing. To strengthen the law enforcement authorities' ability to combat organized
 crime, President Yeltsin issued two decrees in June, giving them power to detain
 suspects without charges and without access to a lawyer for 30 days, and to conduct
 warrantless searches and seizures. Law enforcement authorities are credibly re-
 ported to rely on these decrees to avoid abiding by relevant constitutional provi-
 sions.
 The present judicial and criminal investigative systems lack the resources to deal
 with the continuously increasing number of cases. According to the Society for the
 Guardianship of Penitentiary Institutions, due to the Government's inability to im-
 plement a functioning system of release on bail, by the end of 1994 authorities held
 a total of 250,000 people in pretrial detention centers. This amounted to 25 to 30
 percent of the total prison system's population.
 The constitutional right to udicial review of detention within 48 hours of arrest
 is frequently ignored. Russian human rights monitors have documented evidence
 from interviews with detainees that the few who are aware of their rights and com-
 plain of violations are subjected to beatings. Nevertheless, about one in six cases
 of arrest is now appealed to the courts, and judges release one in six of these on
 grounds of insufficient evidence or breach of procedure.
 The Constitution provides for legal assistance for the indigent, but in practice the
 indigent receive little assistance. Local governments lack sufficient funds to pay for
 trial attorneys representing the indigent.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.in the last 3 years, the Government made sub-
 stantial efforts to reform the criminal justice system and judicial institutions. De-
 spite these efforts, judges are only now beginning to throw off the Soviet legacy to
 assert their constitutionally mandated independence from other branches of govern-
 ment.
 The courts of general jurisdiction, or civil courts, are undifferentiated as to func-
 tion and consider criminal, civil, and juvenile cases, although a separate court sys-
 tem dealing with commercial cases exists. Civil courts are organized on three levels:
 district courts, which try the overwhelming majority of cases; regional courts, which
 operate at the provincial level; and a Supreme Court centered in Moscow. All may
 act as a court of first instance, depending on the nature and seriousness of the
 crime.
 While the Constitution prescribes the separation of pwers and the complete inde-
 pendence of the judiciary, judges in practice are totaly depndent on the Ministry
 of Justice for court infrastructure and financial support and on local authorities for
 their housing.
 Prosecutors, like the courts, are organized into offices at the district, regional and
 federation levels. They are ultimately responsible to the Prosecutor General, who is
 nominated by the President and confirmed by the Federation Council. Aleksey
 Ilyushenko, twice nominated by the President for the position, was denied confirma-
 tion by Parliament in 1994 but nevertheless continued to serve in an acting capac-
 
 
 ity. Apart from regions where adversarial jury trials have recently been introduced,
 prosecutors remain very influential in the conduct of court proceedings. Prosecutors
 supervise criminal investigations, which are usually conducted by theMVD.
 Criminal cases at the district and regional court levels are tried by a panel con-
 sisting of 1 judge and 2 lay assessors, or-in the 9 (out of 89) regions where by
 year's end adversaral jury trials have been introduced-defendants in serious crimi-
 nal cases may elect to have their cases tried by a ry. Trials are public except when
 government secrets are at issue. (See Section 2.l regarding Mirzayanov case.) De-
 fendants are required to attend their trials unless they have been accused of a
 minor crime not punishable by imprisonment. They may confront witnesses and
 present evidence. The court appoints an attorney for any defendant who needs one.
 Although the former Supreme Soviet and the present Parliament, with active en-
 couragement of the President's staff enacted many legal reforms, both the Govern-
 ment of the Russian Federation ana regional governments failed to fund their im-
 plementation adequately. According to a Ministry of Justice official, only one-third
 of the $600,000 (1.5 bilion rubles) promised in 1994 for judicial reforms was allo-
 cated, and inflation turned the rest into "a pile of kopeks." As a result, the wide-
 spread reintroduction of adversarial juries is not taking place according to schedule
 because courts are not being renovated, judges are not receiving necessary training,
 and insufficient funds are available to pay for jurors' stipends.
 There are also a few instances in which laws have been reformed or changed, but
 persons previously convicted continue to be imprisoned. The Society for the Defense
 of Convicted Businessmen and Economic Freedoms is aware of a number of pris-
 oners incarcerated for economic crimes, although the number in 1994 is much less
 than in 1993 when there were tens of thousands of such people. The Criminal
 Codes are still in the process of being revised, but already such crimes as bribe-tak-
 ing, currency speculation, and embezzlement carry penalties far less strict than the
 severe consequences, including the death penalty, in effect until 1991.
 The Society for the Guardianship of Penitentiary Institutions, which compiles rel-
 atively reliable statistics, believes there are few, if any, persons still imprisoned for
 sodomy since the repeal of the sodomy law in 1993 and the enactment of Article
 54 of the Russian Constitution which states in part "if liability for an offense has
 been lifted or mitigated after its perpetration, the new law shall apply." Neverthe-
 less, the Society added that many homosexuals were imprisoned or crimes other
 than or in addition to sodomy and, therefore, were not released when the law was
 repealed (though their prison terms may have been reduced, as permitted under Ar-
 ticle 54.)
 In the 80 regions where juries have not yet been introduced, criminal procedures
 are still weighted heavily in favor of the prosecution. For example, the constitu-
 tionally mandated presumption of innocence is often disregarded, and defendants
 are expected to prove their innocence rather than prosecutors proving guilt. More-
 over, rates of conviction remain above 99 percent, as opposed to the 16-percent ac-
 quittal rate among juries. Judges--fearing that an outright acquittal will result in
 a prosecutorial appeal-frequently send cases back to the prosecutor for "additional
 investigation." Tis greatly increases defendants' time spent in pretrial detention.
 The right to an attorney during pretrial questioning is often overlooked. Many de-
 fendants refute testimony given in pretrial questioning, stating that they were de-
 nied access to an attorney or that they were threatened or beaten and only said
 what they thought the aut'horities wanted to hear (up to a full confession) so that
 the abuse would stop. Nevertheless, Russian human rights monitors have docu-
 mented cases in whin convictions were obtained on the basis of the original, illegal
 testimony (after the defendant refuted that testimony in court), and even in the ab-
 sence of other proof of guilt.
 Criminal defendants, and prosecutors in nonjury trials, have the right of appeal.
 In practice, however, superior courts lack the authority to overturn decisions of a
 lower court and may only mandate that the case be retried. The lower court can
 retry the case on the same evidence, reach the same decision, and-since there is
 no legal limit to the number of appeals-the dissatisfied party can appeal again.
 The system, however, is heavily weighted against appeals because (1) te prosecu-
 tion and the courts have a vested interest in clearing the backlog of cases and (2)
 defendants prefer prisons, where better conditions prevail, over pretrial detention
 centers. (See Section 1.c. for a description of conditions in prisons and pretrial de-
 tention centers.)
 In a notable assertion of judicial authority, in what is believed to be the first time
 in Russian history, a Russian court awarded an individual compensation for an arbi-
 trary act committed against him by the State. In March charges of revealing state
 secrets were dismissed against Vil Minayanov who had passed information to the
 Western press concerning Russian violations of international chemical weapons con-
 
 
 939
 ventions. In June a court heard Mirzayanov's suit for damages against the Russian
 Government and ordered the prosecutor's office and Mirzayanov's former employer
 to pay him about $15,000 (30 million rubles) in damages because of malicious pros-
 ecution.
 This victory was short-lived, however, as a Moscow city court in July overturned
 the decision to award damages. After more legal maneuvering between the two
 courts with jurisdiction over the case, the Moscow Chief Prosecutor, according to
 Mimayanov, refused to hear the case again on appeal, citing, inter alia, technical-
 ities such as the lack of a readily identiable defendant in the case. In October the
 research institute which formerly employed Mirzayanov sued him for 33 million ru-
 bles (about $11,000 at the October rate of exchange) in damages, accusing him again
 of fabricating information. Mirzayanov expects the court to try the case in January
 1995. (See Section 2.d. regardingMirzayanov's desire to travel abroad.)
 The case concerning Semyon Livshits demonstrates continuing problems. Livshits,
 a naval officer, was arrested on April 23, 1990, after applying Ior anexit visa for
 Israel. Imitially, he was accu o~. conspiring with Mossad, the Israeli intelligence
 service to turn the submarine on which he was serving over to the Israeli Govern-
 ment. hese charges were later dropped. He was also accused of group rape and rob-
 bery, for which he was tried, convicted, and given a 10-year sentence by a Vladivos-
 tok military court. In October 1992, the Supreme Court struck the sentence, finding
 insufficient evidence and violations of judicial procedure. From March 1993 to April
 1994, Livshit was retried by a Vladivostok court, which again found him guilty and
 resentenced him to 10 years in prison. Livahits p lana to reappeal his case to the
 Military Collegium of the Supreme Court. By yeas end, defense attorneys had pre-
 seated all recpuired documents for the appeal to the ourt in Vladivostok, which in
 turn was preparing the final documents to be sent to Moscow.
 The Constitution provides for a Constitutional Court, and Parliament adopted a
 law establishing one. But by year's end, the Federation Council failed to confun-m all
 the President's nominees, leaving one vacancy on a consequently inoperative Court.
 There were no known political prisoners. In exercise of its constitutional preroga-
 tive, the State Duma declared an amnesty for all those detained by law enforcement
 authorities in the aftermath of the October 1993 crisis, including Ruslan
 Khasbulatov Chairman of the former Supreme Soviet, and Alexander Rutskoy,
 former Vice President.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Article
 25 of the Constitution states that the right to privacy in the home may be violated
 only on the basis of a court decision or in accordance with federal laws. In practice,
 law enforcement organs and internal security forces fail to do this and continue to
 observe the Soviet-era requirement of informing the prosecutor's office of intent to
 enter private premises.
 Article 23 of the Constitution provides for privacy of correspondence and electronic
 communications, except in cases in which a judge issues a warrant. Many Russians
 believe electronic monitoring of residences and telephone conversations continues,
 even if at reduced levels in comparison to the Soviet era.
 Refugee organizations claim that law enforcement officials routinely use informer
 networks to track the whereabouts of persons from the Caucasus, whether resident
 in Russia legally or illegally. General societal discrimination against people from the
 Caucasus area and reports of harassment against these people by law enforcement
 officials lend credence to such assertions.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Vwolations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 fiicts.-The Russian Federation's Republic of Chechnya in the northern Caucasus
 declared itself independent from the Russian Federation in 1991. In the summer,
 the Russian Government intensified its charges against the government of seces-
 sionist President Dzhokar Dudayev, accusing it of repressing political dissent, of cor-
 ruption, and of involvement in international criminal activities. Meanwhile, several
 armed opposition groups financially and militarily supported by Russian govern-
 ment entities sought to overthrow President Dudayev. In August they bombed a
 telephone station and the Moscow-Bak railroad line. The Dudayev government
 blamed the acts on the political opposition and introduced a state ofemergency, fol-
 lowed in September by martial law. Restrictions included a curfew, limits on exit
 and entry procedures, and restrictions on travel by road in some areas. The opposi-
 tion launched a major offensive on November 26 with the covert support of "volun-
 teers" from several elite regular Russian army units. The operation failed to unseat
 Dudayev.
 By December, Russian military forces were actively working to overthrow the
 Dudayev regime. Russian military aircraft bombed both military and civilian targets
 in Groznyy, the capital of the republic. Russian military officials initially denied any
 official involvement in the conflict. Regular army and MVD troops crossed the bor-
 
 
 940
 der into Chechnya on December 10 to surround Groznyy. Air strikes continued
 through the month of December and into January, causing extensive damage and
 heavy civilian casualties. Beyond the large number of civilians injured and killed,
 most residential and public buildings in Groznyy, including hospitals and an or-
 phanage, were destroyed. These actions were denounced as major human rights vio-
 lations by Sergey Kovalev, President Yeltsin's Human Rights Commissioner, and by
 human rights   GO's. The United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
 Jose Ayala Lasso, reiterated his profound preoccupation at the reports of violations
 of human rights and humanitarian law in Chechnya, characterized by a large num-
 ber of civilian victims. The Russian Government announced on December 28 that
 Russian ground forces had begun an operation to "liberite" Groznyy one district at
 a time and disarm the "illegal armed groupings." Dudayev supporters vowed to con-
 tinue resisting and to switch to guer a warfare. (See Section 2.a. for a description
 of the harassment of journalists reporting on the conflict in Chechnya.)
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-During 1994 freedom of speech and press was
 generally respected. The print media, most of which are independent of the Russian
 Federation Government and many of which are privately owned, functioned largely
 unhindered and represented a wide range of opinions.
 The Russian Government has placed intermittent restrictions on Russian and for-
 eign press covering the war in Chechnya, claiming the need to protect military se-
 crets and to ensure journalists' safety. Duma deputy and Human Rights Ombuds-
 man Kovalev, who was in Groznyy for most of the war, reported that the Russian
 Government has "continually hindered the activity of correspondents in the war
 zone * * * and force has been used to interfere with reporters (including) instances
 of mistreatment, death threats, and confiscation of material" He also alluded to
 government pressure on the Moscow press, including threats to dismiss state tele-
 vision chief Oleg Poptsov for airing news broadcasts critical of the Chechnya oper-
 ation.
 The press law requires that mass media publications be licensed by the State
 Committee for the Press. Its former chairman, Boris Mironov, who favored tight reg-
 ulation of the media, was dismissed by the President in September for allegedly as-
 serting he was a Fascist. His successor, Sergey Gryzuno, announced in December
 the closure of the newspaper Al-Kods (an anti-Zionist Palestinian publication gen-
 erally critical of Palestine Liberation Organization leader Yasser Arafat) because of
 noncompliance with a provision of the press law barring non-Russian citizens from
 founding newspapers. Gryzunov also stated he would issue official warnings and
 begin legal proceedings agains t    100 newspapers he considered to be Fascist
 or inciteful of ethnic and racial enmity.
 Regional political authorities resorted to various devices to close down critical
 newspapers. The Glasnost Defense Fund, which monitors press freedom throughout
 the former Soviet Union, recorded dozens of such incidents. Perhaps the best known
 case occurred in early 1994 when Governor Nazdratenko of Primorskiy Kray (Vladi-
 vostok) fired the mayor of Vladivostok and closed down two newspapers which had
 criticized the governor's actions. A radio reporter was also fired and then beaten by
 unknown attackers in September after criticizing the administration.
 Regional political authorities also cited unpaid printing bills or other debts as a
 pretext for closing newspapers that were too critical. Many media organizations are
 liable to pressure by such authorities because they occupy city-owned premises or
 receive subsidies. In towns dominated by a single industrial enterprise, the leaders
 of that enterprise have sufficient power to suppress investigative reporting and dis-
 cussion of embarrassing topics, such as environmental pollution or privatization
 schemes benefiting management.
 Organized crime is increasingly able to exert pressure on the media either be-
 cause of the dire financial straits in which most newspapers find themselves or be-
 cause of the corruptibility of underpaid journalists willing to write articles favorable
 to particular companies, products, or individuals. In addition. opponents of the Gov-
 ernment and journalists have alleged involvement by military officials in the mur-
 der of an investigative reporter. On October 13, one of Moskovskiy Komsomolets'
 journalists, Dmitriy Kholodov, was notified by telephone by one of his contacts that
 a package of very important documents on illegal arms sales by the Russian army
 was waitingt be picked up at the Kazanskiy train station. He retrieved te pack-
 eand, when he opened it in the newspaper building, it exploded, killing him.
 own for investigative pieces on corruption in the military and intelligence agen-
 cies, he was acheduled to testier in the State Duma on alleged orruption in the
 Western Group of Forces, formerly stationed in East Germany. Since Kholodo's
 
 
 941
 death, some journalists covering corruption in the military claim to have received
 anonymous threatening telephone calls.
 In September a well-known television journalist and two executives of St. Peters-
 burg's Channel 5 television network were beaten and robbed in a 1-week period. The
 attacks are widely considered to have had political motives, although the attackers
 remain unknown.
 Broadcasters have a weaker legal basis for freedom in broadcast programming
 and are potentially subject to much greater government control due to the Govern-
 ment's monopoly of transmission facilities and the expense involved in establishing
 and maintaining independent stations. However, stations such as NTV, a privately
 financed Moscow television station, TV6, and other smaller private stations are be-
 gii     to provide competition to state broadcasting in Moscow and other large
 urban centers.
 Television studios at the regional level, formerly part of the central broadcasting
 system during the Soviet era, now operate more or less independently. They func-
 tion as affiliates, opting to use programs from state-owned sources and producing
 local news prog          independently. Local authorities sometimes subject these
 affiliates to pressure. All broadcasters and cable networks, both public and private,
 use foreign lroadcast material.
 In connection with the Russian military action in Chechnya in December, both
 Russian and foreign journalists reported efforts, including harassment and threats
 of force, by Russian officials and military personnel to prevent journalists from en-
 tering certain areas or to influence their reporting. Although formal censorship pro-
 cedures were not established, nor was access to areas of conflict categorically for id-
 den, the Russian Government did not repudiate such efforts by individual elements
 within the military and the Interior Ministry to control or suppress media coverage
 of events in Chechnya.
 The breadth of academic freedom in Russia continues to expand. Virtually all in-
 stitutions of higher learning, from universities to research institutes, enjoy in-
 creased autonomy. While many university rectors and department heads are still
 appointed by the Ministry of Education, a growing number of senior university ad-
 ministrators are now selected by secret ballot in free and open elections. Curricu-
 lums and textbooks are continuously being revised and updated, and many institu-
 tions have developed relations with Western counterparts. The entrenched academic
 nomenklatura (privileged bureaucracy) nonetheless continues to exert influence
 through its control of some resources and privileges.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembl, and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of assembly and association, and the Government generally respects these
 freedoms.
 Organizers of demonstrations must apply for permission to local authorities be-
 tween 15 and 10 days in advance, and officials must respond at least 5 days before
 the scheduled event. Participants in unauthorized demonstrations are subject to
 civil and criminal penalties, including fines, 15-day jail sentences, and stiffer pun-
 ishment. In December Moscow police briefly detained members of the human rights
 organization Memorial for holding an unauthorized protest in front of the Presi-
 dential Administration building against the bloodshed in Chechnya. The authorities
 routinely issued permits for demonstrations throughout Russia in October to mark
 the first anniversary of the violent confrontation between forces loyal to President
 Yeltsin and members of the former Supreme Soviet (legislature). In 1994 there were
 many public demonstrations, few of which were marred by violence.
 All public associations must register their bylaws and the names of their officers
 with the Ministry of Justice. Political parties must also present 5,000 signatures
 and pay a fee to register. There are now over 300 social and political organizations,
 and the authorities are not known to have refused arbitrarily to register any organi-
 zation.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this freedom
 The Russian Orthodox Church continues to gain influence throughout society, in-
 cluding within the Government. The head of the Church, Patriarch Aleksiy I, has
 asserted the Church's belief in complete religious freedom but has been reluctant
 to condemn openly anti-Semitic pronouncements by Metropolitan Ioann of St. Pe-
 tersburg.
 Bureaucratic obstacles to complete religious freedom still exist because the 1990
 Soviet law on religion requires religious groups of 10 or more persons to register
 with local authorities. Some groups view the requirement itself as contradicting
 their beliefs and refuse to register. Failure to register precludes organizations from
 the right to establish schools, own property, or engage in social work. The registra-
 tion process is open to bureaucratic obstructionism, such as lost or delayed applica-
 
 
 942
 tions or denial of adequate facilities. In Vladivostok, city authorities tried to block
 the registration of a Roman Catholic parish, reportedly after pressure from local Or-
 thodox clergy.
 In Krasnodar, after the son of a Pentecostal minister was murdered, the local au-
 thorities claimed a church member killed him and shut the church down. There
 were credible reports that Russian Orthodox believers prevented Pentecostals and
 other evangelical groups from meeting. (See Section 5 for a discussion of religious
 discrimination.)
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation--Citzes are generaly free to travel within Russia. All adults are issued
 internal passports which they must carry while traveling and use to register with
 local authorities visits of more than 3 days. Travelers not staying in hotels usually
 ignore this requirxement.
 The right to choose one's p lace of residence freely, although provided in Article
 27 of the Constitution, is still restricted in practice. Under the pro iska" system
 all citizens must obtain a residence permit. A law passed in July 1993 attemptea
 to change the character of the system from one in which the authorities grant per-
 mission for a citizen to reside in a given location to one in which the citizen simply
 registers to inform the authorities of his place of residence. The law came into force
 on October 1, 1993, but has not been implemented. The authorities of larger cities
 enforce the existing propiska system selectively, often targeting those who are not
 Russian, primarily persons from the Caucasus and Central Asia. In a few cases, in-
 dividuals have appealed propiska refusals in court and won, but such instances are
 rare. Human rights monitors cite these cases as the absurd lengths to which citizens
 must go to enforce observance of basic constitutional rights.
 Some officials have called for abolition of the propiska system, stating that it is
 unconstitutional. However, officials in major cities especially Moscow, staunchly de-
 fend the system, predicting widespread crime and lomelessness if it were abolished.
 Citing this as justification, Moscow city authorities on July 1 imposed a system
 under which nonresidents must pay a daily fee to visit the capital. Furthermore,
 Russian citizens from within the Russian Federation who wish to change their resi-
 dence to Moscow must pay a fee equal to 500 times the monthly minimum wage
 to purchase a permit, while persons from the countries of the Commonwealth of
 Independent States must pay 1,000 times the monthly minimum wage and those
 from all other countries must pay 1,500 times the monthly minimum wage. The au-
 thorities also enforce this system selectively, especially harassing persons from the
 Caucasus and Central Asia.
 Russian citizens also have the constitutional right to emigrate. Under the May
 1991 Soviet law on emigration and foreign travel, which oflicially came into force
 on January 1, 1993, exit permits and formal invitations from abroad are no longer
 required of travelers who are not emigrating. Emigrants need only show an invita-
 tion from any relative abroad or permission to enter the country to which they are
 immigrating. The law, however, continues to restrict the emigration of persons with
 access to state secrets. Special travel regulations apply to some Russian scientists
 wishing to travel abroad temporarily.
 An interagency government commission reviews individual passport applications
 denied on secrecy grounds. Persons have the right to present their case and to call
 expert witnesses to challenge the continued secrecy of the information in question.
 Since the commission began reviewing cases in June 1993, the overwhelming major-
 ity of passport denials on grounds of secrecy have been overturned. The most fa-
 mous case of a refusal of a passport for foreign travel, that of Vil Mirzayanov, a
 Russian scientist incarcerated several times for revealing to a US. journalist that
 Russia continued to violate international agreements on chemical weapons produc-
 tion, was overturned by the commission on August 31.
 The 1991 law also retains the requirement that those intending to emigrate ob-
 tain permission from close relatives in Russia to leave the country. If unable to ob-
 tain this permission, the intending emigrant may pursue a resolution of the problem
 in the courts. In 1994 Russian courts for the first time began to accept such cases
 for review. At least two such cases were resolved in favor of the intending emigrant.
 Before the events of December in Chechnya, estimates of the number of refugees
 and forced migrants in Russia differed widely, with some stating a total of 3.5 mil-
 lion. Forced migrants or resettlers are generally persons with Russian citizenship
 who lived permanently in other states of the former Soviet Union and fled due to
 economic hardship or discriminatory laws. There are three categories of refugees in
 Russia: (1) ethnic-Russians fleeing conflict areas, such as Tajikistan, who are consid-
 ered refugees by the Russian Government and in some cases under the internation-
 ally accepted definition of refugee; (2) nonethnic Russians, such as Armenians and
 Azerbaijanis of mixed marriages, who would face persecution in either Armenia or
 
 
 943
 Azerbaijan and who might be eligible for refugee status; (3) third-country refugees,
 mainly Somalis, Afghans, Iraqis, and Kurds, who could not safely return home. The
 U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees estimates there to be about 50,000 people in
 this third category.
 Many forced migrants resettled to rural areas complain that housing is inad-
 euate, job opportunities are scarce, and they are unprepared to work in agriculture.
 Many areas have refused to accept refugees resettled by the Federa Migration Serv-
 ice (PMS). Human rights monitors allege that the FMS also places unnecessary bu-
 reaucratic obstacles in the way of processing applications of persons from the states
 of the former Soviet Union and sometimes expels newly arrived refugees, who may
 have valid claims to refugee status, across Russia's southern borders.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Pursuant to the Constitution, the Russian people have the right to change their
 government at both the federation and regional levels, although this right under the
 provisions of the 1993 Constitution has not yet been tested in practice. In December
 1993, concurrent with voting on the constitutional referendum, voters elected rep-
 resentatives to the Federal Assembly in national parliamentary elections. This body
 consists of a 450-seat lower house, the State Duma, and an upper house, or Federa-
 tion Council, comprising two representatives from each of the federation's 89 con-
 stituent regions. (The breakaway Republic of Chechnya refused to participate in the
 elections.) The next parliamentary and presidential elections at the federation level
 are scheduled to take place in late 1995 and 1996, respectively, although many
 prominent politicians have called for their postponement.
 President Yeltsin was democratically elected to an exceptional 5-year term in
 1991. After he prorogued the Supreme Soviet in October 1993, he emerged in a
 stronger position politically vis-a-vis the legislature. In order to avoid legislative
 delays in the Federal Assembly and to overcome political opposition in Parliament
 to bills proposed by the Government, the President makes heavy use of his constitu-
 tional power to issue decrees. Although presidential decrees may not contradict the
 Constitution or the Federal Aasembls statutes, the constitutionality of many de-
 crees is openly questioned in the Government and the press. With the Constitu-
 tional Court not yet in operation, there is no entity which may definitively deter-
 mine the constitutionality (and hence the validity) of either presidential decrees or
 legislation of the Federal Assembly.
 In contrast to national political institutions, most executive branch leaders at the
 regional level have yet to be elected by voters. For example, almost all sitting re-
 gional governors were appointed by the President and have not yet stood for popular
 election, although, by contrast, almost all heads of ethnically based republics within
 the Russian Federation have been properly elected. Most regional legislatures, dis-
 banded by presidential decree in 1993, had been reactivated by year's end.
 The Constitution provides for equal rights and freedoms for men and women, but
 women do not occupy many leading positions in politics and government. However,
 the Women of Russia bloc received around 8 percent of the seats in the State Duma
 through proportional balloting. Women hold 8 of the 170 seats in the Federation
 Council and 59 of 450 seats in the State Duma. Although members of Russia's eth-
 nic and religious minorities face no legal limitations on political participation, some
 ethnic and religious minorities face societal discrimination that makes it difficult for
 their members to be elected. Most major ethnic and religious groups, however, do
 have some representation in Parliament.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Numerous local human rights groups were active during the year, including the
 Moscow Helsinki Group, Memorial, the Center for Human Rights Research, and the
 Union of Councils. They investigated and publicly commented on human rights is-
 sues, generally without government interference or restriction. There was one re-
 ported incident in which a human rights group was denied access to several prisons
 for the purpose of conducting inspections, although other groups gained access and
 reported extensively on prison conditions.
 It is perhaps too early to assess the impact of events in Chechnya on the effective-
 ness of human rights organizations in Russia. On one hand, several organizations
 (for example, the Committee of Soldiers' Mothers, Memorial, Glasnost Defense
 Fund) have gotten considerable exposure and recognition both at home and abroad
 for their stand against the incursion. On the other hand, one official government
 response to reports of human rights abuses in the theater of conflict criticized "bi-
 
 
 944
 
 ased" political figures and human rights organizations who fail to see that the situa-
 tion in Chechnya "has made human tragedies and losses actually inevitable.'
 President Yesin late in 1993 established a special Commission on Human Rights
 headed by Sergey Kovalev, a former dissident and political prisoner widely re-
 spectd in human rights circles. By the end of June 1994, the Commission had
 drafted an unprecedented, highly critical report on human rights practices in Russia
 in 1993 which was leaked to the press and then published in full by an official gov-
 ernment newspaper.
 While openly critical of his style and many of his policies, human rights monitors
 ave the President high marks for creating Kovalev's Commission. However, the
 Goverment's dialog with human rights organizations broke down as a result of the
 Russian military operation in the Chechen republic. Activists, including Commis-
 sioner Kovalev, charged the Government with indiscriminate use of force, dissemi-
 nating disinformation, and attempting to muzzle critical reporting in the mass
 media.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Article 19 of the Constitution prohibits discrimination based on race, sex, religion,
 language, social status, or other circumstances. Both official and societal discrimina-
 tion still exist.
 Women.-Although women are entitled to the same legal rights as men, in prac-
 tice they are subject to considerable discrimination, both official and unofficial.
 Women are often paid less than men for equal work and frequently are the first
 to be laid off as enterprises reduce staff because of a societal bias in favor of male
 employment as the primary income for the family. While methodologically reliable
 statistics are difficult to compile, the Center for Gender Studies in Moscow has stat-
 ed that in 1991 women earned on average 75 percent as much as men, while in 1994
 that figure had dropped to 40 percent, and unemployment was three times higher
 among women than among men. Men still disproportionately occupy positions of in-
 fluence and prestige in both the Government and the economy.
 Although the Government maintains no statistics, there is considerable anecdotal
 evidence that violence against women, including rape and spousal abuse, is both
 substantial and growing. Russian human rights monitors allege that police often do
 not take an interest in cases of violence against women, particularly cases of domes-
 tic violence. Incidents often go unreported because of the belief that the authorities
 will do little about the matter and because of the victim's own shame. In the case
 of spousal abuse, there are no specific legal provisions against wife beating, and
 legal recourse such as bringing charges of assault is unlikely to be successful and
 seldom exercised.
 Anecdotal evidence also indicates that rape and sexual exploitation and harass-
 ment in the workplace have grown substantially. According to the Sexual Assault
 Recovery Center, thousands of unrecorded and uninvestigated rapes take place. Po-
 lice reportedly are reluctant to deal with rape complaints because investigating
 them is time-consuming, often unsuccessful, and increases the unsolved crime sta-
 tistics. To prove rape, the victim must have a mass of evidence including material
 evidence of resistance and medical records. Many doctors are also reportedly unco-
 operative, fearing time-consuming mandatory court appearances.
 Statistics on crime rates do not disaggregate cases of trafficking in women, and
 reliable estimates on the extent of the problem are not available. There were few
 instances of persons being prosecuted for such activity in 1994.
 The "Women of Russia electoral bloc focused its campaign on the need for guar-
 anteed health care, education, and social welfare.
 Children.-The Constitution assigns the Government some responsibility for safe-
 guarding the rights of children. However, the Government's efforts to develop an ef-
 fective social safety net are severely hampered by its failure to allocate sufficient
 resources. In particular, living conditions in orphanages are deteriorating, and adop-
 tions by Russian families are declining. Statistics from human rights organizations
 state that about 20 percent of Russian orphans commit crimes and are sent to pris-
 ons as minors, and 10 percent commit suicide. There are indications that orphans
 and other disadvantaged children are becoming instruments of organized criminal
 organizations.
 Indigenous People.-The State Committee for the Development of the North,
 based in Moscow, is tasked with representing and advocating the interests of indige-
 nous peoples. With only a tiny staff, its influence is limited. Local committees have
 been formed in some areas to study and make recommendations regarding the pres-
 ervation of the culture of indigenous people. Indigenous leaders criticize these com-
 mittees as lacking political influence.
 
 
 945
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Discrimination against people from the
 Caucasus and Central Asia increased in the middle of 1994 concurrently with new
 measures at both the federal and local levels to combat crime. With wide public sup-
 port, law enforcement authorities targeted dark-complexioned people for harass-
 ment, arrest, and deportation from urban centers. According to Russian human
 rights monitors, some were dragged from automobiles in traffic, harassed, extorted,
 and beaten in broad daylight on the streets.
 Human rights groups in Moscow criticized the discriminatory procedures under
 which thousands of persons were forced to leave the capital after the June crime
 decrees. However, the crackdown was generally applauded by Muscovites, who
 blame much of the crime in the city on people from the Caucasus and Central Asia.
 Vendors and merchants in Moscow's many markets, and in city markets throughout
 Russia, were also targets of discrimination. Concentrating on persons who by ap-
 pearance seemed to be from the Caucasus or Central Asia, Moscw police forced
 many to halt their business, confiscated their wares, and subjected them to physical
 abuse.
 Religious Minorities.-Muslims comprise about 10 percent of the Russian popu-
 lation, and there were no reports of offical discrimination against them. The Rus-
 sian Government last year facilitated travel on the hajj to Saudi Arabia. Between
 4,000 and 6,000 Russian Muslims made the pilgrimage. There have been tensions
 between Muslims and Christians in some areas, particularly Chechnya.
 The Government of Russia does not condone anti-Semitism. During the January
 1994 Moscow Summit, President Yeltsin joined President Clinton in a statement
 promoting human rights observance that included specific condemnation of religious
 intolerance and prejudice, including anti-Semitism.
 Jewish leaders have increased efforts to revive the Russian Jewish community
 and have received assistance from both local and federal authorities in obtaining
 buildings to reopen synagogues and Jewish schools. The Russian "black book' on the
 Holocaust, whichwas sponsored by Stalin and then suppressed, was published with
 help from U.S. nongovernmental organizations and released in September.
 Nevertheless, anti-Semitism continues to exist and is manifested in acts of van-
 dalism and verbal assaults on persons who appear to be Jewish. On December 30,
 1993, fire destroyed one of Moscow's three synagogues. The Jewish community be-
 lieves, and authorities suspect, that arson was the cause of the blaze. The results
 of the investigation by year's end were still inconclusive. In October a crude explo-
 sive or incendiary device was found in the Moscow Choral Synagogue during an
 evening choir rehearsal. Authorities removed the device, which caused no injuries
 or damage.
 Popular expression of anti-Semitism is particularly evident in politics. Street
 protestors opposed to President Yeltsin often refer to him pejoratively as a Jew, and
 antigovernment graffiti often contains anti-Semitic imagery. Subtle suggestions of
 Jewish heritage manifested through mispronunciation of politicians' names or ways
 they are printed in the press are used as a means to discredit them. The number
 of extreme nationalist and outright Fascist publications which openly promote anti-
 Semitic views and sold publicly is increasing. The governmental agency responsible
 for regulating the print media, the Russian Committee for the Press, in December
 announced its intention to take legal action to stop the publication of some 100 peri-
 odicals it considered Fascist. (See Section 2.a. for a fuller description.)
 Certain political and religious circles, led by Metropolitan Ioann, the Russian Or-
 thodox bishop of St. Petersburg, disseminate strong anti-Semitic views. Patriarch
 Aleksiy 11, the leader of the Russian Orthodox Church, censured Metropolitan Ioann
 for his anti-Semitic statements. Nonetheless, Ioann's followers continue to express
 such views.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Both the 1993 Constitution and the Labor Code pro-
 vide for the right of workers to form or join trade unions. However, the full exercise
 of this right is limited in practice. Labor unions are required to register with local
 authorities, which in the past have used this requirement to discourage or block the
 formation of new unions. However, independent trade unions have become more ef-
 fective in countering obstruction by local authorities.
 Until October 1993, the Federation of Independent Trade Unions of Russia
 (FNPR), the successor to the Soviet-era All-Union Central Council of Trade Unions,
 was the principal obstacle to the exercise by workers of their right to leave the
 FNPR and join new independent unions. It controlled the social insurance fund
 which provides worker benefits, such as disability and maternity payments sick
 leave, and vacations. Hence, many workers were reluctant to leave the FNPiR and
 openly join an independent union.
 
 
 946
 As of October 1993, the Labor Ministry began officially administering the fund,
 but FNPR employees continue to manage the day-to-day operations of local offices.
 As a result, discrimination and the threat of discrimination continue. A leading
 independent labor union allows workers to join without compelling them to resign
 from the FNPR.
 About 70 percent of Russia's 75 million workers are now members of labor unions.
 The FNPR, which had claimed a membership of 65 million, now admits that its
 membership has dropped to about 50 million workers. Independent unions account
 for approximately another 3 million workers.
 Labor unions are independent of the Government and political parties. The FNPR
 was officially allied with the Civic Union, but that relationship disintegrated in late
 1993 because of the FNPR's decision to support the opposition to President Yeltsin
 during October 1993 and the Civic Union's poor showing in the December 1993 elec-
 tions.
 Although the Russian Federation Labor Code provides that workers have the
 right to strike, it also contains numerous restrictions that severely limit the exercise
 of that right. The Labor Code prohibits strikes for political reasons, strikes that pose
 a threat to people's lives or health, and strikes that might have "severe con-
 sequences," interpreted so as to include the defense industry, communications, civil
 aviation, and railroads. The Labor Code requires a multistage process of notification
 and negotiation before a strike is permitted. Despite these restrictions, strikes are
 numerous in Russia. According to the Labor Ministry, there were nearly 400 strikes
 in the first S months of 1994, compared to 264 strikes in all of 1993. Several strikes
 were declared illegal, including a nationwide strike of airline pilots.
 The Government makes little effort to protect trade union leaders and strikers
 from management retribution. In numerous instances in 1994, enterprise managers
 fired workers for their union activities. For example, during a strike at the Avtovaz
 Automobile Factory, management first tried a lockout and then unilaterally declared
 the strike illegal, bringing in police to end the strike. Forty workers involved in the
 strike were fired for violations of "worker discipline." The independent labor union
 that organized the strike is appealing to senior government officials and is con-
 templating court action to reinstate the fired workers.
 Independent labor unions continued to seek redress for labor law violations from
 the Russian courts, with increasing rates of success. They have established two
 labor law centers to help unions and their members enforce their rights in the
 courts.
 Unions are permitted to form or join federations or confederations and may par-
 ticipate in international bodies.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Collective bargaining is pro-
 tected by law but is not practiced widely. The managements of many enterprises
 refuse to negotiate collective bargaining agreements, and many of those that are
 concluded are not the product of genuine collective bargaining because of the close
 subordinate relationship of the FNPR to enterprise management and because of
 management personnel's membership in the FNPR. Independent unions, however,
 have een agessive in demanding genuine ollective bargaining, and one of them
 boasts of concluding 2,000 collective bargaining agreements.
 In several sectors of the economy, labor unions, management, and government
 representatives in a tripartite commission negotiate industrywide wages, benefits,
 and general conditions of work. This arrangement reinforces the workers' tendency
 to rely on the Government to establish wages and other workplace conditions.
 The Labor Code does not expicitly phitaninion discrmination by employers
 although it is implied in several sections. Discrimination against one union in pref-
 erence for another continues to occur throughout Russian industry. Under current
 law, there is no mechanism for resolving labor disputes.
 Russia has several foreign enterprise zones. There is no evidence that worker
 rights are more restricted in these zones than elsewhere in the country.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Labor Code prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor. The Committee of Soldiers' Mothers alleges that some military
 conscripts were sold into servitude during their military service (see Section 1.c.).
 Government enforcement is ineffective.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Labor Code does not permit
 the regular employment of children under the age of 16. In certain cases, children
 aged 14 and 15 may work in intern or apprent'cship prograns. The Labor Code
 regulates the working conditions of children under the age oT 18, including prohibit-
 ing dangerous work and nighttime and overtime work.However, there is anecdotal
 evidence to suggest that the working conditions of children under 18 violate Labor
 Code standards. The responsibility or the protection of children at work is shared
 
 
 947
 by the Labor Ministry and the Ministry for Social Protection, but government en-
 forcment is largely ineffective.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Federal Assembly sets the minimum
 wage, which applies to all workers. The current monthly minimum wage, set in
 July, was 20,500 rubles (or about $6 at the December rate of exchange) and was
 insufficient to provide a decent living for a worker and family. However, very few
 workers actually receive the minimum wage. Its primary purpose is to serve as a
 baseline for computing benefits, pensions, and some wage scales (primarily in civil
 service positions).
 The Labor Code provides for a standard workweek of 40 hours, which includes
 at least one 24-hour rest period. The law requires premium pay for overtime work
 or work on holidays.
 Russian law establishes minimum conditions of workplace safety and worker
 health, but these standards are widely ignored, and government enforcement of
 safety and health regulations is inadequate. Industrial deaths and accidents con-
 tinue to rise dramatically. The Labor Ministry reported that each day 30 workers
 die as a result of workplace accidents, while another 50 are injured.
