 RUSSIA
 cRUSsia continued its profound political, economic, and social transformation.
 Dmocratic institutions and practices are evolving but are not fully developed. The
 Cnstitution approved by voters in 1993 provides for a democratic government com-
 prised of three branches with checks and balances. The executive branch consists
 of an elected president as its leader and agovernment headed by a prime minister.
 There is a bicameral legislature (Federal Assembly), consisting of the State Duma
 and the Federation Council, and a judicial branch, For the first time in Russia's his-
 tory as an independent state, its head of state was chosen in a competitive election.
 It was judged largely free and fair. The judiciary showed signs of limited independ-
 ence.
 The Ministry of Internal Affairs (MVD), the Federal Security Service (FSB), the
 Prcuracy, and the Federal Tax Polic e woresponsible for law enforcement at all lev-
 els of government throughout the Russian Federation; the MVD also oversees most
 of the prison system. In addition to its core responsibilities of security, counterintel-
 ligence, and contrerterrorism, the FSB has broad law enforcement functions, includ-
 ing fighting crime and corruption. The FSB operates with only limited oversight by
 otherocuracy and the courts. The military particiated inthe conflict in Chechnya
 and s occasally used for riot control. Some members of the security forces contin-
 ued tio commit human ights abuses.
 For the past years, Russia has been in the process of transition from a centrally
 hanned t a market economy. Real gross domestic product had fallen 34 percent
 srom t e 1991 level by the end of 1995. The transformation has affected nearly
 every sector of the economy as labor resources shift from the former Soviet Union's
 emphasis on industrial out ut to a greater balance among production trade, and
 services. Industrial output has shrunk from being over 75 percent of the country's
 economic activity in the 1980's to less than 40 percent in 1996. The energy and raw
 material sectors account for most of industrial output and constitute the majority
 of expors. Organized crime is active in many sectors of the economy. Per capita in-
 come is $3,400. A sharp reduction in inflation and stabilization of the exchange rate
 led incmes to  rw significantly for the ffst time since the beginng of the transi-
 tion. ncome disparities have increased dramatically since the downfall of com-
 munism, and about_23 percent of the population live below the poverty line. By mid-
 year official unemployment was 9 percent. Wage arrears were the cause of many
 strikes, including hunger strikes, and other forms of civil disturbance.
 The Government's human rights record showed little progress in 1996. Domestic
 and foreign human rights groups continued to document serious violations of inter-
 national humanitarian law and human rights in the Republic of Chechnya by both
 Russian  military and Chochen     seoaratist forces. Violations committed by Russian
 fores continued to occur on a much larger scale than those of the Chechen separat-
 ists. Russian forces engaged in the indiscriminate and disproportionate use of force,
 
 
 1083
 resulting in numerous civilian deaths. They also prevented civilians from evacuating
 from areas of imminent danger and humanitarian organizations from assisting civil-
 ians in need. These actions were in conflict with a number of Russia's international
 obligations, including those concerning the protection of civilian noncombatants. Se-
 curity forces were  so responsible for disappearances in Chechnya. Chechen forces
 executed some members of the federal forces and repeatedly seized civilian hostages.
 Both parties to the conflict at times used torture mistreated prisoners of war, and
 executed some of them. Tens of thousands of civilians were killed and over 500,000
 persons displaced since the conflict began in December 1994.
 In August the two sides initiated a cease-fire and for the remainder of the year
 made steady progress toward a political settlement. Russian troops completed their
 withdrawal from Chechnya, leaving the separatist forces in effective control of the
 Chechen Republic. The two sides agreed to hold elections in early 1997 and to re-
 solve Chechnya's status within 5 years.
 Although the Government has made progress in recognizing the legitimacy of
 internationally recognized human rights, the institutionalization of procedures to
 safeguard these rights has lagged. Implementation of the constitutional provisions
 for due process, fair and timely trial, and humane punishment made little progress.
 In addition the judiciary was often subject to manipulation by political authorities
 and was plagued by large case backlogs and trial delays. Lengthy pretrial detention
 remained a serious prob em.
 In one high visibility case that was fraught with numerous violations of due proc-
 ess, Aleksandr Nikitin-a former navy captain who was researching the environ-
 mental dangers of nuclear waste from the Northern Fleet-was detained by the FSB
 for 6 months without charge on suspicion of espionage and revealing state secrets
 crimes possibly punishable by death. He was subsequently charged formally and
 later released pending trial.
 There were reports that law enforcement and correctional officials tortured and
 severely beat detainees and inmates. Prison conditions worsened and are extremely
 harsh. According to human rights groups, between 10,000 and 20,000 detainees and
 prison inmates died in penitentiary facilities, some from beatings, but most as a re-
 sult of overcrowding, inferior sanitary conditions, disease, and lack of medical care.
 In the military, the practice of "dedovshchina" (the violent hazing of new
 conscripts) continued. The Government and human rights groups offered sharply di-
 vergent estimates of the number of soldiers who died as a result of abuse or suicide.
 Arbitrary arrest and detention remained problems. Police and other security
 forces in various parts of Russia continued their practice of targeting citizens from
 the Caucasus for arbitrary searches and detention on the pretext of maintaining
 public safety.
 In the face of a variety of obstacles, the media continued to represent a wide
 range of opinion. The major print media organizations functioned relatively
 unhindered by the Government, although there was evidence that the broadcast
 media did not give equal time to candidates in the presidential election campaign.
 The media reported ffeely on the Chechen conflict despite *overnment pressure and
 heavy-handed treatment of journalists by Russian troops m the war zone. Several
 journalists were killed during the war, some deliberately, others accidentally; other
 journalists were kidnaped. In addition journalists elsewhere in Russia covering con-
 troversial issues were subjected to pressure and physical violence, including death.
 The effort to institutionalize official human rights bodies stalled. In January
 Sergei Kovalev resigned as chairman of the Presidential Human Rights Commission
 to protest President Yeltsin's human rights record. Parliament failed to pass a law
 establishing a human rights ombudsman, a position that is provided for in Russia's
 Constitution and is required of members of the Council of Europe, to which Russia
 was admitted in February. With a few important exceptions, however, nongovern-
 mental organizations (NGO's) documented and reported on human rights abuses.
 The Government continues to restrict freedom of movement. Violence against
 women and abuse of children remain problems, as do discrimination against women,
 and both religious and ethnic minorities.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no confirmed political
 killings by agents of the Government. However, several journalists-including some
 covering the war in Chechnya-and government officials were murdered under sus-
 picious circumstances. Some of these crimes have been attributed to organized crime
 or business disputes. In addition, 10,000 to 20,000 detainees and prison inmates
 died after beatings by security officials or due to harsh conditions (see Section 1.c.).
 
 
 1084
 During the war in Chechnya, the Russian military continued its practice of using
 excessive force and targeting civilian populations, resulting in numerous casualties
 (see Section 1..g.).
 Ten journalists have been killed by unknown assailants for their coverage of the
 war in Chechnya since December 1994-4 of them in 1996-according to the Com-
 mittee to Protect Journalists. The body of Nadezhda Chaykova, a newspaper cor-
 respondent who had been missing for several months, was found in the Chechen vil-
 lage of Geikhi on April 11. Chaykova had been severely beaten, blindfolded, and
 shot in the back of the head. Chaykova was the author of articles on human rights
 violations in the Russian "filtration camps" in Chechnya. The body of Nina
 Yefimova, a correspondent for the newspaper Vozrzhdeniye, was found m Grozn
 on May 9. She ha been kinaped and then shot repeatedly in the back of the head.
 According to news reports, Yenova had received threats m connection with her ar-
 ticles.
 Elsewhere in Russia, some journalists investigating crime and official corruption
 were also killed. Oleg Slabynko was killed in January, soon after producing a tele-
 vision program on government corruption. Photographer Feliks Solovev, who free-
 lanced for the German newspaper Bild, was killed in Moscow on February 26.
 ViktLor Mikhaylov, a journalist for Zabaykalskiy Rabochiy, was killed on May 12 in
 Chits while working on a series of articles on crime and the work of Russian law
 enforcement. At year's end, no one had been charged with these murders.  _
 Several government officials were the targets of violent attacks, although the as-
 sailants' motives in many instances remained unclear. Prime Minister Viktor
 Chernomyrdin's personal physician, Dmitriy Nechayev, was shot and killed on April
 26, perhaps for political reasons. Deputy Justice Minister Anatoliy Stepanov was
 killed b a blow to the head on May 23, reportedly after a dispute with an old
 friend. V iktor Mosalov, the Mayor of Zhukovskiy, a town outside of Moscow, was
 shot and killed on June 13. Gaina Borodina, acting head of the Moscow Oblast Jus-
 tice Administration, was shot and killed in her apartment building in Podolsk on
 June 25. Ganid Gamidov, Minister of Finance in the Republic of Dagestan, was
 killed on September 23 by a car bomb that exploded next to the Dagestani Ministry
 of Finance building.
 There were several high-proffle murders involving members of Russia's financial
 elite and other prominent figures. It is unclear whether any of these killings were
 politically motivated, and most appear to be linked to organized crime or business
 disputes. According to MVD figures cited in press reports in May and June, 560 of
 the 32,000 murders in 1995 were contract killings (twice as many as in 1994). The
 MVD reports that only 22 per cent of such cases are ever solved.
 In November prminent American businessman Paul Tatum was murdered in
 Moscow. Although the authorities pledged to investigate the case vigorously, no sus-
 pects have been identified.
 The administration of capital punishment continued to raise procedural and hu-
 manitarian concerns because of the secrecy with which such cases are treated.
 In June a Moscow oblast court acquitted a suspect in the case of the murder of
 Aleksandr Men, a Russian Orthodox priest murdered in September 1990, ruling
 that the defendant was under duress and had given a false confession. Men's family
 had publicly stated that they believed that the evidence against the suspect was fab-
 ricated.
 The high-profile murder case of Vladislav Listyev, a journalist and television exec-
 utive killed in 1995, remained unsolved, as did the murder of Dmitriy Kholodov, a
 Moskovskiy Komsomolets journalist killed in 1994.
 In December six ICRC workers were murdered and a seventh wounded in an
 ICRC compound, which was located in a region under the effective jurisdiction of
 the Chechen separatists. By year's end, no suspects had been identified, although
 there were widespread suspicions that the crime was committed by persons who
 sought to derail the peace process.
 Three terrorist bombings, apparently politically motivated, occurred in Moscow
 during the summer. A bomb exploded in a Moscow subway on June 11, killing four
 people. A second bomb explodecron a Moscow bus on July 11; a third bomb exploded
 in Moscow on July 12. No one has been charged in these attacks.
 b. Disappearance.-Both federal and Chechen separatist forces used hostage tak-
 ing, including of civilians, as a tactic in the Chechen conflict (see Section 1.g.).
 American relief expert Fred Cuny, who disappeared in Chechnya in April 1995,
 is believed to have been killed. His body still had not been located by year's end.
 No trace has been found of American photojournalist Andrew Shumack, who dis-
 appeared in July 1995 after reportedly entering Chechnya.
 Police logged a number of reports about the disappearances of Russian citizens,
 particularly young men, elderly people, and children. Most were attributed to crLmi-
 
 
 1085
 nal foul play rather than to any political motivations. According to press reports
 some of the young men reported as missing had been rounded up and conscripted
 for military service when they could not prove that they had performed their na-
 tional service.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or DegradinV Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits torture and other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treat-
 ment or punishment. However, prisoners' rights groups have documented numerous
 cases in which law enforcement and correctional officials tortured and beat detain-
 ees and prisoners. Russian forces and Chechen separatists used torture during the
 Chechen conflict (see Section 1.g.).
 Law enforcement officials have admitted unofficially to the Moscow Center for
 Prison Reform (MCPR) that they use torture to coerce confessions from suspects,
 often by cutting off oxygen with a plastic bag or a gas mask. (The latter method
 is referred to as the "elephant" torture in which oxygen is slowly cut off until a sus-
 pect agrees to confess.) Guard brutality is rampant and notorious. In addition to
 raping and severely beating inmates, guards have been known to pour chlorine on
 cell block floors and cut off ventilation.
 In a February report, the Presidential Human Rights Commission noted that ex-
 isting legal norms and administrative instructions failed to provide specific, clear
 regulation of the application of physical force and that this allowed 'the use of im-
 permissible physical coercion directed against prisoners virtually without restraint."
 The practice of "dedovshchina," the violent hdazing of new recruits in the military,
 MVD, and border guards continued unabated. Dedovshchina includes various forms
 of physical and mental abuse, including the use of recruits as personal servants of
 more senior soldiers. Soldiers often d not report hazing to officers for fear of repris-
 als. In 1995 the Ministry of Defense (MOD) reported that 392 military personnel
 died from various noncombat related causes one-third from suicide. The Mothers'
 Rights Foundation and the Soldiers' Mothers" Committee believe that many of those
 who committed suicide were driven to do so by violent hazing or in fact died from
 abuse. Although the Mothers' Rights Foundation has not compiled complete figures
 for 1996, the group estimated that thousands of soldiers died in 1996 as a result
 of criminal acts by fellow soldiers or officers, by committing suicide or by not receiv-
 in sufficient medical attention. The Foundation stated that few of'these cases were
 referred to the courts.
 Senior MOD and MVD officials acknowledged that hazing is a problem but allege
 that it is difficult to eradicate given the quality of recruits, who are often youths
 raised on the streets who have spent time in prison. According to press reports, 5.2
 percent of recruits have a criminal record. Military leaders claim to make every ef-
 fort to punish both soldiers and officers who take part in or allow hazing. But there
 are credible reports that many officers continue to permit-and even encourage-
 dedovshchina, and that some officers hit recruits because they are "inattentive to
 their duties." In a number of units, hazing is at such high levels that officers have
 been ordered to sleep in the barracks until the situation improves. In Augst Itar-
 Tass reported that a preliminary investigation into the suicides of two sailors on a
 ship in the Arctic Sea attributed one of the deaths to brutal hazing from fellow sail-
 ors. Also in August, 30 MVD soldiers from Perm Oblast deserted, complaining of
 "unbearable," vicious hazing. They returned after a few days once a senior com-
 mander guaranteed their safety. Six soldiers suspected of hazing the recruits were
 sent to military prison and criminal cases were opened against them.
 Despite the magnitude of the problem, the national military leadership apparently
 made no moves to implement training and education programs to combat
 dedovshchina systematically, nor was there any apparent progress in establishing
 a military police force.
 The systematic abuse of psychiatry as a form of punishment has declined dramati-
 cally from Soviet-era practice, although human rights groups charge that psychiatric
 hospitals continue to conceal their archives and their practices. There were no re-
 ports of sane persons committed to psychiatric institutions.
 Conditions in almost all pretrial detention centers and many penitentiary facili-
 ties worsened during the year and are extremely harsh and even life threatening.
 Yuriy Kalinin, head of the MVD's Main Directorate of Internal Affairs stated in
 1996 that "the conditions in our pretrial detention centers can be classifed as tor-
 ture under international standards. That is, the deprivation of sleep, air, and
 space."
 According to the law "On the Detention of Those Suspected or Accused of Commit-
 ting Crimes," which came into effect in July 1995, inmates must be provided with
 adequate space, food, and medical attention. Although most of its provisions were
 due to come in effect by the end of 1996, the authorities were not able to ensure
 compliance, primarily due to lack of funds and of a bail system. The law mandates
 
 
 1086
 provision of 2.5 square meters of space per detainee. However, detainees in SIZO's
 (investigative isolation wards) averaged only 1.6 square meters-only 0.9 square
 meters in urban areas. Under such conditions, prisoners sleep in shifts, and there
 is little, if any, room to move within the cell. At Kresty, St. Petersburg's largest
 sIZe, 5 to 15 prisoners are held in cells that were built 100 years ago to hold 1
 prisoner. In most pretrial detention centers and prisons, there is no ventilation sys-
 tem. Cells are stiflingly hot in summer and dangerously cold in winter. Matches
 won't l  tin many SIZO cells during the summer because of a lack of oxygen.
 Health, nutrition, and sanitation standards in penitentiary facilities declined due
 to a lack of funding. It is estimated that the MVD was able to provide only 15 to
 20 percent of needed medications and medical care. Tuberculosis is perhaps the
 most serious health problem. The MCPR has asserted that rates of tuberculosis are
 40 times higher in prison than in the free population, and death rates of those in-
 fected with tuberculosis in prison are 17 times higher than for those outside. Every
 month 2,000 former prisoners with active tuberculosis are released. Head lice, sca-
 bies, and various skin diseases are prevalent. It is estimated that MVD penitentiary
 facilities were able to provide only 60 to 70 percent of the daily food rations they
 envisioned providing. Prisoners and detainees typically rely on families to provide
 them with extra food.
 Statistics are very closely held on the number of detainees and prisoners who
 were killed or died and on the number of law enforcement and prison personnel
 sanctioned for use of excessive force. According to Russian human rights groups, be-
 tween 10,000 and 20,000 detainees and prison inmates died in penitentiary facilities
 throughout Russia, some due to beatings, but most as a result of overcrowding, infe-
 rior sanitary conditions, or lack of medical care. During 1996 the MCPR reported
 that according to official MVD statistics over 3,000 detainees died in IVS's (tem-
 porary holding isolators) and SIZO's and over 9,000 convicts died in prisons and
 penal colonies. The MCPR, however, reports that many detainees are transferred to
 hospitals just before dying so as to deflate the official mortality rate. Although hun-
 dreds of MVD officials have reportedly been dismissed for "unacceptable behavior"
 (usually corruption), there are no reports of any cases of law enforcement or correc-
 tional officers being punished for abusing detainees or convicts.
 The penitentiary system is centrally administered from Moscow. The MVD, the
 Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Defense, and the Ministry of Education all main-
 tain penitentiary facilities. The MVD) oversees about 85 percent of the prison popu-
 lation, which the MCPR estimated to be about 1,150,000 at the beginning of 1996.
 There are five basic forms of detention in the MVD correctional system.
 IVS's are detention centers in police stations where suspects are held upon arrest.
 Approximately 70,000 individuals spent time in IVS's in 1995. Under the Criminal
 Procedure Code, suspects can be detained in an PIS for up to 3 days; in practice,
 however, a presidential decree permits this period to be extended for up to 30 da
 Conditions n IVS's vary onsiderably, but are as a rule harsh. In most cases, de-
 tainees are not fed and have no beddng, sleeping place, running water, or toilet.
 SIZO's are prison-like detention centers where those awaiting cornletion of crimi-
 nal investigatio  trial, sentencing, or appeal are confined. At the en of 1996, there
 were about 170SIZO's holding some 300,000 suspects. Convicts are on occasion im-
 prisned in SIZO's because there is no money to pay for them to be transported else-
 where. Conditions in SIZO's are extremely harsh. A suspect can be detained in a
 IZe for 18 months or longer while the criminal investigation is conducted. In 1995
 the average length of detention was 10 months (see Section 1..). Men and women
 are separated, but juveniles are routinely detained with adults charged with serious
 crimes because guards have found less abuse occurs than when juveniles are seg-
 regated from adults. Family access is not usually permitted.
 ITK's (correctional labor colonies) are penal institutions, divided into minimum
 and maximum security, which handle the bulk of the convicts, a total of 722,000
 in 743 facilities at the beginning of 1996. Conditions in IT=s are, as a rule, much
 better than those in SIZO's and prisons, with the exception of the 158 timber correc-
 tional colonies where hardened criminals serve and where beatings, torture, and
 rape are common. A number of colonies have their own factories where prisoners
 work.
 "Prisons" are penitentiary institutions for those who repeatedly violate the rel-
 atively lax rules in effect in ITK's. At the beginning of 1996, there were 13 prisons
 with about 4,750 inmates. Conditions in many prisons are extremely harsh. Al-
 though they are not as crowded as SIZO's, guards severely discipline prisoners to
 break down resistance. Prisoners are humiliated, beaten, and starved.
 VTK's (educational labor colonies for juveniles) are prisons for juveniles 14 to 20
 years of age. At the beginning of 1996, there were 61 VTKs holding 20,900 juvenile
 
 
 1087
 
 offenders. Conditions in VTKs are significantly better than in 1TKs, but juveniles
 in VTKS and juvenile SIZO cells suffer greatly from beatings, torture, and rape.
 In JanuaryPresident Yeltsin approved the MVD's project to reorganize criminal
 procedures and the penal system in order to bring Russia's penal system in line
 with international standards. The President's Commission for Prison Reform mon-
 itors prison conditions and has prepared recommendations and legislation for re-
 form. None of these efforts have made demonstrable progress.
 Inadequate supervision by guards and brutal conditions have resulted in grue-
 some crimes, including murder and cannibalism, by inmates. According to MVD sta-
 tistics in 1995 there were 102 murders and 230 incidents of serious bodily harm
 in M~D penitentiaries. Violence among inmates, including beatings and rape, are
 common, as are elaborate inmate-enforced caste systems in which informers, homo-
 sexuals, rape victims, child molesters, and others are determined to be "untouch-
 able* and treated very harshly.
 Moscow human rights groups make frequent visits to the prisons in the Moscow
 area, but they have neither the resources nor a national network to investigate con-
 ditions in all 89 regions.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution provides that the ar-
 rest, taking into custody, and detention of persons suspected of crimes are permitted
 only by judicial decision. However, the Constitution's transitional provisions specify
 these provisions will not go into effect until a new criminal procedure code is
 adopted, which is not expected until late 1997 at the earliest. The new Criminal
 Code that was passed in 1995 was scheduled to go into effect at the beginning of
 1997.
 In the absence of measures to implement the procedural safeguards contained in
 the Constitution, suspects were often subjected to uneven and arbitrary treatment
 by officials acting under the present Criminal Procedure Code and "temporary" pres-
 idential decrees. The current code gives procurators authority to issue an order of
 detention without a judge's authorization and, if police believe that the suspect has
 committed a crime or is a danger to others, he can be detained for up to 48 hours
 without a warrant. The Constitution and the Criminal Procedure Code provide that
 detainees are entitled to have a lawyer present from the time of detention, during
 quesioning folo"wing detention, and throughout investigation up to and including
 formal charging. However, the President's 1994 decree on combating organized
 crime allows law enforcement authorities to detain persons suspected of ties to orga-
 nized crime for up to 30 days without explanation of the reasons for detention and
 without access to a lawer. Authorties employed this decree extensively during the
 year. President Yeltsin s July 10 decree on combating crime in Moscow goes even
 furher, allowing officials to hold unregistered residents suspected of crimes for up
 to 30 ays and in certain cases to expel them from Moscow. In addition suspects
 feaet y fear exercising their rights to request judicial review of their detention
 and access to a lawyer out of fear of angering the investigating officer.
 Valeriy Shchelukhin, who is currently being held in a p retrial detention center,
 contested the constitutionality of severalprovisions in the decree and on May 27 the
 Constitutional Court began reviewing the legality of the 1994 decree's provision that
 suspects can be held for 30 days without being charged.
 The Criminal Procedure Code specifies that only 2 months should elapse between
 the date an investigation is initiated and the rte  fie is transferred to the proc-
 urator so that he can file formal charges against the suspect in court. However, in-
 vestigations are seldom  completed ta      ickly. Detainees are sometimes held
 longer than the maximum investigation period. nme suspects spend 18 months or
 longer in detention under harsh conditions (see Section 1.c.). The oe d provides that
 the regional procurator may extend the period of criminal investigation to 6 months
 in complex" cases. If mg re time is required in "exceptional" cases, the Procurator
 General can personally extend the period up to 18 months. Extensions of the inves-
 tigation period are often issued without explanation to the detainee. Until the inves-
 tigation is completed, the suspect is under the jurisdiction of the procurator's office
 and the Ministry of Internal Affairs. There is no procedure for a suspect to plead
 guilty during the investigative period, although if a suspect informs the investigator
 that he is guilty, the period of the investigation is usually shorter than if he main-
 tains his innocence.
 The use of bail is extremely rare in Russia, even if suspects are not flight risks
 or have not been charged with violent crimes. This agvates crowding in pretrial
 detention and, due to delays in bringing cases to trial, results in many suspects re-
 maining in pretrial detention for longer than the maximum penalty they might face
 if convicted.
 Delays also plague the trial stage. Although the Criminal Procedure Code requires
 court consideration to begin no more than 14 days ater the judge issues the order
 
 
 1088
 
 designating where the trial will take place, the congested court system fr-equently
 produces long postponements. Some suspects actually serve the length of their sen-
 tence while awaiting trial.
 Some human rights organizations believe that the authorities have taken advan-
 tage of the systems procedural weaknesses to arrest people on false pretexts for ex-
 pressing views critical of the Government. The case of Aleksandr Nikitin, a retired
 Russian naval captain who was detained for much of the year, was fraught with se-
 rious violations of due process, suggesting that his detention was politically moti-
 vated. The FSB detained Nikitin in St. Petersburg in February on suspicion of espi-
 onage and revealing state secrets, a crime punishable by a jail sentence or even
 death Nikitin had been working with a Norwegian environmental foundation,
 Bellona, to publish information on the dangers posed by the nuclear waste gen-
 erated by the Northern Fleet, where Nikitin had served. Nikitin and Bellona have
 demonstrated that all of the information they published was from open sources.
 The FSB detained Nikitin without charge for over 6 months before charginghi
 with treason and forgery. The authorities unsuccessfully attempted to deny Nikitim
 the right to choose his own legal counsel. The Government's case hinged on Nikitin's
 alleged violation of a secret 1993 MOD decree that Nikitin did not have access to
 because he had retired in 1992. Prosecution under the decree was also contested on
 constitutional grounds: the Constitution specifies that 'any normative legal enact-
 ments affecting human and civil rights, freedoms, and duties cannot be applied un-
 less they havebeen officially published for universal information." Furthermore, nei-
 ther Nikitin nor his lawyer was shown the findings of the expert panel on which
 the chartges are based. Amnesty International oncluded that Nitin was being held
 for political reasons. In December the Federal Deputy Prosecutor ordered the FSB
 to release Nikitin on his own recognizance, because the FSB had no legal grounds
 for holding him in jail before his trial.                         _
 Human rights activists maintain that Yuriy Shadrin was detained because of his
 intention to speak to Moscow jurists about abuses involving the judiciary in Omsk.
 Shadrin was arrested on an automobile-related charge that does not require pretrial
 detention and held for over 1 month. He immediately embarked on a hunger strike
 and prominent activists brought his case to the attention of the Moscow authorities.
 He was released in December.
 Charges against Sergey Belyayev, a lawyer and trade union activist in
 Yekaterinburg, who had been detained, were dropped in February (see Section 6.b.).
 The Government does not use forced exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary; the development of an independent judiciary continued but slowed consider-
 ably. Judges remain subject to some influence from executive, military, and security
 forces, especially in high profile or political cases. The Government's inability to
 fully fund the operations of the justice system further undermined the independence
 of the judiciary, preventing it from acting as an effective counterweight to the other
 branches of government. In addition judges remain dependent on local authorities
 for allocation of a variety of benefits.
 The court system is divided into three parts: the courts of general jurisdiction,
 with the Supreme Court at the apex; the arbitration (commercial) court system,
 headed by the High Court of Arbitration; and the Constitutional Court. The Con-
 stitutional Court is assuming a more active role in the judicial system after it was
 reestablished in early 1995 following its suspension for over 1 year. The Court has
 been asked to rule on a variety of cases involving the Presidents authority, the im-
 munity of parliamentaiy deputies, parliamentary organization, the State's citizen-
 shipmuolicy, and the constitutionality of oblast legislative actions. To date, however,
 the ourt has had limited success in enforcing its decisions.
 Disputes between business entities are tried in the system of courts of arbitration,
 which onsists     o                                  ofof Arbitration. There are
 82 courts of arbitration with over 2,000 judges. These courts hear over 360,000 cases
 per year. If a party to a civil suit is a private citizen, the dispute must be handled
 yacourt of general jurisdiction.
 Throughout Russia there are abut 15,000 judges in approximately 2,500 courts
 of general jurisdiction at the district, regional, and federation level. A part from the
 arbitration courts, there are no courts of special jurisdiction to handle cases such
 as domestic relations or probate. Within the regular court system, 90 percent of the
 civil and criminal cases are heard by trial courts of general jurisdiction called
 "rayon" courts. Only a limited category of cases involving the most serious crimes
 fall directly under the original jurisdiction of the next level of courts-the oblast (re-
 gional) court. Serious cases, such as those involving murder, can be tried by one of
 three methods: a judge and a panel of two "people's assessors-" a judge alone; or
 a jury. However, the latter is possible only in the nine regions where jury trials
 
 
 1089
 
 have been authorized. A decision of lower courts can be appealed through intermedi-
 ate courts up to the Supreme Court. All higher courts have discretionary trial juris-
 diction.
 Procurators, like the courts, are organized at the district, regional, and federation
 levels. They are ultimately responsible to the Procurator General, who is nominated
 by the President and confirmed by the Federation Council. They supervise criminal
 investigations conducted by the MVD, except in serious crimes like murder where
 the procurator actually conducts the investigation. They then submit the results of
 their investigation to the judge or panel of judges. Procurators are quite influential
 in nonjury trials, which are inquisitorial, not adversarial.
 The code provides for the court to appoint a lawyer if the suspect cannot afford
 one. The Society for the Guardianship of Penitentiary Institutions is often called
 upon by judges to provide legal assistance for suspects facing charges and trial with-
 out any representation. This Society operates primarily in Moscow, although it uses
 its connections throughout Russia to appeal to legal professionals to take on cases
 of the indigent. However, in many cases the indigent receive little legal assistance,
 because funds are lacking to pay for trial attorneys for them.
 Because the right to a lawyer during pretrial questioning is often not exercised
 (see Section 1.d.), many defendants recant testimony given in pretrial questioning,
 stating that they were denied access to a lawyer or that they were coerced into giv-
 ing false confessions or statements. Nevertheless, human rights monitors have docu-
 mented cases in which convictions were obtained on the basis of original, illegal tes-
 timony which the defendant refuted in court, even in the absence of other proof of
 guilt.
 In the 80 regions where adversarial jury trials have not yet been introduced,
 criminal procedures are heavily weighted in favor of the procurator. The judge or
 panel of 4udges conduct the trial by asking questions based on their prior review
 of the evidence. The constitutionally mandated presumption of innocence is often
 disregarded, and defendants are often expected to prove their innocence, rather than
 the procurators proving guilt. Judges, fearing that an outright acquittal will result
 in a procuratorial appa, fre   ently send cases back to the procurator for "addi-
 tional information. This greatly increases the defendant's time spent in the SIZO
 (see Section 1.c.).
 Adversarial jury trials, at the option of the accused in cases where there is a risk
 of a death penalty, were introduced in 1993 in Stavrpl kray and Saratov Ryazan
 Ivanov, and Moscow oblasts and in 1994 in Ulyanovsk and Rostov obiasts and
 Altay and Krasnodar krays, overing 23 percent of Russia's population. The Depart-
 ment of Judicial Reform of the State Legal Administration of-the President, which
 is charged with reintroducing jury trials to Russia, plan to expand jury trials to
 12 new regions, including the cities of Moscow and St. Petersburg, the Republic of
 Karelia, and Chelyabinak oblast. This expansion, which was proposed for 1996 but
 delayed due to lack of funds, would extend access to jury trials to approximately
 half of Russias population.
 In June the Al-Russian Council of Judges adopted a resolution expressing lack
 of confidence in Justice Minister Valentin Kovalev because courts had received less
 than one-fifth the sums required to cover administrative costs and other expenses.
 Some courts stopped hearing cases. In October the support staff in 17 of 19 St. Pe-
 tersburg courts went on strike because they had received no salary for over 2
 months and only about one-quarter of their pa for the preceding 8 months. Justice
 officials also are at risk physically; two were killed in 1996 (see Section L.a.), and
 court personnel are routinely threatened. Court security is minimal due to a lack
 of funds.
 Journalist Valeriy Yerofeyev, editor of a Samara weekly called Vremya-Iks, was
 taken into police custody in September 1995 after writing a number of articles about
 city police officers accepting bribes from owners of -'massage parlor" brothels.
 Yerufeyev started this series of articles in the spring of 1995 and was not deterred
 by 3 days of police detention in June 1995 during which he said that he was beaten
 by police and warned to stop writing. In July Yerofeyev was convicted of procuring
 the services of prostitutes following a closed trial by a court in Samara. He was sen-
 tenced to 10 months (exactly the amount of time he had spent in pretrial detention)
 and was released.
 Viktor Orekhov, a former KGB officer who assisted dissidents under the Soviet
 regime, was released in March after serving 8 months of his reduced sentence of
 1 year. Orekhov was arrested for illegally possessing a firearm shortly after he
 made unflattering remarks in an article about his former boss, now the FSB chief
 of intelligence for the Moscow region.
 Semyon Livshits, a naval officer who was convicted after he had applied to emi-
 grate to Israel, was freed from a Krasnoyarsk labor camp on July 2 and emigrated
 
 
 1090
 to Israel. Livshits had served 6 years of a sentence on criminal charges that many
 human rights activists regard as fabricated. The Government's handling of his case
 was marred by serious procedural flaws.
 Chechen separatists have announced that they will institute the use of the Shari'a
 (the Islamic legal code) in areas that they control. Three men were executed for rape
 by a Shari'a court in September. Offenses such as trespassing and drunkenness are
 punished by canings
 There were no confirmed reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correqpondence.-The
 Constitution states that officials can enter a private residence only in cases pre-
 snbed by federal law or on the basis of a judicial decision. It permits the Govern-
 ment to monitor correspondence, telephone conversations, and other means of com-
 munication only with judicial permission. It prohibits the collection, storage, utiliza-
 tion, and dissemination of information about a person's private life without his con-
 sent. The implementing legislation necessary to bring these provisions into effect
 has not yet been passed. In 1995 legislation was passed that gave broad authority
 for the FSB to utilize domestic surveillance and to conduct searches of private resi-
 dences, with only limited oversight by the courts and the procuracy. These measures
 remain in force. There were reports of electronic surveillance by government officials
 and others.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.,In the conflict with the secessionist Republic of Chechnya, Russian forces
 continued to commit numerous, serious violations of human rights and international
 humanitarian law. Russian forces used indiscriminate and excessive force without
 regard for the presence of noncombatants, prevented civilians from evacuating areas
 of imminent danger, blocked humanitarian assistance from reaching civilians in
 need, mistreated detainees who may or may not have had any links with separatist
 forces, and tolerated incidents involving groups of federal soldiers engaging in mur-
 der, rape, assault, extortion, and theft. The Chechen separatists also committed
 human rights violations, though on a lesser scale. Both sides deployed antipersonnel
 landmines. A cease-fire agreed to in August resulted in a dramatic reduction in vio-
 lence during the final 3 months of 1996. By year's end, all federal troops had de-
 parted Chechnya.
 Estimates vary of the total number of casualties caused by the war. Interior Min-
 ister Kulikov claimed that fewer than 20,000 civilians were killed while then-Sec-
 retary of the National Security Council Aleksandr Lebed asserted that 80,000 to
 100,000 had been killed and 240,000 had been injured. Chechen spokesmen claim
 that the true numbers are even higher. Human rights groups estimate that over
 4,300 soldiers from the federal forces were killed. In addition international organiza-
 tions estimate that up to 500,000 people have fled Chechnya during the war. Many
 ethnic Chechens have returned since the conflict ended, but a majority of ethnic
 Russians are likely to resettle elsewhere. Since many records were destroyed during
 the war and many of the refugees who departed Chechnya are undocumented, the
 true numbers of casualties and refugees may never be known.
 In numerous well-documented incidents, federal troops used excessive force
 against the separatist forces and recklessly put civilians in harm's way. Federal use
 of helicopter gunships and artillery bombardments were cited as the most frequent
 causes of death among civilians. Breaking a cease-fire shortly after the presidential
 election, federal forces launched a "preemptive strike" on July 10 against Geikhi,
 a village in which Chechen forces said there were no rebel soldiers. The attack,
 which was preceded by aerial and artillery bombardments, killed at least 20 civil-
 ians. Similar attacks were mounted in July against the villages of Mairtup,
 Kurchaloy, and Artury. The brutality of these actions prompted the ICRC to call on
 all parties to respect international humanitarian law, 'in particular to respect and
 protect civilians by refraining from launching indiscriminate attacks, spreading ter-
 rr among the population or using it for military purposes." Attempts by federal
 forces in August to hold Groznyy were also characterized by indiscriminate use of
 air l~ower and artllery, destroying several residential buldings and a hospital, ac-
 oe to credible sources.
 In March federal forces shelled the village of Sernovodsk while refusing to allow
 civilians to leave the area, resulting in numerous deaths. Similarly, in an assault
 on Samnasbki, the federal forces gave inhabitants 2 hours' warning to evacuate be-
 fore shelling commenced. Once the bombardment started, Chechen men were not
 permitted to leave. The relief organization Medicins Sans Frontiers (MSF) reported
 that civilians were often forced to pay federal forces for permission to escape areas
 under attack through "humanitarian corridors;" in some cases however, civilians-
 including women-were fired upon while transiting these corridors. In Samashki the
 human rights group Memorial reported that small groups of federal forces forced ci-
 
 
 1091
 vilians to walk ahead of military formations or sit on the outer hulls of armored
 vehicles, making them "human shields." According to Memorial, during the battle
 for Groznyy federal farces occupied a hospital and used patients as human shields.
 Prior to attacks  Russian forces often would encircle a village and issue an ulti-
 matum to surrender weapons, troops, and money or face attack. Often, however,
 even those villages that complied withi those terms were subjected to Russian at-
 tack.
 Domestic and international human rights groups have compiled a substantial
 number of credible accounts of torture and other cruel and inhuman or degrading
 punishment of Chechens by Russian military and internal security forces drn  h
 Chcen conflict. These abuses include beatig of combatants as welld~ thefun
 armed civilians suspected of involvement with, or support for, the secessionist
 Chechen rebels. Amnesty International reported that allegations of rape were made
 against Russian forces.
 Federal forces continued to use 'filtration center" to detain suspected separatists
 and supporters. Detainees were frequently subjected to torture during interrogation
 in these centers. Memorial reports that Russian forces took hostages troug the
 filtration center apparatus-including civilians-and used these hostages to ex-
 change for federal prisoners held by the separatists.
 Incidents were reported in the Russian press of undisci p line ed eral forces engag-
 ing in theft, looting, assault, rape, and murder-frequently while intoxicated. There
 are many documented cases of junior officers and ordinary soldiers participating in
 such incidents.
 In violation of international humanitarian law, federal forces repeatedly denied
 aid organizations access to the victims of the conflict. The MSF reported that "dur-
 ing the systematic attacks on villages and civiians, aid agency vehicles, supples
 and teams     . were "blocked by the military at the roadblocks" and that durin g the
 siege of Sernovosk, "aid was only allowed through 25 days aftr the bombing ended."
 The ICRC reported a number of instances in which its representatives were denied
 access to detainees. Each side claimed that the other was still holding detainees at
 year's end.
 Final responsbility for the conduct of the war in Chechnya by the federal side
 rests with the military leadership and, ultimately, with President Yeltsin as Com-
 mander-in-Chief. Russian military and civilian officials routinely characterized sepa-
 ratist forces as criminal groups or illegal armed formations. Remarks in the press
 in July attroute  d  a  uni   orntified major general typify the attitude toward ac-
 countability projected by the federal forces: "since we are not waging war in
 Chechnya, we do not apply the law on criminal responsibility for crimes committed
 in war and combat." Hutman Rights Watch (HRW) reported that the Russian mili-
 tar procuracy was said to have convicted 27 servicemen for crimes against civil-
 ians, but that "it failed adequately to investigate, let alone prosecute, the most glar-
 ing combat-related violations of humanitarian law."
 Separatist forces also violated international humanitarian law by taking and exe-
 cuting hostages and using prisoners as human shields. In January Chhen forces
 took about 100 civilians hostage in the city of Kizlyar and then transported them
 to Pervomayskoye (both in Da~estan). Following a stand-off of severl days during
 which federal authlorities claimed that hostages were executed, federal forces
 bombarded the settlement, resulting in extensive property damage and killing an
 unknown number of hostages and    ciechen rebels. During the crisis, another group
 of rebels hijacked a passenger ship on the Black Sea with many Russians on board.
 The Turkish Government resolved the incident peacefully.
 After the separatist takeover of Grznyy in August, Chechen forces also carried
 out summary executions of civilians deemed cllaborators. Even after the cease-fire
 came into force, separatist forces detained, tortured, and killed members of the Mos-
 cow-backed administration of Doku Zavgayev. During the Pervomaskoye crisis,
 Chechen separatists tortured, burned alive, and left the remains of tree hosta es
 they had previously abducted from the Chechen Ministry of Internal Affairs.
 separatist commanders; who were effectively functioning as a government by year's
 end, demonstrated no intent to punish violations committed by rebel forces.
 As in 1995, journalists working in hechnya were subjected to violence by both
 warring sides. Several were kidnaped and killed, whie others were used in prisoner
 exchanges even thoug they are noncombatants (see Section 2.a.).
 International relie war er in Checty were often tated in kidnapings, most
 likely by local organized crime groups or segments of the rebel forces.
 Efforts at produit a settlement, though ultimately successful, were uneven. In
 May during the final dys of Yeltsin's reelection campaign, a cease-fire agreement
 was reached that lowered the intensity of the conflnct or several weeks. Kmme-
 diately after Yeltsin's victory, however, the federal forces unleashed an offensive
 
 
 1092
 that caused scores of civilian casualties, as they had in March. In subsequent weeks,
 Lebed took over the negotiations and in August he signed an agreement with
 Chechen commander Aslan Maskhadov that called for an end to hostilities, full ex-
 change of prisoners, and joint administration by a coalition government. The agree-
 ment stated that Chechnya's political status would be decided within 5 years. De-
 spite Yeltsin's dismissal of Lbed, the peace process continued during the fall and
 in November the two sides reached another agreement that called for the with-
 drawal of federal forces by the end of the year and the holding of elections in Janu-
 ary1997.
 e Glasnost Fund established an "international intergovernmental tribunal on
 crimes against humanity and war crimes in Chechnya," which plans to conduct in-
 vestigations and forward its findings to the Russian Procurator General, the Council
 of Europe, and the European Court of Human Rights. The tribunal's members in-
 clude prominent human rights activists from throughout the world.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of the
 press and mass information and the "right of each person to seek, pass on, produce,
 and disseminate information freely by any legal method." The Government generally
 respects these provisions; however, the law contains provisions regarding secrecy of
 information that federal, regional, and local authorities have on occasion chosen to
 interpret broadly in order to limit access to information and to prosecute journalists
 and media organizations publishing critical information. Despite this, the major
 print media organizations, most of which are independent of the Government and
 represent Russia's brad political spectrum, were   able to  work   relatively
 unlhindered. Independent and semi-independent television stations continued to de-
 velop, and the number of small private radio stations, mostly in the big cities, con-
 tinued to increase. Nevertheless, reports of government pressure on the media con-
 tinued, particularly when coverage dealt with the Chechen war, other security relat-
 ed issues, corruption, or criticism of the authorities. Furthermore, journalists were
 killed or beaten, and the Government was criticized for its apparent failure to inves-
 tigate these cases.
 During the presidential election campaign, all candidates had access to the mass
 media, including both free broadcast time granted by law and paid advertising.
 However, candidates complained about unequal access and biased reporting. Accord-
 ing to the European Mass Media Institute, President Yeltsin received more than 52
 percent of television news coverage broadcast time, while his main rival, Communist
 Party candidate, Gennadi Zyuganov, only got 18 percent. Each of the other presi-
 dential candidates received no more than 7 percent. Reports proliferated that senior
 media figures received generous "retainer  from the Yeltsin campaign to assure
 their loyalty and that even junior journalists received compensation for positive sto-
 ries. Immediately after declaring his candida President YeltsIn dismissed Oleg
 Poptsov, the head of Russian state television (ORT), an action that human rights
 organizations asserted was in response to critical coverage of the war in Chechnyn,
 a key election issue.
 Media organs openly appealed to their audiences to vote for a particular can-
 didate, in most cases President Yeltsin, a fact that can be explained not simply by
 government pressure, but also by journalists' fear of a crackdown on the liberal
 media if Communist Party      candidate  Gennadi Zyuganov had     won. Igor
 Golembiovskiy, Editor in Chief of the Moscow-based Izvestiya, said that he and his
 staff had agreed that a Yeltsin victory was "in their interests." In the print media,
 only a few pro-Communist, hardline opposition newspapers, such as Pravda and
 Sovetskaya Rossiya, gave positive coverage to Zyuganov. With some exceptions, jour-
 nalists showed little interest in investigating important campaign issues that might
 have resulted in more balanced coverage.
 The press actively covered the war in Chechnya, providing the Russian and inter-
 national publics with a wide range of information about the conflict despite physical
 danger to journalists and government attempts to restrict access. Tis coverage
 (which was often extremely graphic) was a determining factor in crystalizing public
 opposition to the conflict.
 Journalists were subjected to violence by both warring sides (see Section 1.g.). The
 Glasnost Defense Foundation (GDF) reported that combatants violated journalists'
 rights in Chechnya almost daily. Several journalists were killed (see Section 1.a);
 many were detained and beaten; and some were missing at year's end. Natalya
 Vasenina, editor-in-chief of a newspaper published in Chechnya called Nezavisimost,
 was kidnaped from her home in Groznyy on September 27 and forced into a car by
 two unidentified masked persons. A Chechen spokesman stated that regional and
 state security authorities were searching for her. Vitaliy Shevchenko and Andrey
 
 
 1093
 Basvluka, Ukrainian journalists working for Lita-M Television Corpany, were last
 seen on August 11 in Groznyy. Yelena Fetrova, also of Lita-M, was kidnaped at the
 beginnin o September and was believed held by Chechen forces in Achkoy-Martan.
 Journalists were also used in prisoner exchanges even though they are non-
 combatants. According to the Committee to Protect Journalists, on August 31 fed-
 eral border guards detained Salman Betelgereyev and Bekhan Tepsayev, two
 Chechen journalists from the separatist television channel, at the airport in
 Makhachksla, Dagestan, upon their arrival from Turkey. Federal troops released
 Betelgereyev and Tepsayev on September 22 at the Khankala military base outside
 Groznyy in exchange for Russian MVD troops held by Chechen fighters.
 Foreign and Russian journalists covering the conflict in Chechnya alleged that
 Russian forces fired upon and threatened them. On August 8, Russian army heli-
 copters opened fire on two cars marked WTN (Worldwide Television News, a British
 ompany) and =press." On the same day in Groznyy, Russian troops shot at a Cable
 News Network car. Other reports of abuses by the Russian army included destruc-
 tion of equipment confication of exposed tape, and restion ion of journalists' access
 to certain parts ofChechnya.
 The Committee to Protect Journalists prtested the "restrictive and aggressive
 manner in which Russian authorities" treated journalists in Dagestan during the
 Pervomayskoye events in January (see Section  .).   e newspaper Izvestiya com-
 plained that official attempts to manipulate information were "unprecedented," as
 3ournalists were denied free access to the released hostages. According to Russian
 press reports, the Russian military set up cordons 15 kilometers away from
 ervomayskoye on January 16 and barred journalists from approaching the village.
 One reporter said that his car was fired on at a checkpoint by Russian soldiers; oth-
 ers were attacked by guard dogs at checkpoints. Two Russian journalists working
 for WTN had their equipment confiscated.
 Human rights activists cited govem  ent pressure on the media in the cases of
 Yevgenia Albatz, an investigative journalist, and Valeria Novodvorskaya. Albatz
 was fired by the newspaper vestiya after she had completed a major article expos-
 ig alleged illegal activities by the FSB. Human rights activists charged that F SB
 pressure on the newspaper was responsible for her firing, noting that her editor had
 prmised her article front jpage coverage only days be fore. Journalist and political
 activist Valeria Novodvorskaya was charged in 1995 with "promoting interetbnic
 strife," apparently for her criticism of Russian citizens in Latvia and Estonia. Dur-
 ing her trial the judge ordered an investigation of her organization "Democratic
 Choice." The Supreme Court subsequently overturned this order;, however, her case
 is still pending. Human rights activists assert that the FSB is forcing the judiciary
 to prosecute Novodvoaya.
 Journalists publishing critical information about local governments and influen-
 tial businesses, as well as investigative journalists writing about ciime and other
 sensitive issues, were subjected to threats, beatings, and even murder (see Section
 .a.).Others were assaulted or harassed. In a report on violations of the rights of
 journalists, the Glasnost Defense Foundation found numerous instances of harass-
 ment, including inmancialpressure, physical assaults and threats against journal-
 ists' families. Aleksandr Kltov, a correspondent for Moskovskiye Novosti who had
 just published an article entitled The Chechen Syndrome in the Volga Region," was
 hit over the head with a metal pipe more than 10 times by two men in Saratov in
 Februay.
 In the regions outside the major media markets of Moscow and St. Petersburg,
 local authorities continued to use city-owned media premises, printing facilities, gov-
 ernment subsidies, and charges of libel to pressure the media. Vecherniy
 Neftekamk, a newspaper in Baskortostan, pubhished a series of articles that ac-
 cused Bashkortostan President Rakhimov's family of seizing control of the
 Baskortostan oil industiy and described corruption in the local government. As
 soon as the articles were published, the printing plants in Bashkortostan stopped
 printing the newspaer.n agu     te local prosecutor's office started libel proceed-
 ings against the newspaper's editor, Eduard Khusnutdinov, who also received phone
 threats.
 In June the Tatarstan Parliament passed a law to prohibit insulting and
 humiliatin the President of Tatarstan. According to the new law, journalists found
 guice."od be fined up to $5,900 (30 million rubles) and all copies of their pubica-
 tions confiscated. Tatarstan President Shaymiyev wrote in his letter to the uommit-
 tee to Protect Journalists that Russian law prohibited insulting government offi-
 cials, because doing so 'encroaches upon the justice system and the established
 order of government."
 In September the club of regional editors in chief announced that the head of the
 Komi Rpublic's Administration for Media and Law Enforcement issued written or-
 
 
 1094
 ders to all 23 heads of city and regional administrations in the Republic to begin
 judicial investigations against the newspaper, Krasnoye Znamya, because it had
 published an expose of alleged squandering of funds by senior Komi government of-
 ficials. The President's Judicial Chamber on Information Disputes ruled in October
 that this action was unlawful and requested that the President of Komi take strong
 disciplinary action against his chief of staff who ordered this action. The Chamber,
 however, lacks the authority to enforce its decisions, and no disciplinary action was
 taken.
 Meeting with a group of senior Moscow editors, President Yeltsin promised per-
 sonally to examine each case of absorption of independent news organizations by
 other businesses to prevent media intimidation. YeItsin also said that all cases of
 threats and violence against journalists should be reported directly to his office. The
 Committee to Protect Journalists, however, noted that it had received no response
 to its letters asking the President to investigate the cases of journalists who were
 killed, kidnaped, or harmed.
 The Government's information policy remained restrictive by Western standards.
 Facts, documents, and statistical data are still frequently kept from the press. For
 example according to the GDF, in the Orel region all documents containing statistics
 on the region's economy are marked "not for the press." The secrecy of information,
 and the resistance of senior officials to releasing it, were typically cited as pretexts
 for refusing to provide information. The higher an organization's status, the more
 generally closed to the press it remained.
 Institutions of higher learning enjoy academic freedom; however, extreme finanx-
 cial difficulties have slowed the revision of Communist-era curricula and textbooks.
 In larger cities, private high schools and universities have been formed without any
 government interference.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides citi-
 zens with the right to assemble freely, and the Government respects this right in
 practice. Organizations must obtain permits in order to hold public meetings. The
 application process must begin between 5 and 10 days before the scheduled event.
 Citizens freely and actively protested government decisions and actions. Permits to
 demonstrate were readily granted to opponents and to supporters of the Govern-
 ment.
 The Constitution provides for freedom of association and the Government respects
 this right in practice. Public organizations must register their bylaws and the names
 of their leaders with the Ministry of Justice. In 1995 a registration law was passed
 specifying that organizations had until 1999 to reregister. Despite this provision, the
 Je wi. Agency, an organization operating around the world to promote Jewish cul-
 tural life and to facilitate emigration to Israel, was threatened m April by the Min-
 istry of Justice with closure ofits branch offices because its registration had expired.
 After protracted difficulties, the agency was reregistered as the Jewish Agency of
 Russia on September 13. The Agency's functions, including the facilitation of emi-
 gration to Israel, were unaffected by the reregistration difficulties.
 In addition to submitting their bylaws and the names of their leaders, political
 parties must present 5,000 signatures and pay a fee to register. The Constitution
 and the law ban the participation in elections of those organizations that profess
 anticonstitutional themes or activities.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice. The Constitution also provides for the
 equality of all religions before the law and the separation of church and state. In
 December 1990, the Soviet Government adopted a law on religious freedom designed
 to ut all religions on an equal basis. It forbade government interference in religion
 angestablished simple registration procedures for religious grups.
 The Government does not require that religious groups be registerd. However,
 by being registered, religious groups are able to establis official places of worship.
 Religious groups have not reported problems obtaining registration, although some
 evangelical and other religious groups have not applied. Religious publishing is
 flourishing, and religious books from abroad are widely available. The Government
 does not esignate religion on passports or national identity documents.
 Despite official toleration for various religions, however, many public authorities
 make increasingly less effort to avoid the appearance that the Russian Orthodox
 Church (Moscow Patriarchate) and in some regions, the Muslim religion, have privi-
 leged positions, particularly in the return of church properties and in the allocation
 of pblic fun d for restoration and construction of church properties.
 Te sharp increase in the activities of well-financed foreign missionaries has dis-
 turbed many sectors of Russian society, particularly nationalists and those in the
 Russian Orthodox Church, some of whom advocate limiting the activities of foreign
 religious groups. Some government officials have endorsed this idea. In June Lobed
 
 
 1095
 
 said that he viewed the activities of a number of religious groups as a "direct threat
 to Russia's security." Citing Aum Shinrikyo and the Mormons as examples, Lebed
 described foreign religious sects as "mold and scum" that "corrupt the people and
 ravage the State" and he argued that they should be banned. While Lebed later
 apologized for criticizing the Mormons, he reiterated his opposition to foreign sects
 in Russia.
 About one-fourth of Russia's 89 regional governments have passed restrictive laws
 and decrees that violate the provisions of the 1990 Law on Religion by limiting or
 restricting the activities of religious groups or by requiring registration. Enforce-
 ment is uneven, but there are reports of local governments preventing religious
 groups from using venues such as cinemas, suitable for large gatherings. As a re-
 sult, denominations that o not have their own property are denied the opportunity
 to practice their faith in large groups or to hold prayer meetings. In 1996 the Con-
 stitutional Court refused to consider a challenge to the constitutionality of one such
 law on procedural grounds.
 Although reigious activrity was generally not restricted, some religious groups en-
 countered probl ems. In St. Petersobuin March, polce raided a private apartment,
 disturbing a meeting of the Unification Church that was attended by six Russian
 students and one American. After searching the apartment without presenting a
 search warrant, the police took the American and three Russians to the police sta-
 tion for questioning and forced them to sign statements without the presence of
 legal counsel. There were reports that Jehovah's Witnesses were harassed in
 Tyumen. There was substantial negative Russian media coverage of so-called "totali-
 tarian" or "nontraditional" groups, including such groups as Jehovah's Witnesses,
 the Unification Church, the Church of Scientology, the Church of Christ, Hai
 Krishna, and charismatic-fundamentalist Russian Christian groups.
 Since 1993 governmental discrimination against people from the Caucasus and
 Central Asia, many of whom are Muslims, increase concurrently with new meas-
 ures at both the federal and local levels to combat crime (see Section 2.d.). For ex-
 ample on October 2, a group of 40 OMON (MVD Special Forces) troops disrupted
 eveningprayers at a mosque in central Moscow in order to check registration docu-
 ments of the w         Several Duma deputies demanded a thorough investigation
 of the incident and apologies from the appropriate authorities. The Government has
 not yet investigated the incident.
 Although Jews and Muslims continue to encounter prejudice and societal discrimi-
 nation, they have not been inhibited by the Government in the free practice of their
 religion. In some areas of the country, other religions, including Buddhism, various
 minority Christian faiths, and Shamanism are practiced in accord with local tradi-
 tions.
 For the most part, synagogues, churches, and mosques have been returned to
 communities to be used for religious services, but there have been problems. For ex-
 ample some Roman Catholic churches have not yet been returned, and the Moscow
 Anglican church did not regain full possession of its St. Andrew's Church. In addi-
 tion some religious buildings have been "privatized," and local authorities often
 refuse to get involved in property disputes, which they contend are between private
 organizations. Even where state or municipal authorities still have undisputed con-
 troI of properties, a number of religious communities continue to meet with signifi-
 cant obstacles when they request the return of religious buildings, or when they
 seek to acquire land and necessary building permits for new religious structures.
 Reports from Baptist ministers suggested that the Russian Orthodox Church influ-
 ences the Government regarding land allocated for churches of minority sects.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides citizens with the right to choose their place
 of residence freely. However, the Government continues to restrict this right
 through residential registration rules that closely resemble the Soviet-era "propiska
 (pass) regulations. Although the rules, which came into effect at the beginning of
 1996, were touted as a notification device rather than a control system, their imple-
 mentation has produced many of the same results as the propiska system.
 Citizens must register to live and work in a specific area within 7 days of moving
 there. Russian citizens changing residence in Russia as well as citizens of former
 Soviet republics who decide to move to Russia often face enormous difficulties or are
 simply not permitted to register in some cities, such as Krasnodar. The cost of reg-
 istration is often prohibitive, far beyond the means of most migrants or refugees,
 who usually do not register. In October the fee in Moscow was set at 500 times the
 legal minimum wage, or about $7,500 (40 million rubles). In April the Constitutional
 Court struck down a Moscow city law that gives local officials the right to collect
 high fees for registration, but the Court did not outlaw charging fees or specify how
 much could legally be charged. The mayor's office protested the decision and has not
 
 
 1096
 
 lowered the fees. Those who are not registered cannot work legally, are not eligible
 for social or health services, may not send their children to school, and may not
 vote.
 The Government and residents of Moscow and other big cities staunchly defend
 retaining registration as necessary in order to control crime, to keep crowded urban
 areas from attracting even more inhabitants, and to gain revenue. According to an
 MYD press release, during the first 6 months of 1996, one out of every four crimes
 in Moscow was committed by a non-Musovite. The President's Human Rights Com-
 mission and many human rights groups have condemned the registration system as
 well as the requirement to register visits as infringements upon freedom of move-
 ment that create the possibility of arbitrary enforcement by coiipt local authori-
 ties.
 Discriminatory document searches and expulsions increased in the summer and
 fall. In part in reaction to terrorist acts in Moscow, including a bomb that exploded
 in a Moscow subway on June 11 (killing four people), President Yeltsin issued a de-
 cree on July 10 'On Urgent Measures to Consolidate Law and Order and Intensify
 the Fight Against Crime in Moscow and Moscow Oblast." A second bomb exploded
 on a Moscow bus on July 11. On July 12, at the scene of the explosion of a third
 bomb, the mayor of Moscow Yuriy Luzhkov declared that "the entire [Chechen] dias-
 pora must be evicted from Moscow!" (By contrast, earlier in the month, the mayor
 had publicly criticized police efforts to harass law-abiding Chechens, urging that
 they restrict their attention to those who violated the law.) After announcing that
 "we plan to clear Moscow of both homeless people and dangerous elements,"
 Luzhkov signed a resolution in August ordering the deportation of all unregistered
 people living in Moscow back to the place where they were last registered to live.
 At the end of September, the press reported that 4,051 unregistered people had "vol-
 untarily" departed from Moscow and that 812 were deported under armed guard.
 Although citizens are generally free to travel within Russia, the Government also
 imposes registration requirements on domestic travel. All adults are issued internal
 passports, which they must carry while traveling and use to register with local au-
 thorities for visits of more than 3 days (in Moscow it is 24 hours). However, travel-
 ers not staying in hotels usually ignore this requirement.
 The Constitution provides all citizens with the right to emigrate. The Government
 does not impose more than nominal emigration taxes, fees or duties. On average
 it takes 3 to 5 months to process a passport application, although it can take much
 longer if documentation is needed from elsewhere in the former Soviet Union. Emi-
 grants must have an exit stamp in their foreign passport in order to emigrate le-
 gall.y
 However, if a citizen had access to classified material, police and FSB clearances
 are necessary to receive an external passport. By law the Government can impose
 a moratorium of up to 5 years on foreign travel for citizens who have had access
 to such material, and there were hundreds of people awaiting external passports on
 these grounds. Persons denied external passports can appeal the decision to an
 interagency commission chaired by First Deputy Foreign Minister, Igor Ivanov. In
 1996, the commission granted travel permission to 267 applicants and denied 27.
 Potential emigrants must satisfy all financial obligations, including the obligation
 to support immediate family members who remain in Russia. Members of an emi-
 grant's immediate family can prevent emigration by claiming that the emigrant is
 their sole source of support. "Immediate family" can include parents and children
 and can also include grandparents if the parents of the emigrant are deceased.
 Daughters, however, are relieved of their obligations to support parents when they
 marry. There were a number of cases of persons who were not permitted to emigrate
 because they could not get permission from close relatives, sometimes because of ali-
 mony or child support concerns, sometimes because a cash settlement was desired.
 Emigrants who have permanently resettled abroad, including in Israel, Germany,
 or the United States have been able to visit or repatriate without hindrance.
 Russia has been a party to the 1951 United Nations Convention Relating to the
 Status of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol since 1993. Although the Government pro-
 vides first asylum, effective procedures to determine refugee status have not yet
 been formulated. The Government cooperates with the United Nations High Com-
 missioner for Refugees (UNHCR). The Government is in the process of bringing its
 procedures up to UNHCR standards. Some progress has been made in developing
 appropriate mechanisms in St. Petersburg, where over 250 persons were inter-
 viewed in 1996. However, Moscow is still unable even to process applications.
 Human rights organizations claim that this is part of intentional efforts by the au-
 thorities to rid the city of foreign asylum seekers.
 The UNHCR and Amnesty International are working with the Federal Migration
 Service and border officials to ensure that interviews of potential refugees are con-
 
 
 1097
 ducted in a timely fashion, that the UNHCR is allowed access to potential refugees
 in airport transit lounges, and that deportations of potential refugees are delayed
 until cases are adjudicated. The UNHCR has limited access to the transit areas of
 Moscow's airports. UNHCR officers were barred from entering the transit area of
 Sheremetyevo II airport in Moscow without prior notification. Denying UNHCR offi-
 cials free access to the airport areas contradicts the agreement between the UNHCR
 and the Government. As a result, many would-be asylum seekers were deported
 without access to UNHCR. At the request of the Government, the UNHCR estab-
 lished three suboffices in the North Caucasus to handle the flow of people from
 Chechnya.
 There are two groups of refugees recognized by the UNHCR in Russia. The first
 are citizens of the former Soviet Union, generally ethnic Russians, who wish to emi-
 grate to Russia. For ethnic Russians who wish to emigrate to Russia refugee status
 is usually granted in 5 to 6 months. April statistics indicate that there have been
 137,000 refugees of this type since 1992. The other recognized group of refugees con-
 sists of persons from countries that were not part of the former Soviet Union. April
 statistics indicate that 67 persons have been granted refugee status from this group
 since 1992, including Afghans, Ethiopians, and Bosnian Muslims. Some refugees
 who sought refuge in Russia, such as Kurds, have left the country because cities
 would not issue them residence permits or because they were harassed by the police.
 Local legislation in Moscow, St. Petersburg, Rostov, and other major population cen-
 ters prohibits the settlement of refugees within their cities, and Moscow refused to
 process any applications from asylum seekers. A large number of workers and stu-
 dents from Africa and Asia, who came to work or study in accordance with treaties
 between their countries and the former Soviet Union, remain in Russia. The Gov-
 ernment has not deported them but encourages their return home.
 The Russian Government does not recognize as refugees the Armenians evacuated
 in the wake of ethnic unrest in Baku, Azerbaijan, during the Soviet period. They
 are termed "internally displaced" and remain housed in the Moscow hotels where
 they were initially placed "temporarily. " About half of them have emigrated. The re-
 mainder are unable to return to Azerbaijan, are not accepted by Armenia, and have
 no status or residency permits for Moscow. Without residency permits, the refugees
 cannot legally apply for work nor can they register their children for public school-
 ing. They have rejected offers of relocation to other regions of Russia-because they
 have no assurances of housing or employment. Their situation is becoming increas-
 ingly precarious as the formeriy state-owned hotels in which they reside privatize
 and the new owners exert inancial and other pressure on them to depart.
 Several people in Russia accused of criminal acts, who are politi opposition fig-
 ures in other former Soviet countries, were extradited forcibly without due process.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right o Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 merit
 The Constitution provides citizens with the right to change their government, and
 citizens exercised this right in practice inpresidetia h  leti   July and in par-
 liamentary elections in December 1995, both of which domestic and international
 observers declared to be generally free and fair.
 The Federal Assembly comprises two chambers. The lower chamber, or the Duma,
 consists of 450 deputies, half elected in single mandate constituencies, half by party
 lists. In the December 1995 parliamentary elections, 43 political blocs appeared on
 the ballot. The uppr chamber, the Federation Council, has 178 members-the 89
 chief executives of regional administrations (many of whom had been appointed by
 the President) and the 89 chairpersons of regional legislatures. Under the terms of
 a 1995 law, all members of this chamber must be popularly elected by early 1997.
 The Constitution provides the President and the  eter with substantial
 powers, which they used in the absence of effective opposition from the Parliament
 and courts.
 A democratic election for the President of the Russian Federation took place in
 July for the first time in the history of Russia as an independent state. President
 Yeltsin was reelected on July 3 with 54 percent of the vote in a generally free and
 fair election. The International Foundation for Electoral Systems (IFES) found that
 the technical election procedures have shown continuing improvement since 1993.
 While concluding that the elections were generally free and fair, OSCE represent-
 atives expressed concern about biased election coverage in state-owned media and
 scattered irregularities in some areas, such as illegal proxy voting. The Central
 Electoral Commission (CE) and the court stem have ruled on charges of fraud
 against regional election officials, and the CEO reprimanded candidates or violating
 prohibitions on early campaigning.
 
 
 1098
 Elections in 52 of Russia's 89 regions were scheduled to take place between Sep-
 tember and January 1997. Results m two oblasts were appealed to the regional elec-
 toral commissions based on allegations of vote rigging. In Amur oblast, the incum-
 bent governor appealed the results of the September election after it was announced
 that he had lost by fewer than 200 votes.
 Women are underrepresented in government and politics. In the December 1995
 elections, 46 female deputies were elected to the 450-member Duma, a decrease
 from the 58 female deputies in the previous Duma elected in 1993.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Many domestic and international human rights groups operate freely. With the
 notable exception of Chechnya, most groups investigated and publicly commented on
 human rights issues generally doing so without government interference or restric-
 tions. Most are headquartered in Moscow and have branches throughout the coun-
 try. Some of the more prominent human rights organizations are the-Moscow Center
 for Prison Reform, the Society for the Guardianship of Penitentiary Institutions, the
 Glasnost Fund Memorial, the Moscow Research Center for Human Rights, the Sol-
 diers' Mothers Committee, and the Mothers' Rights Foundation. Regional groups
 which generally do not benefit from any international support or attention, reported
 that locd authorities have obstructed their work and that law enforcement officers
 have begun criminal investigations based on fabricated charges against certain re-
 gional human rights   ups' leaders.
 In September the FSB prevented the Bellona Foundation a Norwegian environ-
 mental group, from distributing its report on environmental hazards in the North
 Sea caused by Russian nuclear vessels, although Bellona had distributed the same
 report unhindered prior to the detention of Bellona employee Alexander Nikitin (see
 Section 1.d.). During Nikitin's detention, the Government restricted the movements
 of Bellona staff members who were visiting Russia in an attempt to assist Nikltin
 with his case.
 The OSCE and the ICRC both reported that their access to areas of Chechnya
 was frequently curtailed by Russian forces. The Government strongly cautioned
 against, but did not speifically prohibit, travel by foreign diplomats and inter-
 national organization staff to Chiechnya. In the wake of the murder of six ICRC rep-
 resentatives and frequent kidnaping, all international organizations except the
 OSCE had withdrawn from Chechnya by year's end.
 Russia's governmental human rights institutions were weakened during the year.
 The Human Rights Commission, created by presidential decree in 1993, which had
 the right to carry out independent investigation of human rights concerns, virtually
 ceased functioning after human rights activist Sergey Kovalev resigned as the hekd
 of the Commission in January in protest of the war in Chechnya. Four Commission
 members resigned in February, the day after releasing the Commission's Report on
 Human Rights in Russia in 1994-95. The Report declared that there had been a
 "visible retreat from democratic achievements" in many areas. The Report also
 noted that there was no official reaction to the Commission's 1993 Report.
 In May President Yeltsin reaffirmed his commitment to the Commission and
 named new members, including law professor Vladimir Kartashkin as chairman.
 The reconstituted Commission is composed primarily of people from the Government
 whereas Kovalev's commission included independent human rights activists. The
 Commission plans to resume publishing a biannual report on human rights. Some
 human rights groups complained that the Commission's focus has changed from ad-
 vocacy of human rights to defending the Government's policy.
 In June President Yeltsin signed a decree entitled "On Certain Measures of State
 Support for the Human Rights Movement in the Russian Federation," which called
 for a high degree of coordination between federal structures and the human rights
 community. Specific measures laid out in the decree included the creation of three
 entities: an interregional human rights center to coordinate human rights activities;
 a human rights training center, and a center publishing human rights literature.
 Regional administrations were instructed to establish bodies analogous to the fed-
 eral Human Rights Commission. The human rights group Memorial reported that
 no action has been taken on this decree.
 By year's end, the Parliament had not approved a law establishing a human
 rights ombudsman. This position is provided for in the Constitution and is a condi-
 tion for membership in the Council of Europe, which admitted Russia as a member
 in Februr.
 In July President Yeltsin established by decree a Political Consultative Council
 (PCC) to assist in the creation of a legal framework for economic and political re-
 forms with 12 standing chambers, including a human rights chamber, headed by
 
 
 1099
 Duma Deputy Valeriy Borshchev and a legal chamber, headed by Boris Zolotukhin,
 a former uma deputy. The PCC meets monthly. The Human Rights Chamber in-
 cludes representatives of the various Duma factions as well as 10 members of the
 human rights NGO community. The Chamber has held hearings on issues such as
 prison reform and has proposed legislation on a death penalty moratorium to comply
 with Russia's obligations to the Council of Europe.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination based on race sex, religion, language,
 social status, or other circumstances. However, both officia and societal discrimina-
 tion still exist.
 Women.-Domestic violence remains a major problem, as victims rarely have re-
 course to protection from the authorities. Police are frequently reluctant or even un-
 willing to involve themselves in what the see as domestic disputes. Many women
 are deterred from reporting such crimes because of this and because the housing
 system makes it difficult either to find housing outside the family dwelling or to
 expel an abusive spouse, even after a final divorce action.
 During the first 6 months of 1996, there were 46,000 rapes reported in Moscow,
 an increase over the first 6 months of 1995. The MVD estimated that 80 percent
 of violent crime occurred in the home. Hospitals and members of the medical profes-
 sion provide assistance to women who have been assaulted. However, some doctors
 are reluctant to ascertain the details of a sexual assault, fearing that they will be
 required to spend long periods in court. Human Rights Watch criticized the Govern-
 ment for failing to provide guidelines for improving police response to violence or
 to call for the adoption of a domestic violence law.
 There is credible evidence that women encounter considerable discrimination in
 employment. At a Duma-sponsored roundtable held on March 5, representatives of
 53 women's associations appealed to the Duma to improve the legal status of women
 by creating a council to assess all draft legislation to ensure that it provided for
 equal opportunities for women and men. In their appeal to the Duma, the women's
 associations' representatives raised their concerns that women form a disproportion-
 ately high percentage (62 percent) of the officially registered unemployed, that
 women are discriminated against in hiring and firing, that the differences between
 the salaries of men and women have increased sharily, and that few women attain
 senior positions. In March the Public Opinion Fund released a poll that indicated
 that the higher the income bracket, the lower the proportion of women. Women
 made up 87 percent of the employed urban residents with a personal income of less
 than $21 (100,000 rubles) a month and only 32 percent of those earning more than
 $315 (1.5 million rubles) a month.
 Human Rights Watch accused the Government of participating in discriminatory
 actions against women, contending that the Government seldom enforces employ-
 ment laws concerning women. Employers prefer to hire men, thereby saving on ma-
 ternity and child care costs, and avoiding the perceived unreliability that accom-
 panies the hiring of women with small children. In July a change in the Labor Code
 went into effect prohibiting women between the ages of 15 and 49 from being hired
 for jobs that are considered to be harmful to their health, including working on the
 night shift. Many of these jobs pay more, allow early retirement, or both.
 In an April survey of female trade unionists conducted by the Institute of Free
 Trade Unions, 20 percent of respondents reported that they were aware of female
 workers in their enterprises being more frequently assigned to the lowest paid work,
 and 28 percent said that women were more frequently laid off or placed on involun-
 tary leave. In the same survey, 16 percent said that women were less likely to be
 promoted, that women with young children were the first to be dismissed, and that
 women were not paid the same wage for the same work (as their male coworkers).
 Almost 14 percent of respondents considered that their enterprises shortchanged fe-
 male workers on benefits, including maternity leave, exemption from night shifts,
 and other benefits.
 Children.-The Constitution assigns the Government some responsibility for safe-
 guarding the rights of children. The State endeavors to provide, within its reduced
 means, or the welfare of children. A new family code regulating children's rights
 and marriage and divorce issues came into effect on March 1. Although the Presi-
 dent stated in March that government policies to improve the situation of children
 were a top priority, the Government had not begun any significant programs in this
 area by year's end. Many Moscow charitable organizations have established produc-
 tive relations with the city government to address the needs of disabled children,
 as well as other distressed groups.
 
 
 1100
 The position of many children has deteriorated since the collapse of communism
 because of falling living standards, an increase in the number of broken homes, and
 domestic violence. According to press reports 40 percent of all children live below
 the poverty line. In November 1995, Dtima bepug! Marya Gaydash stated that 2
 million children under 14 years of age suffer from physical or mental abuse with
 as many as 200,000 dying each year from injuries received at home, usually from
 area   abuse or negl    About 50,000 children run away from home each year,
 Gaydash asserted, and 2 000 commit suicide. To combat the growing number of chil-
 dren being abducted, police organizations, like the Nizhny-Tagil Police Academy in
 Sverdlovsk oblast, are forming programs to protect children.
 The most vulnerable group of children in society are orphans and the mentally
 disabled, who are often given up by their parents to state-run institutions. Human
 rights activists allege that c i dren in state institutions are poorly provided for
 (often because funds are lacking) and in some cases are physiay  used by staff.
 People With Disabilities.-The Constitution does not directly address the issue of
 discrimination against disabled persons. Although laws exist that prohibit discrimi-
 nation, the Government has not enforced them. The meager resources that the Gov-
 ernment can devote to assisting disabled persons are provided to veterans of World
 War H and other military conflicts. Special institutions exist for children with var-
 ious disabilities. The Government does not mandate special access to buildings for
 the disabled. The Society for the Defense of Invalids is working to broaden public
 awareness and understanding of issues concerning people with disabilities.
 Indgenous People.-The State Committee for the Development of the North,
 based in Moscow, is charged with representing and advocating the interests of indig-
 enous people. With only a small staff, its influence is limited. Local communities
 have organized in some areas to study and make recommendations regarding the
 preservation of the culture of indigenous people. People such as the Buryats inSibe-
 ria; the Tatar and Bashkiri in the Urals; the people of the north, including the
 Enver Tafarli, and Chukchi; and others have worked actively to preserve an  de-
 fend their cultures, as well as the economic resources of their regions. Most believe
 that they are treated equally with ethnic Russians within the Russian Federation.
 Religious Minorities.-Muslims, who comprise approximately 10 percent of Rus-
 sia's population, continue to encounter societal discrimination and antagonism.
 There are between 600,000 and 700,000 Jews in Russia. Jews continue to encoun-
 tor societal discrimination, and government authorities have been criticized for in-
 sufficient action to counter it. There were a number of anti-Semitic incidents re-
 erted in 1996, including the desecration of 60 gvestones in St. Petersburg's only
 Jewish emetery; the disruption of a meeting in Orel by representatives of the para-
 military group Russian National Unity; the-ombing of a YarosavI synagogue that
 damaged the library and offices; the robbey and spray painting of anti-Semitic graf-
 fiti in a Jewish center in Smlensk; vandalism of 40 gravestones in a Jewish ceme-
 tery in Kursk; and a bomb attack on Moscow's Marina Roshcha Chassidic Syna-
 gogue which damaged masonry and shattered windows. With the exception of the
 Yarsiavl attack, no suspects have been identified in these crimes.
 In addition antiSemitic themes continued to figure prominently in hundreds of
 extremist publications, and some Russian politicians-includingsome who ran for
 president-made anti-Semitic remarks. Members of Russian National Unity, an
 anti-Semitic organization that uses a modified swastika as its symbol, patrolled two
 Moscow parks, reportedly at the request of local officials. A prominent foreign visitr
 was demed a visa to attend a conference in Russia on Jews in the former Soviet
 Union in July.
 There were, however, a few important judicial developments in combating intoler-
 ant speech. In a notable decision, in March a Yarslavl court sentenced Igor
 Pirozhok, leader of the ne-Nazi group Werewolf Legion, and another Werewolf Le-
 gion member to 5- and 9-year prison terms for murder and inciting ethnic hatred.
 Pirozhok had admitted to Izvestiya that his group commits terrorist acts against
 "Jews, Communists, and domocrata." In February a St. Petersburg court found
 Yuriy Belyayev, head of the St. Petersburg branch of the National Republican Party
 of Russia, guilty of inciting ethnic hatred under the Criminal Code based on an
 interview he gave Izvestiya. However, although Belyayev was sentenced to 1 year
 in prison, he was immediately amnestied under President Yeltsin's 1995 general
 amnesty in connection with the 50th anniversary of World War H.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Ethnic Rma from the Caucasus and Central
 Asia face widespread popular discrimination, which is often reflected in official atti-
 tudes and actions. Since 1993 discrimination against people from the Caucasus and
 Central Asia increased concurrently with new measures at beth the federal and
 local levels to combat crime. Law enforcement authorities targeted people with dark
 complexions for harassment, arrest, and deportation from urban centers (see Section
 
 
</pre>
<pre>
 1101
 
 2.d.). In May Amnesty International sent a letter to the Procurator General's office,
 the MVD, and law enforcement agencies in Moscow demanding that a series of cases
 be investigated in which Moscow police officers threatened and beat Chechen refu-
 gee. In A ugust participants at a rundtable of organizations of the Helsinki Citi-
 zen' Assembly from the Caucasus expressed their concern over Russian authorities'
 intentional policy of open racial and national discrimination against Armenians,
 Georgians, and Azerbaianis. They cited the arbitrary detention, beating, and humil-
 iation of thousands of their compatriots in Moscow and the Moscow oblast as well
 as a campaign in the mass media against those originally from the Caucasus.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The law provides workers with the rights to join and
 to form trade unions, and roughly 65 percent of the work force are nominally orga-
 nized. However, this number includes members of the successor organizations to the
 official Communist unions, which are themselves organized as the Federation of
 Independent Trade Unions of Russia (FNPR). The numerical dominance of the
 FNPR, its continued control over the extensive property and real estate of its prede-
 cessor, and its still-substantial role in the distri ution of social benefits, function as
 practical constraints on the right to freedom of association. Moreover, almost all of
 the formerly official unions include management as part of the bargaining unit.
 In practice the leaders of FNPR unions tend to remain dependent on enterprise
 managers or local political elites. The FNPR uses the leverage it has as the guard-
 ian of social benefits, including health care and recreation and vacation facilities,
 to dissuade workers from joining independent unions. Labor market analysts cite
 polls showing that the majority of workers either do not know that they belong to
 a union at all or belong solely  ecause they believe that they would not be covered
 by social insurance or receive other benefits if they did not pay dues to their union.
 On the national level, trade unions exist independently of the Government, politi-
 cal parties, and other political forces. The independent, or 'free" labor unions sup-
 ported a wide variety of political blocs in the December 1995 parliamentary elec-
 tions. Political parties do not control or interfere in the function of any of the trade
 unions. At the national level, even the FNPR plays a ve independent political role.
 On the regional and local levels, FNPR unions are often closely associated with
 lower-level political bosses.
 Despite the thousands of strikes that took place in 1996, most strikes were tech-
 nically illegal since the labor dispute at issue was not first reviewed by an arbitra-
 tion court. (Frequently, however, local authorities do not bother to have the strikes
 declared illegal.) Unions have complained that arbitration court findings favor man-
 agement. Transportation unions n particular have complained that, because trans-
 portation can be considered an essential service, their right to strie has been effec-
 tively negated.
 There have also been incidents of reprisals for organizing and for strike activity.
 In October 1995, a district procurator initiated a criminal case against Sergey
 Belyayev, chairman of the Yekaterinburg Comradeship of Free Trade Unions.
 Belyayev was particularly active on behalf of the free trade unions and had initiated
 approximately 50 court cases on behalf of union members for wage arrears, failure
 to index payment of back wages, illegal layoffs, violations of collective bargaining
 agreements, and other matters. He was accused of hooliganism, a charge with a
 maximum prison sentence of 5 years, detained, and the local media launched a
 smear campaign against him. -Union members protested the charges against
 Belyayev by picketing the prosecutor's office, and the charges were dropped on Feb-
 ruary 2.
 In March in Lipetsk oblast, workers affiliated with the independent union federa-
 tion SOTSPROF went on strike at a tractor factory over wages unpaid since Decem-
 ber 1995. The oblast procurator began criminal proceedings against the strike's or-
 ga   er, Igor Cherkasov. Investigators searched union premises and seized various
 doments relating to his union activities. In Krasnoyarsk kray the management
 of an aviation company attempted to force three pilots active in the union to accept
 positions as repairmen, janitors, or drivers.
 Unions may freely form federations and affiliate with international labor bodies.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-While collective bargaining
 is protected under the law, its practice is limited by the frequent refusal of enter-
 rise management to negotiate collective bargaining agreements with independent
 labor unions. This has been a particular problem for unions outside of the FNPR's
 organization. For example, the management of an electro-mechanical factory in
 Novosibirsk refused to recognize the independent federation SOTSPROF. In Tomsk
 oblast, the general director of a furniture factory refused to recognize an alternative
 union formed by his workers and ordered the mass dismissal of its members. Dis-
 
 
 1102
 crimination between the FNPR and alternative unions is not confined to enterprises.
 In Upetak oblast the SOTSPROF organized picketing in front of the oblast's admin-
 istration building on July 1, in part to stem discrimination against union members,
 and in part to stop the administration from charging members of alternative unions
 more for vacation packages and other benefits than FNPR members.
 Enterprises in special economic zones and export processing zones must comply
 with the Labor Code.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Labor Code prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor, and there are no documented cases of violations. Soldiers are
 regularly sent to work on farms to gather food for their units. There are documented
 cases of soldiers being sent by their superior officers to perform work for private
 citizens or organizations. However, while such labor might violate military regula-
 tions, it is not clear that it violates International Labor Organization (ILO) conven-
 tions, which do not cover military personnel
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Labor Code prohibits regular
 employment for children under the age of 16, and also regulates the working condi-
 tions of children under the age of 18, including banning dangerous, nighttime, and
 overtime work. Children may, under certain specific conditions, work in apprentice-
 ship or internship programs at the ages of 14 and 15. Although in some instances
 children sell consumer goods on street corners, accepted social prohibitions against
 employment of children and the availability of adult workers at low wage rates com-
 bine to prevent widespread abuse of child labor legislation. According to figures
 cited by a Duma committee, approximately 2 million 14- and 15-year-olds are nei-
 ther in school nor officially at work. There are no reports of children being forced
 to work due to economic necessity, although children working after school in family
 businesses is not unknown.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The monthly minimum wage as of April was
 roughly $15 (75,900 rubles). While this figure does not constitute a living wage
 under prevailing conditions, most people receive several times the official minimum.
 At the same time, much of the population continues to reside in low-rent or sub-
 sidized housing and receive various social services from enterprises or municipali-
 ties. The official minimum wage is primarily a benchmark figure for calculating uni-
 versity stipends, old age pensions, civil service wages, and a host of other social ben-
 efits.
 The Labor Code provides for a standard workweek of 40 hours, with at least one
 24-hour rest period. The law requires premium pay for overtime work or work on
 holidays. Workers have complained of being forced to work well beyond the normal
 week, i.e., 10 to 12 hour days, of abrogations of negotiated labor agreements, and
 of forced transfers of workers.
 Nonpayment of wages was the most widespread abuse of the Labor Code experi-
 enced by workers, and the primary reason for the more than 3,000 strikes that oc-
 curred during the first 6 months of 1996. Nonpayment of wages was a widespread
 and pervasive problem: A May poll indicated that 27 percent of all workers had not
 received their salary for the previous month and 26 percent received their salaries
 late. In the same poll, 34 percent of workers indicated that wage arrears were the
 cause of labor conflict in their enterprise. Wage arrears across industries range be-
 tween 3 and 9 months. The Federation of Independent Trade Unions estimate that
 wage arrears totaled approximately $7.5 billion (40 trillion rubles) in September,
 while government statistics indicated that as of July 8, wage arrears had reached
 approximately $5.6 billion (29.8 trillion rubles).
 Although roughly 4 percent of the workers owed back wages have sought relief
 through th court system, this has proved ineffective, as many enterprises are them-
 selves owed substantial sums by their customers, and some cannot afford to pay
 wages. Others simply chose not to use their funds to pay workers. Although Labor
 itry inspectors have found, as in the case of a Kazan factory manufacturing gas
 fittings, that enterprises owing workers substantial wage arrears have accumulated
 capital funad overseas, and have pursued these cases, individual pumishments have
 not been a sufficient deterrent to resolve the problem. There havebeen various laws
 and presidential decrees issued, but these have had little impact on the problem.
 In order to draw public and Government attention to their plight and to   paoiti-
 cal pressure on enterprises to resolve their wage arrears, workers have resorted to
 mass hunger strikes, demonstrations, picketing, blocking rads, and, occasionally,
 suicide.
 The law establishes minimum conditions of workplace safety and worker health,
 but these standards are not effectively enforced. Workers wear little protective
 equipment in factores, enterprises store hazardous materials n open areas, and
 smoking is permitted near containers of flammable substances. The Labor Code does
 
 
 1103
 
 establish workers' right to remove themselves from hazardous or life-threatening
 work situations without endangering their continued employment.
 Workers were at unacceptably high levels of risk of industrial accidents and
 death. According to statistics compiled for 1995 by the Federal Employment Service,
 21 percent of workers in industry 11 percent of workers in transport, and 9 percent
 of workers in construction labored under conditions not meeting occupational-health
 norms. Particularly egregious conditions were found in the energy industry (80 per-
 cent violating norms), foundries/metallurgical enterprises (60 percent), and under-
 ground transport (50 percent). It is unlikely that occupational safety and health im-
 proved substantially in 1996 compared with 1995, as industrial accidents have con-
 sistently increased over the past 5 years.
