Russia
^he State Department's 1995 report on the Russian Federation presents the picture of a country that remains deeply troubled and divided, while still much freer than it was a decade ago. A practical consensus has yet to emerge in Russia over the priority that should be accorded to human rights, the rule of law and the nature and purposes of democracy. Democratic rule remained precarious at the end of 1995, even after the procedural step forward of the second free Duma elections on December 17. A symptom of that precariousness, which does not emerge clearly enough from the State Department report, was the increasing influence of the Communist Party and the continued fragmentation of the supporters of democracy and reform. The election results confirm the finding in last year's edition of the Critique of "the fragmentation of democratic reform parties in Parliament and around Yeltsin, and the increasing influence of nationalist, agrarian and neo-communist parties." The results confirm also the volatility of the electoral support.
The report is once again wide-ranging and detailed. It contains thorough accounts of serious violations in law enforcement and the administration of justice. These range from widespread police brutality to appalling conditions in pre-trial detention centers, persistent violations of defendants' rights to due process, the holdup in expanding the jury system, and sweeping new investigative powers for the security agencies, which once again have become a force unto themselves. The report expands its coverage of the mistreatment of army conscripts, which reportedly caused the deaths of some 4,000 to 5,000 in 1995.
Under the rubric of "discrimination based on race, sex, religion, etc.," the report notes the increasing violations of the rights of women, including inadequate protection against domestic violence and job discrimination; of children (notably the orphaned and homeless); of indigenous people — especially from the Caucasus; and of religious minorities, including Jews and "foreign" groups such as Jehovah's Witnesses. The coverage of worker rights brings out shortcomings in the protection of labor rights and occupational safety.
177
Critique 1995
Though detailed and balanced in its presentation of facts, the report contains significant omissions in analysis and coverage. It fails to assess the responsibility and impact of the president and his "power ministers" in matters of war and in the failure to provide adequate human rights protections. Analysis is also lacking on the Constitutional Court's guardianship of the rule of law.
The report's expansive coverage of civil liberties omitted three areas of governmental policy which bear on democratic freedoms and governance. These are: access to information; infringements on religious freedom and equality emanating from within the Russian Orthodox Church; and the growth of organized extremism. The report also passes lightly over other threats to democratic rights, such as organized crime and the deterioration in respect for economic and social rights.
The report provides substantial coverage of the extensive violations of humanitarian law by both sides in the Chechnya War, which has produced as many as "tens of thousands of civilians killed and some 500,000 people displaced." The report correctly concludes that: "Violations committed by Russian military forces occurred on a much greater scale than those of the Chechen separatists."
The report alludes to a "major debate over accountability in government for decisionmaking and the Government's commitment to the rights of its citizens and international norms." Yet it remains almost silent on the responsibility of the president and his ascendant conservative advisers and "power ministers" for waging war as a solution to Chechnya's separatism since November 1991. The report cites "Russia," "Russian military forces" or "Russian forces" — and, just once, "government forces" — as violators in the attack on Chechnya, while leaving unmentioned the responsibility of the president and the conservative cabal of security, police and military officials around him in Moscow. As the 1994 edition of the Critique found, "The effect of this is clearly to downplay criticism of President Yeltsin's actions and of his justification for the actions."
President Yeltsin's Human Rights Commission has declared that, "in the magnitude and severity of the human rights violations, in the sufferings of hundreds of thousands of Russian citizens, and in the
178
Russia
brutalities perpetrated against the civilian population, the Chechen events are unparalleled since the era of mass political repressions in the USSR." The report's probing treatment of violations committed during the war on Chechnya bears out this view. However, it remains silent on the lukewarm criticisms of that war that have been offered by the U.N. Secretary-General, the European Union, and foreign governments including that of the United States.
The report does not evaluate the Constitutional Court's fulfillment of its mandate "to protect the foundations of the constitutional system and the basic rights and freedoms of the individual and the citizen, and ... to ensure the supremacy and direct action of the Russian Federation Constitution on the entire territory of the Russian Federation." When the court finally reconvened in February 1995, after its suspension and reorganization by President Yeltsin in 1993-1994, the president had packed the court by raising its membership to 19 and by steering through the Federation Council the approval of six new justices.
Citizens may now complain directiy to the court about legal norms, but only about laws, not about the more numerous decrees and resolutions with normative force issued by the president and the government. As last year's Critique noted: "This is a potentially crippling limitation since many major state actions are taken solely by decree or decision, including the Chechnya intervention and the Anti-Crime decree." Although citizens may now bring cases directly to the Constitutional Court, their complaints — or complaints by different state organs — may not concern law application, which is now beyond the competence of the court. For this reason, the Constitutional Court could not rule on the constitutionality of the government's violations of human rights and humanitarian law in Chechnya. It could only advise that civilians had the right to bring suit in ordinary courts for restitution of damage caused by the action of government forces. That recourse, the report fails to note, is hardly promising, given the dubious remedies provided by ordinary courts.
The 1994 statute reduced the court's legitimate powers of judicial review to the detriment of the rule of law and the separation of powers. The reduction in the length of a judicial term from life to 12 years for
179
Critique 1995
judges elected under the 1994 law makes the court more rather than less subject to political pressures and changes. The lack of explicit guarantees of the right of non-citizens to petition the court themselves threatens the constitutional recognition of equal rights. It leaves foreigners particularly at risk because of increasing discrimination against non-Russian minorities, especially favorite targets such as people from the Caucasus and Central Asia.
The report, as noted last year, "does not adequately set out the legal foundations for principled opposition to the Chechen events." It fails to give an independent assessment of the Constitutional Court's July 31 decision denying the suit of plaintiff parliamentary deputies and upholding President Yeltsin's decrees ordering the sending of troops to Chechnya to liquidate "illegal armed bands." The court did, as the report notes, ban the revoking of journalists' accreditation in the war zone without a court order as unconstitutional. But the flaunting of that ruling through the "detentions, beatings and sniper attacks" mentioned in the report, as well as the authorities' disregard of the court's and law's bans on residence permit requirements as a violation of the freedom of movement, only exemplify the limited enforcement of the court's decisions.
The requirement of residence permits contributes also to the violation of the human rights of forced migrants to freedom of movement. Forced migrants are Russian citizens returning from other parts of the former Soviet Union, and all permanent residents of Russia who are forced to resettle within Russia, to escape violence or persecution. Lack of a propiska is also one of the reasons given by the Federal Migration Service for the denial of asylum to refugees. Thousands of refugees have been granted asylum, but the report does not say that fewer than a hundred of these have come from countries outside the former Soviet Union. Contrary to the report's assertion that "most refugees do not want to remain in Russia," the majority of refugee asylum seekers polled in UNHCR accommodation centers in Moscow by the NGO Equilibre in early 1996 said that they would like to seek asylum in Russia. The denial of asylum, even often of asylum status hearings, has resulted in violations of Russia's obligations — under both international and (formally
180
Russia
generous) Russian law — to grant asylum seekers non-discriminatory due process in establishing refugee status and protection against refoulement to countries where they face persecution.
The Presidential Human Rights Commission has covered a gap in the report with data concerning limited access to government information, which the commission finds to be "among the critical problems in Russia today." By the end of 1995, 42 ministers and agency directors had been granted the right to restrict citizens' access to information. One disturbing example of secrecy is the Ministry of Atomic Industry's classification of information about the amount of nuclear wastes stored underground, as well as annual inspection reports on the country's nuclear and radiation safety. The Presidential Human Rights Commission also gives ample evidence of the unlawful denial of information to the media.
Access to many government archives is closed or disappearing — a trend the commission sees as "a step toward a new alienation of society from its history." Blows to independent human rights monitoring noted in the State Department ref)ort have been the interference by government forces with domestic and foreign human rights reporting from Chechnya, the Duma's dismissal of Sergei Kovalev as Ombudsman in March, and his resignation from the depleted and undermined Human Rights Commission of President Yeltsin in January 1996. Yelena Bonner, the widow of Andrei Sakharov and herself a prominent human rights activist, had resigned from the commission in protest against the Chechnya War in February 1995. The network of Russian human rights NGOs continued to expand in 1995 but remained heavily dependent on foreign funding.
The report mentions local violations of religious freedom, which were also alluded to in the 1994 report, such as the refusal to return non-Orthodox religious property. It also notes the proposed legal restrictions on proselytizing by foreign groups, which would have been endorsed by a draft law in parliament but were opposed by President Yeltsin. The report also fails to follow up on its predecessor's mention of the growing influence of the Russian Orthodox Church's influence in society and
181
Critique 1995
government and the reluctance of Patriarch Aleksy to condemn the anti-Semitic writings of Metropolitan loann of St. Petersburg.
Metropolitan loann's death on November 2, 1995 has not ended the threat of anti-Semitism or significantly advanced the interests of a liberal minority in the church which favors greater openness, parish outreach and dialogue with other religions and non-Russians, including Jews. The government has done little or nothing to implement constitutional and legal protections against hate speech and activities amidst the steppe-fire spread of extreme nationalist-racist organizations across Russia. Alexander Barshakov's Russian National Unity, for example, has its own publications, security forces and commercial enterprises, with branches in 350 cities.
Such extremism feeds on the growing poverty and economic insecurity that afflict Russia today. The report mentions that 13% of the labor force is unemployed and that 30% of the population lives below the poverty line. However, it stops short of detailing the calamitous deterioration in the sphere of economic and social rights to adequate living standards, for all but a flagrantly rich stratum of beneficiaries of reform. Specialists at the Ministry of Social Security estimate that by the end of 1995, real income had dropped to 46% of its 1991 level. The Presidential Commission on Human Rights concludes from citizen complaints and appeals that "violations of sodal and economic rights and citizens' legitimate interests constitute the most widespread form of human rights abuse and are the main source of social tension." Organized crime is a major contributor to that tension, yet the report gives even less space to this issue than it did a year ago.
Complicity with organized crime reaches into the government, parliament and police, to the point that criminal gangs have had little to fear from the police who are routinely paid off. Duma deputies have had shadowy and at times fatal connections to organized crime. During 1994-1995, mysterious assassins killed four Duma deputies, contract-style. One of the deputies, Sergei Skorochkin, was murdered by gangsters in early 1995 apparently in revenge for his killing of an organized crime leader in 1994.
182
Russia
Government inaction and complicity further undermines its shaky legitimacy. Attempts to challenge official complicity in the legislature were set back by the death in an unexplained traffic accident of Deputy Vitaly Savitsky, a leader of the Christian Democratic Union, just eight days before the 1995 elections, when he was expected to be re-elected. A prominent and respected member of the Duma, Savitsky served as vice-chair of the Committee on Social and Religious organizations. Among his controversial actions had been his support for repeal of norms that guaranteed legal immunity for Duma members.
Savitsky's death was reminiscent of the mysterious deaths in traffic accidents that occurred during the Stalin era. He suffered massive injuries after his driver suddenly and inexplicably swerved into a collision with oncoming traffic. While the driver was rushed to a military hospital with relatively minor injuries, Savitsky lay unattended on the street. He was then kept in isolation and later reported to have died from "medical complications."
Savitsky's suspicious death also resembles the hit-and-run death in January of the son of Sergei Grigoriants, head of the Glasnost Foundation, as well as an attack on Grigoriants himself in March. It adds to a growing record of suspicious behavior by police, prosecutorial and security agencies, including their inability to solve any of the scores of murders of bankers and business people. As the report indicates, the wave of contract killings, still unsolved, has struck the press as well, inhibiting crime reporting. Former KGB General Oleg Kalugin has commented that "[t]he government is filled with mafia people. Unfortunately this is the reality of our country." Grigory Yavlinsky, leader of the liberal Yabloko party, has said bitterly that the killing of Dmitry ICholodov, a journalist investigating army corruption, "shows what the future holds for people who speak the truth here." Responses to organized crime themselves pose a threat to human rights — whether in the form of procedural shortcomings in the arrest and processing of suspects or the proliferation of private armed groups in what the Presidential Commission has dubbed a "militarization of society."
Reports such as the Lawyers Committee's Critique draw heavily on information from a growing network of Russian human rights NGOs such
183
Critique 1995
as the Glasnost Foundation, Memorial, the Moscow Center for Prison Reform and the Soldiers' Mothers' Committees. Collaboration with these NGOs will remain possible to the extent that the Russian government in power continues to allow them and their affiliates across Russia to operate. They remain vulnerable, as the State Department report reveals, to harassment and worse from national and local security agencies. They will also remain vulnerable to the extent that they continue to rely heavily on funding by foreign foundations.
In summary, the 1995 State Department report covers the human rights situation in Russia even more thoroughly than its immediate predecessor. But as in 1994, this year's report falls short when it comes to analysis of responsibility and context. The report's format continues to be strong on the classification of violations by specific types of rights. But this format contributes to an overall sense of fragmentation and the loss of analytical thrust. Nevertheless, in casting such a wide net for its data, the State Department report is more than ever an indispensable source of information on human rights as Russia continues its uneasy transition toward democratic governance.
184
t:
