Russia
The murder of journalist Anna Politkovskaia profoundly shocked the human rights
movement in Russia and internationally and symbolized the further deterioration
of the human rights situation in Russia. Meanwhile, the Kremlin has tightened its
grip on human rights organizations and other independent institutions.
Grave human rights abuses persist in Chechnya, including torture, abductions,
and forced disappearances, and the conflict threatens to spill over into other
regions of the northern Caucasus.
International scrutiny of Russia’s human rights record was grossly inadequate at a
time when Russia assumed leadership of two international bodies in 2006,
resulting in a lost opportunity to press Russia to improve its record. Russia took
over chairmanship of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe in May
and held the presidency of the Group of Eight, hosting the organization’s summit
in St Petersburg in July.
The Northern Caucasus
Despite claims of stability and reconstruction in Chechnya, the ongoing armed
conflict continues to claim civilian lives. Russia’s federal forces play less of a
direct role in Chechnya; pro-Kremlin Chechen forces under the command of
Chechnya’s prime minister, Ramzan Kadyrov, known as the “kadyrovtsy” now
dominate law enforcement and security operations and commit grave human
rights abuses.
Although local human rights groups reported a slight decline in the number of
abductions leading to forced disappearances in 2006, these disappearances
remain a key feature of the conflict, with as many as 5,000 people “disappeared”
since 1999 and at least 54 so far in 2006. Reports of torture, especially in unofficial
detention centers run by the “Kadyrovtsy” increased in 2006.
The Russian government failed to pursue any accountability process for human
rights abuses committed during the course of the conflict in Chechnya. Unable to
secure justice domestically, hundreds of victims of abuse have filed applications with the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR). The court issued landmark rulings
on Chechnya, finding the Russian government guilty of violating the right to
life and the prohibition of torture with respect to civilians who had died or been
forcibly disappeared at the hands of Russia’s federal troops. Hundreds of similar
claims are pending before the court.
Civil Society
Nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), activists, and independent journalists
working on human rights issues, particularly the war in Chechnya, faced increasing
administrative and judicial harassment. In some cases, these individuals also
endured persecution, threats, and physical attacks.
In October 2006 an unidentified gunman murdered Novaya Gazeta journalist
Anna Politkovskaia. Known for her independent reporting, particularly about
abuses committed in the war in Chechnya, Politkovskaia was a fierce critic of the
Kremlin and the pro-Russian Chechen government. There seemed little doubt she
was killed because of her work. Also, there was a rise in the number of death
threats against prominent human rights defenders.
In November 2005 authorities in Dagestan held Osman Boliev—a human rights
defender who investigated kidnapping and other abuses by police—for three
months on charges of illegal weapons possession. He was tortured in custody
and later acquitted and released. In July 2006 police charged him with aiding the
terrorists who seized hundreds of hostages in a Moscow theater in 2002. Fearing
for his safety, Boliev fled Russia.
In January President Vladimir V. Putin signed into law new regulations that impose
burdensome reporting requirements on all NGOs and grant registration officials
unprecedented authority to interfere with or restrict the work of NGOs. Under the
law, officials may, without a court order, demand any document at any time from
an NGO and order an intrusive inspection of an NGO’s office. The law requires foreign
NGOs to submit annual and quarterly work plans and permits government
officials to ban planned projects or activities that conflict with Russia’s national
interests. All foreign NGOs had to re-register by mid-October; hundreds had to
suspend their operations for weeks while their applications were pending.
In February a criminal court in Nizhni Novgorod handed Stanislav Dmitrievsky, the
executive director of the Russian-Chechen Friendship Society, a two-year suspended
sentence on charges of “inciting racial hatred” for articles he had published
in the organization’s newspaper. The articles featured statements from
leading Chechen separatists that in reality amounted to protected speech. A civil
court liquidated the organization, finding that it had failed to distance itself from
Dmitrievsky; as of this writing the case was on appeal with the Supreme Court.
Several Russian human rights organizations were threatened with—but avoided—
closure for problems with their charter or failing to report their activities. But the
International Defense Assistance Center, a Russian group that represents people
from Russia at the ECHR received a bill for back taxes and penalties on tax exempt
grants for US$167,000. Under the tax code, money for educational, analytical, and
research purposes is not taxable and the tax bill appears to be an attempt to shut
down the NGO, which has 250 cases pending before the ECHR.
Xenophobia and Intolerance
Human rights groups reported more than a hundred racist and xenophobic
attacks—an increase over last year—including at least 36 murders and 286 people
beaten or wounded in the first nine months of the year. Notably, in September
violent mobs in Kondopoga, in northern Russia, attacked residents from the
Caucasus, causing hundreds to flee the city fearing for their lives. Some of the
more serious attacks have been prosecuted, but police routinely characterize
racist crimes as hooliganism, a misdemeanor charge, rather than use sentencing
enhancement for hate-motivated crimes available in Russian law.
After months of rising tensions between the Russian and Georgian governments,
in October 2006 Georgian authorities in Tbilisi briefly detained four Russian military
officers on accusations of espionage. In retaliation, the Russian government
deported hundreds of Georgians, forced Georgian-owned businesses to close,
and asked teachers for lists of school children with Georgian last names so their
parents could be investigated for visa or tax violations.
After a court upheld Moscow Mayor Yuri Luzkhov’s ban on a gay and lesbian pride
march, on May 27, 2006, several dozen gay activists and supporters attempted to hold two protest rallies in support of freedoms of assembly and expression.
Hundreds of anti-gay protesters, including skinheads, nationalists, and Orthodox
followers, attacked the participants, beating and kicking many, and chanted
threats. The mayor’s office had earlier made homophobic statements and circulated
directives to restrict gay and lesbian rights.
Entrenched Problems
A gruesome case of hazing in the army, which resulted in a conscript having to
have his legs and genitals amputated, once again pushed violent hazing in
Russia’s military into the spotlight. The Ministry of Defense took steps to address
this crime, but maintained that violent hazing is not widespread in Russia’s military
and blamed television and “the decline of traditional values” for hazing
rather than taking responsibility for the problem. Violent hazing results in the
death of dozens of young soldiers every year, and serious injuries to thousands
more. Many conscripts commit or attempt suicide and thousands defect from
their units to escape harm.
Russia continued to increase attention and resources to combat HIV/AIDS. It proposed
an ambitious plan to develop treatments and vaccines and raise awareness
about the disease and made infectious diseases one of the key agenda
items at the summit of G8 leaders in July. However, police abuse, harassment,
and widespread discrimination against injection drug users and other groups at
high risk for HIV/AIDS continued to interfere with HIV prevention, care, and treatment
efforts. Access to treatment remained a major problem, with only a fraction
of people living with the disease receiving anti-retroviral drugs.
Russia violated its obligations under the Convention against Torture by forcibly
returning Uzbeks to Uzbekistan, where they face a risk of torture. In March 2006
the government announced it had returned 19 Uzbeks. In October it returned
Rustam Muminov, an asylum seeker wanted on politically-motivated charges in
Uzbekistan, in violation of Russian law and after the ECHR imposed an injunction
to stop the deportation.
Key International Actors
While many global leaders expressed concern over developments in Russia, such
as the NGO law and the murder of Politkovskaia, human rights issues remained
on the margins of Russia’s bi-lateral and multi-lateral relations, with many key
interlocutors failing to press Russia to reform or call it to account for continuing
problems, especially in Chechnya.
The EU held two rounds of human rights consultations with Russia. But human
rights did not figure prominently in the broader EU-Russia agenda, which was
dominated by energy security. The EU and its member states appeared to surrender
to a false assumption that robust promotion of human rights would result in
Russia cutting Europe’s energy supply, without due concern to the long-term consequences
of sidelining Russia’s growing human rights problems. Germany
played a key role in shaping EU policy emphasizing friendly relations at the
expense of human rights; Germany’s energy transportation projects with Russia
were paramount in its bilateral relations.
The United States government issued several strong statements on human rights
but similarly appeared to lack the appetite to challenge Russia forcefully on its
worsening human rights record. However, President George Bush did issue a
strong statement on Anna Politkovskaia’s death and Secretary of State,
Condoleezza Rice, met with her family.
In May 2006 Russia won a seat on the new United Nations Human Rights Council.
After refusing access for many years, Russia issued an invitation to the UN special
rapporteur on torture, but the rapporteur cancelled his visit just two days before it
was planned to begin in October. The cancellation took place due to the Russian
government’s refusal to grant the conditions necessary for the visit, such as unfettered
access to places of detention and private interviews with detainees, citing
conflict with Russian law.
In January the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe adopted a strong
report on Chechnya and expressed concern that many governments and the organization’s
Committee of Ministers failed to address human rights violations in
Chechnya and impunity for them “in a regular, serious and intensive manner.”
The Assembly’s bureau, however, subsequently decided not to renew the Assembly’s Chechnya monitoring and reporting mandate, silencing this critical
voice.
The Council of Europe’s Committee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT) conducted
two visits to the North Caucasus in 2006, an indication of its serious concerns in
the region. The Russian government is the only Council of Europe member state
not to authorize the publication of CPT’s reports.
In its new country strategy for Russia, the European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development (EBRD) noted “concerns in the international community over the
Russian authorities’ continued weakening of the checks on executive power” and
called for stronger protection for human and civic rights. The bank announced
plans to hold its 2007 annual meeting in Kazan, in the Volga region.