 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 According to the Soviet Constitution, the Soviet Union
 (U.S.S.R.) is "a socialist state of the whole people,
 expressing the will and interests of the workers, peasants,
 and intelligentsia, and the working people of all nations and
 nationalities of the country." In fact, the U.S.S.R. is a
 one-party centralized State in which the leadership of the
 Communist Party, a self-perpetuating elite assisted by the
 repressive measures of the secret police, attempts to direct
 all aspects of public life, to interfere significantly with
 what in the West would be considered private life, and to
 prohibit the development of independent centers of political
 or ideological influence% There was no evidence of change in
 this pattern of repression in 1985.
 The Committee for State Security (KGB), police authorities,
 and prosecutors' offices are charged by the party with
 enforcing compliance by the population with policy decisions,
 directives, and legislation. They do so in large part by
 instilling fear among dissenters and potential dissenters.
 The highly centralized economy has been growing at a
 decelerating rate in recent years. Production and
 distribution bottlenecks, low productivity, and poor quality
 consumer goods continue to characterize an inefficient economy.
 Soviet performance in the realm of human rights fails to meet
 even the most elementary of accepted international standards.
 The Constitution formally provides for most internationally
 recognized human rights and guarantees the right to education,
 medical care, and work. In practice, however, these rights
 are limited by the admitted priority given to the interests of
 the State. Freedom of speech is denied by vague laws
 prescribing imprisonment for defaming the State.
 The State and party control the mass media and seek to prevent
 the free flow of information and ideas from abroad. Voluntary
 organizations, if allowed to exist, must submit to state or
 party supervision. Trade unions are strictly subordinated to
 the party and act as agents of the Government in implementing
 economic policy and ensuring labor discipline. They are not
 collective bargaining agents for workers. Religious believers
 in an officially atheist State must submit to state
 supervision or face harassment or imprisonment. Freedom of
 movement is neither guaranteed by law nor respected in
 practice. Many infringements of human rights are carried out
 by the KGB and police authorities, whose actions are not
 subject to effective appeal.
 The regime confines those attempting to exercise their rights
 to prison, labor camps, or psychiatric hospitals.
 Mistreatment of political prisoners continued in 1985.
 Beatings, inadequate food, clothing, and shelter, heavy manual
 labor, unsatisfactory medical care, isolation, extended
 interrogation, and threats against prisoners' families were
 characteristic abuses. Many prisoners are denied the right to
 correspond with their families or to receive family visits.
 Some are arbitrarily confined to special psychiatric hospitals
 or to the psychiatric wards of regular hospitals where they
 are often subjected to cruel and degrading treatment and
 administered doses of powerful and painful drugs to punish and
 intimidate them rather than to treat a medical condition. The
 authorities also continue to exile prisoners to remote areas
 of the Soviet Union or force them to emigrate. Every year a
 
 
 1123
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 number of persons die in prisons and labor camps because of
 the harsh conditions and inadequate medical attention.
 Persecution of individuals who attempt to express themselves
 outside state-controlled channels continued during 1985.
 Human rights monitors, religious believers, proponents of
 greater cultural and political rights for ethnic minorities,
 and peace activists were all subject to arrest and
 imprisonment. Jewish, ethnic German, and Armenian emigration
 remained at severely restricted levels, despite the desire of
 many thousands of persons to emigrate.
 Abroad, the Soviet Union continues its occupation of
 Afghanistan and its support of the Vietnamese occupation of
 Cambodia. There has been evidence that the Soviet Union has
 been responsible for the use of chemical warfare in
 Afghanistan, Laos, and Cambodia.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from
 a. Political Killing
 There are occasional reports of unusual circumstances
 surrounding the deaths of people engaged in religious or
 political dissent, or members of their families. The
 possibility of official involvement in such deaths, however,
 can neither be proved nor investigated. On the other hand, a
 number of political prisoners and common criminals do perish
 each year in prison and in forced labor camps due to the
 severe conditions: beatings, strenuous physical labor, poor
 diet, extreme cold, and lack of adequate medical care. It is
 impossible to estimate the number of such deaths.
 Prominent Ukrainian dissident poet Vasyl Stus, a member of the
 now-defunct Ukrainian Helsinki Monitoring Group, died of
 emaciation in a labor camp in September following years of
 brutal treatment. Armenian activist Iskhan Mkrtchyan and
 Estonian activist Johannes Hint also died in Soviet custody in
 1985.
 Soviet law provides for the imposition of capital punishment
 for a variety of offenses, including some economic crimes
 (e.g., fraud) which are not generally considered capital
 offenses outside the U.S.S.R. Statistics on capital
 punishment, however, as well as statistics on crime in
 general, are not published by the Soviet Government.
 b. Disappearance
 There have been no known instances of prolonged or permanent
 disappearance in recent years. However, it is not unusual for
 people to be arrested or confined in psychiatric facilities
 without next of kin being notified. Concerned relatives are
 expected to initiate an inquiry with the authorities to find
 out if and when their family member was arrested, and where he
 or she is being held.
 
 
 1124
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 It is clear that mistreatment of political prisoners during
 interrogation and incarceration occurs. Although the criminal
 codes of the Russian and other Soviet republics assert that
 punishment is not intended to cause physical suffering or the
 destruction of human dignity, reliable sources have described
 beatings, isolation, extreme cold, poor diet and malnutrition,
 compulsory hard labor in difficult conditions, inadequate
 medical care, and frequent arbitrary deprivation of a
 prisoner's limited right to receive correspondence and visits
 from his family. Prisoners cannot practice their religion and
 may be punished for attempts to do so. They have been beaten
 by other camp inmates at the instigation of camp authorities.
 Political prisoners have then been falsely accused of having
 created a disturbance and, on the basis of the fabricated
 charges, consigned to the camp prison or solitary confinement.
 In 1985, members of the independent peace movement, "Group to
 Establish Trust Between the U.S.S.R. and the U.S.A.," were
 beaten by police agents on more than one occasion while
 attempting to hold peace demonstrations in Moscow. Jewish
 cultural activist Yuliy Edelshtein was repeatedly beaten at
 the instigation of labor camp officials in an effort to
 persuade him to renounce his religion. Prisoners who protest
 by hunger strikes are often force-fed by methods harmful to
 health and occasionally resulting in medical problems.
 Prisoners are frequently subjected to psychological pressures
 such as isolation, extended interrogation, and threats against
 their families. The security organs of the Government are
 responsible for these abuses.
 The Government continues to confine political and religious
 activists to psychiatric hospitals where they are often
 subjected to painful drugs not in standard psychiatric use.
 This treatment is, in reality, a form of torture. In 1981 the
 Soviet Ministry of Health's chief neuropsychiatrist publicly
 stated at the Seventh All-Union Congress of Neuropathologists
 and Psychiatrists that 1.2 percent of patients in Moscow
 psychiatric hospitals were there "in connection with visits to
 state agencies to present groundless complaints and slanderous
 statements." The Soviet Union withdrew from the World
 Psychiatric Association in February 1983 rather than face the
 expected censure of that body for its abuses of psychiatry.
 Among the victims of such abuses in 1985 were Rozalia
 Kiikbayeva, who was confined in a Kazakhstan psychiatric
 hospital in May 1983 for refusing to give up her emigration
 efforts, and who died on January 8, 1985 at the age of 29,
 after she was not provided sufficient medical care. Lydia
 Koifman, wife of imprisoned Hebrew teacher Yevgeniy Koifman,
 was committed to a psychiatric hospital because of her efforts
 to assist and defend her husband. At least three members of
 the "Group to Establish Trust Between the U.S.S.R. and the
 U.S.A." were confined to Moscow psychiatric hospitals for
 relatively short periods, either to intimidate them or to
 reduce their contact with foreigners. Other political victims
 of the abuse of psychiatry remained in such facilities, many
 of them in special psychiatric hospitals operated by the
 Ministry of the Interior. Some sources estimate that up to
 1,000 persons may be confined in psychiatric hospitals for
 political or religious reasons.
 
 
 1125
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Government spokesmen insist that prosecution occurs only in
 cases in which persons commit acts prohibited by law. But the
 provisions of laws under which prosecutions have occurred
 themselves violate internationally recognized human rights,
 including freedom of expression and freedom of association.
 Among these provisions are:
 -- Article 190-1, "The dissemination of deliberately
 hostile fabrications defaming the Soviet State and social
 system." This article, introduced in 1965, carries a maximum
 penalty of 3 years' imprisonment;
 -- Article 190-3, "The organization of, or active
 participation in, a group actively violating public order,"
 which carries a maximum penalty of 3 years' imprisonment.
 -- Article 70, "Anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda,"
 which carries a maximum penalty of 7 years' imprisonment and
 up to an additional 5 years in internal exile.
 -- Article 227, "The infringement of the person and the
 rights of citizens under the appearance of performing
 religious ceremonies," which carries a maximum penalty of 5
 years' imprisonment.
 In addition to these provisions, the authorities continue to
 use criminal code provisions against "parasitism,"
 "hooliganism," and "illegal commerce" or "speculation" to
 harass persons for political activity. Dissidents are
 sometimes fired from their jobs, then arrested for parasitism
 because they have no jobs; or the authorities fabricate
 charges for common crimes, such as theft or possession of
 drugs or weapons. A recent new criminal code provision making
 labor camp prisoners liable for resentencing to additional
 terms of up to 5 years for "malicious disobedience of labor
 camp rules" has been used to prolong the sentences of
 prisoners of conscience. Thus, the spectre of indefinite
 detention, a commonplace of the Stalin era, has reappeared in
 the 1980's.
 Habeas corpus or its equivalent does not exist. According to
 the code of criminal procedure, pretrial detention can last as
 long as 9 months, and prisoners are not entitled to consult
 with a lawyer until after the conclusion of the pretrial
 investigation. Instances of prolonged detention function in
 effect as a form of preventive detention.
 Persons also face administrative jailing for periods of up to
 15 days. In 1985 several Moscow peace activists were jailed
 for short periods for "hooliganism" or resisting the
 authorities. Sergei Petrov, who is married to an American
 citizen, was arrested September 20 while attempting to enter
 the American Embassy on consular business and was sentenced to
 2 weeks in a labor camp. Arbitrary detention or house arrest
 were used to prevent citizens with dissenting views from
 meeting foreigners during an international youth festival in
 Moscow in August.
 The practice of exiling political dissenters, often to
 isolated Siberian villages or other remote areas, dates back
 to Tsarist times and continues under Soviet rule. Exile often
 follows prison and, in practice, means confinement in a remote
 
 
 1126
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 village in conditions of extreme cold, isolation, and relative
 scarcity of fresh food. These conditions are mitigated only
 by the privilege of receiving food parcels from family
 members, moving about within a limited area, finding work
 (albeit frequently far below one's capability), and arranging
 one's own often primitive accommodations. The families of
 exiles are permitted to live with them. Yuriy Orlov, the
 founder of the Helsinki monitoring movement, who is serving a
 term of internal exile in a remote area of Siberia following
 his release from labor camp in 1984, was beaten by unknown
 assailants in April 1985 and has been forced to live in a
 crude hut bereft of indoor plumbing.
 The exile of Andrey Sakharov and his wife Yelena Bonner in the
 city of Gor'kiy, a city closed to foreigners, is the
 best-known example of this practice. Throughout much of 1985
 the authorities continued to deny him normal contact with
 scientific colleagues and to cut them both off from virtually
 all contact with the rest of the world. This situation
 changed in early November when Soviet authorities granted exit
 permission to Mrs. Bonner to travel to the West for medical
 treatment. Both Sakharovs were subsequently permitted to
 speak to their U.S. relatives by telephone. Despite these
 gestures, at year's end Dr. Sakharov remained in exile.
 Persons released from exile often are not allowed to return to
 their former places of residence. Some are forced to live in
 other areas of the country, thereby in reality insuring
 continuation of their exile. Others, having nowhere to go,
 return to their old homes without residence permits, where
 they run the risk of being arrested for violating residence
 laws.
 In addition to internal exile, the authorities occasionally
 exile persons abroad or permit their "voluntary" departure.
 For example, Irina Grivnina, formerly active in monitoring
 abuses of psychiatry, was told to leave the country in
 October. The "voluntary" departure of Lydia Staskevich in
 September deprived Moscow's unregistered Pentacostal Church of
 one of its leading members.
 Large areas of the country are closed to foreigners, and
 reports of trials in closed areas and remote regions may not
 become known to foreign observers. An unknown number of
 political prisoners have been convicted of "ordinary" crimes
 and therefore incarcerated in camps for common criminals
 rather than in special camps reserved for political prisoners.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Communist party control of society extends to the legal and
 judicial system and is exercised in political cases to negate
 constitutional guarantees of the objectivity and independence
 of the judicial process. Soviet authorities frequently ensure
 that political trials are closed to the public by requiring
 passes for admission to the trial, packing the courtroom with
 government supporters, and harassing or detaining observers
 outside the courtroom. The location and date of a trial are
 often announced on short notice and may be changed with little
 warning. Western journalists and diplomats are regularly
 denied access to political trials and permission to visit
 cities outside Moscow where trials are taking place.
 
 
 1127
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 Defense attorneys, like judges, are subject to political
 pressures and constraints applied by the security forces and
 the party. About 60 percent of Soviet attorneys are party
 members; they must, moreover, have special clearance to act as
 defense counsel in a political case. Attorneys who overstep
 their assigned role of providing a perfunctory defense risk
 losing their clearance and destroying their careers. Even the
 most honest and vigorous defense is of limited utility since
 the outcome of political trials is determined beforehand by
 the authorities.
 No trial of civilians by-military courts have been reported in
 recent years.
 Psychiatric commitment of dissidents, described earlier,
 allows the Government to circumvent many requirements of the
 legal process and to incarcerate activists at the discretion
 of officials and psychiatrists.
 A reliable, privately compiled list of political prisoners in
 the U.S.S.R., edited by Soviet emigre and former political
 prisoner Kronid Lubarsky, contains nearly 900 names, including
 some persons in internal exile in remote villages. Since data
 on the number of political prisoners is regarded as a state
 secre, only relatively prominent cases, such as those on
 Lubarsky's list, are known in the West. Although estimates
 vary somewhat, most observers believe there are as many as
 10,000 prisoners of conscience.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Government interference in personal life is pervasive. The
 authorities regard it as a citizen's duty to inform them about
 unorthodox attitudes of family members and friends. They
 routinely monitor the residences and telephones of Soviet
 citizens and foreigners with electronic devices. The
 Constitution guarantees the inviolability of citizens' homes,
 and in theory no one may enter a home against the will of the
 resident "without legal grounds." In practice this provision
 has little restraining effect on investigative agencies, and
 well-documented cases of forced entry and illegal searches
 continued in 1985. Through their control of mail and
 telephone circuits, the authorities selectively restrict
 contact between citizens and foreigners, often intercepting
 mail.
 The Government continues to jam most Western radio broadcasts
 in Russian and other languages, an action clearly inconsistent
 with the provisions of the Helsinki Final Act. Soviet
 citizens who have even chance encounters with foreign tourists
 are often questioned, and receiving a foreign guest at home
 can result in extended interrogation. Foreigners are
 frequently questioned and intimidated after visiting Soviet
 citizens and, in some cases during 1.985, were even expelled.
 Leningrad authorities were particularly active in this regard.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution mentions most internationally accepted
 political liberties but limits their exercise to behavior in
 accordance with the "interests of the people and the
 
 
 1128
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 strengthening and development of the Socialist system." In
 practice, the Government does not tolerate dissident behavior
 and has not hesitated to imprison persons for exercising
 freedom of expression. All information media are controlled
 by the party and the Government, which own or operate almost
 all of them. Publications, films, and radio and television
 scripts are subject to censorship by the Main Administration
 for Safeguarding State Secrets in the Media. Soviet
 journalists are subject to the discipline of the Communist
 Party and subordinated to the directives of their editorial
 superiors, themselves trusted members of the party. As such,
 they are not journalists in the Western sense but rather
 spokesmen for official government policies.
 All universities and research institutes are operated by the
 State or party; teaching and research are required to conform
 to official requirements. In areas such as foreign policy and
 contemporary Soviet history, these requirements narrowly
 circumscribe the content of research and teaching to the
 virtual exclusion of independent investigation. All books in
 the Soviet Union are published by the State or party, and are
 subject to prepublication censorship. Freedom of express'ion
 is substantially greater in scholarship not involving
 politically sensitive subjects. Nonetheless, the Government's
 range of political sensitivities is broad, and censorship
 standards are often applied in an arbitrary and capricious
 manner.
 Openly dissident views on important questions of policy do not
 appear in the media. No criticism of the party, the
 Government, or the leadership is permitted except to correct
 an administrative abuse or to discredit an individual
 responsible for violating party norms. Open criticism of
 officials takes place only when decided upon by higher
 officials. Within very narrow limits, arguments for and
 against prospective policies may appear in public. Debate
 within the leadership is occasionally reflected in published
 texts where polemics and criticism, expressed in veiled
 language, allow experienced readers to identify policy trends
 and controversial issues. Such policy debate may not call
 into question the existing political and social system.
 The authors of literary, religious, and political "samizdat"
 (self-published) materials have been subject to harassment,
 including loss of employment, warnings from the KnB, apartment
 searches, and, ultimately, arrest and conviction o:
 incarceration in mental hospitals.
 The Government continues to maintain tight control over the
 work of foreign newspapers. Overt censorship of wire
 transmissions of news stories out of the country is rare, but
 the authorities harass selected foreign journalists and, in
 some cases, either delay or deny visas already issued.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Constitution grants citizens the right to associate in
 public organizations "in accordance with the aim of building
 communism." In practice, public associations are organized by
 the authorities or are subject to their strict control, and
 the Government suppresses attempts to function independently
 of its supervision. As a result of a campaign during the last
 few years, virtually all independent human rights or peace
 groups have been suppressed and have ceased functioning.
 
 
 1129
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 Those eliminated include the Helsinki Watch Groups, which
 attempted to monitor the Government's implementation of the
 Helsinki Final Act, and the Psychiatric Watch Group, which
 monitored Soviet abuses of psychiatry. Members of these
 groups have been imprisoned or exiled, and many still face
 persecution. Several persons who attempted to revive the
 Georgian Helsinki monitoring group in Tbilisi during 1985 were
 arrested or faced official threats of prosecution for offenses
 carrying long-term sentences in penal camps.
 Trade unions are strictly subordinated to the Communist Party
 and act as agents of the Government in implementing economic
 policy and ensuring labor discipline. They in no respect act
 as collective bargaining agents. The International Labor
 Organization's Committee of Experts has noted that the Soviet
 Union had contravened the Convention on Freedom of Association
 and Protection of the Right to Organize by imposing a
 constitutional link between the Communist Party and trade
 unions which restricted the right of the unions to organize
 their own activities and formulate their own programs. The
 right to strike is not recognized, and strikes are rare.
 Those strikes which do occur are ruthlessly put down by the
 security forces.
 Soviet authorities have continued to suppress all unofficial
 labor or political associations which they believe represent a
 challenge to the monopoly of the State. Vladimir Sytinskiy, a
 member of the "Free Interprofessional Association of Workers"
 (SMOT, in its Russian acronym), was charged with anti-Soviet
 slander and confined in May by a Leningrad court to an
 indefinite term in a psychiatric hospital. The "Group to
 Establish Trust Between the U.S.S.R. and the U.S.A." continued
 to come under intense pressure in 1985, as members were
 arrested, detained, confined to psychiatric institutions,
 beaten, and exiled abroad. Group member Vladimir Brodskiy was
 sentenced in August to 3 years in a penal camp for "malicious
 hooliganism." Group members Nikolai Khramov and Aleksei
 Lusnikov were each detained for several days, and two young
 women members were "treated" in a psychiatric hospital before
 being released. Group members were among many residents of
 Moscow who were prevented or strongly discouraged from meeting
 foreigners attending an international youth festival in Moscow
 in August, some being placed under house arrest.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Constitution guarantees the "right to profess or not to
 profess any religion.and to conduct religious worship or
 atheistic propaganda." In practice, however, religious
 believers are subject to many restrictions. Participation in
 religious ceremonies causes exclusion from the Communist Party
 and, sometimes, dismissal from employment.
 Soviet law requires religious congregations with a minimum of
 20 adults to register with the authorities. In practice, the
 authorities reserve the right to grant or withhold
 registration. Soviet refusal to grant registration can be
 used to limit the number of congregations or to deny legal
 status to an entire religious denomination as has been the
 case, for example, with the Ukrainian Catholic (Eastern Rite
 or Uniate) Church. Religious believers, moreover, are
 prohibited from engaging in charitable activity,
 proselytizing, or providing formal religious training to their
 children. In some instances, the authorities have removed
 
 
 1130
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 children from families which have permitted or have conducted
 such instruction in place of Soviet schooling. Existing
 seminaries and other institutions of clerical education and
 the numbers of students permitted to pursue a religious
 vocation do not provide a sufficient body of trained clergy
 for officially registered denominations. Unregistered
 believers, such as some Baptists, Jehovah's Witnesses,
 Seventh-Day Adventists, and Pentecostals are subject to an
 even wider variety of repressive measures, including
 harassment at school or place of employment, denial of access
 to housing, dismissal from work, and imprisonment.
 Examples of such repression of religious freedom were abundant
 during 1985. A small community of 170 Pentecostals in
 Chuguevka in the Soviet Far East was especially victimized.
 Ten community elders, including Pastor Viktor Val'ter, were
 sentenced to labor camp terms of up to 5 years. All working
 adults have been fired from their jobs. Soviet authorities,
 meanwhile, continue their threats to take custody of community
 children whose parents took them out of school to save them
 from constant beatings and harassment. Vasily Boyechko,
 Pentecostal Bishop for the western U.S.S.R., was arrested in
 September, reportedly on charges of leading an unregistered
 religious group. Unregistered Baptists continued to suffer
 the most arrests of any Soviet religious group. Ivan Peters,
 Wilhelm Richert, and Victor Rogalskiy, three Baptists from
 Gagra on the Black Sea, were reportedly sentenced in mid-May
 to labor camp terms of 2 to 3 years. Other Baptists were
 reportedly arrested in April and June in the Kiev region,
 Perm, the Voroshilovgrad region, the Tula region, the Gelgorod
 region, and Omsk. Three more Baptists, I. Steffen, Igor
 Worlf, and Andrei Woln, were convicted in August in Alma-Ata
 for possession of a printing press.
 In the Ukraine, the campaign against defenders of the outlawed
 Uniate Church continued. Iosif Terelya, a leader of the
 unofficial "Initiative Group of the Committee for the Defense
 of Believers of the Catholic Church," was sentenced August 20
 to 7 years in a labor camp and 5 years of internal exile on
 charges of anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda. His
 colleague, Vasily Kobrin, was convicted in March on charges of
 anti-Soviet slander. Both men were moving forces behind the
 samizdat Chronicle of the Catholic Church in the Ukraine which
 exposed systematic Soviet repression of the Uniate Church,
 including church burnings. The Chronicle had brought to the
 world's attention the fact that hundreds of Ukrainian
 Catholics had renounced their citizenship in protest over
 religious persecution and Soviet subjugation of the Ukraine.
 The traditional religious affiliation of ethnic Russians and
 eastern Ukrainians is the Russian Orthodox Church. In
 Moscow, authorities permit only about 50 churches to
 function. On Easter, when large crowds seek entry to
 services, police often make access to churches difficult,
 seeking to intimidate those wishing to attend. Believers
 going beyond church ritual may encounter more serious
 difficulty. Orthodox activist Feliks Svetov, arrested in
 January and charged with anti-Soviet slander for publishing a
 novel in the West, was held in prison during an extended
 investigation still under way at year's end. His wife, Zoya
 Krakbmalnikova, is reportedly serving a term of exile in
 Siberia for publishing a religious journal. In June, Vladimir
 Frenkel of Riga was sentenced to 18 months in a labor camp for
 anti-Soviet slander. A Jewish "refusenik" conyerted to
 
 
 1131
 
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 Christianity, Frenkel was charged with contributing to an
 underground Jewish cultural journal and with publishing
 articles on Orthodox Christianity in the West.
 In the traditionally Muslim regions of central Asia and
 Azerbaijan, very few mosques are open for use, and officially
 recognized clergy are few. Muslim clergy not sanctioned by
 the authorities are attacked in the official press as
 "vagabonds." One of them, Akverdy Eshkulov, was reportedly
 arrested in the Samarkand region during 1985 and sentenced to
 2 years in a penal camp for serving as a mullah without
 official sanction. The Soviet press has reported several
 other arrests of Muslims for religious activities, including
 printing and distributing religious books. The official press
 in Muslim areas attacks traditional Muslim funeral rites as.
 outdated and as occasions for expressing nationalist feelings.
 Even tiny religious groups were not immune to severe pressure.
 Five members of the Hare Krishna sect, in a trial ending July
 3 in the north Caucasus village of Kurdzhinovo, were sentenced
 to terms of from 2 to 5 years in labor camp for "encroaching
 on the individuality and rights of citizens under the guise of
 conducting religious rites." Jehovah's Witnesses also
 continued to encounter serious obstacles to the free exercise
 of their religion.
 The crackdown on Jewish (primarily "refusenik") activists and
 Hebrew teachers continued in 1985. (A "refusenik" is a Jew
 who has been denied permission to emigrate.) By year's end,
 15 had been sentenced to terms of up to 4 years in a labor
 camp, many on trumped-up criminal charges specifically
 designed to discredit their cause. Moscow Hebrew teacher
 Dmitriy (Dan) Shapiro was brought to trial June 26. After
 reportedly being subjected to threats of severe punishment and
 other forms of pressure, Shapiro signed a "confession" to
 Zionist and anti-Soviet activities. Later broadcast on Soviet
 national television, Shapiro's statement named several Jewish
 "collaborators," many of whom in fact did not know him well.
 Shapiro was given a suspended sentence, but his public
 "confession" was widely interpreted as a stern warning against
 assertion of Jewish culture and identity.
 Other arrests and trials of Hebrew teachers reinforced the
 climate of repression. Leningrad Hebrew teacher Roald
 Zelichonok was tried August 8 and sentenced to 3 years in a
 labor camp for anti-Soviet slander, apparently on the basis of
 statements made in private letters. Yevgeniy Koifman was
 tried in Dnepropetrovsk on a trumped-up narcotics charge and
 sentenced to 2-1/2 years of closely supervised work release.
 His wife was confined to a psychiatric hospital following her
 attempts to assist and defend her arrested husband. Another
 Hebrew teacher, Leonid Volvovskiy, already exiled to the
 closed city of Gor'kiy, was charged with anti-Soviet slander
 and sentenced October 24 to 3 years in a penal camp. His
 trial took place in an atmosphere characterized by
 anti-Semitic slogans painted on walls near his apartment and
 by hostile articles in the official local press. Iosif Begun
 was transferred from a labor camp to a prison, apparently for
 violation of camp rules. His wife and son were repeatedly
 warned by Soviet authorities to cease activities on his
 behalf, such as hunger strikes and press conferences. losif
 Berenshtein underwent medical treatment for blindness suffered
 in a prison attack but was transferred back to a camp at
 Zholtye Vody with little chance of regaining his sight.
 
 
 1132
 
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 Aleksandr Kholmyanskiy, another imprisoned Hebrew teacher,
 also suffered ill health. Samuel Epshtein, serving a term for
 anti-Soviet slander, had his term extended by 2 years under a
 new law which permits extension of camp sentences for minor
 infractions of camp rules. By the fall of 1985 the number of
 imprisoned Jewish activists was conservatively estimated at 22.
 A film, "Conspiracy Against the Nation of Soviets," was shown
 on Soviet television in February and again in September, as
 well as in theaters. The film not only attacked major
 dissident figures but also sought to link Jewish emigration
 with Western intelligence activities. Many Soviet Jews regard
 such films, books, and articles featuring anti-Semitic themes
 as evidence of government-inspired hostility to them.
 Beyond the persecution of specific classes of believers, the
 Government exerts wide-ranging pressure to discourage
 religious belief in general among its citizens. The Commiinist
 Party, defined in the Constitution as the "leading and guiding
 force in Soviet society," is, according to its rules, an
 atheistic organization. Membership in the party, considered
 incompatible with religious belief, is a requirement for
 advancement to most positions of authority or prestige in the
 country. Thus the Government has structured career incentives
 in such a way as virtually to exclude admitted believers from
 educational opportunities and desirable careers.
 Discrimination in education and employment is also practiced
 against Jews, based on ancestry rather than religious
 commitment.
 The official media feature much antireligious propaganda, and
 only a few religious publications of controlled content, such
 as the Vestnik of the Russian Orthodox Patriarchate, are
 allowed to appear. The practice of religion is also
 discouraged by strictly applied limitations on the number of
 sacred books, such as the Bible or the Koran, which may be
 printed and by government prohibitions against their
 importation. Few works are published in Hebrew. The number
 of clergymen and places of worship today is only a small
 fraction of the number which existed before the October 1917
 Revolution.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Freedom of movement is neither guaranteed by law nor respected
 in practice. Although citizens are generally free to move
 about within the territory of the U.S.S.R., travel in certain
 areas (e.g., frontier regions or areas of military
 significance) requires special permission. All adults are
 issued identity documents or internal passports which must be
 carried on their person during travel in the U.S.S.R. and used
 to register visits of more than 3 days with the local
 authorities. Approximately 20 percent of Soviet territory is
 formally closed to travel by foreigners. An additional 70
 percent is either closed in fact or inaccessible. The right
 to choose one's place of residence, although formally
 guaranteed by law, is subject to restrictions. Everyone is
 required to register his place of residence. The authorities
 limit the number of residence permits in some large cities,
 such as Moscow and Leningrad, where housing is at a premium.
 There are persistent reports that Crimean Tatars, forcibly
 evicted from their historic homeland in 1944, continue to
 
 
 1133
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 attempt to return home. Tatar families who try to reestablish
 farms in the Crimea, however, are often apprehended by the
 authorities and forced to leave again. In 1985 the
 authorities did, however, permit the Meskhetroms, a
 Turkish-speaking Islamic people also deported during World War
 II, to return to their homeland in southern Georgia.
 As a member of the United Nations, the U.S.S.R. joined the
 consensus adopting the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
 and has also accepted other international documents in which
 the right to leave one's country and return thereto is
 recognized. In reality, however, Soviet law does not
 recognize the right of-citizens to emigrate by choice, and the
 only recognized motive for emigration is reunification of
 divided families. On this basis, emigration increased
 significantly during the 1970's, especially among Soviet Jews,
 Armenians, and ethnic Germans. Jewish emigration reached a
 peak of 51,320 in 1979. At the end of that year, however,
 Soviet authorities began deliberately to restrict the level of
 emigration. By 1984, Jewish emigration had fallen to only
 896. The pattern of Armenian and ethnic German emigration
 followed suit.
 Jewish emigration continued at severely restricted levels in
 1985. The total for the year, 1,140, was up only slightly
 from 1984. Despite worldwide concern and condemnation, by
 year's end there was still no clear sign that Soviet
 authorities intended to increase the level of emigration.
 Many Jews have waited in vain for more than 10 years for
 permission to emigrate, Jewish sources estimate that there
 are still more than 200,000 Jews who possess the letters of
 invitation (vyzovs) from Israel necessary for application to
 emigrate. The number of ethnic Germans and Armenians
 emigrating from the U.S.S.R. also remained low during 1985.
 In 1985 Soviet authorities resolved several cases on the U.S.
 Government Representation List of Divided Families. This list
 contains the names of Soviet families denied Soviet permission
 to reunite with their relatives in the United States. At
 year's end 130 families still remained on the List.
 Twenty-three U.S./Soviet dual nationals on the U.S. Government
 Representation List of American Citizens have been denied
 Soviet permission to leave, several for many decades. Only
 one case on the list was resolved in 1985. The only
 significant progress in 1985 was in regard to persons on the
 U.S. Government Representation List of Separated Spouses.
 This List contains the names of the Soviet spouses of U.S.
 citizens who have been denied Soviet permission to join their
 spouses in the United States. Fourteen cases were resolved in
 1985, but at year's end 18 spouses remained on the List.
 For the very few who received exit visas in 1985, emigration
 procedures were cumbersome and expensive. The cost of a
 passport for emigration to a "capitalist" county is 200 rubles
 (approximately $254 at the official rate). The mere attempt
 to submit an emigration application frequently involves a
 variety of administrative and extralegal sanctions, including
 loss of employment, harassment, social ostracism, and long
 delays.
 While Soviet emigrants generally retain possession of their
 Soviet travel passports when they leave the U.S.S.R., they are
 not always permitted to return. Some individuals are stripped
 
 
 1134
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 of their citizenship when they are abroad, thus precluding
 their return. Jewish emigrants departing for Israel are
 required to renounce formally Soviet citizenship prior to
 departure, thus effectively precluding their return to the
 U.S.S.R. as Soviet citizens.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Only officeholders in either of the parallel state and party
 hierarchies can influence the composition of the Government.
 The Soviet Union is a one-party, totalitarian State in which
 the Communist Party directs and controls all legal political
 life. The Constitution provides that the Communist Party is
 the "leading and guiding force of Soviet society and the
 nucleus of its political system, of all state organizations
 and public organizations." The nomenklatura (Soviet personnel
 system in which all senior appointments are decided by the
 party) allows a relatively small group of the Communist
 Party's elite members to use the party as the instrument of
 their own personal, self-perpetuating rule.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government contends that all internationally recognized
 human rights are fully protected and asserts that only
 "Socialism" can truly guarantee human rights. Soviet
 authorities reject foreign criticism of their human rights
 record as interference in Soviet internal affairs, despite the
 fact that the Soviet Union is signatory to numerous
 international documents, including the Final Act of the
 Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, recognizing
 human rights as a valid subject of international concern.
 The authorities do not permit foreigners to investigate the
 status of human rights in the U.S.S.R. International human
 rights organizations such as Amnesty International have
 frequently addressed communications to the Soviet Government
 concerning human rights, but the authorities have declined to
 reply in a substantive manner. The authorities have
 suppressed the Moscow chapter of Amnesty International and
 published attacks on the organization, alleging that it works
 with Western intelligence agencies against the Soviet
 Government. Vladimir Albrecht, a former member of the Soviet
 chapter of Amnesty International, was sentenced in September
 to a term in a labor camp for "malicious hooliganism" in
 connection with alleged offenses committed while serving a
 previous penal term imposed in 1983 for anti-Soviet slander.
 In its 1985 Report (covering the year 1984), Amnesty
 International was concerned that many Soviet citizens were
 imprisoned or confined to mental hospitals solely for the
 nonviolent exercise of their human rights, namely, freedom of
 religion and expression. It received reports of ill-treatment
 from prisons, corrective labor colonies, and psychiatric
 institutions. Amnesty International adopted as prisoners of
 conscience or was investigating the cases of 560 persons but
 believed the total number of prisoners of conscience to be
 much higher. It noted allegations of systematic brutality
 against some prisoners of conscience and was concerned that
 apparently none of the allegations had been thoroughly
 investigated by the competent authorities. Furthermore,
 
 
 1135
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 Amnesty International reported that those who tried
 independently to gather information on human rights abuses
 themselves risked imprisonment. Freedom House rated the
 U.S.S.R. "not free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 The Soviet Union in 1985 had a population of 277,504,000 with
 an annual growth rate of I percent. The 1983 per capita gross
 nationa product was $6,765.
 The highly centralized, rigidly planned Soviet economy is
 characterized by widespread waste, chronic shortages of basic
 goods, and low labor productivity. Current efforts to improve
 economic efficiency apparently do not include plans for the
 structural economic changes believed necessary for significant
 improvement. Despite attempts to improve the production and
 distribution of basic goods, queues and a flourishing black
 market remain common features of Soviet life. Formal and
 informal food rationing still persist in some areas.
 Housing is subsidized in the U.S.S.R. but is in extremely
 short supply. Twenty percent of the population still live in
 communal apartments, and another 5 percent are housed in
 factory dormitories. Young couples often must live with
 relatives and typically have to wait years for housing of
 their own. The housing that does exist is extremely cramped,
 more so than in any other developed country in the world.
 Construction quality is very low, and buildings are poorly
 maintained. Many urban buildings and most rural buildings
 lack indoor plumbing.
 Free, universal health care is guaranteed by the Constitution,
 but the health care system has proved inadequate to deal with
 the enormous increase in cardiovascular and other diseases
 associated with contemporary industrial society. Soviet male
 life expectancy has actually decreased by more than 4 years
 over the past two decades, and female life expectancy has
 remained static. Since these figures only account for the
 increase in the adult death rate, and ignore the impact of
 infant mortality rates, which have themselves risen during the
 same period by as much as 40 percent, the actual decrease in
 life expectancy is certainly much greater. The problems in
 the health care system responsible for these alarming trends
 involve both quality and quantity. There are chronic
 shortages of the most essential medicines and vaccines, the
 average Soviet doctor is only trained at the level of a
 Western paramedic, medical equipment is well below
 international standards or nonexistent, and poor sanitary
 conditions breed frequent infection and disease.
 Alcohol abuse has been an important factor in increased Soviet
 morbidity rates. The Soviet Union ranks first in the world in
 the per capita consumption of hard liquor, the most dangerous
 from the standpoint of health. Alcohol consumption has more
 than doubled during the past 25 years and now takes 10 percent
 of the average Soviet household budget. In 1984 more than one
 Soviet adult in eight spent at least one night in a
 sobering-up station. Soviet sources have themselves estimated
 that more than one-third of all male workers are chronically
 drunk. This dramatic evidence of social malaise costs the
 Soviet economy 10 percent in lost production every year. In
 May, Soviet leaders acknowledged the gravity of this economic
 and social problem by enacting a series of measures aimed at
 
 
 1136
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 reducing alcohol consumption. At year's end, the
 effectiveness of these measures remained in doubt.
 Most members of the Soviet elites (the party, the military,
 the diplomatic corps, the scientific-technical intelligentsia,
 the cultural and sports establishments) are to various degrees
 shielded from these social and economic hardships. They have
 access to such special benefits as foreign travel,
 automobiles, quality consumer goods sold in special stores,
 special medical facilities, admission to the best schools,
 country houses, and paid vacations in choice resorts, which
 are not available to the average citizen.
 Education is free at all levels and is compulsory through the
 l1th year. Basic literacy among citizens under 50 is
 practically universal; only in certain areas of central Asia
 and the Caucasus were some children unable to attend school.
 Atheism and Marxist-Leninist ideology are required courses.
 The statutory minimum age for the employment of children in
 1983 was 16 (18 for heavy work), and the standard workweek was
 41 hours (less for minors and workers doing dangerous work).
 There is no indication of widespread violation of these
 norms. The minimum wage was set at $203 per month by the end
 of 1985. Soviet law requires, in general terms, healthy and
 safe working conditions, but practice falls far short of
 accepted Western standards.
 Women nominally enjoy the same legal status as men but in
 practice are systematically discriminated against by a
 male-dominated society. An extensive system of day-care
 service and maternity leave benefits, including in some cases
 *up to I year's leave from work, significantly enhances the
 ability of women to secure and retain employment. However,
 women hold less remunerative positions. Traditionally, men
 occupy the great majority of the leading positions in most
 professions and politically sensitive occupations, especially
 politics. At present, only 8 of the 301 full members of the
 Central Committee of the Soviet Communist Party are women.
 Discrimination on the basis of race, sex, or other grounds is
 nominally prohibited by the Constitution. However, attempts
 to impose the Russian language on minorities have led to
 widespread resistance by Ukrainians, Balts, and other minority
 groups. In recent years, numerous reports and investigations
 by activists have noted discrimination against Jews in
 universities, research institutes, and other organizations.
 
 
 1137
