 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 
 The Soviet Union is a one-party state in which the Communist
 Party claims the right to direct all political, economic,
 social, cultural and other developments. The 1977 Soviet
 constitution codifies the Party's leading role in all
 spheres of activity. Tolerance of any other political
 belief is incompatible with the Communist Party's ideology.
 The USSR comprises a vast, rich land of many nationalities
 in many stages of development. The Soviet Union shows little
 toleration for local autonomy: a federated state in
 appearance, it is a centralized unitary state in reality,
 integrated by the mechanisms of police, party, ideology and
 the predominance of the now shrinking Russian majority.
 National development, security, and assertion of sovereignty
 continue to be the primary goals and burdens of the state.
 This rapid development of heavy industry has provided the
 USSR with the military and technical means to assert its
 historically conditioned claim to status as a superpower.
 Development has emphasized the id6als of social cohesion,
 political centralization and ideological conformity.
 Indeed, Russian history has not observed many times when
 dissent has emerged.
 The Soviet constitution formally provides for all
 internationally recognized human rights, both civil and
 political, and social and economic -- including the right to
 work, education, and medical care. But as the former have
 ceded to the system's perception of the need for political
 control, so the latter have given way before the Government's
 closely related security-oriented economic priorities,
 chiefly the development of defense and heavy industry. In
 addition, these rights are qualified by a number of
 provisions requiring that they not be exercised in a manner
 contrary to the interests of society, as defined by the
 Party. In practice, any human right may be suppressed in
 the USSR when its attempted exercise runs counter to the
 interests of the Party regime.
 Following a long period of peace, rapid economic development
 and a significant relaxation of the totalitarian character
 of the Stalin regime, two interrelated trends have emerged.
 One is a new, explicit dissent which, in its diversity,
 includes traditional nationalist sentiments and neo-Leninist
 reform Marxism as well as a liberal democratic tendency.
 The movement does not have a well-defined leadership, nor
 does it agree --beyond a common desire for genuine legality
 and respect for general human rights -- on objectives for
 Soviet society and how to achieve them. The number of open
 dissenters and human rights activists remains relatively
 small, and they are subject to constant harassment and
 imprisonment. They are denied any role in the political
 process. The Soviet authorities, often behave as though
 they believe these activists represent a serious threat to
 the regime.
 A second trend is the emergence of pressure from all levels
 of society for greater respect of human rights and for
 Soviet laws. The transition from terror and abject
 repression to "socialist legality," which begun after the
 
 (675)
 
 
 676
 20th Party Congress in 1956, improved the atmosphere, but
 has not lessened Party control over the Soviet legal system
 or satisfied those who seek protection of the law from
 arbitrary rule. Nonetheless, Soviet citizens are
 increasingly willing to assert their rights under Soviet law
 in their dealings with authorities. They go to court more
 often to resolve disputes over such non-political matters as
 salaries, and illegal discharge from work. As with more
 direct dissent, the depth of this mood is difficult to gauge
 because of state control over all systems for the expression
 of public opinion.
 In its public statements, the Soviet state has placed
 considerable emphasis on economic and social rights. The
 population as a whole is adequately fed, clothed, housed,
 educated and medically cared for although the quality of
 such services is often criticized by Soviet citizens and
 official media. The Soviets revolutionized the economy of
 tsarist Russia; out of the chaos and disorder of 1917-1921
 and the widespread destruction experienced in World War II,
 the Soviet economy has emerged as the world's second largest
 which, despite its deficiencies, does meet the minimal needs
 of its citizenry. There are substantial restrictions,
 however, on freedom of individual economic choice and the
 state utilizes economic and social controls -- such as
 access to higher education, better jobs and quality consumer
 goods -- to encourage conformity.
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a.   Torture
 Torture and physical abuse of prisoners as a means of
 obtaining confessions appears to have become less prevalent
 in the 1970s. Nevertheless, reports from a variety of
 sources indicate that mistreatment of prisoners during
 interrogation continues to occur. Prisoners awating trial
 are often held in isolation and may be subjected to long
 periods of interrogation and to psychological pressure, such
 as threats against their families. In some cases, beatings
 or other forms of physical abuse reportedly are employed
 against prisoners during their pre-trial investigation.
 Agents of the government are responsible for any such
 actions. Some political prisoners are confined in
 psychiatric hospitals where they have been subjected to
 mistreatment. In places of confinement, prisoners suffer
 cold and hunger under penal regulations which provide for
 different norms of nutrition for different categories of
 prisoners. Many reports of ill health from Soviet camps and
 prisons support the conclusion that low standards of
 maintenance are enforced.
 b.   Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 Article 20 of the Russian Soviet Federated Socialist
 Republic's Criminal Code states that "punishment does not
 have the goal of causing physical suffering or the
 destruction of human dignity." In spite of this legal
 guarantee, cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment is wide-
 spread especially among political prisoners. The Soviet
 penal system provides for incarceration in prisons or in
 corrective labor camps. The camps are divided into five
 classes based on the severity of conditions of confinement,
 ranging from the most liberal "colony settlements" to the
 extremely severe "special regime" camps.
 
 
 677
 A number of Soviet emigre and foreign authors have
 described, on the basis of personal experience, stark, often
 inhuman conditions in Soviet prisons and labor camps. Non-
 governmental human rights organizations, including Amnesty
 International (Al) have also registered their concern. In
 1977 Al prepared a major study on conditions in Vladimir
 Prison, one of the Soviet Union's most notorious prisons and
 one where many political prisoners have been confined.
 According to AI, "Areas of particular concern are the
 prisoners' diet, their exposure to severe punishments (often
 a danger to their health) for protesting against their
 treatment and conditions, the wholly inadequate medical
 attention given them, and their difficult conditions of
 compulsory labor.' There are recent reports that imprisoned
 human rights activists suffer ill health.
 Although some political prisoners have been removed from
 Vladimir Prison, probably because the city of Vladimir will
 be visited heavily by foreign tourists during the 1980
 Olympics, the conditions in the prisons to which they have
 been transfered are reported to be little better.
 Al has also criticized the conditions of confinement in
 Soviet labor camps, especially the "special regime" camps in
 Mordovia. Forms of mistreatment in these camps include
 inadequate diet leading to chronic hunger and health
 problems, inadequate medical treatment, heavy labor often in
 unsafe conditions, and arbitrary deprivation of the
 prisoners' limited rights to receive correspondence and
 family visits. Political prisoners appear to be treated
 significantly worse than other inmates and are reportedly
 subjected to beatings and other forms of harassment by
 groups of criminal prisoners. Prisoners who are religious
 believers are denied the right to practice their beliefs and
 may be punished for attempts to do so.
 The International Committee of the Red Cross and other
 humanitarian organizations are not allowed access to Soviet
 prisoners.
 Prisoners in the USSR are sometimes confined for political
 reasons in special psychiatric hospitals under severe
 conditions. According to reports, inmates in such special
 psychiatric hospitals are subjected to a variety of cruel
 and degrading treatments, including excessive doses of
 powerful and painful drugs, beatings, and confinements
 without any right of appeal. Some sources estimate that up
 to 1,000 persons may be confined in such special psychiatric
 hospitals for political reasons in the USSR. In 1977, the
 World Psychiatric Association adopted a resolution condemning
 political abuse of psychiatry and named the Soviet Union as
 an offender in this regard.
 "Internal exile" to Siberia -- a lesser form of punishment
 than imprisonment, forced labor or psychiatric incarceration
 and one of the tsarist police's primary methods of dealing
 with dissenters -- remains a wide-spread practice. Persons
 given a sentence of exile, which may range up to five years,
 are assigned to police supervision in a far-off town or
 village which they may leave only for urgent reasons and
 with special authorization. Such exile in underdeveloped
 areas, where the cold is extreme and where fresh foods are
 generally unavailable, represents a real hardship. This
 hardship is mitigated only by the exiles' privilege of
 receiving food parcels and the comparative freedom to
 arrange for their own accommodations, to find work, and to
 move about over a limited area.
 
 
 678
 The Soviet legal code authorizes the death penalty for a
 variety of offenses, including some which are not generally
 considered capital crimes elsewhere in the world, namely
 economic crimes such as large-scale financial fraud. The
 Soviet press occasionally reports imposition of the death
 penalty and it has apparently been carried out in several
 instances. However, statistics on capital punishment --
 like other crime statistics -- are not published by the
 Soviet Government.
 c.   Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Neither Soviet law nor official Soviet policy recognizes the
 concept of political prisoners. Soviet spokesmen deny that
 persons are prosecuted for their ideas. They insist that
 prosecution occurs only in cases when persons commit acts
 prohibited by express provisions which have frequently been
 used to convict individuals for the exercise of
 internationally recognized human rights. The articles of
 the Soviet criminal code which have been most commonly used
 for political purposes are the following.  (The articles
 have been taken from the RSFSR Criminal Code, but similar
 articles exist in the codes of the.Soviet Union's other
 constituent republics.)
 -- Article 190-1 "Dissemination of deliberately
 hostile fabrications slandering the Soviet state
 and social system."  (This article, which was introduced
 in 1966 after the trial of Soviet writers Sinyavsky
 and Daniel, carries a maximum penalty of three years
 imprisonment.);
 -- Article 190-3 "Organization or active participation
 in a group activity, violating public order."  (Maximum
 penalty of three years imprisonment.);
 -- Article 70 "Anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda."
 (Maximum penalty of ten years imprisonment and up
 to an additional five years internal exile.);
 -- Article 227 "Infringement of Person and Right
 of Citizens under Appearance of Performing Religious
 Ceremonies" (Maximum penalty of five years imprisonment.)
 Sentences of political prisoners sometimes run to 15 years
 because they are charged with treason in some form.
 In addition to these and other articles of law dealing with
 political offenses, Soviet judicial authorities have also
 had recourse to charges, unrelated to political offenses,
 such as illegal commerce and hooliganism, in order to
 prosecute persons for political activity.
 It is difficult to estimate the total number of political
 prisoners in the USSR. Large areas of the country are
 closed to foreigners and reports of trials in these and
 other remote regions may not come to the attention of
 foreign observers. An unknown number of political prisoners
 have been convicted and sentenced for "ordinary" crimes and
 as such would not be incarcerated in any of the special
 camps reserved for political offenders. Likewise, it is
 difficult to establish how many are imprisoned in psychiatric
 hospitals. Using Soviet and Western data, however, Al has
 estimated that the total prison general population in the
 USSR is approximately one million. Other estimates range to
 as high as five million for the total population of prisoners
 and between 2,000 and 10,000 for political prisoners. The
 Moscow Helsinki Monitoring Group has reported the names of
 700 political prisoners, but believes the total number to be
 far greater.
 
 
 679
 Soviet criminal procedures set forth stringent rules
 governing search, arrest and detention. No one in the USSR
 may be legally arrested without the written sanction of a
 procurator. Although the Soviet authorities endeavor to
 place the arrest and detention of political prisoners on a
 legal basis, AI has concluded that "instances of procedural
 infringements and even physical violence are frequent."
 According to Article 97 of the RSFSR Code of Criminal
 Procedure, pre-trial detention during a preliminary
 investigation may last up to six months, and may be extended
 "in exceptional circumstances" by the Procurator General of
 the USSR. In practice, political prisoners have been held
 in pre-trial confinement for'up to a year or more.
 Prisoners are not entitled to consult with a lawyer until
 after the conclusion of the pre-trial investigation of their
 case. Accroding to Al, prisoners can "legally be held
 incommunicado for up to nine months after arrest."
 At the present time, individuals do not generally
 "disappear" for protracted periods in the USSR. However,
 dissidents and other individuals are sometimes picked up by
 the police and held for days without any charges being
 brought against them, especially when the authorities fear
 that the individual might engage in some act of protest that
 might embarrass the state. Dissidents, persons awaiting
 emigration and others have sometimes been confined or exiled
 for "parasitism," a vague regulation which allows the
 authorities to resettle for up to two years persons who have
 no officially recognized employment.
 d.   Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Soviet constitution provides for a number of guarantees
 for the objectivity and independence of the judicial
 process. These standards, however, are frequently violated
 during political trials. In any case, the pervasive control
 exercised by the regime and the Communist Party in all areas
 of society, including the police and the legal establishment,
 makes a truly independent judicial process impossible.
 Article 158 of the Soviet constitution guarantees defendants
 in criminal actions the right to legal assistance and an
 accused can generally select his or her own counsel
 although there is sometimes interference with such choice.
 Many Soviet lawyers are reluctant to become involved in
 political trials, and the selection is further limited by
 the requirement that lawyers in many political cases have a
 special clearance for "secret" matters. In any case, the
 fact that all lawyers in the USSR are employees of the state
 and approximately 60 percent are members of the Communist
 Party limits their ability to conduct a vigorous defense in
 such cases. Some Soviet lawyers who have shown an excess of
 zeal in defending clients accused of political offenses have
 suffered various penalties, including expulsion from the
 Party and loss of their jobs. Nonetheless, some Soviet
 lawyers involved in political cases have shown courage and
 independence in insisting upon the protection afforded by
 Soviet law to their clients, and some have taken their place
 in the ranks of the dissenters. In a recent incident the
 Moscow Bar protested a requirement that attorneys visiting
 prisoners be searched.
 In the final analysis, however, even the most vigorous
 defense is of limited utility in a Soviet political trial.
 Throughout the more than 62 years of the Soviet Union's
 existence, no acquittal in a political trial is known. In
 some cases, the press has published attacks on persons in
 detention and awaiting trial, even before formal charges are
 made.
 
 
 680
 Although Article 155 of the Soviet constitution states that
 judges in the USSR are independent and subject only to law,
 judicial personnel are subject to the same Party and
 governmental constraints as lawyers. Reports from numerous
 political trials in recent years indicate that judges have
 manipulated the proceedings to the disadvantage of the
 defendant.
 Article 157 of the Soviet constitution provides that all
 legal proceedings be open and allows in camera hearings
 "only in cases provided for by law." However, the
 authorities have employed a number of techniques to ensure
 that most political trials have in actuality been closed to
 the public, including close relatives of the accused. The
 locations of trials are often announced on short notice and
 may be transferred with little warning. Special passes are
 often required for entrance to the trial and the courtrooms
 are frequently packed in advance with government supporters.
 Observers outside the court may be harassed or detained by
 the police. In the rare instances when political trials are
 mentioned in the Soviet press, they are reported in a biased
 fashion aimed at discrediting the defendant.
 Soviet legal procedure does not overtly provide for special
 courts to deal with security or political offenses.
 However, the Western press has recently reported the
 existence of.a system of "special courts" in the USSR.
 These are apparently established to handle judicial matters
 concerning the extensive network of secret institutes in the
 USSR. No information is available on the legal procedures
 under which these courts may operate.
 No trials of civilians by military courts have been reported
 in recent years.
 e.   Invasion of the Home
 According to Article 55 of the Soviet constitution, citizens
 of the USSR are guaranteed inviolability of the home. In
 theory, no one may enter a home against the will of the
 resident "without legal grounds." In practice, this
 provision has little restraining effect on Soviet
 investigatory agencies, and illegal searches of residences
 have been reported.
 2.   Government Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 The Soviet economy is a highly centralized system, where
 government planners control all production and investment
 decisions, where nearly all the means of production are
 owned by the state, and private use of capital resources --
 with the significant exception of the private plots of
 agricultural land -- is forbidden to citizens. The regime's
 major economic problem may be summarized as the difficulty
 of making a transition from extensive economic growth
 (growth resulting from increased labor and capital inputs)
 to growth based upon increased factor productivity. Special
 problems which the USSR faces include a declining rate of
 growth of the labor force, low labor productivity,
 increasing costs, inefficient use of raw materials,
 difficulties in developing, absorbing and disseminating
 technological innovation and large variability in
 agricultural production. As a result, overall growth rates
 which ran as high as 10-12 percent in the early days of the
 
 
 (381
 Five Year Plans and during the post-war reconstruction
 period, have declined: to 6-8 percent in the 1950s, 4-5
 percent in the 1960s, and to 3 percent in the late 1970s.
 These figures, based on Western calculations, dramatize the
 regime's growing difficulty in maintaining its priority of
 heavy investment in defense and industrialization while
 attempting simultaneously to meet increased consumer
 expectations.
 The Soviet Government publishes few statistics regarding
 distribution of income. In any case, money income is not
 necessarily indicative of general wealth or welfare in the
 USSR, for money does not measure buying power in the sense
 that it does in market economies. Command over real
 resources is determined in significant measure by rank
 within the various elites of the Soviet society.
 Distribution often occurs through non-monetary exchange and
 by access to perquisites such as private auto transport;
 high-quality consumer goods, especially those of foreign
 origin; and to special medical facilities. Opportunities
 for training and education are generally available to all
 citizens. However, children of the Soviet elite enjoy
 easier access to some more desirable faculties and
 institutes and such advantages as being able to hire tutors
 in preparation for the rigorous entrance examination to
 institutions of higher education. Restrictions on access to
 higher education for children of human rights and religious
 activists are also known to exist.
 The Soviet income tax system is mildly progressive.
 However, a large share of tax receipts is obtained through
 what amounts to a value-added tax, whereby goods, especially
 consumer items, are sold by the government at prices
 considerably higher than their apparent cost of production.
 The size of this tax is unknown and its existence is seldom
 mentioned in the Soviet press. Offsetting its regressive
 character, however, is the fact that it enhances the
 government's ability to subsidize housing and consumer
 necessities at the expense of luxury items.
 One of the Soviet Government's major stated goals is to
 provide an increasing quantity and quality bf foodstuffs,
 modern roads, health care and cultural facilities.
 Substantial progress has been made in the provision of basic
 goods to most of the Soviet population but many shortages
 still exist. There is often a wide disparity in regional
 distribution of these amenities, especially between rural
 and urban areas. In general, food supplies in rural areas
 fall far short of those available in major cities. The USSR
 has had to import large quantities of grain from the West,
 primarily to increase livestock production.
 The Soviet constitution guarantees the right to own private
 personal property. However, seizure by the state of
 property considered to have been illegally acquired is
 possible without effective legal recourse and there are
 reports of abuse of this power.
 The Soviet Government has devoted considerable effort to
 increased housing construction in recent years, and this is
 reflected in the rapid growth of large suburban apartment
 complexes and interest in restoring older city dwellings.
 
 
 682
 Many major cities have impressive long-term plans for
 coordinated regional development including housing,
 transportation, and consumer services. In the cases of
 Moscow and Leningrad, these plans are calculated as separate
 items in the government's overall economic plans.
 Nevertheless, housing shortages and overcrowding continue to
 exist in major cities, due to the relative neglect of
 housing during the Stalin period and the continued
 substantial migration from rural to urban areas which
 increases the populations of already crowded cities.
 Planned housing construction for the entire Tenth Five-Year
 Plan (1976-80) is 545-550 million square meters. In 1976
 and 1977 performance was roughly on target.
 Housing construction, measured in square meters per capita
 was about 43 percent of the U. S. level in 1978. The
 general norm for housing in the RSFSR remains at nine square
 meters per person. In Leningrad, considered by the
 authorities to be a "model city," official Soviet statistics
 indicate that 40 percent of the population still lives in
 communal apartments. In such an apartment, a family might
 have one or two rooms, but still must share kitchen and
 bathroom facilities with other families in the same
 apartment. One aim of the government is to provide private
 apartments for everyone, but the waiting list for such
 apartments is long. A popular option of the last few years
 for those who can afford it is the purchase of a cooperative
 apartment.
 Free universal health care is guaranteed by the Soviet
 constitution. In addition, provision for the continuation
 of the citizen's income during periods of illness is quite
 liberal. Medical standards and the availability of
 personnel and facilities have improved substantially under
 Soviet rule. As of 1977 there were 34.5 physicians and
 120.8 hospital beds per 10,000 people. There is, however,
 considerable disparity in the regional distribution of
 medical facilities. Shortages of medicines and vaccines
 persist, and medical equipment is generally not up to
 Western standards.
 Enormous strides in the quality and availability of
 education in the Soviet Union have been made. Literacy in
 native languages is nearly universal and younger people of
 most nationalities, with a few notable exceptions, can read
 and write in Russian as well. Despite certain deficiencies
 in availability in Central Asia and the Caucasus region,
 education is free at all levels and is compulsory through
 the tenth year. During the 1977-78 academic year, there
 were approximately 40 million students in grades 1-10,
 divided about evenly between urban and rural locations, and
 about 10 million students in higher and specialized
 secondary educational institutions. All regular students
 admitted to institutions of higher learning receive stipends
 indexed to their academic achievement. There is great
 respect for education, and competition for scarce seats in
 the universities and the better institutes is keen.
 Opportunities for education and professional advancement
 made possible by national development under the Soviet
 regime have led to greater social mobility for a large part
 of the Soviet population.
 
 
 683
 The importance of non-income factors for personal well-being
 in the Soviet Union provides the regime a convenient means
 of social control. The elite, and aspirants to that status,
 are encouraged to conform to Party expectations by the
 prospect of gaining access to goods, services, and privileges
 unavailable to the general public. Loss of one's job or
 status as a result of dissident activity, including applying
 to emigrate, results in loss of such benefits and, at times,
 in considerable hardship, thereby posing a distinct
 disincentive to such behaviour.
 3.   Respect for Civil and Political Liberties
 a.   Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 In 1977, the USSR adopted a new constitution which provides
 for most commonly accepted political liberties, including,
 according to Article 50, "freedom of speech, press, assembly,
 meetings, street processions, and demonstrations." However,
 the exercise of these rights must be "in accordance with the
 interests of the people and in order to strengthen and
 develop the socialist system." Article 39 of the Soviet
 constitution also states that "enjoyment by citizens of
 their rights and freedoms must not be to the detriment of
 the interests of society or the state." In practice, this
 means that the regime recognizes no right to any opinion or
 behaviour it chooses to regard as deviant.
 Since the adoption of the new constitution -- as under its
 predecessor -- the Soviet authorities have not hesitated to
 imprison persons for exercising basic human rights. In the
 opinion of Al, "the new constitution, like that of 1936,
 institutionalizes restrictions on Soviet citizens' human
 rights."
 All Soviet media, including the press, are subject to
 complete control by the state and Party. Newspapers,
 whether organs of the Soviet Government, the Communist
 Party, labor unions, professional associations, educational
 or cultural organizations, etc., are dominated and
 controlled by the Party and the government. In addition,
 all books and other publications, films, and radio and
 television scripts are subject to pre-release censorship by
 the Main Administration of Safeguarding State Secrets in the
 Press.
 No dissenting or opposition views on important questions of
 policy are permitted in Soviet media and no criticism of the
 government, the Party, or the leadership is permitted
 (except at the behest of the leadership in order to
 discredit an individual or to call for or illustrate a
 corrective action of some abuse such as inefficient, lower
 level implementation of policy). Authors of literary or
 political material, which circulates in unpublished form
 (samizdat), have been subject to such varied penalties as
 loss of employment, exile to remote regions of the USSR,
 sentences to labor camps and prisons, and incarceration in
 Soviet mental hospitals. However, the Chronicle of Current Events,
 an information bulletin which reports on the human rights
 situation in the Soviet Union, has succeeded in publishing
 53 issues over a 12-year period despite more than 30 arrests
 of persons alleged to be associated with its preparation and
 circulation. In little more than a year several more
 significant samizdat publications have appeared. One of
 
 
 684
 these was Poiski, a journal devoted to discussion of social
 and political issues; another was Metropol, a literary
 anthology containing uncensored works of recognized Soviet
 writers; a third was Vitiyaz, dedicated to Russian nationalist
 themes; and the most recent was Women and Russia. Two
 contributors to Metropol have been barred from membership in
 the Union of Writers, and editors of Poiski have had their
 apartments searched and have been detained for interrogation.
 All Soviet journalists are bound by the discipline of the
 Communist Party and subordinate to the directives of their
 editorial superiors -- who are themselves trusted members of
 the Party. In practice, Soviet journalists are to a greater
 or lesser degree collaborators in, and executors of,
 official policy.
 The Soviet continue to maintain tight control over the work
 of foreign journalists and the circulation of foreign
 newspapers in the Soviet Union. While overt censorship of
 wire transmissions of news stories out of the country by
 foreign journalists is infrequent, Soviet authorities harass
 some foreign journalists and in some cases curtail or deny
 them Soviet visas. The Soviets have taken some steps to
 improve the working conditions of foreign journalists --
 especially by granting them the privilege of multiple
 entry/exit visas -- in connection with Soviet undertakings
 under the Helsinki Final Act.
 Article 52 of the Soviet constitution guarantees the "right
 to profess or not to profess any religion and to conduct
 religious worship or atheistic propaganda." In practice,
 however, religious believers are subjected to many
 restrictions on their activities. Soviet law on religious
 associations requires religious groups of more than 20
 persons to register with the authorities. Soviet law
 prohibits religious believers from engaging in charitable
 activity, conducting evangelical activity, and providing
 religious training to children. There have been confirmed
 reports that the authorities have taken away children from
 families which have permitted or conducted such instruction.
 Religious believers, especially those who belong to an
 unregistered group, such as some Baptist groups, Jehovah's
 Witnesses, Seventh Day Adventists and others, may also be
 subject to a wide variety of repressive measures by the
 authorities, including harassment at school or place of
 employment, denial of access to housing, dismissal from work
 or imprisonment for violation of Soviet law on religion.
 Such conditions underlie the desire of many Soviet
 Pentecostalists to emigrate, including the Vashchenko and
 Chmykalova families now living in refuge in the U. S.
 Embassy in Moscow.
 While the official Soviet communications media transmit
 large amounts of anti-religious material, pro-religious
 meterial is not permitted to appear in any official media.
 The Communist party, which the Soviet constitution defines
 as the "leading and guiding force in Soviet society," is,
 according to its rules , an atheistic organization.
 Membership in the Party, which is considered incompatible
 with religious belief, is an informal requirement for
 advancement to most leading positions in the country.
 
 
 685
 The regime shows particular sensitivity to religion when it
 is perceived as linked to actual or potential political
 dissent, as in the case of Roman Catholicism in Lithuania,
 Islam in Central Asia, or Judaism. There have been
 continuing reports of anti-Semitism as reflected in
 discrimination against Jews in access to higher education
 and the professions. Officially-condoned published attacks
 on Zionism, which appear only thinly to veil anti-Semitic
 feelings, have also aroused concern. There have been some
 instances of criticism in the Soviet press of books said to
 mirror anti-semitism.
 Article 51 of the Soviet constitution grants citizens the
 right to associate in public organizations, but only "in
 accordance with the aim of building communism." In
 practice, all public associations in the USSR are subject to
 the control of the authorities and any associations which
 appear to challenge the interests of the regime are
 suppressed. For example, members of the "Helsinki Watch"
 committees, private Soviet groups which attempt to monitor
 the performance of the Soviet Government in fulfilling the
 provisions of the Helsinki Final Act, have been subjected to
 severe repression, and in many cases imprisonment. As
 recently as November 1979, associates of the Helsinki Watch
 group Tatiana Velikanova and Father Gleb Yakunin were
 apprehended in a series of arrests. At present, there are
 more than twenty members of Soviet Helsinki Watch groups,
 including Professor Yuri Orlov, founder of the first
 Helsinki Watch group, serving sentences of imprisonment.
 The right of assembly is likewise guaranteed in theory to
 Soviet citizens, but in actuality the authorities prevent
 the exercise of this right for any purpose not in accordance
 with official policy.
 Soviet authorities use their control over the mails and
 telephone circuits to restrict, on a selective basis,
 contact between Soviet dissenters and citizens of all
 categories outside the USSR.
 b.   Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 Freedom of movement is neither guaranteed by law nor
 respected in practice. Although Soviet citizens are
 generally free to move about within the territory of the
 USSR, travel to certain areas, such as some border regions
 or areas of military significance, requires special
 permission. All adult Soviet citizens are issued identity
 documents ("passports") which must be carried for internal
 travel and used to register local stays of longer than three
 days with the authorities.
 The right to choose one's place of residence, although
 formally guaranteed by law, is subject to restrictions in
 practice. All persons are required to register at their
 place of residence. The authorities limit the issuance of
 residence permits in some large cities, such as Moscow and
 Leningrad, where housing is at a premium. Until 1976,
 workers on state and collective farms did not receive
 internal passports and could not travel from their homes
 without permission. Although these state and collective
 farm workers are now legally entitled to passports, actual
 implementation of this provision is uncertain. Former
 
 
 686
 prisoners are prohibited from settling in certain areas,
 even after they have served their sentences. Certain
 national minorities such as the Crimean Tartars, Meskhi and
 Volga Germans are prevented from freely resettling in the
 native areas from which they were deported during World War
 II for being security risks or for allegedly collaborating
 with the Germans. These charges have been acknowledged as
 spurious.
 Although the greater part of the Soviet Union remains closed
 to foreign travellers, the Soviets announced in 1978 the
 opening of a few additional areas which foreign tourists
 might visit.
 The USSR has ratified the U. N. Charter and other
 international documents, such as the International Covenants
 on Civil and Political Ri~hts and on Economic, Social, and
 Cultural Rights, in which the right to leave one's country
 and return thereto is enumerated, but this right is also
 restricted in practice beyond what is permissible in these
 documents. Reunification of divided familites is the only
 officially recognized basis for emigration from the Soviet
 Union. In 1976, the Soviets announced measures to simplify
 emigration procedures and reduce emigration fees which they
 presented as bringing their practice into conformity with
 the Helsinki Final Act. Laws and regulations which govern
 travel or emigration abroad are not publicly available,
 however, except for those concerning passport fees.
 Application procedures for emigration are cumbersome and
 expensive. The cost of an emigration passport to a
 "capitalist" country is 300 rubles (approximately $460),
 down from 400 rubles as of 1976. In addition, those seeking
 to emigrate to Israel -- the bulk of all emigrants -- are
 required to give up their Soviet citizenship, an act which
 costs 500 rubles (approximately $765). This is a reduction
 from 800 rubles as of 1976.
 Those applying for permission to emigrate are frequently
 subjected to a variety of administrative and extra-legal
 sanctions, such as loss of job, harassment and social
 ostracism. Some activists have suffered imprisonment or
 exile for their efforts to promote their own and others'
 right to emigrate. Many Soviet Jews have waited
 unsuccessfully for as long as seven years for permission to
 emigrate. Nevertheless, the number of Soviet Jews receiving
 permission to leave in the last few years has risen sharply:
 since 1968 over 230,000 Jews have been given exit permission
 for Israel. In 1979, 50,000 Soviet Jews were allowed to
 emigrate, the largest total ever. In addition, over 40,000
 ethnic Germans have been allowed to go to the FRG since
 1968, and thousands or Armenians have received exit
 permission -- mostly to the United States. Jewish sources
 estimate that as many as 200,000 additional Soviet Jews
 possess letters of invitation ("vyzovs") from Israel which
 are needed to apply to emigrate.
 Curently, more than 100 Soviet families, consisting of more
 than 300 individuals, are included on a United States
 Government representation list of those actively seeking to
 join close relatives in the United States and who have been
 refused exit permission one or more times by the Soviet
 Government. About 18-20 percent of that number are allowed
 
 
 687
 to emigrate each year. There are known to be 14 Americans
 living in the USSR with a claim to U. S. citizenship who
 have been denied permission to leave, several for many
 decades. One person, the subject of Embassy and State
 Department representations since 1947, was allowed to
 resettle in the U. S. only in December 1979. In addition,
 there are at least seven longstanding cases in which the
 Soviet Government has denied permission for the Soviet
 citizen spouse of an American citizen to emigrate.
 c.   Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 According to Article 6 of the Soviet constitution, the Party
 is "the leading and guiding force of Soviet society and the
 nucleus of its political system, of all state organizations
 and public organizations." No other party or organized
 group of any character is allowed to exist outside the
 control of the Communist Party. Attempts to establish such
 independent groups, even if their aims are entirely peaceful
 and in accordance with Soviet law, are suppressed by the
 authorities. This was the fate of an effort by persons
 connected with the dissident Free Trade Union Movement to
 sponsor dissident historian Roy Medvedev and would-be
 emigrant Lyudmila Agapova as candidates in the 1979 election
 of deputies to the Supreme Soviet.
 Strict discipline prevails within the Communist Party
 itself. Opposition groups within the Party are prohibited.
 Lower-ranking Party members have no real ability to
 influence or to criticize the decisions of their Party
 superiors. The limits of intra-party activity are defined
 by "democratic centralism" and a strictly hierarchical
 structure.
 Participation in the political system is open to all
 citizens who accept the principles of the regime and the
 Communist Party. Discrimination on the basis of race, sex,
 or other grounds is prohibited by the Soviet constitution.
 However, Russification and in particular attempts to prefer
 the Russian language over the language of national
 minorities, have led to demonstrations in the Georgian
 Republic, dissatisfaction among Ukrainian intellectuals and
 other protests by national minorities. In recent years,
 also, there have been allegations that some ethnic groups,
 especially Jews, face restrictions on their ability to
 participate in leading positions in the political system and
 in some other sensitive positions. It has been charged that
 informal quotas exist to limit the access of Jews to some
 universities and research institutes.
 Some Soviet citizens have been deprived of their citizenship
 because of their political activities and have been exiled
 abroad or have not been permitted to return to the USSR from
 foreign trips.
 Women are legally equal to men in the USSR and they
 participate in all areas of the country's social, political
 and economic life. However, males tend to occupy the
 leading positions in most fields of society, especially
 politics. Since the founding of the Soviet states, one
 woman has served on the Politburo, the country's leading
 political body. In the non-European portions of the USSR,
 
 
 688
 cultural, social, or religious biases restricting women to
 "traditional" roles tend to be stronger. However,
 liberation of women from traditional discrimination is one
 of the proclaimed goals of Soviet society. There is not
 stated economic discrimination against women; however, far
 larger numbers of women than men tend to be found in lower-
 paying positions.
 An extensive system of day care service and maternity leave
 benefits which allow women up to one year off from work
 significantly enhances the rights of women at the same time
 that it facilitates their membership in the work force.
 Soviet trade unions are strictly subordinated to the
 Communist Party and act as agents of the government in
 implementing economic policy and ensuring labor discipline.
 They do not function as collective bargaining agencies for
 workers. The right to strike is not recognized in the
 Soviet constitution and in practice has been rarely resorted
 to. Any strikes are treated by the authorities as illegal
 and are quickly suppressed, though not necessarily by
 violence. Recent attempts by a limited number of people to
 establish an independent trade union in the USSR have been
 severely repressed and the leaders have been imprisoned or
 incarcerated in psychiatric hospitals. Soviet workers,
 however, do enjoy and highly prize a large measure of job
 security in the absence of political motives for their
 dismissal.
 4.   Government Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Soviet Government contends that all internationally
 recognized human rights are fully protected in the USSR. In
 a submission to the U. N. Human Rights Committee in January
 1978, the Soviet Government said its new constitution
 fully guarantees and ensures the practical implementation
 in the Soviet Union of all principles enshrined
 in the Charter of the United Nations, the International
 Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights
 and other international instruments of the United
 Nations concerning human rights.
 The Soviet Government contends that only "socialism" can
 truly guarantee human rights.
 In spite of the fact that the USSR has signed a number of
 international documents, including the Helsinki Final Act,
 which recognize that human rights are a valid subject of
 international concern, the Soviet Government rejects foreign
 criticism of its human rights record as interference in its
 internal affairs. However, the government-controlled press
 publishes sharp criticism of the human rights situation in
 Western countries, especially the U. S.
 The Soviet Government does not permit foreign investigation
 of the human rights situation in the country. International
 human rights organizations, such as Amnesty International
 and the International League for Human Rights, have
 frequently addressed communications to the Soviet Government
 
 
 689
 concerning human rights, but the Soviet Government is not
 known to have replied to those inquiries in a substantive
 fashion. The Soviet Government has sought to repress by
 arrests and forced emigration an effort by human rights
 activists to maintain a Moscow chapter of Amnesty
 International.
 When individual allegations of human rights violations in
 the USSR are raised in the United Nations Human Rights
 Commission, Soviet representatives generally attempt to bar
 discussion on procedural grounds. If such discussion cannot
 be avoided, the Soviet representatives deny the substance of
 the allegations.
 Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania
 The human rights situation in the Baltic Republics has not
 been addressed specifically in the foregoing report since
 the United States has not recognized the illegal forcible
 incorporation in 1940 of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania into
 the Soviet Union. Human rights conditions in the three
 republics are, however, similar to those in the Soviet
 Union. The Lithuanian Catholic Church is under particularly
 heavy pressure. There appears to be a systematic program of
 "Russification" of the Baltic States by continuing
 resettlement there of a greater percentage of Russians
 relative to the native Estonian, Latvian, and Lithuanian
 populations. Prominent Baltic activists such as Viktoras
 Petkus, Balys Gajaukas, Antanas Terleckas, Zanis Skudra, and
 Kalju Mattik languish in prison, and there is harassment of
 a number of Baltic citizens who signed a petition last
 August (the 40th anniversary of the Hitler-Stalin Pact)
 calling for self-determination.
 
