 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 The Soviet Union (U.S.S.R.) is a one-party state, dominated by
 the leadership of the Communist Party. General Secretary
 Mikhail Gorbachev, who was elected President of the Soviet
 Union in 1988, actively pursued the policies of glasnost'
 (openness), encouraging broad public discussion on national
 problems, and perestroika (restructuring), aimed at stimulating
 initiative and change in government and economic operations.
 These policies had a major impact in 1988 in introducing
 changes in the perception and functioning of the Communist
 system. Although the party leadership is a self-perpetuating
 elite which attempts to direct all aspects of public life, the
 implementation of glasnost' thus far has given the Soviet
 population, at least in major cities, greater opportunity to
 express its views in public. Although the Soviet Union is a
 multinational state, political power has always been highly
 centralized in Moscow.
 The Committee for State Security (KGB), police authorities,
 and prosecutors. offices are charged by the party leadership
 with enforcing the population's compliance with policy
 decisions, directives, and legislation. They have
 traditionally done so by seeking to intimidate dissenters and
 potential dissenters. The severe punishment meted out in the
 past has, however, been replaced by short-term detention,
 administrative sentencing of demonstrators, selective summons
 for admonishment or reproof, and harsh press attacks on
 dissidents. Unlike other government agencies, the KGB has
 been subjected to only a modicum of glasnost' and perestroika.
 The Communist Party bolsters its monopoly of economic power
 through state ownership of the means of production and
 government administration of all significant economic
 activity. 'In 1988 the Soviet leadership broadened the limits
 of legal private enterprise. General Secretary Gorbachev
 announced that collective farmers would be allowed to lease
 agricultural land on a long-term basis (up to 50 years). The
 comprehensive economic reform program, meanwhile, is still
 under intense review.
 The limits of permissible dissent in 1988 continued to expand,
 perhaps most notably demonstrated at the XIX Communist Party
 Conference and by the massive national demonstrations in
 Armenia and the Baltic republics during the spring, summer,
 and early fall. While changes are still most evident in
 Moscow and Leningrad, an increasing number of informal
 organizations and publications are appearing in other cities,
 such as Sverdlovsk and L'vov. At the end of the year,
 however, Moscow cracked down on the Armenian National
 Movement, the Leningrad authorities launched an investigation
 under Article 70 (anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda), and
 local authorities brought charges under Article 190-3
 (violating public order) against activists in Sverdlovsk and
 Georgia.
 Reforms are taking place at the direction of the party;
 increased freedoms have come mainly as the result of political
 decisions. Most of the current reforms have yet to be
 reinforced by the adoption of laws, administrative regulations,
 and bureaucratic procedures that will ensure the rights of
 individual citizens. Moreover, the citizenry itself is unused
 to defending its rights against century-long traditions of
 state repression.
 
 
 1214
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 Emigration for selected groups--Jews, ethnic Germans,
 Pentecostals, and Armenians--continued to grow. By the end of
 1988, monthly average departures for members of these groups
 compared favorably with the late 1970's. Jewish emigration
 was less than half of what it was in the peak year of 1979,
 but the total emigration from the Soviet Union was
 substantially above the 1979 figure. Emigration of members of
 other ethnic groups remained negligible.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There was one report of suspected political killing in 1988.
 Dissident sources suspected KGB complicity in the murder of a
 Soviet activist of German descent, Vladimir Rayzev, in
 Kirgizia early in September. Rayzev reportedly knew so much
 about "KGB operatives" in Kirgizia that they were afraid of
 him. He had received exit permission from the Soviet Union
 and was planning to depart in mid-September. However, Rayzev's
 murder cannot be clearly labeled as a political killing.
 b. Disappearance
 There have been no known instances of prolonged or permanent
 disappearance in recent years.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Many Soviet prisoners suffer both mental and physical abuse
 and mistreatment during interrogation, trial, and confinement,
 according to a wide variety of reliable sources. Prisoners
 released in 1988 report that prison and camp conditions have
 not improved. Life in prison or labor camps continues to be
 marked by isolation, poor diet and malnutrition, compulsory
 hard labor, beatings, frequent incarceration in punishment
 cells for violations of camp rules, and inadequate medical
 care.
 A decree of the U.S.S.R. Supreme Soviet Presidium in July
 rescinded a paragraph of the Soviet Penal Code stipulating
 reduced rations for labor camp inmates who undergo punishment
 in solitary confinement. This measure was issued apparently
 to bring Soviet domestic legislation into line with the
 U.S.S.R.'s commitments as a signatory of the International
 Convention Against Torture, to which it acceded in March 1987.
 There were several instances of persons being confined in
 psychiatric hospitals for political reasons. Most were
 released within a few months. There continue to be reports of
 psychiatrists being called to militia stations to examine
 persons apprehended for political reasons. Reports indicate
 that conditions in psychiatric hospitals and the punitive
 administration of sedatives, antipsychotics, and other drugs
 have not changed significantly, except that beatings are
 fewer. Inclusion in the register of the mentally ill leads to
 many restrictions on activities, including a prohibition on
 driving a car, and a requirement to check in with a mental
 health dispensary every 6 months.
 
 
 1215
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 Official attention to the problems of psychiatric abuse
 increased in 1988, with press articles, an official press
 conference on "blank spots in Soviet psychiatry" in February,
 and press interviews with Soviet officials from the Ministry
 of Health and elsewhere. The most significant development was
 the promulqation in January of a new decree on the provision
 of psychiatric care, which went into effect March 1. Under
 its provisions, psychiatrists can be sued for knowingly
 committing healthy persons to psychiatric institutions, and
 chief psychiatrists are given increased responsibility for
 determining that persons committed are genuinely mentally ill
 and are being given the proper treatment. There is evidence
 that these reforms have made psychiatrists less willing to
 confine persons without substantial grounds for believing them
 mentally.ill. Ministry of Health officials said forced
 commitment to mental hospitals under the new regulations could
 take place only when a person was a danger to himself or
 others.
 Many persons were removed from the register of the mentally
 ill, and a commission reviewed the cases of many patients in
 mental hospitals to determine which could be released. A
 number of well-known political prisoners interned in
 psychiatric hospitals were released in 1988, including-
 Vladimir Gershuni, Teofils Kuma7, and Vasiliy Spinenko.
 According to Western human rights observers, approximately 50
 political and religious prisoners were released from
 psychiatric hospitals in 1988. It is not known how many
 people committed for reasons other than genuine mental illness
 remain in psychiatric hospitals.
 There were reports of beatings of persons detained for
 violating regulations on demonstrations. For example, a group
 of Leningrad activists, who came to Moscow in May for the
 founding of the Democratic Union and were forcibly deported to
 Leningrad, reported that they were severely beaten while in
 militia custody. In general, however, there were fewer
 reports of beatings of political prisoners and detainees. New
 militia units set up for dispersing demonstrations appeared to
 operate efficiently and with a minimum of force when it was
 used. There is no information to indicate, however, that
 routine beatings of ordinary criminal prisoners have decreased.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 While Soviet spokesmen have always insisted that persons are
 arrested. only for vfalation of Soviet law, some of those laws
 violate internationally recognized human rights, including
 freedom of expression and freedom of association. Amonc these
 laws are:
 --Article 70, "Anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda,"
 which carries a maximum penalty of 7 years' imprisonment and
 up to an additional 5 years in internal exile.
 --Article 142, "The violation of the laws on the
 separation of church and state and of the school and church,*
 which carries a maximum penalty of 3 years' imprisonment.
 --Article 190-1, "The dissemination of deliberately
 hostile fabrications defaming the Soviet State and social
 system." This article, introduced in 1965, carries a maximum
 penalty of 3 years, imprisonment;
 
 
 1216
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 --Article 190-3, "The organization of, or active
 participation in, a group actively violating public order,"
 which carries a maximum penalty of 3 years' imprisonment.
 --Article 227, "The infringement of the person and the
 rights of citizens under the guise of performing religious
 ceremonies," which carries a maximum penalty of 5 years'
 imprisonment.
 Review of the criminal code continued. A draft of the
 "Principles of Criminal Legislation" was published in Izvestia
 on December 16. Among other changes, it eliminated internal
 and foreign exile, reduced the number of crimes punishable by
 death to six, and explicitly called for Soviet criminal
 legislation to be brought into accord with the U.S.S.R.'s
 international agreements. After public discussion, a final
 draft is to be delivered to the Presidium of the U.S.S.R.
 Supceme Soviet by March 15; it will then be considered by the
 new Supreme Soviet, which convenes in April. Since the new
 criminal code will be based on these principles, a draft is
 expected sometime after the new Supreme Soviet convenes.
 Final approval is likely to come later in the year.
 According to official Soviet sources, articles 190-1 and 227
 will be dropped, and articles 70 and 142 will remain, but in
 revised form. No convictions are known to have occurred under
 any of these articles in 1988, an indication that they will be
 either revoked or substantially revised. Although there were
 no convictions, there were a number of arrests, including
 those of Paruyr Ayrikyan, Sivert Zoldins, Modris Lujans, and
 Ivan Makar. Ayrikyan was pardoned (despite the fact he had
 not been convicted) and deported, and Zoldins was reportedly
 released. Lujans was acquitted in Riga. Charges against
 Makar were dropped in November. He was rearrested on December
 14 and put in jail for a period of 15 days; no new charges
 were brought against him. While no one had been charged at
 year's end, an investigation was opened on Article 70 charges
 in Leningrad. Several Democratic Union members and a National
 Workers' Union (NTS) member were called as witnesses. In
 December a trial opened in Tbilisi of four activists on
 Article 190-3 charges, and Sverdlovsk activist Kuznetsov was
 charged under Article 190-3.
 While there were no arrests for "parasitism," the threat of
 arrest continues to hang over the heads of those dissidents
 without full-time state employment. A Kharkov former
 political prisoner and poet, Stepan Sapelyak, was reportedly
 warned July 19 that he would be arrested for parasitism if he
 did not find a job. Charges of "hooliganism" also continue to
 be used against dissidents, but much less frequently.
 Many human rights activists in 1988 were detained under the
 provisions of a Supreme Soviet decree on meetings and
 demonstrations (see Section 2.b.). While a number of large
 demonstrations have been permitted under the provisions of
 that decree, most notably in the Baltic republics on August 23
 and thereafter, many have been forbidden.
 The criminal codes provide Soviet authorities power to detain
 citizens for 3 to 4 hours for questioning; after this period,
 detainees must either be charged or released. According to
 the code of criminal procedure, pretrial detention can last as
 long as 9 months, and prisoners are not entitled to consult
 with a lawyer until shortly before trial. Prolonged pretrial
 
 
 1217
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 detention thus can function as a form of preventive detention.
 There was no known instance in 1988 of preventive detention.
 In September 1983, the authorities approved an addition to the
 Russian Soviet Federated Socialist Republic (RSFSR) criminal
 code dealing with "malicious disobedience of the
 administration of corrective labor institutions." Under this
 provision, prisoners who disobey camp authorities or who have
 spent time in solitary confinement during the course of the
 previous year may be sentenced to an additional 3 years.
 There were no reports that this provision was applied in 1988.
 At the end of 1988, some political prisoners remained in
 internal exile, a form of punishment which dates back to
 Tsarist times. Exile often follows prison and, in practice,
 means confinement in a remote village where climatic
 conditions are usually severe, fresh food is scarce, and
 isolation is an additional burden. These conditions are
 mitigated only by the privilege of receiving food parcels from
 -family members, moving about within a limited area, finding
 work (usually menial), and arranging one's own (often
 primitive) accommodations. The families of exiles are usually
 permitted to live with them, although it may take several
 months to receive the required permits.
 No political prisoners convicted under Articles 70, 142, 190,
 or 227 remained in internal exile as of the end of 1988. In
 November 1987, the Government announced that it was planning
 to end the use of internal exile as a form of punishment. The
 draft of the "Principles of Criminal Legislation" did not
 include internal exile as a form of punishment. Whether that
 omission will be retained in the final version remains to be
 seen, although official sources indicate that .it will. As of
 the end of'1988, however, provisions for internal exile were
 still in the criminal code.
 Persons released from exile often are not allowed to return to
 their former places of residence. Some are forced to live in
 other areas of the country, in reality ensuring continued
 separation from their homes. Others, having nowhere to go,
 return to their old homes without residence permits, where
 they risk arrest for violating residence laws. In August
 1985, the Council of Ministers issued decree no. 736, as yet
 unpublished, which severely limits the right of many former
 prisoners to reside in or visit Moscow or its suburbs.
 In 1988 the Soviets released over 150 political prisoners,
 including Helsinki monitors Ivan Sokulskiy, Ivan Kandyba,
 Mykola Horbal, Mart Niklus, Vasyl Ovsiyenko, Alfonsas
 Svarinskas, Lev Lukyanenko, and Mikola Matusevich.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Communist party control of society extends to the legal and
 judicial system and negates constitutional guarantees of the
 objectivity and independence of the judicial process. The
 Soviet press continues to expose problems in the Soviet
 judicial system. Since there have been few political trials
 in 1988, it is difficult to make judgments on how perestroika
 may have contributed to reform in this area. A draft new law
 on the courts is expected in early 1989.
 
 
 1218
 
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 A Vilnius judge on September 29 acquitted eight persons of
 charges brought against them for a September 28 demonstration,
 and a judge in Sverdlovsk dismissed similar charges against a
 group there in September. Perestroika thus seems to have
 contributed somewhat to the independence of individual
 judges. Defense attorneys, however, are hesitant to take on
 cases that involve politically sensitive questions--as
 demonstrated by Sergey Grigoryants' difficulty in finding a
 lawyer who would represent him in connection with a libel suit
 against Literaturnaya Gazeta (which carried an article
 accusing him of working for the Central Intelligence Agency),
 or the difficulty L'vov activists encountered seeking a lawyer
 to defend Ivan Makar, charged under article 190-1. Defense
 attorneys, like judges, are subject to political pressures and
 constraints applied by the security forces and the party.
 According to official statistics, about 60 percent of
 attorneys are party members. Moreover, attorneys must have
 special clearance to act as a defendant's counsel in a
 political case. In this area, as in the press, limits have
 expanded but are still clearly drawn.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Government interference in personal life is pervasive.
 However, the authorities* view that it is a citizen's duty to
 inform on the unorthodox attitudes of family members, friends,
 and neighbors may be changing. For example, most government
 agencies now refuse to accept anonymous denunciations.
 Electronic monitoring of the residences and telephones of
 certain Soviet citizens and foreigners is done routinely,
 despite constitutional guarantees of the inviolability of
 citizens, homes. As the resolutions of the XIX Communist
 Party Conference specifically called for guaranteeing the
 privacy of private communications, major changes in this area
 may be in the offing. According to law, no one may enter a
 home against the will of the resident "without legal
 grounds." In practice this provision has little restraining
 effect on investigative agencies. A new U.S.S.R. Supreme
 Soviet decree provides a legal basis for Ministry of Internal
 Affairs troops to enter private homes in pursuit of a
 suspected criminal. There were virtually no house searches
 for political materials reported in 1988 until the end of the
 year, when house searches were conducted in Leningrad,
 Tbilisi, Saratov, and Sverdlovsk.
 Through the control of mail and telephone circuits, the
 authorities can selectively restrict contact between citizens
 and foreigners, intercepting mail or cutting off telephone
 conversations. While this has become much less frequent than
 in the past, it is still practiced when the authorities
 consider vital political interests to be affected. Human
 rights activists, including Aleksandr Ogorodnikov, Sergey
 Grigoryants, and Valeriy Senderov, had their telephone service
 interrupted for varying periods of time. The most blatant
 example in 1988 came during the Armenian disturbances. On the
 eve of April 26, the day a mass strike was expected in support
 of a demand that Nagorno-Karabakh be united with Armenia,
 Moscow-based foreign correspondents and Soviet human rights
 activists reported that their telephone conversations were
 disconnected as soon as the talk turned to Armenia. This
 severe disruption lasted approximately 12-24 hours, according
 to most accounts.
 
 
 1219
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 Contacts with foreigners continue to be discouraged, although
 less actively than in the past. The 1984 decree that mandates
 fines for Soviet citizens who provide foreigners with
 "accommodation or transportation or have rendered them other
 services in violation of established rules" remains in force.
 Foreigners who visited refuseniks or dissidents, however, were
 less harassed. Refuseniks and dissidents criticized in the
 press are often cited for their ties and contacts with the
 West. In a September 2 Pravda interview, then KGB chief
 Chebrikov stated that many opposition groups.in Moscow act at
 the behest of foreign intelligence agencies. On the other
 hand, it has become much easier for Soviet citizens to invite
 American relatives and even friends to visit the U.S.S.R. as
 private guests.
 Foreigners who decide to marry Soviet citizens are sometimes
 prevented from returning to the Soviet Union for the required
 registration of the intention to marry or the marriage itself,
 resulting in a "blocked marriage."
 During 1988 jamming of Western radio broadcasts, including
 those of Radio Liberty in Russian and other Soviet languages,
 Deutsche Welle (German Airwaves), and the Voice of Israel,
 apparently ended. Most jamming of Voice of America Broadcasts
 ended in 1987, and jamming of Radio Liberty ceased on November
 30, 1988.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution guarantees freedom of speech and press to the
 extent that it is in accordance with the "interests of the
 people and the strengthening and development of the Socialist
 system." During 1988 that last phrase was interpreted more
 broadly. The degree of glasnost' and the range of acceptable
 opinion have expanded considerably, even if they do not
 compare to Western criteria.
 One illustration of the extent of change was the XIX Communist
 Party Conference at which close to 5,000 delegates sharply
 debated proposals concerning the pace and direction of reform
 in the Soviet Union. Television coverage was extensive and
 balanced. In particular, viewers were treated to a passionate
 confrontation between Politburo member Yegor Ligachev and
 former Moscow party boss Boris Yel'tsin. That confrontation
 underscored the differences between the conservative and
 reformist wings of the party on perestroika and left few
 doubts that such divisions extended to the highest party
 levels. Mainstream Soviet observers remarked that the
 conference marked the return of "real politics" to the Soviet
 Union.
 The official Soviet media grew livelier in 1988, although they
 ultimately remained under party or government control. There
 is reportedly no longer any requirement to submit
 publications, films, and radio and television scripts for
 censorship to the Main Administration for Safeguarding State
 Secrets in the Media. Instead, it is the responsibility of
 individual editors to assure that their publications are in
 line with party policies and directives. This led in 1988 to
 a broader and sharper discussion of historical, social,
 economic, and political issues in the official media. Several
 publications adopted distinctive perspectives. Some, like the
 
 
 1220
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 illustrated weekly Ogonek, developed a reputation for
 investigative and daring journalism.
 In place of formal censorship, the regime exercises guidance
 over the press through periodic meetings between party leaders
 and editors. Strict limits remain on what can be published:
 Lenin, socialism, the party as the social vanguard, and
 current Soviet foreign policy are still sacrosanct; the true
 size and structure of the military budget, and the number of
 prison inmates remain secret. In 1988 officials reprimanded
 editors who published articles pushing those limits, but there
 was no reported instance of an editor being fired for that
 reason.
 Official Soviet journalists are subject to the discipline of
 the Communist Party and subordinated to the directives of
 their editorial superiors, themselves trusted members of the
 party. As such, they are not journalists in the Western sense
 but rather spokesmen for official government policies.
 Nevertheless, they are now able to voice their own opinions
 more frequently in signed articles for which they are held
 responsible. The policy of glasnost' has contributed to the
 development of investigative journalism, much to the
 discomfiture of local and economic officials. Soviet news
 media carried more, and more detailed, information on internal
 events, such as demonstrations and strikes, that was
 previously forbidden.
 Unofficial publications (samizdat, or self-published) grew in
 number and sophistication during 1988, not only in Moscow and
 Leningrad, but in provincial towns such as L'vov, Pskov,
 Sverdlovsk, and Kuybyshev as well. Unofficial journalists
 established extensive networks that provide a constant flow of
 information on important public issues. Through such a
 network, The Express Chronicle, a weekly edited by Aleksandr
 Podrabinek, was able to maintain a steady flow of high'quality
 information on the Soviet human rights situation for well over
 a year. In May some 50 unofficial editors of Soviet
 periodicals assembled in Moscow to discuss common problems and
 to organize a club to further their interests.
 Neither explicitly permitted nor prohibited, unofficial
 publications exist in a gray zone. In the past, many of their
 editors and contributors would have been convicted for
 "anti-Soviet" activity and their publications suppressed.
 Under present conditions the future of these publications is
 unclear. Although there were no reports in 1988 that the
 authorities shut down any unofficial publication or imprisoned
 anyone for journalistic activities, editors and contributors
 for the more outspoken periodicals were harassed. They were
 detained, visited repeatedly by militia, threatened with
 prosecution for illegal use of government reproduction
 facilities, and attacked in the official media. In May, for
 example, the authorities raided the editorial offices of the
 unofficial journal Glasnost', edited by Sergey Grigor'yants,
 and confiscated much of the journal's archives and production
 equipment (including a sophisticated foreign-made personal
 computer). On a number of occasions, the central press
 accused him of working with foreign intelligence agencies.
 While he continued to publish Glasnost', it came out much less
 frequently than before. Vyacheslav Chornovil, the editor of
 the underground journal Ukrainian Herald, was threatened with
 arrest and pressured to leave the Soviet Union.
 
 
 1221
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 The Government relaxed somewhat the obstacles to foreign
 journalists. Official press conferences became a regular
 feature of life, and Western journalists said their access to
 Soviet officials was much improved. Some Western journalists
 were allowed to travel and interview in closed areas. Overt
 censorship of wire and satellite transmissions of news stories
 out of the country has become rare. Nevertheless, the
 authorities limited the activity of foreign journalists. In
 addition, they sometimes harassed selected foreign
 journalists, especially those who maintained close contacts
 with dissidents and refuseniks. Finally, the Government
 continued to circumscribe the circulation of non-Communist
 foreign newspapers, whichare rarely available to average
 Soviet citizens.
 All universities and research institutes are operated by the
 State or party; teaching and research must conform to official
 requirements. In areas such as foreign policy and
 contemporary Soviet history, restrictions on research and
 teaching reportedly are being relaxed. Access has been
 granted to many previously closed archives, and many books
 formerly banished to closed stacks have been moved onto open
 library shelves. Nevertheless, Soviet academics themselves
 acknowledge that the situation is still far from satisfactory.
 The realm of the permissible in the field of culture continued
 to expand. A significant number of previously banned books
 and plays were published or staged, such as Pasternak's
 "Doctor Zhivago" anc? Grossman's "Life and Fate." Political
 satire by Soviet comedians became sharper, although generally
 within officially approved limits--for example, satirizing
 official corruption, mismanagement, or inertia.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Government's toleration of demonstrations and unauthorized
 meetings made a quantum leap in 1988. The numerous mass
 meetings and marches that took place in Yerevan in 1988--one
 on March 8, officially estimated at more than 700,000 persons--
 were only the most prominent examples. Major nationalist
 demonstrations also took place in the Baltic republics. One
 that took place in October in Estonia drew over 300,000
 persons--close to one-third of the Estonian ethnic population
 in Estonia. Demonstrations on a smaller scale were commonplace
 in Moscow and Leningrad and especially frequent in the weeks
 before the June party conference. Some proceeded peaceably;
 others were broken up by force, such as those by the Moscow
 People's Front and the Democratic Union in the center of Moscow
 on June 25. Organizations such as the Democratic Union, which
 exceed the limits of discussion that the party is willing to
 tolerate, have consistently been refused permission to
 demonstrate, and its leaders have been subjected to repeated
 administrative punishment for violating regulations on
 demonstrations. By midsummer, the Ministry of Justice had
 tallied some 250 unauthorized rallies, and the Ministry of
 Internal Affairs had counted some 600 rallies, including
 authorized ones.
 On July 28, the U.S.S.R. Supreme Soviet Presidium issued a
 decree on "procedures for the organization and conduct of
 meetings, rallies, street marches and demonstrations in the
 U.S.S.R." The decree provides a legal basis for
 demonstrations, thus limiting official arbitrariness, and
 seeks to standardize o9ficial procedures for handling them.
 (During the past 3 years, both republic and local
 
 
 1222
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 jurisdictions had issued a variety of temporary regulations.)
 According to its provisions, demonstration organizers must
 apply to local officials 10 days before the meeting is
 scheduled, and officials must notify them of their decision at
 least 5 days before the scheduled date. Civil and criminal
 penalties were provided for those who participate in
 unauthorized demonstrations. The ensuing R.S.F.S.R. law of
 July 29 set stiff penalties: participation in unauthorized
 demonstrations is punishable by fines of up to $495 (at the
 December 1988 official exchange rate) and/or administrative
 arrest for up to 15 days. Repeat offenders may be fined up to
 $1,650, arrested for up to 15 days per offense, and/or
 sentenced to corrective labor for 30 to 60 days with a
 deduction of 20 percent of their earnings. If criminal
 responsibility is established, the law provides for
 deprivation of freedom for up to 6 months, corrective labor
 for up to 1 year, and a fine of up to $3,300. While many
 persons received fines of up to $495 and sentences of up to 15
 days, no one is reported to have been sentenced under the
 stiffer penalties.
 In implementing the law, the authorities gave permission to
 some gatherings, including those in the Baltic republics on
 August 23 and in Yerevan on several occasions in August and
 September, and in other cases cracked down on demonstrators.
 In November the authorities declared a state of emergency in
 Yerevan, banning all demonstrations; in December a number of
 leading Armenian activists were detained, presumably at least
 in part for the role they had played in organizing earlier
 demonstrations. In August the authorities in L'vov (Ukraine)
 moved to end demonstrations with nationalist overtonez that
 they had permitted in June and July. In Moscow a small
 refusenik demonstration was broken up in August, and its
 participants were subjected to heavy fines and administrative
 sentences. The Moscow authorities also denied the Democratic
 Union permission to hold a demonstration commemorating the
 20th anniversary of the Warsaw Pact's invasion of
 Czechoslovakia August 21. The Union decided to go ahead with
 the demonstration, and the authorities moved quickly to break
 it up; some 150 persons were detained, and many were fined or
 given administrative sentences of up to 15 days.
 The Constitution grants citizens the right to associate in
 public organizations -in accordance with the aim of building
 communism." Previously, public associations were organized by
 the authorities or subject to their strict control, and the
 Government suppressed attempts to function independently. The
 situation began to change significantly in 1987 with the
 emergence of large numbers (the figure generally cited is
 30,000) of unofficial or informal organizations that provided
 a forum for discussion of political, social, ecological, and
 other issues. Many of these clubs produce journals or
 bulletins; most actively support perestroika.
 In 1988 this movement took a major step forward with the
 formation of large organizations for political action. In May
 the Estonian People's Front for the Support of Perestroika
 emerged out of a meeting of the creative intelligentsia.
 Nationalist in orientation, the Front claims some 100,000
 members, a significant percentage of whom are Communist Party
 members. Similar organizations emerged in the other two
 Baltic states during the summer, and all three held founding
 congresses in October. So-called people's fronts also emerged
 on a lesser scale in Ukraine, Moldavia, Georgia, Byelorussia,
 Moscow, Leningrad, and Yaroslav'.
 
 
 1223
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 In May a self-avowed "opposition political party," the
 Democratic Union, was founded in Moscow primarily by Moscow
 and Leningrad dissidents. The authorities disrupted some of
 the sessions of the founding conference, detained a number of
 the participants, and allowed some to emigrate. Although the
 Government has continued to harass the group, it has not moved
 forcibly to suppress it. The Moscow and Leningrad branches
 each publish their own bulletins.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Constitution guarantees the "right to profess or not to
 profess any religion and to conduct religious worship or
 atheistic propaganda." The right to conduct religious worship
 and the right to make atheistic propaganda are not equivalent,
 however, since the former right does not include the right to
 conduct "religious propaganda," i.e., to engage in public
 defense of religious values or to rebut official attacks on
 religion. Moreover, extensive legislation and administrative
 regulations on "religious cults" place additional restrictions
 on freedom of religion. This legislation is now under review
 and draft legislation is expected in 1989.
 The Government, however, displayed a much more tolerant
 attitude toward mainstream religion, particularly toward the
 Russian Orthodox Church. The State was a full participant in
 the Church's celebration of the Millennium of the Baptism of
 Kievan Rus' in Moscow in June. On this occasion, General
 Secretary Gorbachev remarked that believers are patriots and
 not second-class citizens, leading some to hope that
 restrictions on religious activities may be reduced.
 Worshipers at Russian Orthodox Easter services were not
 subjected to the harassment of past years. General Secretary
 Gorbachev met with a number of Church hierarchs in May. The
 media gave substantial and favorable coverage to the
 Millennial celebrations. Earlier, a portion of the Easter
 service at the Patriarch's Church in Moscow was broadcast over
 Soviet television. Overall, articles on religious themes
 became commonplace. Government harassment during unofficial
 seminard on religious affairs that took place in Moscow at the
 time of the Millennial celebrations was minimal.
 Registration with the Soviet Council on Religious Affairs is
 required for religious groups of 20 adults or more. The State
 is able to limit the number of congregations since the
 authorities reserve the right to grant or withhold
 registration. Their refusal to grant registration has been
 used to deny legal status to entire religious denominations,
 for example, to the Ukrainian Catholic (Uniate) Church since
 1946. In May the Council on Religious Affairs allowed the
 Moscow community of Hare Krishnas to register; in December the
 Riga Hare Krishna community was allowed to register, but other
 communities have been unsuccessful in attempts to register.
 Once registered, religious congregations must accept strict
 regulations which prohibit proselytizing, religious discussion
 and Bible study groups, charitable activity, and formal
 religious training for children. Participation in religious
 ceremonies is cause for exclusion from the Communist Party.
 Existing seminaries and other institutions of clerical
 education and. the numbers of students permitted to pursue a
 religious vocation do not provide a sufficient body of trained
 clergy for officially registered denominations. Although in
 
 
 1224
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 1987 the authorities rescinded the requirement that priests
 register all baptisms with the State, in many areas outside
 Moscow and Leningrad priests continue to do so.
 Many groups of believers refuse to register officially on the
 grounds that much of the legislation affecting "religious
 cults" contradicts the tenets of their religious beliefs.
 Others, such as the Uniates, are refused the right to
 register. Unregistered believers, such as some Baptists,
 Jehovah's Witnesses, Seventh-Day Adventists, Pentecostalists,
 and Hare Krishnas outside of Moscow, are subject to repressive
 measures, including harassment at school or place of
 employment, denial of access to housing, dismissal from work,
 and imprisonment.
 In Ukraine, the Uniates are still subject to severe
 repression, even though Soviet officials in Moscow claim that
 their legal status is under review. Several Uniate Easter
 services in western Ukraine were broken up by force.
 Dissident sources report that after the publication of the
 U.S.S.R. Supreme Soviet decree on demonstrations and meetings
 late in July, the authorities began to use the decree to break
 up Uniate services as unauthorized meetings and demonstrations.
 Repression of the Hare Krishnas eased significantly during
 1988. For the first time, the Krishna communities in two
 cities were officially registered. Nevertheless, at year's
 end Moscow authorities had still refused to authorize local
 Hare Krishnas' renting a place of worship, and the militia had
 beaten and detained on at least one occasion Hare Krishna who
 had gathered outdoors in downtown Moscow. In December the
 last three known Hare Krishna prisoners of conscience,
 Vladimir Kystrya, Yevgeniy Lyubinskiy, and Agvan Arutyunyan,
 were released. Official and officially tolerated harassment
 of sect members reportedly continued throughout 1988.
 Pressure on the Roman Catholic Church in Lithuania eased
 somewhat in 1988. The cathedral at Vilnius, which had been
 converted into an art gallery in 1950, was returned for
 religious use, and several bishops were allowed to visit the
 Vatican.
 Although only a small number of mosques are open for use in
 the Muslim regions of Central Asia and Azerbaijan, Islam
 appears to retain a strong hold on the population. Unofficial
 mullahs, who function without government permission, are often
 subject to official pressure. Soviet press condemnations of
 foreign (mostly Iranian) Islamic radio broadcasts and continued
 jamming of these broadcasts reflect concern on the part of the
 authorities. Official propaganda efforts are tailored to
 bolster atheism among the Muslim peoples of the U.S.S.R. and
 advocate secular Soviet ceremonies as substitutes for religious
 observances on the occasion of births, marriages, and deaths.
 According to reliable Soviet dissident sources, over 30 Moslems
 are in custody on religious grounds.
 The authorities exert wide-ranging pressure, including through
 the official media, to discourage religious belief in general
 among Soviet citizens. The Communist Party is, according to
 its rules, an atheistic organization. Membership in the
 party, considered incompatible with religious belief, is in
 effect a requirement for advancement to most positions of
 authority or prestige in the country. Thus the authorities
 have virtually excluded practicing believers from attractive
 
 
 1225
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 educational opportunities and many career paths available to
 nonbelievers.
 Only a few religious publications of controlled content, such
 as the Vestnik of the Russian Orthodox Patriarchate, are
 officially allowed to appear. Two unofficial orthodox
 publications that appeared in 1987, Bulletin of the Christian
 Community and Choice, have so far been tolerated. Uniate,
 Lithuanian Catholic, and Baptist unofficial journals continue
 to be repressed. The practice of religion is discouraged by
 strictly applied limitations on the number of sacred books,
 such as the Bible or the Koran, which may be printed. The
 Soviet Government eased restrictions on the importation of
 Bibles last year. In August it was announced that there were
 no longer any customs regulations restricting the importation
 of Bibles because of their religious content, although laws
 against speculation continued to limit the numbers that could
 be imported. Many packages containing Bibles and religious
 books continue to be seized, and visitors to the Soviet Union
 continue to have religious books in Russian confiscated at the
 border.
 Books in Hebrew still may not be printed in the Soviet Union.
 The authorities'began to relax the ban on teaching Hebrew in
 1988. By year's end, plans were under way to offer public
 classes in Moscow at a foreign-language teaching facility and
 in proposed Jewish cultural centers.
 In addition to the profound shortage of synagogues, there is
 also a shortage of Jewish cemeteries consecrated for religious
 purposes. Religious ritual articles, such as phylacteries,
 have not been legally imported, and no training facilities
 exist to teach the religious scribal arts needed for their
 manufacture in the U.S.S.R. A small seminary, or yeshiva, for
 the study of traditional Jewish law, or talmud, at the main
 synagogue in Moscow is the only such institution for over 2
 million Jews, and it reportedly has 10 students. There is no
 rabbinical seminary in the Soviet Union. Discussions with
 interested outside groups began over maintenance of and access
 to gravesites of ancestors and Jewish religious leaders.
 The number of clergymen and places of worship today is only a
 small fraction of the number which existed before the October
 1917 Revolution. At the same time, Soviet officials recognize
 that up to 70 million Soviet citizens adhere to some religion.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Freedom of movement is neither guaranteed by law nor respected
 in practice. Official statements, most notably that oE
 General Secretary Gorbachev before the United Nations in
 December, indicate that a new law on emigration will
 substantially improve freedom of movement abroad. The draft
 of that law had not been published by year's end, however.
 Although citizens are generally free to move about within the
 country, travel in certain areas (e.g., frontier regions or
 areas of military significance) requires special permission.
 All adults are issued identity documents or internal passports
 which must be carried on their person during travel and used
 to register visits of more than 3 days with the local
 authorities. Although only about 20 percent of Soviet
 territory is formally closed to travel by foreigners, outside
 of major urban centers most of the remaining territory is in
 
 
 1226
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 practice difficult to visit or inaccessible and is therefore
 de facto closed to travel by foreigners.
 The right to choose one's place of residence, although
 formally provided for by law, is subject to restrictions.
 Everyone is required to register his or her place of
 residence. The authorities limit the number of residence-
 permits in an increasing number of large cities, including
 Moscow, Leningrad, and Kiev, where housing is at a premium.
 In the summer of 1988, residency permits became a problem for
 intending emigres. Soviet citizens who request to emigrate
 give up their housing and residency permits in the latter
 stages of the emigration process. Because Soviet authorities
 often process exib applications well before the emigre has
 obtained permission to enter another country, the emigre is
 often in a no man's land--cut off from access to Soviet
 housing and services, yet not allowed to emigrate. During
 1988 intending emigres, waiting to conclude entry formalities
 for other countries, reported harassment from police for
 renting rooms and remaining in Moscow without residency
 permits, which they had relinquished in order to obtain exit
 visas.
 An unpublished directive issued by the U.S.S.R. Council of
 Ministers in August 1985 (the text became available from
 unofficial sources in 1986) excludes from the city of Moscow
 citizens convicted of certain offenses, including all the
 "political" articles of the criminal code, unless the person
 has been pardoned or granted amnesty. Two prisoners relpased
 in 1987, Galina and Vasiliy Barats, were denied residence
 permits in Moscow on these grounds, and Vasiliy was deported
 to Trans-Carpathia in the spring. Galina spent most of 1988
 locked in some friends' apartment, fearing she too would be
 deported. At year's end, however, the Moscow authorities
 agreed to give the two a residence permit.
 To travel abroad, Soviet citizens must have a special passport
 for foreign travel and an exit visa, usually valid for
 6 months, specifying the destination for each trip. In the
 late spring of 1988, however, Soviet passport authorities
 ceased to specify the amount of time a citizen is permitted to
 remain abroad. As a consequence of new Soviet entry-exit
 regulations, which became-effective on January 1, 1987, travel
 both on officially sponsored trips (for business, academic
 exchange, or tourism) and on private family visits has
 increased. During 1988 more than 20,000 nonimmigrant visas
 were issued to Soviets traveling to the United States on
 business or pleasure, almost four times the number issued in
 any previous year.
 During 1988 some persons without relatives abroad were allowed
 to travel abroad to visit friends. However, Soviet citizens
 usually can travel on private visits to the West only if they
 receive an invitation from a friend or relative who undertakes
 all financial responsibility for the trip. Currency
 regulations and requirements to purchase tickets in rubles
 also restrict travel opportunities, even if formal exit
 permission is granted.
 While Soviet authorities claim that they are encouraging
 travel abroad to visit relatives, routine permission to travel
 is still far from commonplace. Lengthy formalities, an
 unresponsive bureaucracy, as well as arbitrary denials for
 reasons of security continue to discourage many from
 attempting a private trip.
 
 
 1227
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 During 1988 thousands of Soviet citizens residing abroad
 permanently as well as former Soviet citizens were permitted
 to return on short family visits or for other reasons. This
 trend, which began in 1987, continued to grow rapidly during
 1988.
 The right to emigrate is restricted, as Soviet law does not
 recognize the right of citizens to emigrate by choice. While
 the Soviet Union has signed the Helsinki Final Act and other
 international documents in which the right to leave one's
 country and return thereto is recognized, the Soviet system
 continues to restrict emigration (with very few exceptions) to
 those citizens desiring family reunification with immediate
 relatives abroad, and even those with immediate relatives
 abroad are-not always permitted to emigrate. In 1987 this
 restriction was codified, although substantial numbers of
 Jews, Germans, Pentecostals, and Armenians emigrated in 1988
 without regard to this requirement. A number of former
 political prisoners were given the option of emigrating in
 1988, although they had no claim to family reunification. In
 September Soviet officials told U.S. officials that
 elimination of the first-degree relative requirement was being
 considered as part of proposed new legislation on emigration.
 The most frequently used barrier to emigration, aside from the
 requirement of an invitation, is the requirement that
 prospective emigrants should have had no access to "secrets."
 In many cases, persons have been denied exit permission
 although they have had no access to "secrets" for more than
 10, and in some cases 15, years. In a few cases, denial has
 been based on mere possession of a clearance, although there
 was never any access to classified information. The
 application of this restriction is often quite arbitrary.
 Some persons, such as Alexander Pyatetski, have been regularly
 denied exit permission while coworkers and supervisors who
 enjoyed equal or greater access to "secrets" have been allowed
 to emigrate. In recent months, the Soviets have responded to
 U.S. efforts to resolve the most difficult cases by lifting
 the security restrictions of up to 120 persons, including
 Aleksandr Pyatetskiy.
 Another barrier to emigration is the requirement that family
 members sign release forms for their children--meaning that
 they may refuse to release an adult child from financial or
 moral commitments. Soviet officials indicated in September
 that a new process of judicial review in such cases would be
 provided for by the expected new law on emigration. The
 family of American citizen Abe Stolar had been refused for 16
 years for this reason. In December Soviet officials informed
 the Embassy and Abe Stolar's family that the mother of his
 daughter-in-law had signed the release form and the entire
 family would be allowed to emigrate. As of January 1, 1989,
 the Stolar family had still not received their exit documents,
 but Soviet officials continue to assure U.S. officials and the
 Stolar family that they will be allowed to emigrate.
 Although many of the long-standing refusenik cases were on the
 way to resolution at year's end, there remained a substantial
 number of Jews who have waited for many years to emigrate.
 Official Israeli sources estimate that there are approximately
 370,000 Soviet Jews who have requested the letters of
 invitation (vyzovs) necessary to apply to emigrate. These
 sources also argue that, if emigration restrictions were
 lifted, many more Jews would apply to emigrate, especially if
 
 
 1228
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 the perceived increase in anti-Semitism, as exemplified by
 activities of groups such as Pamyat', continues.
 The uncertainties involved in applying to emigrate, including
 possible loss of employment (if security-related work is
 involved), harassment, social ostracism, and long delays,
 continue to dissuade many Jews from attempting to submit an
 emigration application, although the situation has vastly
 improved. In 1988 it was rare that a person not employed in
 security-related work lost his job when submitting an
 emigration application. The vast majority of those applying
 for visas for the first time were approved, and social
 ostracism eased considerably for would-be emigrants. Jewish
 emigration in 1988 totaled 19,292, up substantially from 8,155
 in 1987 and the highest yearly total since 1979, when 51,000
 Jews emigrated.
 During 1988 over 10,000 Soviet Armenians emigrated to the
 United States. This represents a dramatic increase over the
 1987 figure of slightly more than 3,000 Armenian departures
 for the United States.
 More than 45,000 Soviet ethnic Germans were permitted to leave
 the Soviet Union in 1988 for the Federal Republic of Germany.
 This figure, again, represents'a dramatic increase over the
 previous year's 14,000 departures.
 Soviet authorities in 1988 resolved a significant number of
 divided family cases affecting the United States, France, the
 United Kingdom, and Australia. In January there were 4
 separated spouses, 3 blocked marriages, 18 dual nationals, and
 106 divided families on a.U.S. Government list of families who
 are actively seeking to join relatives in the United States
 and who have been refused exit permission by the Soviet
 Government. Currently, 7 Soviet families, numbering some 11
 persons, are on this list. This includes one separated spouse
 and 6 divided families. Additionally, Soviet authorities have
 agreed to a mechanis' to allow the 8 remaining dual nationals,
 who have been denied permission to return to the United States,
 in the past, to leave. Ten other divided families remain on
 the U.S. list, but their cases require further clarification.
 In 1988 Soviet authorities continued a. trend begun in 1987 to
 permit emigrants to return for. tourist visits to the U.S.S.R.,
 both those who had retained Soviet citizenship and Soviet
 passports and those--primarily Soviet Jews who had emigrated
 on Israeli vyzovs--who had been stripped of Soviet
 citizenship. However, those who had obtained a second
 citizenship were not permitted a grace period to determine if
 they wished to return permanently. As soon as a returning
 former citizen requested housing or medical services or even a
 residency permit, local authorities required the surrender of
 the Soviet foreign travel passport or Soviet exit visa and the
 acceptance of an internal passport before services could be
 made available. This created extreme hardship for many
 persons who needed more time than their tourist visa permitted
 to determine if they could resettle in the community they had
 left.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Soviet citizens are not free to change their system of
 government. Ultimate political power is vested in the
 Communist Party, which is a self-selecting, self-perpetuating
 
 
 1229
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 hierarchy controlling virtually every element of political
 expression at all levels. The Constitution provides that the
 party is the "leading and guiding force of Soviet society and
 the nucleus of its political system, of all state
 organizations and public organizations." Ordinary citizens
 have little opportunity to influence the actions of the
 party. Actual power within the party flows from the top (the
 General Secretary, the Politburo, and the Secretariat), thus
 allowing relatively small groups of party officials and
 leaders to control the decisions of subordinate bodies.
 Traditionally, elections to the Supreme Soviet (parliament)
 have been a formality since they have been based on a single
 list of party-approved candidates and voting has been public.
 The XIX Communist Party Conference in June, however,
 recommended reforming the electoral system to include secret
 balloting and multiple-candidate elections at all government
 and party levels. Establishment of a Congress of People's
 Deputies, which will elect a permanent parliament with broader
 powers, was proposed in 1988. Elections were announced for
 March 1989, with the Congress to convene in April 1989.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights.
 Soviet authorities have adopted a more forthcoming approach to
 foreign criticism of their human rights record, acknowledging
 problems and stating their desire to make their society more
 "humane." They have also acknowledged that the human rights
 situation in the U.S.S.R. is subject to discussion in official
 bilateral and multilateral contacts. They have begun to
 permit foreigners, on a very limited, controlled basis, to
 investigate the status of human rights in the U.S.S.R. They
 permittet a Visit by the International HeIsinki Federation in
 January. In December the authorities arranged a visit to
 Perm' labor camp 35 for New York Times columnist Abe
 Rosenthal, New York Times correspondent Phil Taubman, and
 Helsinki Watch official Cathy Fitzpatrick.
 Authorities also permitted tourist visits by members of
 Christian Solidarity International and the Frankfurt-based
 International Society for Human Rights. These visitors were
 allowed to.meet freely with dissidents, refuseniks, and
 others. Members of the Soviet Human Rights Commission
 (described as a nongovernmental organization (NGO) by the
 Soviets, although clearly an officially organized body) met
 with the International Helsinki Federation in Paris and
 informally with Amnesty International (AI) representatives.
 The Soviet Union committed itself in the Conference on
 Security and Cooperation in Europe forum to permit NGO's to
 attend an official human rights conference in Moscow, if one
 is held.
 Soviet authorities have not been willing to communicate
 officially with Al, although they permitted a tourist, visit in
 1988 by two AI representatives. The authorities suppressed
 the Moscow chapter of AI, alleging that it worked with Western
 intelligence agencies against the Soviet Government.
 The Soviet Government has cooperated with the United States in
 investigating alleged war crimes committed during World War II
 by persons who are now citizens or residents of the United
 States. It has permitted the U.S. Government to take
 depositions from witnesses in the U.S.S.R. and has provided
 documentation for use in U.S. courts.
 
 
 1230
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution provides for the equal status of all Soviet
 citizens, regardless of nationality, sex, or language. Soviet
 reality falls far short of the constitutional ideal; indeed,
 discrimination along national, sexual, and linguistic lines is
 actively practiced. Along with social status, those factors
 deeply affect a Soviet citizen's opportunities.
 The Soviets recognize more than 100 nationalities in the
 U.S.S.R., and the Soviet federal system is based on
 nationality. Many ethnic groups have territorial and
 administrative entities: the 15 Soviet Union republics, some
 of which were formerly independent countries, represent some
 of the largest and most developed nationalities. Other,
 smaller nationalities have autonomous republics, oblasts, or
 districts, but some 55 million Soviets live outside their
 nationality's administrative region or belong to a nationality
 that has none. The national rights of these Soviets have not
 been adequately addressed, as even Soviet officials now admit.
 At the XIX Communist Party Conference in June, General
 Secretary Gorbachev admitted that earlier Soviet claims that
 the Soviet Union had no nationality problem were mere
 pretense. A government commission established in 1987 to
 study Crimean Tatar grievances continued its deliberations in
 1988. A high-level commission was set up earlier in 1988 to
 consider the grievances of the Armenian population of
 Nagorno-Karabakh in Azerbaydzhan. The leaderships in the
 Baltic republics now pay close attention to national demands,
 and the Estonian leadership in particular has even declared
 sovereignty and represented national interests in talks with
 the central leadership in Moscow. At the same time, there was
 a major public debate over nationality policy. Bilingualism,
 fears of Russification, the rights of national minorities
 outside their administrative regions, and similar topics have
 all been widely discussed in the central and republic press.
 The Crimean Tatars, a Muslim minority forcibly deported from
 their historic Crimean homeland to Central Asia in 1944,
 continued to seek repatriation and the reestablishment of a
 Crimean autonomous region. After major Crimean Tatar
 demonstrations in Moscow in 1987, the Soviets established a
 commission headed by Andrei Gromyko to study their grievances.
 Parallel commissions were established at lower levels in areas
 with compact Crimean Tatar populations, such as Uzbekistan and
 the Kuban'. The Gromyko commission issued a statement in June
 rejecting Tatar demands for the reestablishment of a Crimean
 autonomous region as unfounded and approving only limited
 opportunities for return to the Crimea. On the other hand,
 the commission recommended that more be done at the local
 level to meet Crimean Tatar national and cultural demands.
 Accordingly, Tatar-language newspapers and radio and
 television broadcasts were increased at the local level, and
 instruction in Crimean Tatar was made available at a number of
 schools.
 Crimean Tatar activists, however, remained dissatisfied with
 the Government's response. Demonstrations and meetings were
 held frequently in and around Tashkent and in Krasnodar Kray
 to press demands. Most of these proceeded peacefully. The
 authorities, however, thwarted Tatar attempts to stage major
 demonstrations in Moscow throughout the year, principally by
 deporting activists from Moscow back to their places of
 
 
 1231
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 residence. Tatar activists' efforts to call a general strike
 among Tatar workers to press their demands in June and July
 were met with responsiveness only in Krasnodar Kray, although
 even there activists judged the strike itself a failure.
 At the same time, current Soviet policy continues to promote
 Russification and Russian domination. Mastery of the Russian
 language is a necessity for social advancement. Russian is
 almost exclusively the language of scientific and
 technological discourse. Government business is conducted in
 Russian almost everywhere; only in the Caucasus and in the
 Baltic republics do the languages of these indigenous
 populations enjoy the status of official state languages.
 The situation in the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic
 exemplifies the extent of Russification. The number of
 Ukrainian-language schools has declined in many areas,
 particularly in the industrial southeast, but some new ones
 were opened in 1988. Ukrainian history, culture, and religion
 are often ignored or distorted, though dissident sources in
 Ukraine report the authorities are devoting more positive
 attention to this issue of late. While the percentage of
 Ukrainian-language publications remains significantly below
 the percentage of Ukrainian speakers in the population, the
 publication of certain Ukrainian-language materials rose in
 1988.
 The Soviet Government is considering the expansion of German-
 language education, newspapers, and broadcasts in areas where
 ethnic Germans are concentrated, as well as liberalizing
 permission for increasing numbers of ethnic Germans to make
 private visits to family members in the Federal Republic of
 Germany. The absence of these reforms is widely seen as a
 major reason for the continuing increase in ethnic German
 emigration.
 Few ethnic minorities are seen in the highest levels of
 nationwide organizations, academic, or governmental bodies,
 though they tend to dominate their own local organizations,
 including at the republic level. Although they are for the
 most part assimilated, Jews are largely absent from positions
 of leadership. Of the 21 top leaders--full and candidate
 Politburo members and Central Committee Secretaries--only
 4 are non-Russians.
 During the Brezhnev period, a quota system was used
 extensively throughout the Soviet Union as part of a broader
 nationality policy. Some ethnic groups, such as the Central
 Asians, benefited significantly from that policy, as they
 obtained positions in universities and middle-class
 occupations that they would not have obtained had merit been
 the main criterion. Other groups, most notably Jews but also
 Russians outside the R.S.F.S.R., suffered. General Secretary
 Gorbachev has moved against the quota system, in part out of
 the belief that it had fostered deep-seated corruption in many
 parts of the country. That move has improved the situation of
 Jews; although discrimination still exists in admissions to
 universities, for example, dissident sources claim that
 restrictions have been eased. At the same time, those ethnic
 groups that benefitted from Brezhnev's "affirmative action"
 program have begun to lose substantial privileges and
 opportunities.
 While still far from satisfactory, official toleration of
 expressions of Jewish cultural life increased during 1988.
 
 
 1232
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 Jewish culture clubs received official approval in Leningrad
 and Minsk, an unofficial Jewish museum was established in a
 Moscow apartment, and a Jewish library in another. A
 cooperative restaurant featuring Jewish cuisine and
 entertainment opened in Moscow. However, a rabbinical school,
 agreed to in principle by the Soviets in May and again in
 October, has not yet opened. Neither has the promised
 cultural center adjacent to the Moscow synagogue nor the
 promised Yiddish theater. Official efforts to reduce
 anti-Semitism continued. Znamya, Pravda, and Vechernyaya
 Moskva all carried articles highly critical of the Russian
 nationalist and virulently anti-Semitic "Pamyat'" society. In
 the summer, the Leningrad authorities began to deny "Pamyat'"
 permission to hold demonstrations and meetings, even though
 rumors persisted that the society enjoyed high-level support
 there.
 There were reports that the Anti-Zionist Committee was
 disbanded. At the same time, official publications still
 attacked many Jewish activists as "Zionists," which aggravates
 anti-Semitism. Efforts to establish a Jewish cultural
 association in Moscow have met with failure, and the leader of
 the informal association, Mikhail Chlenov, was attacked in the
 press.
 Women nominally enjoy the same legal rights as men, including
 the right to participate in all areas of social, political,
 and economic life. An extensive system of day-care service
 and maternity leave benefits enhances the ability of women to
 retain employment. Virtually all women, however, have no
 choice but to work both inside and outside the home. Women
 bear the main brunt of the hardships of Soviet daily life,
 such as waiting in long lines for food products. Women hold a
 disproportionate percentage of low-level jobs, such as
 street-sweeping. The difficulty of women's lives has begun to
 be discussed in the Soviet press. General Secretary Gorbachev
 has shown sensitivity to this problem in his public statements
 and appears to be interested in improving women's lot.
 Perhaps indicative of the Kremlin's concern, Aleksandra
 Biryukova was promoted to candidate membership of the
 Politburo at the September Central Committee plenum. She is
 the first woman to enjoy membership in that body since
 Yekaterina Furtseva in the Khrushchev era (1956-61).
 Men occupy the great majority of leading positions in most
 professions, especially politics. At present, there are no
 women serving as full Politburo members or Secretaries of the
 Central Committee. Only 12 of 305 full members of the Central
 Committee of the Soviet Communist Party are women. And only a
 single Soviet ambassador is female.
 Most members of the Soviet elite (the party, the military, the
 diplomatic service, the scientific-technical intelligentsia,
 and the cultural and sports establishments) are shielded to
 various degrees from social and economic hardships. They have
 greater access than the average Soviet citizen to quality food
 and consumer goods, special medical facilities, the best
 schools, foreign travel, automobiles, country houses, and paid
 vacations at choice resorts. In 1988, however, a number of
 special stores for the elite were closed down, including one
 in Moscow that served members of the Central Committee and
 Council of Ministers. These stores subsequently reopened with
 a substantial reduction in offerings of imported goods.
 Better than average supplies of domestically produced consumer
 goods are still sold in these stores, however. Also, some
 
 
 1233
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 special clinics formerly reserved for the elite have been
 opened to a broader public, including one in the Moscow area
 that has been turned over for the treatment of disabled
 veterans of the Afghanistan conflict.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 In the Soviet Union, there is no right of association as
 defined by the International Labor Organization. Although
 approximately 30 functional trade unions exist in the
 U.S.S.R., encompassing virtually the entire Soviet labor
 force, all of these fall under the direction of the officially
 sponsored All-Union Council oif Trade Unions (AUCCTU), a
 governmental umbrella mass organization which advances Soviet
 and Communist international labor interests. The AUCCTU
 serves primarily as a means of political indoctrination,
 control, and propaganda; neither it nor its constituent
 organizations actually advance worker interests.  In a
 mid-1987 poll by the newspaper Sotsialisticheskaya Industriya,
 only 9 percent of the 11,50G workers questioned approved of
 the work of their trade unions. Only 7.3 percent gave
 management a favorable rating. Even the official trade union
 organ, the newspaper Trud, has commented on the need for
 unions to play a more active role in defending workers'
 interests. In the October 4, 1988, issue of Trud, for
 instance, a Kazakh trade union official noted worker
 characterization of trade unions as being "toothless" and
 unable to defend worker interests.
 A fledgling and small-scale independent trade union movement
 exists in some Soviet cities, despite the disapproval of
 Soviet authoiities. The Free Interprofessional Union of
 Workers (SMOT) was decimated by arrests and forced emigration
 in the late 1970's and early 1980"s, but it has resumed a
 limited level of activity following the pardon of some of its
 organizers in 1987. In an early 1988 interview with a British
 newspaper, a SMOT leader said SMOT had 400 members in Moscow,
 Leningrad, Riga, Kaliningrad, and Sverdlovsk. The Soviet
 press reported on the actions of the Leningrad informal group,
 "Committee for the Democratization of Trade Unions" (KDP), in
 early 1988. The KDP championed the cause of a dissident
 employee at a Leningrad factory who led protests against
 occupational safety hazards, was fired, but later reinstated
 with damages paid after Moscow authorities intervened. In
 addition, a group of unofficial editors and correspondents
 organized by the editor of the dissident publication Glasnost'
 has applied for affiliation with the International Federation
 of Journalists. The group claims some 40 members. It remains
 to be seen how far any of these incipient independent trade
 organizations will be allowed to go in advancing workers'
 interests.
 The right to strike is not recognized, and strikes are still
 rare despite the loosening of Soviet society. Nevertheless,
 in Nagorno-Karabakh and Yerevan, Armenians conducted major
 prolonged strikes at various times to push an explicitly
 political demand: Karabakh's transfer to Armenia. Despite
 the severity of the economic dislocation and the economic
 losses to enterprises elsewhere in the Soviet Union, the
 authorities did not put the strikes down with force. Rather,
 they entered into a major effort--as yet unsuccessful--to
 resolve the Karabakh issue to the satisfaction of all
 parties.   Shortly after the December 7 earthquake, Armenian
 
 
 1234
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 organizers suspended their strike activities to focus on
 relief to the victims.
 Purely economic strikes took place, for example in Omsk, where
 truck drivers struck in February to show their lack of
 confidence in their depot's leadership, and in Kishinev, where
 bus drivers struck over work conditions in May. In December
 1987, workers at the Yaroslavl Motor Manufacturing Plant held
 a sitdown strike against being forced to work 20 Saturdays in
 1 year; the number was reduced to 8. In most cases, the
 authorities entered into negotiations with the strikers. The
 media gave substantial coverage to a number of these strikes.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Under terms of the June 1987 "Law on State Enterprises,"
 managers can fire excess labor and divide the wage fund among
 fewer workers, thereby raising salaries. Soviet authorities
 have stated publicly that they anticipate 16 million workers
 will be "released" from their jobs by the year 2000 and
 3 million in the current 5-year plan, which concludes in
 1990. As the Soviet Constitution guarantees the right to
 work, those released theoretically will be retrained for other
 jobs, sometimes requiring relocation.
 In disputes about these and other employment issues, workers
 may not resort to collective bargaining as practiced in the
 West. Soviet workers' interests generally are represented by
 leaders of the local chapter of the official trade union, and
 local chapter party officials. These representatives are
 subordinate to government and Communist Party officials,
 respectively, and thus do not necessarily represent workers'
 interests fully. There are no economic incentive zones or
 special industries where labor standards differ from those
 elsewhere in the country, although the concept was being
 discussed in 1988.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Most political prisoners, as well as most ordinary criminals,
 are confined to camps where they are forced to labor, often
 under harsh and degrading conditions, on Soviet developmental
 projects and to assist in the production of primary and
 manufactured goods. Goods are manufactured on behalf of
 nearby factories and are included in those factories' quotas
 and production statistics. Prisoners are theoretically paid
 the same wage as factory workers, but up to 90 percent of
 their pay goes to prison authorities, supposedly to cover the
 cost of their maintenance, according to the corrective labor
 code of the R.S.F.S.R.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The statutory minimum age for employment of children is 16,
 and the standard workweek is 40 hours. There is no indication
 of widespread violation of these norms, though the popular and
 progressive Soviet journal Ogonyok recently reported in a
 series of articles on the exploitation of child labor in some
 Central Asian textile plants.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 According to the Soviet state statistical committee, the
 average monthly wage for blue- and white-collar workers in
 mid-1988 was $350 and for collective farm workers $250 at the
 
 
 1235
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 December 1988 official exchange rate. (The ruble is not a
 convertible currency, and its value here in terms of the U.S.
 dollar does not represent actual purchasing power for
 international comparison.) The mean wage, however, is
 estimated by Western observers to be in the area of $200-250
 per month, and a third of all Soviet families get by on less
 than $165 per month. Labor performed under dangerous
 conditions, such as in mining or metallurgical enterprises or
 in harsh climates such as Siberia and the far north, is
 rewarded with percentage bonuses which can raise wages to
 $500-600 per month--somewhat offset by substantially higher
 living costs in these remote areas. General Secretary
 Gorbachev has supported efforts to raise the prestige of
 professions that are crucial to scientific and technical
 progress, such as design engineers, business managers, and
 teachers, by raising salaries. Wages in the health sector
 have also increased in the past year.
 The average workweek is 40 hours for most white-collar workers
 and 48 hours for blue-collar workers. In addition, workers
 are required periodically to "donate" a working Saturday for
 which they receive no pay. For blue-collar workers, this
 means an unpaid day at the factory; white-collar workers are
 expected to put in time cleaning up their neighborhoods and
 performing other social services. Labor resources frequently
 are drawn at harvest time on a paid and unpaid basis from
 educational institutions, the military, office workers., and
 other city residents for work in the fields. Annual leave for
 vacations varies according to a number of factors, but most
 Soviet citizens receive 4 weeks or more of paid vacation each
 year.
 Monetary wagep earned in the state sector do not tell the
 whole story of remuneration in the Soviet Union, however. The
 State supplements wages by heavily subsidizing the cost of
 basic foodstuffs (especially meat, milk and bread), education,
 health care, housing, and transportation--all of which are
 provided free of charge or at nominal cost. Soviet experts
 have published estimates that these services amount to about
 $132 of remuneration per worker per month.
 Soviet ltw establishes minimum conditions of health and
 safety. Press reports, however, suggest that laws on health
 and safety standards are widely ignored, as are those
 regarding maximum hours of work.
 
 
 1236
