 RUSSIA
 A year of 3olitical turmoil and crisis culminated in elections for a new Russian
 Parliament and a concurrent referendum on a new constitution on December 12.
 Voters elected a Parliament, roughly divided among reformers, Communists, and ex-
 treme nationalists, which convened for the first time in mid-January. The majority
 of voters approved the Constitution providing for a strong executive branch of gov-
 ernment.
 The conflict between the legislative and executive branches, which characterized
 the political situation during 1992, continued until September 21 when President
 Boris Yeltsin disbanded the Congress of People'r Deputies (CPD) elected in 1990
 under the Soviet electoral system. After September 21, the President ruled by de-
 cree. The national referendum on April 25 had given President Yeltsin a strong vote
 of  pular support but had not succeeded in resolving the constitutional crisis.
 Initially refusing to accept its dissolution, the CPD voted to remove the President
 and named an alternate government, including "ministers" of interior, security, and
 defense who sought to exert command over the armed forces. The Government in-
 creasingly controlled public access to the so-called White House, where the CPD was
 meeting. After a 10-ay standoff marked by bloody street clashes, demonstrators
 broke through the government security cordon on October 3 and rallied at the White
 House. Vice President Aleksandr Rutskoy and CPD Chairman Ruslan Khasbulatov
 urged the demonstrators, some of whom were armed with automatic weapons, to at-
 tack the nearby mayor's offices and the Ostankino television facilities.
 On October 4, army troops surrounded and assaulted the White House. Given op.
 portunities to surrender, some 300 persons, including deputies and journalists, left
 the building peacefully. While some deputies were     detained  and released,
 Khasbulatov, Rutskoy, and the "ministers" of security, interior and defense were ar-
 rested. Another group of armed militants remained in the building and battled gov-
 ernment forces, including Interior Ministry troops, which attacked with tanks and
 armored personnel carriers. The number of persons who died in the violence of Octo-
 ber 3-4 is disputed. Estimates in the press published in the immediate aftermath
 of the events ranged widely; they eventually settled on more than 100 persons re-
 killed at Ostankino and as           a    ed   h    h
 HIouse. he official death tll was setilat~~  150kle4i7h.igtn    t h    ht
 Following the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the Committee for State Security
 (KGB) was broken into two organizations, the Foreign Intelligence Service (SVR)
 and the Ministry of Security. Internal security became the responsibility of the Min-
 istry of Security. A presindeni  decree in December 1993 dissolved that Ministry
 andset up in its place a counterintelligence service under the direct control of the
 President. Laws passed in 1992 require them to respect human and civil rights, out-
 line rules and procedures governing their activities and investigations, and establish
 presidential and legislative oversight over each agency's activities.
 The Government in 1993 continued to pursue the transformation of a centrally
 controlled economy into a market-oriented system. Fiscal and monetary stabilization
 were the central issues. As the economy continued to ajust to market price mecha-
 nisms, the Government began efforts to rein in credit and deficit spending, paving
 the way for assistance from the International Monetary Fund and the rescheduling
 of Russia s official debt. Inflation continued at monthly rates of 20 to 25 percent for
 most of the year. Privatization continued rapidly, and the Government sold off over
 half the retail businesses and thousands of commercial and industrial firms. Clos-
 ings of inefficient firms or bankruptcies were few, official unemployment remained
 low, and industrial output, which ad fallen by about 50 percent from 1990 figures,
 began to level off.
 Russia continued its progress on human rights during 1993, despite some tem-
 porary setbacks as a result of the October crisis. Freedom of speech, assembly, and
 association, other than during the October crisis, were largely respected. Sviet-era
 restrictions on freedom of religion and travel continued to be eased. The 1991 law
 on exit and entry is gradually being implemented, although some issues are unre-
 solved. There are no known political prisoners in Russia.
 Despite significant progress in recent years, Russia's overall human rights record
 is uneven, and some serous problems remain. On October 3, President Yeltsin de-
 clared a state of emergency in the capital. Several important human rights problems
 occurred during the state of emergency. Press freedoms were restricted, for example,
 by the introduction of temporary censorship. Restrictinns on freedom of travel were
 imposed through enforrement of the "propiska" (residence permit) system against
 dark-complexioned people. This resulted in the expulsion from Moscow of thousands
 of people from the Caucasus and Central Asia.
 
 
 1024
 In spite of legislation to foster greater judicial independence, the judiciary still re-
 flects its Communist heritage in personnel and practice. It is not yet fully independ-
 ent or empowered to act as a guarantor of human rights. Other human rights prob-
 lems include harsh prison conditions; official discrimination against people from the
 Caucasus; societal discrimination against people from the Caucasus and Jews; soci-
 etal discrimination and violence against women; and governmental pressures
 against independent labor unions.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political
 killings by Russian authorities in 1993. (See Section 1.g. for details of the political
 violence in Moscow on October 3-4.)
 Politics in the northern Caucasus, however, was marked by considerable violence.
 In Chechnya, a journalist investigatin corruption in the Chechen government was
 killed in April in the city of Grozny. Observers believe local authorities with crimi-
 nal ties were responsible. In June forces loyal to Chechen President Dzhokhar
 Dudaev fired on a crowd of protesters gathered in front of Grozny's city hall, killing
 14 persons, including the democratically elected mayor of the city.
 On August 1, Viktor Polyaichko, head of administration of the State of Emergency
 Zone in north Ossetia and Ingushetia, was assassinated. No persons have been
 charged in connection with this incident.
 b. Disappearance.-No political disappearances or abductions are known to have
 occurred in 1993. According to Ingush sources, several hundred of the 687 Ingush
 who reportedly disappeared as a result of fighting in north Ossetia in 1992 are still
 missing.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Russian Constitution specifically prohibits torture and other cruel, inhuman, or
 degrading treatment or punishment. However, some authorities still use force
 against persons in custody or under suspicion. Human rights organizations routinely
 receive credible complaints of police beatings during qiuestioning or at the time of
 arrest. In one case, police told relatives of a victim that the injuries were caused
 by the person's trying to escape out of a second-floor window. Amnesty International
 was told by police that the injuries did not occur as described and that the injured
 victim was reportedly seen being wheeled out of the building into an ambulance.
 Human rights groups reported that the authorities took numerous persons into cus-
 tody following the assault on the White House and beat and mistreated them.
 Russian detention and incarceration practices remain harsh. Conditions in many
 risons threaten the health and life of prisoners. Many prisoners continue to suffer
 from mental and physical abuse and mistreatment during interrogation, trial, and
 confinement, according to a wide variety of reliable sources. Excessive force by law
 enforcement personnel goes unpunished, and victims are rarely able to seek redress.
 There are approximately 827,000 inmates in the Russian prison system, according
 to the Interior Ministry, and overcrowding is a significant problem. In Moscow, for
 example, three prisons designed to hold 8,500 inmates house 14,400 persons, accord-
 ing to prison officials. Prisoners ill with infectious diseases in some cases are not
 segrgated from healthy prisoners.
 Prisoners are frequently placed in unduly harsh punishment cells for violations
 of rules. No administrative process exists to ensure that prisoners are not arbitrar-
 ily or inappropriately sent to such cells. Changes in procedures instituted in 1992
 limit the time a prisoner may be held in such cells to no more than 60 days during
 a year and a maximum of 15 days at a time. In labor camps, where prisoners live
 in barracks, prisoners may only be placed in cells for a maximum of 6 months per
 year.
 Corrective institutions for women also house children. Like other Russian prisons,
 these institutions are marked by overcrowding and poor conditions. Pregnant
 women and mothers, while incarcerated, are entitled to better conditions and food
 than other prisoners. Few women inmates are believed to be aware of these rights
 and therefore do not always benefit from these entitlements.
 The violent hazing of new recruits by other soldiers continued in 1993. Cruel and
 degrading treatment of military conscripts sometimes resulted in death. According
 to Ministry of Defense statistics, during the first 8 months of 1993, 1,222 service-
 men died, of whom 25 percent reportedly committed suicide. The Committee of Sol-
 diers' Mothers uses the number of suicides to illustrate the hazing problem. The
 Committee made some progress toward easing such treatment through direct con-
 tacts with military officials.
 
 
 1025
 
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Persons may be detained arbitrarily and
 arrested without warrants. The Criminal Code requires that detainees be charged
 or released within 72 hours. Under the 1992 law on the procuracy, decisions on de-
 tention and custody are the responsibility of the procurator's office. Criminal Code
 amendments enacted in 1992 provide for court review of arrests and empower
 judges to order the release of those arrested pending trial. Detainees have the right
 to request a court evaluation of the legality of detention. If the court finds the de-
 tention illegal, the judge has the power to order an immediate release. Nonetheless,
 the judicial system is unable to cope with the increasing numbers of persons ar-
 rested for crimes. Thousands of persons are held for extended periods of time, often
 for more than a year, in pretrial detention, without judicial revie w.
 Access to defense attorneys has improved. The new Constitution guarantees the
 right of a detainee to consult with a awyer. However, authorities denied the attor-
 neys for former CPD Chairman Ruslan Khasbulatov and Vice President Rutskoy ac-
 cess to them during the initial days of their confinement. The attorneys and families
 of the accused were later granted access, as was the International Committee of the
 Red Cross.
 Thousands of persons were detained during the weeks before and after the Octo-
 ber 3-4 violence. Most, but not all, were released within the legally prescribed 72-
 hour detention period. Of those charged with criminal offenses, most remained in
 custody, though some were released under the legal provisions described above.
 e. Denial   Fair Public Trial-Government efforts to reform the legal and judi-
 cial systems had limited effect in 1993. Russian courts, which have long served as
 tools for enforcing state power, remain subject on occasion topolitical influence. In
 July the Supreme Soviet passed a law authorizing the phased introduction of trial
 by jury in nine regions beginning in November. Russian legal reformers hope that
 use of jury trials will spur the growth of a more open and fair adversarial courtroom
 procedure. The first ury trials were conducted in November and offered to defend-
 ants accused of murder and other capital crimes. A criminal defendant must be ad-
 vised of his right to a jury trial by the investigator during the preliminary investiga-
 tion. Defendants may choose to be tried before a judge and jury or, in accord with
 traditional criminal procedures, before a judge and two people's assessors. A defend-
 ant in a jury trial has the right to appeal to the Supreme Court.
 In general, Russian judges are poorly trained and have little concept of a truly
 independent judiciary. The 1992 law on the status of judges began to have some
 positive effect on judicial morale. Monetary incentives attracted better candidates to
 entry-level judicial positions. Judicial wages increased by eight or nine times during
 1993 and are now indexed to senior executive pay scales.
 President Yeltsin suspended the Constitutional Court's activities on October 6, cit-
 ing the Court's lack of lmpartiality in the events leading to the violence of October
 3-4. Prior to the Court's suspension, each side in the political power struggle turned
 to the Court in the hope that the Court's decision would add to its legitimacy. The
 Court's most significant achievement during this turbulent period was to promote
 the notion of the judiciary's independence and authority, operating alongside the ex-
 ecutive and legislative branches of government. The Constitution adopted in Decem-
 ber envisages a prominent role for a Constitutional Court and an independent judi-
 ciary.
 Criminal defendants are permitted by law to have an attorney represent them in
 court, and Russian courts routinely assign defense attorneys to defendants who can-
 not afford one. The criminal justice system continues to be based on the presump-
 tion of guilt, and defense attorneys operate within a system that remains biased
 against their clients. Russia's new Constitution provides for the presumption of in-
 nocence, but it remains to be seen whether and how this will work in practice. Law-
 yers are often unable to work with their clients during the early stages of an inves-
 tigation and have only limited access to evidence developed by government prosecu-
 tors. Many believe that prosecutors feel confident in bringing weak cases to court
 because they enjoy numerous built-in procedural advantages over the defense. An
 overall conviction rate of better than 99 percent testifies to the limited ability of the
 defense to present an effective case. Russia has no system of plea bargaining.
 In March the military collegium of the Supreme Court, handling the trial of those
 persons accused of plotting the Augst 1991cup attempt, instituted procedures to
 regulate public attendance at the trial. More than a dozen news organizations were
 granted credentials to cover the proceedings. The court turned down a defense re-
 quest in mid-October to allow more media representatives to attend the trial. The
 trial, which began in April, proceeded in fits and starts, with numerous procedural
 delays because of illness among the defendants or their attorneys. On one occasion,
 the court denied a defense petition to dismiss the government prosecution team. The
 defense alleged bias on the part of the Procurator General who had published a book
 
 
 1026
 on the coup based, in part, on the pretrial testimony of the defendants. The coup
 trial recessed again in December due to claims of illness by three defendants.
 In June the Tatarstan supreme court sentenced Tatar national activist Zinnue
 Agliullin, chairman of the All-Tatar Public Center, to 2 years in prison under Arti-
 cles 70 (which prohibits calls for the violent overthrow of the government and the
 constitutional order) and 79 (which prohibits "organization of mass disorder" and
 "armed resistance" to the authorities) of the Russian Federation Criminal Code. In
 October 1992, Agliullin publicly called for the "punishment" of the Tatarstan presi-
 dent for "betraying the interests of the Tatar people." Tatarstan authorities brought
 additional charges against Agliullin in August under special Tatar anticrime legisla-
 tion, claiming that Agliullin owned a weapon allegedly found in his apartment at
 the time of his arrest. Agliullin alleged that the charges were politically motivated.
 There are no known political prisoners in Russia. Hundreds of persons captured
 in connection with the October 3-4 events were held briefly and released. Those
 charged with crimes remain in custody.
 Thousands of persons remain incarcerated for violating laws that prohibit a vari-
 ety of commercial activities that are now legal and commonplace. One such "crime"
 was speculation, in which a person sells a commodity at a higher price than he or
 she paid for it.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 right to privacy is guaranteed by the Constitution. The splitting of the KGB in De-
 cember 1991 and President Yeltsin's breakup of the Ministry of Security in Decem-
 ber 1993 ended the security services' status as a "state within a state. The Presi-
 dent's December decree calls for a trimming of personnel and bureaucratic struc-
 tures devoted to domestic intelligence and places the internal security services
 under his direct control. In a December 22 news conference, he announced that po-
 lice surveillance of the Russian people would now end and that the domestic intel-
 ligence service would perform only counterintelligence functions.
 Authorities may search premises without a warrant but are obliged to obtain one
 within 24 hours after the search. In July President Yeltsin signed legislation that
 allowed warrantless searches with 24-hour notification in cases of terrorism or
 threats to national security. In spite of reforms that divided the KGB into two sepa-
 rate organs, electronic monitoring of residence is believed to continue, albeit at re-
 duced levels. Foreign radio broadcasts were not jammed.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-A week prior to the violence of October 3-4, armed supporters of the dis-
 banded Parliament, trying to take over a military communications facility in Mos-
 cow, killed one police officer and a civilian bystander. On October 3, responding to
 Vice President Rutskoy's exhortation from the balcony of the White House, hun-
 dreds of anti-Yeltsin demonstrators, some armed with automatic weapons, attacked
 the Moscow mayor's office and later the television facilities at Ostankino. More than
 100 persons were reportedly killed in the fighting at Ostankino. The attackers suf-
 fered the majority of the casualties.
 Police forces by themselves were unable to control the situation in Moscow. On
 October 4, the Gvernment used the army to quash the rebellion. Approximately
 1,700 troops, 10 tanks, and 20 armored personnel carriers were involved in the as-
 sault of the White House. Occupiers of the building were given opportunities to sur-
 render before government forces opened fire. After some shelling by the tanks, the
 occupiers were given another opportunity to surrender. More than 300 persons left
 peacefully, but a number of the more militant supporters of Parliament remained
 in the building and battled government forces. Press estimates of the death toll
 range between 150 and 200 persons. Military casualties were light.
 Russian troops are still in place in many of the republics of the former Soviet
 Union and are embroiled in a number of controversial conflicts, some involving the
 Russian minorities in the republics. (See the reports on Georgia, Moldova, and
 Tajikistan.)
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Freedom of speech and press was widely re-
 spected during much of 1993. Newspapers and magazines, most of which are inde-
 pendent of the Government and some of which are privately owned, functioned
 unhindered. However, during the events of September-October, the Government re-
 stricted freedom of speech and press.
 In March the executive and legislative branches issued conflicting decrees assert-
 ing control over the media. President Yeltsin issued a decree placing radio and tele-
 vision under his control. On March 28, the Parliament voted to disband the Govern-
 ment's Federal Information Center (FIC) and to put state radio and television under
 its own control. This battle for control of the media continued throughout the year,
 
 
 1027
 flaring up again on October 3 when supporters of the disbanded Parliament vio-
 lently attacked the country's television broadcasting center. In a December decree,
 Yeltsin replaced the Information Ministry and the FIC with a new media apparatus
 in the presidential administration.
 Following the Government's assault on the White House, it imposed strict censor-
 ship for 2 days. Authorities on October 3 confiscated film from journalists leaving
 the country at the airport. The newspapers Nezavisimaya Gazeta and Segodnya
 were published with blank spaces (or spaces labeled "censored") where three arti-
 cles to which government censors objected, would have appeared. Censors ceased
 work after the second day. However, the state of emergency empowered the Govern-
 ment to suspend provisions of the media law and to continue to hold publications
 "responsible for the material they published after the lifting of censorship. The
 Government advised publications to consult with the Ministry of Information if
 doubts about articles or their content arose. The Government also pressured Presi-
 dent Yeltsin's opponents to cancel a number of press conferences during the first
 week in October. It banned 15 newspapers and froze their bank accounts. In late
 October, the President gave assurances that the Government would respect freedom
 of the press. By November freedom of speech and press largely returned to its pre-
 September 21 status. Three of the banned publications, the full-fledged newspapers
 Pravda, Sovietskaya Rossiya, and Den (under the new name Zavtra) resumed publi-
 cation.
 Police reportedly beat more than 20 journalists attempting to cover the Septem-
 ber/October events. Also in 1993, unidentified assailants in Moscow severely beat
 three Central Asian journalists covering their home region from Moscow. The jour-
 nalists believe members of the security services from Tajikistan attacked them to
 intimidate them and force them to cease reporting on alleged government repression
 there.
 The investigation of Vil Mirzayanov, arrested in November 1992 in connection
 with the publication of an article in the newspaper Moscow News about the exist-
 ence of a chemical weapons plant in the capital, began in the spring. Mirzayanov
 was charged with revealing state secrets. During the pretrial investigation, the Min-
 istry of Security in Apnil called in for questioning the American orrespondent resi-
 dent in Moscow who broke the story in the United States. The American journalist
 answered the summons. The investigation was concluded in summer, and the trial
 was set to bgin in January 1994.
 Many pubhcations in Russia suffer from acute financial problems which may af-
 fect their ability to function independently. The Government directly subsidizes
 more than 20 publications. Indirectly, the Government subsidizes publications by
 guaranteeing a percentage of their newsprint at controlled prices. Paper and ink are
 controlled by monopolies.
 Television is a primary source of information for most Russians. The two Russian
 television companies Ostankino and Russian State Television, transmit nationwide
 and to most of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS). The Russian Gov-
 ernment owns both, but the degree of official supervision has varied. Following
 President Yeltsin's disbandment of the CPD on September 21, television coverage
 of politics was markedly biased in favor of the President. In late September, for ex-
 ample, the program "Krasny Kvadrat" was not allowed to air because the Chairman
 of the Constitutional Court was a guest. Less than a month later, the directors of
 Russian State Television announced that the show would no longer be broadcast at
 all. President Yeltsin ordered the program "600 Seconds" off the air on October 4.
 The Government had also sought to cancel the program in April.
 On October 11, a new independent television news program appeared, anchored
 by a journalist who left Ostankino because of the Government's influence on content
 there. A December 22 edict by President Yeltsin provided a limited amount of time
 on Moscow television's Channel 8 to NTV, Independent Television.
 Television studios at the oblast (province) level that were part of the central sys-
 tem during the Soviet era now operate more or less independently. They function
 as affiliates, opting to use programs from the national company and producing local
 news programming independently. Local authorities sometimes subject these affili-
 ates to pressure.
 All broadcasters and cable networks, both public and private, use foreign broad-
 cast material. In addition to the Russian broadcasters, several joint venture cable
 companies now offer programming in Moscow.
 In the second year of post-Soviet existence, the environment for academic freedom
 in Russia continued to improve. Russian scholars enjoyed unprecedented academic
 freedom. Virtually all institutions of higher learning, from universities to research
 institutes, enjoy increased autonomy. University rectors and department heads were
 selected in free and open elections. Curriculums and textbooks were revamped, and
 
 
 1028
 many institutions developed closer relations with Western universities. The en-
 trenched academic nomenklatura establishment, tinged with much "old thinking,'
 nonetheless continued to exert some influence through their control of resources and
 privileges. Educational institutions at all levels suffered from decreased levels of
 government funding and support. Many aperate at subsistence levels.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Organizers of demonstrations
 must apply for permission to local authorities 10 days in advance, and officials must
 respond at least 5 days before the scheduled event. According to a presidential de-
 cree issued in May, requests for permission may be submitted no earlier than 15
 days and no later than 10 days before the scheduled date. Participants in unauthor-
 ized demonstrations are subject to civil and criminal penalties, including fines, 15-
 day jail sentences, and stiffer punishment. In April the Government issued a decree
 banning demonstrations on Red Square and in its vicinity.
 In the aftermath of the October assault on the White House, the Government tem-
 porarily banned all public demonstrations. The ban was lifted when the state of
 emergency expired on October 17.
 During the year, there were many peaceful public demonstrations, but a number
 of events were marked by violence. Much of the violence occurred when anti-Yeltsin
 groups clashed with the authorities. In September demonstrators protesting Presi-
 dent Yeltsin's disbandment of the CPD gathered daily in front of the White House
 where it was meeting. When the Government tightened security around the area
 and prevented demonstrators from rallying there, demonstrators clashed with the
 authorities in other parts of the city. Unable to get to the White House, the crowd
 gathered at a nearby metro station and blocked Moscow's ring road with com-
 mandeered vehicles. A senior policeman died when he was struck by a vehicle while
 assisting efforts to control a crowd.
 May Day demonstrations by the National Salvation Front, Working Moscow, and
 the Communist Workers Party of Russia turned violent when protestors clashed
 with police after following an unauthorized route for their march. One policeman
 was killed in the melee.
 Freedom of association is respected in practice. All public organizations must reg-
 ister their bylaws and the names of their leaders with the Ministry of Justice. Politi-
 cal parties must also present 5,000 signatures and pay a fee to register. The 1991
 Soviet law on public organizations allows the formation of political parties and guar-
 antees such organizations the right to propagate their views. The law also bans
 groups advocating violent change in the constitutional system or groups undermin-
 ing public order. In the aftermath of the October 3-4 violence, the Government
 banned 10 organizations because of their alleged role in the events surrounding the
 violence.
 Organizations registered with the Justice Ministry were allowed to present can-
 didates for the December parliamentary elections. As of October 20, 126 organiza-
 tions registered with the Ministry planned to take part in the elections. The Min-
 istry suspended the registration of the 10 banned organizations, denying them the
 ri ht to participate in the elections.
 % April the Ministry of Justice launched an investigation into the activities of the
 Communist Workers Party of Russia in workplaces. Their activities were alleged to
 run counter to a 1991 Russian Federation decree "on the cessation of the activities
 of organizational structures of political parties and mass social movements in state
 bodies, institutions, and organizations of the Russian Federation." In February the
 Justice Ministry sought to ban a Russian Communist Party conference, citing (erro-
 neously) the November 1992 Constitutional Court decision which reaffirmed the
 Communist Party's right to exist as a political organization. The conference none-
 theless took place without hindrance.
 Otherwise, hundreds of organizations, representing a wide political spectrum,
 functioned unhindered in 1993.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Freedom of religion continued to expand in 1992, and the
 visibility of religion increased dramatically. Religious services and other programs
 were televised throughout the year.
 Official and unofficial religious groups held seminars, conferences, and revival
 meetings, frequently in public facilities. Public advertising of religious services,
 leafletting in subways and other parts of the city, and street proselytizing in major
 cities was common. The press extensively covered religious issues, including state-
 ments of religious leaders and Orthodox Church events. Missionaries from almost
 every world religion, as well as lesser known sects, are present in Russia, and an
 increasing number of such groups opened permanent offices.
 Relations between the Russian Orthodox Church and the Government have grown
 closer in recent years. The Patriarch claims that the Church seeks no role in politics
 but has insisted that the Church act as a moral influence in Russian society. In
 
 
 1029
 March he appeared on national television to appeal for political reconciliation be-
 tween the legislative and executive branches, while during the September/October
 crisis in Moscow he mediated negotiations between presidential and legislative rep-
 resentatives. In July the Orthodox Church prompted the legislature to pass a pro-
 posed new law which relied heavily on the Church's views and, if enacted, could
 have further strengthened the Church's already preeminent place among religious
 groups in Russia. The law would have required all non-Russian organizations to reg-
 ister with the Government before engaging in religious activity in Russia. After
 President Yeltsin vetoed the bill, the Sptember 21 dissolution of the Congress of
 People's Deputies ended parliamentary efforts to pass the bill over his veto.
 Bureaucratic obstacles to complete freedom of religion still exist due to the provi-
 sion of the 1990 Soviet law on religion requiring religious groups of 10 adults or
 more to register with local authorities. Some groups view the requirement itself as
 contradicting their beliefs and therefore refuse to register. Although failure to reg-
 ister has not resulted in harassment, groups must register to acquire the status of
 a "juridical person" and to receive benefits, including access to the media and the
 right to establ*sh their own schools, own property, and engage in social work. The
 registration process, therefore allows for obstructionist tactics by local authorities,
 such as lost applications, endless reviews of applications, or denial of adequate fa-
 cilities. This problem is most prevalent in cases of Protestants and the Russian Or-
 thodox Free Church. Individual Russian Orthodox believers have prevented
 Pentecostals and other evangelical groups from meeting, particularly in the north-
 ern Caucasus and the Russian Far East. Violent attacks against non-Muslims by
 Muslim believers in Chechnya were also reported.
 The number of clergy and places of worship in Russia is still inadequate for the
 population, but churches continued to open in record numbers. Seminaries and other
 institutions of clerical education continued to expand their enrollment, limited only
 by their financial resources. Bibles, icons, religious calendars, and memorabilia are
 on sale in street kiosks and stores in major cities. There are no restrictions on the
 importation of religious materials.
 Young men who object to military duty because of their faith continued to be sub-
 ject to prison terms. Legislation providing alternatives to military service for con-
 scientious objectors was pending, but there will be no resolution until after the new
 legislative body convenes.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriatin.-Citizens were generally free to travel within the country. All adults are
 ssued internal passports which must be carried during travel. Internal passports
 are also used to register with local authorities visits of more than 3 days, although
 this requirement is generally ignored by travelers not staying in hotels.
 The right to choose one's place of residence, though guaranteed by law, continued
 to be restricted in practice. Under the propiska registration system, all citizens must
 register their place of residence. The system is enforced selectively and often tar-
 geted against those who are not Russian, primarily persons from the Caucasus and
 central Asia. Some officials called for abolition of the propiska system, stating that
 it infringes on the right of citizens to choose their place of residence. However, offi-
 cials in major cities, especially Moscow, staunchly defended the system, predicting
 widespread crime and homelessness if it were abolishe
 During the weeks prior to and following the October 3-4 violence, city authorities
 reportedly deported from Moscow more than 4,000 persons, most of whom were Ca-
 casians or Central Asians, because they were not officially registered. Authorities
 in Moscow during that time also detained more than 20,000 persons for residency
 violations.
 The new Constitution guarantees freedom of travel, including emigration. The
 May 1991 Soviet law on emigration officially came into force on January 1, 1993;
 however, actual implementation has been gradual. Under this law, exit permission
 and a formal invitation from abroad are no longer required of travelers who are not
 emigrating. Passport offices were overwhelmed by the flood of new applications, but
 despite adinistrative delays many thousands of Russian citizens traveled abroad
 during 1993.
 Emigrants are no longer required to show an invitation from a first-degree rel-
 ative and need only show an invitation from any relative abroad or permission to
 enter the country to which they are emigrating. The implementing resolution for the
 new law also annulled the 1967 decree under which emigrants to Israel were re-
 quired to give up their Soviet citizenship. The new law, however, continues to re-
 strict the emigration of persons with access to state secrets. Special travel regula-
 tions apply to some Russian scientists wishing to travel abroad temporarily.
 A government commission headed by deputy Foreign Minister Lavrov was estab-
 lished in March to review emigration applications refused on secrecy grounds. The
 
 
 1030
 
 commission accepts individual appeals, contacts the government entity that has
 placed the secrecy restriction on the person, and gives the entity 2 weeks to re-
 spond. If no response is received within the 2 weeks, the restriction is automatically
 lifted. Persons also have the right to argue before the commission and to call expert
 witnesses to challenge the continued secrecy of the information in question. Since
 the commission began reviewing cases this summer, many secrecy cases have been
 overturned.
 The 1991 law also retains the requirement for intending emigrants to obtain per-
 mission from close relatives in Russia. If would-be emigrants are unable to secure
 the permission, they may, theoretically, pursue a resolution of the problem in the
 courts. However, to date no Russian court has accepted such a case for review. The
 law also added a new emigration restriction on draft-age men who have not yet com-
 pleted their obligatory military service.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Under the new Constitution, the Russian people, in principle, have the right to
 change their government. The President may be impeached by a vote of two-thirds
 of the Federation Council if the Duma by a two-thirds majority charges him with
 treason or another serious crime and if the Supreme Court and the Constitutional
 Court confirm the charge. The President may not dissolve the Duma during the first
 year of its existence. It is still not certain, however, that the Russian people have
 the ability to change their government peacefully and democratically. The constitu-
 tional crisis between the executive and legislative branches, which began in 1992,
 continued throughout much of 1993, leading to the events of October 3-4 in Moscow.
 President Yeltsin was democratically elected to a 5-year term in 1991 with approxi-
 mately 60 percent of the vote. On September 21, he disbanded the Russian legisla-
 ture, last elected in 1990 under Soviet electoral rules. The legislature had repeat-
 edly and arbitrarily blocked efforts to introduce democratic and free market reforms.
 President Yeltsin called for elections to a new Parliament on December 12. A ref-
 erendum on a new constitution was held concurrently. In a mixed majoritarian and
 proportional electoral system, Russian voters elected a 450-seat lower house called
 the Duma and an upper house consisting of 2 representatives from each of the coun-
 try's 88 constituent administrative areas. (The Federation's 89th constituent mem-
 ber, Chechnya, refused to participate in the elections.) To qualify for the 225 propor-
 tional seats in the Duma, a party, electoral bloc, or political movement had to obtain
 100,000 signatures of which no more than 15 percent could come from a single area.
 A group gained representation in the Duma if it received more than 5 percent of
 the total vote. This minimum percentage guarantees a group at least 11 seats. Can-
 didates for the majority seats were elected from 225 electoral districts, each consist-
 ing of an average of 475,000 to 500,000 inhabitants. The new Parliament, split
 roughly four ways between reformers, nationalists, Communists, and independents,
 convened on January 11.
 On April 25, in an attempt to resolve the conflict between the executive and legis-
 lative branches, the Yeltsin Government conducted a referendum on four questions:
 1) confidence in the President; 2) confidence in his economic policies; 3) early presi-
 dential elections; and 4) early legislative elections. According to a Constitutional
 Court decision on referendum rules, a majority of votes by participants in the ref-
 erendum would suffice for the first two questions to carry, while a majority of reg-
 istered voters would suffice to carry the second two questions. The majority of par-
 ticipants voted "yes" on all four questions, but not in sufficient numbers, according
 to a decision of the Constitutional Court, to be legally binding on the questions of
 elections. The results strengthened the position of President Yeltsin but did not re-
 solve the political impasse.
 The Constitution provides for equal political rights for men and women, but
 women do not occupy man leading positions in politics and government. However,
 the "Women of Russia" b oc received around 8 percent in proportional balloting.
 Members of Russia's ethnic and religious minorities face no legal limitations on po-
 litical participation.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Numerous nongovernmental human rights groups were active during the year.
 Amnesty International, Helsinki Watch, the Moscow Helsinki Group, Memorial, and
 the Center for Human Rights were the most prominent. They investigated and pub-
 licly commented on human rights issues; there were no reports of government inter-
 ference in their activities. Financing remained a problem for many groups in light
 
 
 1031
 
 of Russia's difficult economic situation. Russian authorities encouraged international
 investigation of alleged human rights violations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Human Xights guarantees figure prominently in the new Constitution. It remains
 to be seen whether these guarantees will be respected. Both official and societal dis-
 crimination still exist.
 For the majority of Russians, homosexuality is socially unacceptable behavior. Ho-
 mosexuals are subject to violence and discrimination by police and civilians. Local
 police also continue surveillance of homosexuals and keep iles on them.
 Women.-Women are entitled to the same legal rights as men, including the right
 to participate in all areas of social, political, and economic life. An extensive system
 of day-care and maternity leave allows women to retain employment after having
 children. The system has become less reliable, and in some cases reform has meant
 that the families must pay directly for child-care services. Women are well rep-
 resented at many levels of the general economy. Nonetheless, women often are not
 paid the same as men for equal work and frequently are the first to be laid off as
 enterrises reduce staff. Positions of influence and prestige in both the Government
 and the economy are still disproportionately occupied by men.
 Violence against women occurs, but its extent is unknown. Police often do not
 take an interest in cases of violence against women. According to a rape crisis center
 in Mosow started by a foreigner, some 16,000 rape cases throughout Russia were
 reported to the authorities in 1992. The real number is likely to be much higher
 but is not reflected in either official or nongovernmental records. Incidents often go
 unreported because of the belief that authorities will do little about the matter and
 because of the victim's own shame. In the case of spousal abuse, there are no spe-
 cific legal provisions against wife beating, and legal recourse such as bringing
 charges of assault is seldom exercised in such cases. Interest in women's issues is
 only beginning to grow and is focused primarily on the effects of the transition to
 a market economy. The "Women of Russia" electoral bloc, which received 8 percent
 of the vote in the December 12 election, focused its campaign on the need for guar-
 anteed health care, education, and social welfare.
 Children.-The new Constitution assigns the Government some responsibility for
 safeguarding the rights of children. While Article 38, section 2, notes that "concern
 for children and their upbringing are the equal right and duty of parents," section
 1 stipulates that "maternity, childhood, and the family are under the State's protec-
 tion. Article 39 guarantees " social security. . . for the raising of children." Russia
 is a signatory of the 1989 U.N. Convention on the Rights of the Child. Russians
 from all political perspectives advocate a greater state role in safeguarding the wel-
 fare of children and all Russian citizens. The Government's efforts to develop an ef-
 fective "social safety net," however, are severely hampered by economic problems.
 Indigenous People.-The State Committee for Development of the North based in
 Moscow, is tasked with representing the interests of indigenous peoples. With only
 one full-time staff member, its influence is limited. Local committees have been
 formed in some areas to study and make recommendations regarding the preserva-
 tion of the indigenous peoples' cultures. Indigenous leaders criticize these commit-
 tees as lacking political influence. In September Russian authorities sponsored an
 international conference on the rights of indigenous peoples but drew relatively lit-
 tle participation from indigenous groups from Russia or abroad.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Discrimination against people from     the
 Caucasus was most evident in the weeks around the October 3-4 violence. The Mos-
 cow authorities targeted persons with Caucasian features at checkpoints around
 Moscow and during the state of emergency ordered traffic police to stop all vehicles
 driven by "persons of Caucasus nationality." A spokesperson for the traffic police
 said that the purpose of these measures was to rid the city of all illegal residents,
 most of whom are from the Caucasus. The official noted that the order singled out
 those from the Caucasus because they are easy to identify by their "physiological
 and facial features." He also commented that "most of these people are thieves and
 robbers," responsible "for two-thirds of the crime" in Moscow. Human rights groups
 in Moscow criticized the discriminatory procedures under which thousands of per-
 sons were forced to leave the capital. However, the crackdown provoked little nega-
 tive response from Muscovites, who blame much of the crime in the city on people
 from the Caucasus. Vendors and merchants in the capital's many markets and in
 city markets throughout Russia were also targets of discrimination. Concentrating
 on persons that looked like Caucasus residents, Moscow police forced many to halt
 their business, confiscated wares, and subjected the vendors and merchants to phys-
 ical violence.
 
 
 1032
 
 Following his arrest on October 4, former CPD Chairman Ruslan Khasbulatov
 who is himself a Chechen, refused to be represented by a Chechen lawyer. He said
 a lawyer from that part of Russia would not be able to mount an effective defense
 because of discrimination.
 Religious Minorities.-Anti-Semitism is no longer condoned by the Government.
 However, it continues to occur, its virulence varying by region. Jewish leaders called
 for greater assertiveness on the part of the central Government in combating anti-
 Semitism.
 Anti-Semitism continues to exist among the people and is manifested in acts of
 vandalism and verbal assaults on persons who appear to be Jewish. A number of
 Jewish cemeteries were desecrated, and on occasion rocks were thrown through the
 windows of Jewish schools. In February the a high-ranking figure in the Russian
 Orthodox Church published an article in the newspaper Rossiskaya Gazeta which
 asserted that the discredited "Protocols of the Elders of Zion" are a blueprint for
 Russia's political crisis.
 The authorities at times have been unwilling to take action when anti-Semitic
 acts are committed. In the spring a group of persons gathered in front of Moscow's
 Choral Synagogue, shouted anti-mitic slogans and broke windows. Police refused
 calls for assistance from the temple's leaders. Later in the year, police refused to
 help a Jewish family regain its apartment in Moscow after criminals" took it over
 waen the family was out of the country.
 In April the newspaper Pravda published a spurious article linking Hasidism to
 satanic cults and blood ritual murders. The newspaper later noted that the article
 contained unfounded assertions and apologized to its readers. Although as a rule the
 Russian Government does not respond to newspaper items, it called the article "de-
 structive in its manner" and criticized it for inflaming "nationalist and religious dis-
 sension." On December 30, fire destroyed one of Moscow's three synagogues. The
 Jewish community believes, and the authorities suspect, that arson was the cause
 of the blaze.
 The expression of anti-Semitism was particularly evident in politics. Street
 protestors opposed to President Yeltsin often referred to him as a Jew, and
 antigovernment graffiti often contained anti-Semitic imagery. Prior to the April ref-
 erendum, the Communist Party of Russia distributed election flyers that criticized
 Yeltsin for having allowed Hasid- to tread on the "holy stones of the Kremlin."
 People with Disabilities.-The new Constitution stipulates that all persons are
 equal before the law. It does not contain any specific prohibitions directed at dis-
 crimination against disabled persons. There is no known specific legislation that
 mandates accesibility for people with disabilities.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Russian Labor Code guarantees the right of
 workers to join trade unions. Unions are required to register with local authorities.
 Local authorities have historically used this requirement to impede the establish-
 ment of new unions. The primary obstacle to the exercise of this right has been the
 special position occupied by the Federation of Independent Trade Unions of Russia
 (FNPR) the successor to the Soviet-era All-Union Central Council of Trade Unions.
 The FNPR has largely retained the privileges and control mechanisms of the old
 official union structure that existed in the Soviet era. For example, it retained exclu-
 sive control of the social insurance fund, from which it distributes worker benefits
 such as vacations and sick and disability pay, and has used these benefits to keep
 workers in the FNPR and to threaten those workers contemplating leaving the offi-
 cial unions.
 Leaders of the free, democratic labor unions consider the FNPR's exclusive control
 of the social insurance fund the primary obstacle to the growth of democratic trade
 unions. In September, shortly after President Yeltsin dissolved the Congress of Peo-
 ple's Deputies, FNPR Chairman Klochkov led the official unions into direct opposi-
 tion to Yeltsin and called for massive strikes in support of Khasbulatov and
 Rutskoy. In response, the Government prepared to punish the FNPR. It took over
 the social insurance fund and threatened to ban the FNPR. The FNPR, however,
 forced Klochkov to resign and made peace with the Government. As a result, no fur-
 ther steps were taken against the FNPR. Moreover, although the social insurance
 fund remained under the nominal control of the Labor Ministry, no real changes
 were made in the operation or management of the fund. As a result, independent
 union members seeking benefits from the fund continue to face discrimination. The
 Government has invited the FNPR to take an active role in preparing new legisla-
 tion for the fund.
 Nominally, almost all of the Russian work force is organized. In the Soviet period,
 all workers were required to join the official trade unions. However, an increasing
 
 
 1033
 number of jobs are located in the private sector or in the informal economy, in which
 unions are much less active. The FNPR still claims to represent about 65 million
 of Russia's 72 million workers. However, labor officials and other observers estimate
 that it has lost a significant portion of its membership, perhaps as much as 30 per-
 cent. The membership of the independent unions and independent unionlike organi-
 zations probably does not exceed 3 million.
 Labor unions in Russia are independent of the Government and political parties.
 The FNPR has a formal agreement of cooperation with the Civic Union, an alliance
 of centrist parties, and one of the free trade unions has ties with the Social Demo-
 cratic Party of Russia.
 The Labor Code recognizes the right of workers to strike. However, the law in-
 cludes numerous restrictions on that right, prohibiting for example, strikes for po-
 litical reasons. The law permits strikes only after all other means of resolving a dis-
 pute have been exhausted. Strikes may be declared illegal if they pose a threat to
 people's lives orh heah o    e closing of a plant's operations might lead to severe
 consequences. Strikes are also prohibited i several sectors: railroads, city transport,
 civil aviation, communications, energy, and the defense industry.
 Numerous strikes occurred in 1993; however, most were either short-term warn-
 ing strikes or were settled quickly. Unlike in Western market economies labor dis-
 putes are rarely directed against enterprise management. In fact, the  R
 management of large state-owned industries normally cooperate closely in pressing
 their demands against the Government. In early 1993, the FNPR and the Govern-
 ment formed a tripartite commission comprised of union, management, and govern-
 ment representatives to protect workers rights and standard of living and avoid
 strikes and other labor disputes. This arrangement reduced the number of strikes
 in 1993. The FNPR withdrew from the commission in August and organized a series
 of strikes and other worker protests to ?ressure the Government to maintain sub-
 sidies to industries and increase workers pay. The FNPR was only moderately suc-
 cessful and decided to suspend further strikes because of the political crisis in Mos-
 cow.
 The Government did little to protect workers from management's retribution in
 the event of a strike. FNPR-affiliated union officials work in a close, subordinate
 relationship with enterprise management. As a result, FNPR-led strikes were usu-
 ally approved in advance and supported by enterprise management. Free union
 members and leaders face threats and intimidation from enterprise management.
 Free union officials contend that these actions are often taken with the passive sup-
 port of FNPR officials and local politicians.
 During 1993, free union officials were increasingly aggressive in pressing their
 case in the Russian courts, with moderate success. For example, the Association of
 Trade Unions of Yekaterinburg has been very active in employing law students from
 the city's legal institute to assist member unions protect worker rights. The head
 of the Association says the poor state of the legal system is the primary hindrance
 to the protection of workers' rights.
 Unions are permitted to form and join federations or confederations and may par-
 ticipate in international bodies. The Government designated the FNPR to represent
 Russian workers at the International Labor Organization (ILO) conference in 1993.
 The ILO Governing Body in 1993 addressed two freedom of association complaints
 against the Russian Federation, one of which was from the FNPR protesting a deci-
 sion by local government bodies prohibiting wage check-offs for union dues. The ILO
 observed that government bodies should not interfere with check-off arrangements
 reached through collective bargaining between workers and employers but that such
 deductions should not infringe on the right of workers to belong to trade unions of
 their choosing.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively-Collective bargaining is not
 widely practiced and still largely misunderstood by workers and enterprise directors
 because official unions, which include managers in their membership, continue their
 close, subordinate relationship with management. The tripartite commission rein-
 forced this misunderstanding by perpetuating the process whereby official unions
 and enterprise managers spoke with a common voice, requesting subsidies, for ex-
 ample, from the Government.
 Some free unions understand the importance of creating in Russia a system in
 which enterprise management is independent of labor and the Government and is
 held responsible for complying with the terms of contracts. Recently, as firms have
 become privatized, the courts have started to compel enterprises to comply with con-
 tracts.
 Most wages continue to be set at the industry level by government agencies or
 in national tariff agreements negotiated in the Tripartite Commission. The Labor
 Code does not explicitly prohibit antiunion discrimination by employers. Such a pro-
 
 
 1034
 
 hibition is implied, however, in several sections of the Labor Code. The Government
 admits that under current law there is no mechanism for resolving labor disputes;
 it recently undertook, however, to establish in the Labor Ministry a service for the
 resolution of disputes. The legal basis for conflict resolution and the full establish-
 ment of the service were not expected until some time in 1994.
 During 1993, the Government established a number of foreign enterprise zones.
 Worker rights are not more restrictive in these zones than elsewhere in the country.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Labor Code prohibits compul-
 sory labor, and there are no known reports that it occurs. However, as in other
 areas of worker rights, the government apparatus for enforcing and overseeing com-
 pliance with labor laws either does not exist or is largely ineffective.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Labor Code does not permit
 the regular employment of children under the age of 16. In certain cases, children
 aged 14 and 15 may work in intern or apprenticeship proframs. The Labor Code
 regulates the working conditions of children under the age o 18, including prohibit-
 ing dangerous work and nighttime and overtime work. Government enforcement is
 largely ineffective, but there is no evidence that this prohibition is violated in Rus-
 sia. The responsibility for the protection of children in this area is shared by the
 Labor Ministry and the Ministry for Social Protection.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The legislature sets the minimum wage, which
 covers all workers. It is so low, however, that few workers actually receive such a
 low salary. Even the minimum pension is higher than the minimum wage. The min-
 imum wage is insufficient to provide a decent living for a worker and family. Its
 primary purpose is to serve as a baseline for computing benefits, pensions, and some
 wage scales. The minimum wage is set quarterly. It was increased in July, for exam-
 ple, to just under $8 (7,740 rubles) per month at the then exchange rate. This is
 elow the minimum pension of 14,000 rubles per month and the poverty line of
 about 20,000 rubles per month. In contrast, the average wage in September was $67
 (about 80,000 rubles). A December 1 decree by President Yeltsin raised the mini-
 mum wage to $12.25 (14,620 rubles).
 The Labor Code provides for a standard workweek of 40 hours, which includes
 at least one 24-hour rest period. The law requires premium pay for overtime work
 or work on holidays.
 Russian law establishes minimum conditions of workplace safety and worker
 health, but these standards continue to be widely ignored, and no effective enforce-
 ment mechanism exists. Industrial deaths and injuries are very high, especially in
 heavy industries such as mining. The free unions have been in the forefront of ef-
 forts to improve safety and health conditions.
