 RUSSIA
 Russia has been undergoing a profound political, economic, and social trans-
 formation since the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991. Institutions and democratic
 practices are evolving but not fully developed. The Constitution approved by voters
 in 1993 provides for a democratic government founded on three branches of power
 with checks and balances: the Presidency and the Government, headed by the Prime
 Minister, a bicameral legislature or Federal Assembly, consisting of the State Duma
 and the Federation Council; and the courts. Suspended in 1993 the Constitutional
 Court again heard cases in 1995, among them a challenge to the constitutionality
 of the President's decrees regarding the use of federal military forces in the Republic
 of Chechnya. For the first time in Russian history, the second consecutive
 multiparty democratic parliamentary elections took place in December.
 The Ministry of Internal Affairs (MVD), the Federal Security Service (FSB), and
 the Procuracy are responsible for law enforcement; the MVD also oversees the pris-
 on system. A new law gave the FSB broad law enforcement functions, including
 fighting crime and corruption, in addition to its previous security and counterintel-
 ligence tasks. The law enihances the FSB's powers; however, its human rights provi-
 sions are unclear, and it provides for only limited oversight of the FSB. In addition,
 as part of the Russian Government's effort to fight organized crime, a new law on
 operative searches and seizures granted a number of internal security agencies the
 right to enge in a variety of clandestine activities, also with limited oversight. No
 cases in which this law has been used agaist critics have yet been documented,
 although the potential for misuse exists. At the same time, however, some Russian
 human rights and environmental activists complained of harassment by the FSB
 and other internal security agencies. Some members of the security forces continued
 to ommit human right a uses.
 This was a pivota year in Russia's difficult transition from a centrlly planned
 to a stable, market economy. Over 73 percent of enterprises, comprising 75 percent
 of the industrial work force and producing 85 percent of manufacturing output, are
 privatized. After 4 years of large annual declines in gross domestic product (GDP)
 and industrial production, the economy is showing tentative signs of stabilizing. The
 fall in real GD P has slowed considerably-dwn 4 percent in the first half of 1995
 over the same period in 1994--and overall industria production effectively stopped
 falling in the summer of 1994. Inflation has been declining since the beginning of
 1995, in line with the Government's commitment to noninflationary financing of the
 federal deficit. Unemployment has remained steady over the same period, with the
 number of unemployed and underemployed estimated at 13 percent of the labor
 force.
 However, real wages continue to decline, and roughly 30 percent of the population
 now live below the poverty line.
 The Governments human rights record continued to be uneven, with reversals
 and worsening in some areas, most notably in the conduct of the war in Chechnys.
 Domestic and foreign human rights groups documented numerous killings and seri-
 ous violations of international humanitarian law and human rights in the Republic
 of Chechnya by bth Russian military and Chechen separatist forces. Violations
 committed bY Russian military forces occurred on a much greater scale than those
 of the Chechen separatists.
 Russian troops invaded the Republic of Checnya on December  , 1994, in order
 to prevent Chechnya's effort to secede from the russian Federation. The origins of
 the conflict are complex. The immediate roots of this crisis oback to 1991, when
 fenya declared its independence. But relations between Russia and the people
 of Chechnya have long been contentious, dating to the period of Russian expansion
 in the Caucasus in the 19th Coentury. The indiscriminate and disproportionate use
 of force in Chechnya by Russian troops resulted in thousands to tens of thousands
 of civilians killed, and some 500,000 people displaced. These actions were in conflict
 with a number of Russia's international obligations, including those concerning the
 protection of civilian noncombatants. In addition, American humanitarian aid expert
 and outspoken Chechen War critic Fred Cuny disappeared, and his body had not
 been recovered by year's end.
 The Chechen conflict sparked a major debate over accountability in government
 decisionmaking and the Goveent's commitment to the rights of its citizens and
 international norms. The Constitutional Court found President Yeltsin's deployment
 of military forces in Cehnya without parliamentary approval to be constitutional.
 However, the Court ruled that international law was binding on bth gvernment
 and rebel forces, although neither was in compliance with Protocol II  rditional of
 the Geneva Conventions, specifically with the provision that every effort must be
 
 
 990
 made to avoid causing damage to civilians and their property. The Court also ruled
 that victims of human rights violations had legal recourse.
 As the conflict in Checmya continued, police and other security forces in various
 parts of Russia increased their practice of targeting citizens from the Caucasus re-
 gion for arbitrary searches and detention on the pretext of maintaining public safe-
 ty.
 The media functioned unhindered, with a few notable exceptions, and represented
 a wide range of opinion. For the most part, the media oprated freely in reporting
 on the Chechen conflict despite government pressure an heavy-handed treatment
 by Russian troops in the war zone. The Constitutional Court found the Govern-
 ment's efforts to ban certain journalists from the war zone unconstitutional. While
 journalists were permitted back into the war zone, pressures against them contin-
 ued. In addition, the prosecutor's office opened investigations against some journal-
 ists based on their reporting on Chechnya, on charges of having spread propaganda
 in the service of terrorists.
 With some exceptions, nongovernmental organizations freely documented and re-
 ported on human rights abuses. However, the Parliament's dismissal of Sergey
 Kovalev as Parliamentary Ombudsman for Human Rights for his condemnation of
 the conduct of the war in Checya undermined official human rights monitoring.
 Kovalev resigned as Chairman of the Presidential Human Rights Commission in
 January 1996, publicly accusing the President of backtracking on human rights.
 According to Russian and foreign human rights groups, several prison inmates
 died after having been tortured by members of the security forces or as a result of
 inferior sanitary conditions and medical care.
 In the military the practice of "dedovshchina,* or the violent hazing of younger
 soldiers continued. The Mothers' Rights Organization estimated that approximately
 4,000 to 5,000 soldiers died from abuse or commited suicide.
 The Constitution outlines an extensive underpinning of legal protections and in-
 stitutional support for the observance and enforcement of human rights. However,
 several important pieces of legislation designed to provide the implementing mecha-
 nisms for human rights provisions had not yet been approved by Parliament by
 year's end. Furthermore, the impetus for legal reform weakened. Judicial reform did
 not advance very far, and the judiciary remained subject to executive and military
 influence. Jury trials were only available in 9 of 89 regions. A large case backlog,
 trial delays, and lengthy pretrial detention remained problems. There are no laws
 on domestic violence although violence against women remains a problem.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no known political
 killings by agents of the Government. However, some detainees died after beatings
 by security officials, others died due to harsh conditions in detention facilities and
 the lack or inadequac of medical care (see Section 1.e.).
 Several people died while being detained by police for questioning or while being
 held in pretrial detention centers (SIZO's, the Russian acronym for investigative iso-
 lation centers) as investigations were carried out. The prosecutor's office in
 Saransk's Leninskiy district instituted criminal proceedings against a policeman for
 premeditated murder in the case of the death of 19-year-old Oleg Igonin while he
 was being held for questioning. In a July report to the United Nations, the Moscow
 Center for Prison Reform (MCPR) called pretrial detention centers (SIZO's) "places
 that threaten all of us. SIZO's are a serious threat to public securit ."
 It is difficult to determine exactly how many citizens who were dtained or incar-
 cerated died in custody. Prison reform organizations and human rights groups are
 only now beginning to collect information from the regions. The Moscow Human
 Rights Researh Center, an umbrella organization for several Moscow-based human
 rights groups, reported that in 1994, 417 detainees in pretrial detention died, 184
 of-those infailities in the Moscow area. The report also notes that "there is serious
 basis to presume that these reported numbers are substantially lower than reality."
 Sme died as a result of the lack or madeua   of medical care. Others died from
 injuries sufferd as a result of beatings. The data for 1995 are not yet available.
 The MCPR and the President's Human Rights Commission, formerly led by
 Sergey Kovalev, charged that prison guards and other security personnel, who are
 smetimes brought to prisons to assist with controlling inmates, are seldom rebuked
 or reprimanded for excessive use of force. However, charges of abuse were fied
 against some correction facility directors and officers.
 Sergey Grigryants, a vocal ctic of the Russian security services, charged that
 he an    s fa  y have bee the targets of reprisals, and that the FSB had a hand
 
 
 in his son's death in January and an attack on Grigoryants himself in March. Inves-
 tigative agencies reportedly have not interviewed the only witness to the murder of
 Grigoryanta' son. The full acts in this case have been difficult to establish.
 There were several high profile murders involving members of Russia's financial
 elite and other prominent figures. It is unclear whether any of these killings was
 politically motivated, and most appear linked to organized crime or business dis-
 putes. By year's end, no arrests were made in approximately 60 cases of murder for
 all of 1995 involving prominent bankers or businessmen, or in the case of the mur-
 der of journalist  television executive Vladislav Listyev.
 Members of Parliament and candidates were also murder victims. The motive for
 most of these killings is also unclear. In early 1995, Sergei Skorochkin was mur-
 dered, apparently in revenge for having killed an organized crime leader in 1994.
 During the December Duma election, candidates murdered included Mikhail
 Lezhnev (an entrepreneur from Chelyabinsk) and Duma Deputy Sergei Markidonov.
 Markidonov, who was killed in November, was the fourth Duma Deputy to be killed
 during the 2-year term of the Duma, according to the Moscow Times.
 Russian attacks were responsible for the deaths of thousands to tens of thousands
 of civilian residents of Checbnya, and Russian forces were credibly reported to have
 summarily executed Chechens. Foreign and Russian journalists covering the mili-
 tary conflict in Chechnya alleged that Russian forces fired upon and threatened
 them. The Glasnst Defense Foundation reported that 14 journalists died in
 Chechnya. Natalia Aliakina, a journalist for the German  y ma azine Focus,
 was killed in Chechnya in June by a Russian soldier. She and her husband had
 stopped at a checkpoint when they were fired upon by the soldier. The soldier has
 since been detained on murder charges. Chechen rebels also killed civilians, most
 notably during the raid on the town of Budennovsk in southern Russia. Human
 Rights Watch/Helsinki reported that Chechen forces admitted to having summarily
 executed Russian pilots and at least eight other Russian military detainees (see Sec-
 tion l.g.).
 The case of the 1994 murder of investigative reporter Dmitriy Kholodov remained
 open, although no one has yet been arrested (see 1994 report).
 The investigation into the murder of Aleksandr Men, a Russian Orthodox priest
 murdered 5 years ago, was reopened in August (see 1990 and 1991 reports).
 The administration of capital punishment raised some procedural and humani-
 tarian concerns. Official statistics of the Ministry of Internal Affairs show that 20
 . le were executed in 1995, but relile e sources suggest that the number was
 r. Human rights organizations claim that cases involving the death penalty are
 shrouded               are still governed by procedures defined by the Central
 Committee of the Communist Party in 1982. The Code of Criminal Procedures r-
 quires that those accused of crimes carrying a possible death sentence be afforded
 a jury trial, if they want one. However, jury trials are available in only 9 of 89 re-
 gions. The Consttution also gives those sentenced to death the right to appeal to
 the President for clemency. However, with ited access to legal representation,
 these appeals often are not made, and when they d occur, are usually refused. The
 MCPR has alleged that prisoners awaiting appeals of death sentences are often de-
 nied adequate food and medical attention.
 b. Disappearanice.-Human Rights Watch and the OSCE have documented several
 instances m which Ministry of Internal Affairs forces in Chechnya abducted civilian
 noncombatants as well as Chechen separatist soldiers. According to government sta-
 tistiCs, government forces detained 1,308 Chechen noncombatants without arrest
 warrants in the period up to June 30. Of that number, the Government admits to
 still holding 141. The Government claims that the others have been released, but
 documenting these statements has been difficult. Many Chechens have apfed to
 the OSCE and human rights grups for help in locating relatives whom federal au-
 thorities claim to have released.
 Chechen separatist forces also engaged in hostage-taking, most notably in
 Budennovbk. Most of the Russians apparently have been released, although it is es-
 timated that Chechen forces ontinue to hold approximately 60 to 70 Russians.
 American relief expert and outspoken Chechen War critic Fred Cuny disappeared
 in Chechnya in April. It is unclear what actually happened, but many different
 sources have reported that at some point he was held by Chechen fighters. An ex-
 tensive effort was mounted to locate Cuny. Some Russian officials made spurious
 accusations of ties between Cuny and US. lntelligence or Chechen leader Dudayev.
 Cunys family members finally discontinued the search, based on their belief that
 Cuny was dead. Cuny's relatives criticized .the governments of the  en pubic of
 Ceqnat and especially the Russian Federation far inadequate cooperation durng
 the Dim arch.    -ua       ihsWac      n  h    SEhvedcmne           eea
 
 
 992
 Police logged an increasing number of reports about the disappearances of Rus-
 sian citizens, particularly young men. Most were attributed to criminal foul play
 rather than to any political motivations.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits torture and other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treat-
 ment or punishment. However, Russian prisoners' rights groups have documented
 cases in which members of the security forces torture and bat detainees and pris-
 oners. The law "On the Detention of Those Suspected or Accused of Committing
 Crimes" was approved by the Duma on June 21. The law establishes mechanisms
 intended to prevent violations of the rights of individuals in pretrial detention. The
 law also states that inmates must be provided with adequate space, food, and medi-
 cal attention. Nevertheless, the authorities do not ensure that these provisions are
 reSecoiety for Penitentiary Institutions and the MCPR have amassed a large vol-
 ume of documentation, through oral interviews with prisoners and suspects' and
 prisoners' letters to families, on the use of torture against persons held in pretrial
 detention facilities throughout Russia.
 The MCPR has documented many cases of torture. One such method is referred
 to as the "elephant" torture. A gas mask is put on the suspect. The flow of oxygen
 is restricted or cut off until a suspect agrees to confess. The prosecutor's office in
 Saransk's Leninskiy district instituted criminal proceedings for premeditated mur-
 der against a police officer in the case of the death of 19-year old Oleg Igonin, who
 had a heart attack and died while being subjected to the elephant torture in July.
 The MCPR also reports many cases in which suspects have had the soles of their
 feet beaten. There are allegations that sometimes outside guard are brought in to
 rough-up suspects in pretrial detention centers in order to "keep them in line."
 Two Tunkmen dissidents, who were arrested in Russia for activities against the
 Government in Turkmenistan, claimed that they were beaten while in pretrial de-
 tention. Their cases were dropped in January due to lack of evidence, and both are
 now living in Sweden.
 The Society for the Guardianship of Penitentiary Institutions has amassed consid-
 erable evidence of rape in prison by guards and by other inmates.
 The systematic abuse of psychiatry as a form of punishment has declined dramati-
 cally from Soviet-era practice. However, the Independent Psychiatric Association
 continues to document isolated cases in which sane persons are committed to psy-
 chiatric institutions after running afoul of local authorities. In February Valeriy
 Pashin was committed to a mental hospital in Tambov by order of the Tambov pros-
 ecutor, the order followed a reported series of property disputes between Pashin and
 the prosecutor. Pashin spent a month in the psychiatric institution, until a court
 threw out the decision and ordered Pashin freed following an outcry from Pashin's
 family and friends.
 Domestic and international human rights organizations have compiled a substan-
 tial number of credible accounts of torture and other cruel and inhuman or degrad-
 ing punishment of Chechens by Russian military and internal forces. These abuses
 include beatings of combatants as well as of unarmed civilians suspected of involve-
 ment with, or support for, the secessionist Chechen rebels. Human Rights Watch
 has also collected testimony from civilians in Chechnya on cases of the use of rape
 by Russian military and internal forces as a form of punishment against residents
 or villages which are believed to support separatist forces. There have also been
 well-founded reports of Chechen militants engaging in torture or degrading punish-
 ment against Russians.
 Conditions in detention centers are harsh and, at times, life threatening. Severe
 overcrowding, the failure to expand capacity, the Government's lack of sufficient
 funds for the care and feeding of inmates, inadequate supervision by law enforce-
 ment and correctional facility personnel, and the lack of individual or institutional
 accountability for violations, all contributed to continued substandard conditions. In
 a report to the United Nations, the MCPR called the conditions in pretrial detention
 centers "torture." The law mandates a space of 2.5 square meters per detainee.
 However, the average space for persons in pretrial detention centers dropped to 1.6
 square meters, 0.9 square meters in urban areas. Men and women are separated,
 but juveniles are routinely detained with adults charged with serious crimes. In
 Moscow pretrial detention facilities with spaces for 88,100 detainees housed over
 250,000. In other large cities, such as Yekaterinburg and Vladivostok facilities
 house an average of twice the number of inmates they are intended to hold.
 Human rights groups report that suspects can be detained in such facilities for
 up to 18 months while an investigation is being conducted, and then even longer
 while they await court sessions.
 
 
 993
 In comparison, conditions in prisons are better. However, in 1994 the MVD re-
 ceived only 87 percent of its funds allocated by the federal budget. As a result, it
 is estimated that prisons were able in fact to provide only 60 to 70 percent of the
 daily food rations they envisioned providing and only 15 to 20 percent of needed
 medications and medical care. Prisoners anddetainees must rely on families to pro-
 vide them with extra food and routine medicines.
 Health and sanitation standards in pretrial detention facilities and prisons them-
 selves declined in 1995. The overcrowding and unsanitary conditions in penal facili-
 ties are directly linked to insufficient funding of the operations by the MVD, and
 present a grave danger to detainees. Tiberculosis is perhaps the biggest health
 problem. The MCPR has certified rates of tuberculosis 17 times higher in prison
 than in the free population, and death rates of those infected with tuberculosis in
 prison of 10 times hiher than those outside.
 The MCPR chronicled the deaths in July of 11 people in a pretrial detention cen-
 tar in Novokuznetsk who perished when temperatures in crawded cells rose to over
 110 degrees, and inmates were denied water. In August two inmates in Perm also
 died in a cramped pretrial detention facility in hot weather without water.
 The MCPR has documented many cases of inmates who died because they were
 not given adequate medical assistance for grave illnesses, despite complaints about
 these illnesses to prison authorities for long periods before their deaths. For exam-
 ple, Konstantin Vedeneyev was denied medical attention until he was transferred
 from Butyrka prison to Matrosskaya Tishina prison (which has better medical facili-
 ties) only 2 days before he died of tuberculosis.
 Prison reform has not yet been implemented. Prisons are centrally administered
 from Moscow, although reforms envision transferring control to regional officials. At
 present, regional prison and detention facilities often receive only a percentage of
 the funds allocated to them, and then usually behind schedule. Guards are fre-
 entl not paid for months, and they usually have little training before coming on
 duty.creasimgly emPloyees of detention and prison faciities are quitting for high-
 er and more reglarly paid positions in the private sector, leaving prison jobs un-
 filled. This adds to tburde of those emplo ees left behind, increasing their con-
 thes enei dconoici
 crns for personal safetyon the job an  ontriuting tindents of abuse. However,
 in 1995 the MVD and MCPR set up a training program for new officers coming on
 duty to educate them on human rights standard and legal norms.
 Prisoners involved in national security cases are detained in special prisons. In
 cases involving charges of espionage or treason, access is very limited or completely
 restricted. Family access to those detained in pretrial facilities is usuall not  -
 lowed, while for those in prisons it varies by institution and depends on the prison
 administration. Some prisons have accommodations for overnight visits of family
 members if they have traveled far to see a prisoner. Prisoner monitors are allowed
 access to prisons, provided that they have prior approval to visit from the Central
 Directorate for theExecution of Punishment (GUIN).
 A Duma committee is charged with investigating and monitoring conditions in
 prisen and pretrial detention facilities. The Commission for Prison Reform to the
 ,dent and the Commission for Judicial Reform to the President also monitor
 prisn conditions and have p repared recommendations and legislation for reform.
 However, due to opposition by the Ministry of Internal Affairs, these efforts have
 made little progress. Moscow human rights groups make frequent visits to the pris-
 ons in the Moscow area, but they do not have the resources and do not yet have
 the network across the country to investigate conditions in all 89 regions.
 The practice of dedovshchina, the violent hazing of new recruits in the military,
 continued. This practice includes various forms of physical and mental abuse, in-
 cluding the use of recruits as persona servants of more senior soldiers. The criminal
 investigation unit of the Ministry of Defense reported that 423 soldiers committed
 suicide in the Russian army in 1994 and that an additional 2,500 died as a result
 of "criminal incidents." The Mothers' Rights Foundation and the Soldiers' Mothers
 Committee believe that many of those whno committed suicide were driven to do so
 by violent hazing or, indeed, that they did not take their own lives but rather died
 from abuse. Although the Mothers' Rights Foundation did not have complete figures
 for 1995, the group estimated that approximately 4,000 to 5,000 soldiers died from
 abuse or committed suicide. These organizations have compiled evidence on individ-
 ual suicide and hazing deaths and have tried to help the families of soldiers who
 died under such circumstances apply to the Government for compensation. Officers
 of the armed forces continue to permit, even encourage, dedovshchina. The national
 military leadership apparently made no moves to implement training and education
 programs systematically to combat dedovshchina, nor has the concept of a military
 police force advanced much past the discussion phase.
 
 
 994
 Hazing of Jehovah's Witnesses in the military was reported. After being forcibly
 inducted into military service, three members of a Jehovah's Witness congregation
 from the Murmansk area were beaten severely and denied food and water. Court
 martial charges have been brought against some soldiers who refused to participate
 in military training;, others have simply been dismissed. Others, after months of
 beatings and abuse, were declared "medically unfit' and discharged. The Soldiers'
 Mothers Committee estimates that 25,000 men annually dodge the military draft.
 There were reports of some instances of forced labor. There have been documented
 cases of soldiers being sent to perform work for private citizens or organizations.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exiie.-The Constitution states that the arrest,
 taking into custody, and detention of persons suspected of crimes are permitted only
 by judicial decision. The Criminal Procedures Code currently in force gives prosecu-
 tors, not judges, the authority to order the arrest of a suspect. Although the Con-
 stitution provides for transferring that power to judicial authorities, the President
 first approved and then later vetoed legislation for a new criminal procedures code
 implementing this provision.
 A criminal suspect can be detained up to 48 hours without a warrant if police
 have reason to believe the person has just committed a crime or if he is a danger
 to others. The suspect must be arraigned before a judge within 72 hours of being
 taken into custody if the crime for which the person is being detained is punishable
 by at least 18 months in prison. The draft criminal procedure code requires that
 suspects be informed of charges and gives a suspect the right to a hearing before
 a judge, at which time he can challenge the grounds of the arrest. However the
 President's 1994 decree on combating organized crime, which is still in force, aflows
 law enforcement authorities to detain persons suspected of ties to organized crime
 for up to 30 days without charge and without access to a lawyer. Authorities em-
 ployed this decree extensively during the year. Bail is provided for in the law but
 is seldom granted.
 Detainees have the right to have an attorney present during questioning following
 arrest and throughout proceedings up to and including arraignment. Detainees have
 the right to request a court evaluation of the legality of detention. If the court finds
 the detention illegal, the judge has the power to order immediate release. However,
 most citizens are not aware of their rights and rarely exercise them.
 Police often detain persons without judicial permission beyond the 48-hour time
 period, and the constitutional right to judicial review of detention within 48 hours
 of arrest is frequently ignored. Russian human rights monitors have documented
 evidence from interviews with detainees that the few who are aware of their rights
 and complain of violations are subjected to beatings. Nevertheless, about one in six
 cases of arrest is now appealed to the courts, and judges release one in six of these
 on grounds of insufficient evidence or breach of procedure.
 While in pretrial detention, a suspect is under the jurisdiction of the prosecutor's
 office and the Ministry of Internal Affairs. The Criminal Code requires the prosecu-
 tor's office to conclude the investigation within 2 months. However, investigations
 are seldom completed in that time, and prosecutors can ask for extensions of up to
 18 months. After the investigation has been completed, the suspect is transferred
 from MVD to the jurisdiction of the court system. The law does not stipulate a time
 frame during which a suspect must be brought to trial. Given the backl    of cases,
 suspects often wait a long time for a case to be brought to trial. Indeed, suspects
 frequently serve the length of their sentence while awaiting trial in detention facili-
 ties.
 The Constitution and the draft criminal procedures code provide for the court to
 appoint a lawyer if a suspect cannot afford one. The Society for Guardianship of
 Penitentiary Institutions is often called upon by judges to provide legal assistance
 for suspects facing charges and trial without any representation. This Society oper-
 ates primarily in Moscow, although it uses its connections throughout Russia to ap-
 peal to legal professionals to take on cases of the indigent. However, in many cases
 the indigent receive little assistance, because local governments lack sufficient funds
 to pay for trial attorneys for them.
 Some human rights activists believe that the authorities have arrested some peo-
 le on false pretexts for expressing views critical of the Government and in particu-
 a   for voicing criticism of the security services. Viktor Orekhov, a former KGB offi-
 cer who assisted dissidents under the Soviet regime, was arrested on charges of ille-
 rally possessing a firearm soon after he made unflattering remarks about his former
 ass, no      FSB chief of intelligence for the Moscow region, in an article. Within
 a matter of weeks Orekhov had been tried, convicted, and sentenced to 3 years in
 prison at hard labor. This sentence was subsequently reduced to 1 year. Noting the
 speed with which he was tried and sentenced in the usually slow court system,
 Grekhov alleged that he was targeted for retribution by the security services be-
 
 
 995
 cause of his human rights work. There were a number of procedural flaws and mis-
 handling of evidence marred his trial. The FSB's influence and interest in the case
 was extensively reported in the domestic and foreign press. In addition, former KGB
 Major Vladimir K azantsev was arrested on August 21 after he gave an interview
 to the Moscow News newspaper in which he described purchases by the KGB's
 central directorate for security of illegal eavesdropping devices from foreign firms.
 At yea's end, Kazantsev had been released from custody, but the case continued
 to be investigated.
 Family members often are not informed of charges and sometimes are not per-
 mitted to visit relatives in custody. Hamat Kurbanov, the Moscow representative of
 the Chechen government, was arrested in his home at 1:00 a.m. on June 17 by four
 plainclothes police officers who had no warrant or legal basis for making the arrest.
 Kurbanov was subsequently told that he would be charged with treason and crimes
 against the State. Only after he had been in custody for 10 days was his wife able
 to find out where and on what charges he was being detained. He was later re-
 leased. No charges had been filed by year's end.
 The MCPR reported that, as of December 31, 701,400 persons convicted of crimes
 were confined to the penal system. As of December 31, the MVD's Central Direc-
 torate for Carrying out Punishment reported that 295,000 people-as compared with
 260,000 in 1994-were being held as suspects in crimes in 168 pretrial detention
 centers, which were built to hold 88,100 people. Of that number, 4,750 suspects
 who had not yet been tried or awaited appeal of their convictions, were being held
 in prisons. Furthermore, of the 295,000, the Central Directorate reported that
 39,600 people were being detained on charges of violating public order and had been
 detained for more than 30 days under President Yeltsin's crime decree. The average
 period of detention was 9 to 10 months.
 The Ministry of Internal Affairs is responsible for 743 correctional labor institu-
 tions, 168 pretrial detention facilities, and 13 prisons. In addition, the MVD main-
 tains 60 educational labor colonies for juveniles. The Ministry of Education is at-
 tempting to certify that schooling is indeed provided in all of these institutions in
 place of the current system of trade and handicraft production.
 The Government does not use forced exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary. While the judiciary is far from independent, it is starting to act more like an
 independent judiciary. Judges still remain subject to influence from executive or
 military security forces. In addition, judges in practice are totally dependent on the
 Ministry of Justice for court infrastructure and financial support and on local au.
 thorities for their housing.
 The judiciary consists of three branches: the regular court system, with the Su-
 preme Court at its apex, the arbitration court system, over which the High Court
 of Arbitration presides; and the Constitutional Court as a single body with no courts
 under it. The Constitutional Court functioned until the fall of 1993, when President
 Yeltsin suspended it (see 1993 report). The Court then remained inoperative due to
 the Government's inability to fill remaining vacancies. Following the Federation
 Council's confirmation of all of the President's nominees, the Court was finally rees-
 tablished in early 1995, and it ruled on politically sensitive issues related to the war
 in Chechnya (see Sections 1.g. and 2.a.). It displayed some independence and is be-
 ginning to assume a mre active role in the judicial system.
 Disputes between business entities are tried in the system of courts of arbitration,
 whichi consists of lower level courts and the High Court of Arbitration. There are
 82 courts of arbitration with over 2,000 judges. These courts hear over 300,000 cases
 per year. If a party to a civil suit is a private citizen, the dispute must be handled
 y a co   of general jurisdiction.
 Throughout Russia there are about 14,000 judges in approximately 2,500 courts
 of general  ridiction at various levels. he vast majority of litigation is heard by
 these regular courts. Apart from the arbitration courts, there are no courts of special
 jurisdiction to handle domestic relations or probate disputes. Within the regular
 court system most cases are heard in the peoples' court. This form of judicial pr-
 ceedingfunctions everywhere. As trial courts of general jurisdiction, the people's
 courts handle over 90 percent of civil and criminal cases. Only a imited category
 of cases involving the most serious crimes falls directly under the original jurisdic-
 tion of the next level of courts-the oblast (regional) court.
 -Serious cases, such as those involving murder, can be tried by one of several dif-
 feret methods: a case can be heard by (1) the judge and a panel of "people's asses-
 sors;" (2) a judge-alone; or (3) a jury, but only in those regions where jury trials
 have been authorized. A decision of lower courts can be appealed through intermedi-
 ate courts up to the Supreme Court. All higher courts have discretionary trial juris-
 diction.
 
 
 996
 Direct appeal (referred to as cassation) to a higher court is not the only way for
 a party to challenge a trial court decision. The law provides citizens with the right
 to appeal to higher courts even when the time limits prescribed for cassation review
 have expired. This right can be exercised by a person duly convicted and serving
 a sentence, as well as by another person who wishes to proceed on behalf of such
 an inmate.
 Access to government information and evidence in a case depends on the charges
 against the defendant. In some cases involving espionage or treason, only those de-
 fense lawyers who have the necessary security clearances are allowed to work on
 cases and review evidence against clients. Often this means that the defendant may
 not be able to retain the lawyer he wishes, but rather a lawyer appointed or sug-
 gested by the court. Under secrecy law provisions, the lawyer must forfeit his or her
 right to travel abroad for up to 5 years and may also be subject to having mail and
 telephone monito    by the FSB.
 Prosecutors, like te courts, are organized into offices at the district, regional and
 federation levels. They are ultimately responsible to the Prosecutor Geneial, who is
 nominated by the President and confirmed by the Federation Council. Apart from
 regions where adversarial jury trials have been introduced, prosecutors remain very
 influential in the conduct of court proceedings. Prosecutors supervise criminal inves-
 tigations, which are usually conducted by the MVD. Prosecutors also conduct inves-
 tigations for serious crimes, e.g., murder. The Procuracy, unlike in the United
 States is an investigative body.
 In the 80 regions where juries have not yet been introduced, criminal procedures
 are still weighted heavily in favor of the prosecution. For example, the constitu-
 tionally man-dted presumption of innocence is often disregarded, and defendants
 are expected to prove their innocence rather than prosecutors proi  guilt. More-
 over, rates of conviction remain above 99 percent, as opposed to the 16-prcent ac-
 quittal rate among juries. Judges-fearing that an outright acquittal wi result in
 a prosecutorial appeal--frequently send cases back to the prosecutor for "additional
 investigation." This greatly increases defendants' time spent in pretrial detention.
 The right to an attorney during pretrial uestioning is often overlooked. Many de-
 fendants recant testimony given in pretrial questioning, stating that they were de-
 nied access to an attorney or that they were threatened or beaten and only said
 what they thought the authorities wanted to hear (up to a full confession) so that
 the abuse would stop. Nevertheless, Russian human rights monitors have docu-
 mented cases in which convictions were obtained on the basis of the original, illegal
 testimony (after the defendant refuted that testimony in court), and even in the ab-
 sence of other proof of guilt.
 Criminal defendants, and prosecutors in nonjury trials, have the right of appeal.
 In practice, however, superior courts lack the authority to overturn decisions of a
 lower court and may only mandate that the case be retried. The lower court can
 retry the case on the same evidence, reach the same decision, and-since there is
 no legal limit to the number of appeals-the dissatisfied party can appeal again.
 The system, however, is heavily weighted against appeals because (1) the prosecu-
 tion and the courts have a vested interest in clearing the backlog of cases and (2)
 defendants prefer prisons, where better conditions prevail, over pretrial detention
 centers (see Sections 1.c. and 1.d.).
 Since 1993 adversarial jury trials have been introduced in 9 out of 89 regions. In
 1995, 376 jury trials were held in the 9 regions in which they are sanctioned. Ver-
 dicts were handed down in 257 of these, which involved 419 people; 338 were found
 guilty, 81 were found innocent. The 119 cases that were not decided were remanded
 back to the prosecutor's office for more investigation, which is not supposed to hap-
 pen under the jury trial law.
 In the first 6 months of 1995, 529,055 criminal cases were opened; in 410,703 of
 these a sentence was handed down. Some 530,027 people were convicted; 2,484 oth-
 ers were acquitted; 47,413 cases were sent back to the prosecutor for further inves-
 tigation.
 n August the case of Viktor Orekhov (see Section 1.d.) focused attention on the
 possibility that agencies outside the judicial system, particularly the security serv-
 ices, were exerting influence on certain cases.
 In a high profie case, Vil Mirzayanov, an employee who exposed information on
 the illegal production of chemical weapons in Russia and won a civil case against
 the Ministry of Defense in February, faced a Ministry of Defense countersuit. How-
 ever, the countersuit was dropped in March, and Mirzayanov left the country the
 same month (see 1994 report).
 The case of Fridrikh Gilshteyn demonstrated continuing problems with judicial
 procedure. In May 1992, officers from the local militia station allegedly broke into
 Mr. Gilshteyn's apartment, beat him, and arrested him. In November 1992, Mr.
 
 
 Gilshteyn was charged with an armed attack on a drunken man. He was arrested
 in March 1993 and sentenced to 3 years' imprisonment. In August 1993, he was sent
 to a labor camp 400 kilometers from Moscow. He was subsequently freed by the
 court in February 1995 and emigrated from Russia.
 The case of Semyon Livshits a Jewish naval officer who had applied to emigrate
 to Israel, also highlighted problems of judicial procedure. His appeal was finally
 heard in late August after months of postponements by the Military Collegium of
 the Supreme Court. The military court upheld Livshits conviction but reduced his
 sentence from 10 to 6 years, 5 of which he has already served in a labor prison near
 Vladivostok. Livshits' lawyer is working to secure his release before Liv ts serves
 out the final year of his sentence (see 1994 report).
 There are few reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution states that officials can enter a private residence only in cases pre-
 scribed by federal law or on the basis of a judicial decision. It permits the Govern-
 ment to monitor correspondence, telephone conversations, and other means of com-
 munication only with court orders. It prohibits the collection, storage, utilization,
 and dissemination of information about a person's private life without his consent.
 The implementing legislation necessary to bring these provisions into effect has not
 yet been passed.
 New laws on the Federal Security Service and on operative searches and seizures
 significantly strengthened the legal powers of the FSB and other internal security
 agencies. The April 3 law on theFSB provides it with broad law enforcement func-
 tions-flhting crime and corruption-in addition to its previous security and
 counter-intelligence tasks. The law details the circumstances under which FSB
 agents ma enter a private residence, office, or other premises without prior judicial
 approval. There must be either sufficient grounds to believe that a crime is in
 progress or has been committed or a beliefthat the welfare of citizens is endan-
 gered. In such cases, the FSB must notify the Prosecutor within 24 hours of the
 entry.
 Despite the expansion of the FSB's powers, the law provides for only limited over-
 sight and contains unclear human rights provisions. The law vests the Procurator
 General with the power to oversee the FSB's activities. However, it denies such
 oversight authority in the areas of informants, organization, tactics, methods, and
 means of implementation. The role of the Parliament is limited to that of monitoring
 the FSB.
 The August 12 law on operative searches and seizures granted to seven internal
 security agencies, including the FSB, the right to engage in a variety of clandestine
 activities, some of which could be carried out in the absence of prior judicial ap-
 proval The law does bring the use of wiretaps and searches and seizures into con-
 formity with the Constitution by introducing, for the first time in Russia, a require-
 ment that wiretaps in criminal cases be approved by a judge rather than a prosecu-
 tor. However, although this approval could be given after the fact in some cases,
 some human rights experts believe that the Constitution requires prior judicial ap-
 proval in certain instances. Government officials can still conduct wiretaps in crimi-
 nal investigations without court review, but evidence obtained in this fashion would
 not be admissable in court.
 The August law permits agents to open mail, tap telephones, monitor other forms
 of communication, and enter a private residence without a court order in cases of
 emergency that may lead to the commission of a serious crime or if Russia's politi-
 cal military economic, or environmental security is threatened. In these cases, a
 judge must be notified within 24 hours of the action. Within 48 hours of the start
 of such an action, the agency must either receive a court order permitting it or end
 it. The law does not define what would constitute either a case of emergency or the
 term "security."
 As is the case with the FSB law, oversight is weak. Information concerning the
 organization, tactics, methods and means of investigations is off limits to the pros-
 ecutor. Similarly, the role of the Parliament is limited.
 Human rights groups charge that the FSB is stepping up harassment of domestic
 critics and certain other groups. For example, in December FSB agents confiscated
 material on human rights abuses in Chechnya from a group of Russian human
 rights activists on their way to an international meeting (see Section 4 and the
 cases of Sergay Grigoryants and Viktor Orekhov described in Sections L.a. and 1.d.).
 In addition, the FSB accused the Norwegian environmental Bellona Foundation of
 collecting state secrets on Russia's Northern Fleet in October. The group had been
 gathering material for a second report on the Fleet's nuclear waste. The FSB raided
 the group's Murmansk office, confiscating all material on the Fleet's nuclear waste
 sites as well as computers and video cameras, interrogated researchers working on
 
 
 998
 the study, and searched many of their homes. Others cooperating with Bellona in
 Murmansi, St. Petersburg, and Severodbinsk also were interrogated and subject to
 apartment searches. According to the Moscow Times, the Bellona Director asserted
 that the FSB's objective seemed to be to intimidate Russians from working with the
 foundation.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-Russia continued its brutal military campaign against the secessionist Re-
 public of Chechnya, which it launched in December 1994. Russian forces used indis-
 criminate and disproportionate force during the destruction of most of Checbnya's
 main city, Groznyy, and in attacks on other Chechen towns and villages. According
 to press reports, there were up to 4,000 detonations an hour at the height of the
 winter campaign  ainst Groznyy. After federal forces captured several major cities
 and towns in the =een Republic, Chechen fighters employed guerrilla and terror-
 ist tactics against forces of the Ministries of Defense and Internal Affairs, as well
 as against Russian civilians in the town of Budennovsk.
 There is no official figure for civilian deaths, but unofficial estimates range from
 the thousands to the tens of thousands. The Government has reported that 2,000
 federal soldiers were killed and 6,000 wounded during the military operation.
 Violations of international humanitarian law andghuman rights by government
 forces included. the disproportionate and indiscriminate use of military force; the in-
 humane treatment of noncombatants; arbitrary detention; beatings; the torture or
 summary execution of Chechens at "filtration" (detention) centers, the largest of
 which functioned at a meat processing plant near Groznyy; and harassment and at-
 tacks on journalists in the war zone. Credible sources reported severe mistreatment
 of Chechen prisoners by Russian defense and internal security forces. In April credi-
 ble sources also reported that many Chechen prisoners, all of whom Russian au-
 thorities allegedly presented as soldiers but amongst whom it was believed were
 many civilians, had been beaten by Russian authorities. Although humanitarian or-
 ganizations suceeded in providing relief supplies throughout most of the year, gov-
 ernment forces at times obstructed the delivery of these materials. Government
 forces also hindered the provision of medical assistance to injured combatants and
 noncombatants alike.
 The worst violations of international humanitarian law and human rights were
 reportedly committed by the "kontraktniki," nonconscripted Russian citizens paid by
 the Russian army. "Kontraktniki" are accused of being the group most likely respon-
 sible for having committed the civilian massacre at Samashki. According to the Rus-
 sian human rights group Memorial, Russian forces killed 103 civilians m Samashki
 in early April in retaliation for the village's support for Chechen separatists. The
 Memorial report indicated that no fewer than 18 persons were killed in artillery
 bombardment; 5 were killed as a result of shots fired from armored vehickles; 6
 were shot by Russian snipers; at least 30 were killed inside their homes, either from
 gunfire at close range or as a result of grenades being thrown into homes; at least
 2 Samashki residents were reported to have been executed by Russian officers while
 in filtration camps; others were set on fire by Russian forces. The youngest killed
 was 15 years old; the oldest 103. A Duma commission is investigating the massacre,
 but the commission head has rejected allegations that a massacre or gross violations
 of human rights took place there.
 Chechen violations of international humanitarian law and human rights included
 taking civilians hostage, killing civilians, and using civilians as shields to attain
 military goals during the June raid on the town of Budennovsk. A pproximately 100
 civilians were killed during the hostage-taking and raid. Human Rights Watch re-
 ported that Chechen forces admitted to summarily executing Russian pilots and at
 least eight other Russian military detainees (see Section l.a.)
 The Constitutional Court ruled that international law was binding on both gov-
 ernment and rebel forces, although neither was in compliance with Protocol II Addi-
 tional of the Geneva Conventions, specifically with the provision that every effort
 must be made to avoid causing damage to civilians and their property. The Court
 further ruled that victims of human rights violations had legal recourse, in accord-
 ance with the Constitution and the International Covenant on Civil and Political
 Rights.
 he international community and human rights nongovernmental organizations
 (NGO's) repeatedly called upon both parties to respect the rights of both civilian
 noncombatants and detainees provided for in international humanitarian law and
 the OSCE Code of Conduct and to hold human rights violators accountable. The
 OSCE Permanent Council expressed deep concern over the disproportionate use of
 force by the Russian Armed Forces; deplored the serious violations of human rights
 before and after the outbreak of the current crisis; called for the full respect of inter-
 national humanitarian law in the region; for human rights violators to be brought
 
 
 999
 to justice; and the unhindered delivery of humanitarian aid to all in need. The
 OSCE also emphasized the need for an immediate cease-fire and for the Inter-
 national Committee of the Red Cross to be given unhindered access to all detainees.
 In April the OSCE sent a mission to Chechnya to promote human rights observance
 and a peaceful settlement to the dispute. NGO's such as Human Rights Watch, Am-
 nesty International, and Russia's Memorial, issued reports based on travel to the
 region detailing human rights violations, particularly the treatment of Chechens
 and other local residents, by Russian soldiers.
 Four government agencies are investigating human rights violations in Chechnya:
 the State Duma Investigatory Commission on the Causes and Conditions of the
 Emergence of the Crisis in the Chechen Republic (the Duma Commission)- the Min-
 istry of Justice's temporary Commission Observing the Implementation of the Con-
 stitutional Rights and Freedoms of Citizens in the Process of the Restoration of Con-
 stitutional Order on the Territory of the Chechen Republic (Ministry of Justice Com-
 mission); the Milta  rocy of the Russian Federation; and the Interregional
 Military Procuracy of the Northern Caucasus.
 In addition to the massive loss of life, the Russian Federal Migration Service
 (FMS) reports that 380,000 people have fled from Chechnya since the conflict began.
 International observers have put the number as high as 500,000. The FMS cal-
 culates that from 200,000 to 250,000 displaced people are expected to return. While
 the FMS has announced that it will compensate people for destroyed apartments
 and most iving space, it is unclear whether ethnicRussians will return to the war-
 ravaged republic. Many Chechens are living with relatives in surrounding areas;
 whether or not they will return is unknown.
 International observers report that legal institutions have ceased completely to
 function, and there is no authority to ensure the enforcement of Russian law and
 the provisions of the Constitution in Chechnya. On July 30, the Government and
 forces loyal to Chechen president Dudayev signed a military protocol calling for a
 cease-fire, the disrming of rebel formations, the withdrawal of most federal trxops,
 and the exchange of prisoers. Implementation of the protocol was slow and came
 to a halt in the fall, following the assassination attempt on General Romanov,
 former commander of the federal forces in Chechnya. Sporadic-and at times
 heavy-fighting continues.
 In late 1995, the Russian government announced elections to replace the Moscow-
 backed government that assumed power after Dudayev was driven from Groznyy.
 Prominent human rights organizations called for cancellation of the December 17
 elections in Chechnya due to the conditions in the region, which they described as
 a virtual state of emergency. They warned that the results of the elections would
 lack credibility and predicted that the elections would exacerbate preexisting ten-
 sions and prevent political reconciliation. The OSCE Assistance Group (AG) tempo-
 rarily departed Groznyy rather than monitor elections that they judged could not
 be "free and fair. Dokur Zavgayev won the elections, but there were widespread al-
 legations of fraud and manipulation of the results.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of mass
 information and the 'right of each person to seek, receive, pass on, produce, and dis-
 seminate information freely by any legal method.? Although the Russian Federation
 Government still retained various potential levers over the media, including publica-
 tion licensing, access to printing presses, access to newsprint, and distribution, the
 print media-most of which are independent of the Government and many of which
 are privately owned--functioned, with exceptions, relatively unhindered and rep-
 resented a wide range of opinions. Also, small, private radio stations continued to
 proliferate, and independent and semi-independent television throughout the coun-
 try continued to multiply.
 Neverteless, reports of government pressure on selected media increased, espe-
 cially in relation to the conflict in Chechnya. In May the Fourth Cogrss of the
 Russian Union of Journalists, representing 60,000 journalists nationwide, reported
 that 'pelitic , economic, and administrative pressure on media organizations and
 individual journalists in Russia has been increasing The Union also noted that
 "one of the most important achievements of the press today is the fact that the polit-
 ical spectrum is represented" in both the print and broadcast media. The Glasnost
 Defense Foundation (GDF), a media watchdog organization, reported over 450 cases
 of violations of urnalists' rights during 1995, of which 60 percent were related to
 the conflict in Chechnya. This was a 150 percent increase over the same period dur-
 irg the previous year, although the increase may be due in part to better reporting.
 InChechnya the Glasnost Defense Foundation reported 371 incidents against 267
 journalists; 14 journalists died in Chechnya.
 
 
 1000
 The GDF reported some 200 incidents unrelated to Chechnya that included- mur-
 ders and other suspicious deaths of journalists (30 percent); restricting access to
 sources or news sites by authorities at different levels (18 percent); financial re-
 straints leading to the cancellation of broadcasts or individual issues of publications,
 or even the complete closure of publications (15 percent); prosecutions of ournalists
 because of their reports (14 percent)- robberies and destruction of journalsts' equip-
 ment, including the firebombing of newspaper offices in Tomsk (9 percent); and
 other types of interference by authorities, including intimidation of sources (8 per-
 cent) and outright censorship (6 percent). During the summer, a criminal case was
 initiated by the regional government against Arsenyevskie Vestiye, a newspaper in
 the Primorskiy region, for reprinting a 1994 report on human rights violations in
 the region.
 In the Chechen conflict, both Russian and foreign journalists reported that the
 Russian army subjected them to detentions, beatings, and sniper attacks. Other re-
 ports of abuses by the Russian army cited destruction of video and audio equipment
 and exposed tapes, censorship of completed reports, and interference in readiffg the
 zones of conflict. The Government established a special committee to urge the media
 to proect official government war information, although this effort was generally in-
 effective.
 In addition, the Government attempted to revoke the accreditation of certain jour-
 nalists working in the war zone without a court order as required by a 1991 law
 on mass media. In a case involving government actions in Chechnya, the Constitu-
 tional Court ruled that the Government's efforts to evict critical journalists from
 Chechnya without a valid court ruling were illegal. The ruling reaffirmed the con-
 stitutional right to free information and guarantee of court protection of rights and
 freedoms. As a result of this ruling, journalists were permitted back into the area
 of conflict. However, the pressures against them continued.
 The Government did not launch a serious crackdown against the television net-
 works for their coverage of the Chechen war. The independent network, NTV, and,
 to a lesser extent, the state-owned television and radio (now known as Russian Pub-
 lic Television), continued to broadcast frank reports on the conduct of the military
 campaign, largely without direct interference. However, Russian State Television
 head 01eg Pol~tsov chargd that he was nearly fired, and that government officials
 attempted to intimidate him due to the station's independent coverage of the war.
 The Government did institute a criminal investigation of an NTV reporter for hav-
 ing interviewed Shamil Basayev, the Chechen who led the attack on Budennovsk.
 In July the General Prosecutor launched criminal proceedings against the satiric
 puppet show "Kukl" on NTV, charging the show's producers with "public and pre-
 meditated humiliation  of high state officials, including President Yeltsin, by depict-
 ing them "in an insulting manner." The Kukly case was subsequently dropped.
 Outside the large media markets of Moscow and St. Petersburg, regional media
 continued to be subject to varying degrees of pressure from authorities and domi-
 nant industries. Regional officials cited unpaid debts as a pretext for closing some
 newspapers that were also critical of regional governments. Many media organiza-
 tions were liable to pressure because they occupied city-owned premises or received
 subsidies from local and regional governments. In towns dominated by single indus-
 trial enterprises, the leaders of that enterprise had sufficient power to suppress in-
 vesigative reporting and discussion of enbarrassing topics, such as environmental
 pollution or privatization schemes benefiting management. In these circumstances,
 some journalists said they practiced self-censorship. Despite a ruling by the Presi-
 dential Judicial Chamber in favor of the regional newspaper Luberetskaya Pravda,
 local authorities took over the paper and hired an entirely new staff. In the far east-
 ern city of Khabarovsk, local authorities closed the ind  ent television station
 TV S.E.T. in August after it broadcast programs critical of the regional administra-
 tion.
 Perilous finances caused some independent media to accept govenent and pri-
 vate subsidies. The sudden withdrawal of financial subsidies at the time of the
 breakup of the Soviet Union continued to bedevil theprint media. In a replay of
 a similar effort in 1994, the Federation Council rejected a law passed by the Duma
 on state support for the media, which would have replaced most of the media sub-
 sidies now in the state budget-89 billion rubles in 1995 compared with 237 billion
 rubles the previous year-with an expanded package of tax breaks.
 There are also reports that investigative journalists were subjected to intimida-
 tion and pressure by emerging private business and financial interests.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides citi-
 zens with the right to assemble freely, and the Government respects this right in
 pracice. Organizations must obtain permits in order to hold public meet in. The
 application process must begin between 5 and 10 days before the scheduled event.
 
 
 1001
 
 Citizens freely and actively protested government decisions and actions. Permits to
 demonstrate were readily granted to opponents and to supporters of the Govern-
 ment.
 However, in August police broke up two antinuclear rallies organized by the Mos-
 cow chapter of Greenpeace for lacking a ppropriate demonstration permits. Video-
 tapes being made at the scene of a Red Square rally were confiscated and erased
 by   lice. A rally in front of the French Embassy was also dispersed.
 Pblic organizations must register their bylaws and the names of their leaders
 with the Ministry of Justice. Political parties must also present 5,000 signatures
 and pay a fee to register. Organizations registered with the Ministry of Justice were
 allowed t present candidates in the December elections. The law and the Constitu-
 tion ban the participation in elections of those organizations which jprofess
 anticonstitutional themes or activities. During the campaign preceding the Decem-
 ber elections, the Ministry of Justice closely monitored the statements and activities
 of all parties to limit the propagation of extremist views.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice. In December 1990, the Soviet Govern-
 ment enacted a law on religious freedom designed to put all religions on an equal
 basis. While it posed some obstacles to complete freedom of religion, it forbade gov-
 ernment interference in religion and enacted simple registration requirements for
 religious groups.
 The enactment of the 1990 law was followed by a "boom" in religious life, both
 in traditional and nontraditional forms. The religious boom that has occurred since
 1990, in part due to the presence of well-financed foreign missionaries, has dis-
 turbed many sectors of Russian society, particularly nationalists and those in the
 Russian Orthodox Church, some representatives of which indicated that they wished
 to limit the activities of foreign religious groups; however, President Yeltsin opposes
 such control. In 1995 a new law on religion was considered by the Parliamen , but
 it had not been approved by year's end. The draft emphasizes "regulation" and "con-
 trol" of religious groups, as opposed to freedom.
 According to the US. Helnki Commi sion, an increasing number of local and
 provincial governments are issuing restrictive laws and decrees that violate the pro-
 visions of the 1990 Law on Religion. Foreign religious groups are usually the target,
 and reportedly the measures are surprisingly similar. These decrees often include
 provisions that violate the right of an individual to talk and write freely about his
 or her religion. These harsh laws are not always enforced, but the potential exists
 for them to be used to restrict the activities of religious minorities.
 There were reports that Jehovah's Witnesses were forcibly inducted into the mili-
 tary and suffered hazing, including beatings and confinement without food or water.
 Although Jews and Muslims continue to encounter prejudice, they have not been
 inhibited by the Government in the free practice of their religion. Synagogues,
 churches, and mosques have been returned to communities to be used for religious
 services. However, for some religious communities the return of property confiscated
 by the Communist regime remains an issue. According to the Uff. Helsinki Commis-
 sion, several churches continue to encounter problems in the return of church prop-
 erties. The Moscow Anglican Church and Moscow's Immaculate Conception Catolic
 Church have not been able to occupy fully buildings that were forcibly taken from
 their congregations by the Communist government. Throughout Russia all religious
 faiths are attempting to regain nationalized property through legal measures. Most
 synagogues have been returned; some Roman Catholic Churches are still in the
 process of being handed back to congregations; the Anglican Church in Moscow may
 soon again become the property of that community.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides citizens with the right to freely choose their
 place of residence. However, the Government severely restricts this right. Citizens
 are generally free to travel within Russia. All adults are issued internal passports
 which they must cary while traveling and use to register visits of more than 10
 days with local authorities. Travelers not staying in hotels usually ignore this re-
 quirement.
 Citizens must obtain "propiskas" (residence permits) to live and work in a specific
 area. Tens of thousands of ethnic Russians, citizens of former Soviet Republics who
 have decided to move to Russia, often face great difficulty with the cost of obtaining
 these propiskas. The leaders (and citizens) of Moscow and other big cities staunchly
 defend retaining these permits as necessary in order to control crime and keep
 crowded urban areas from attracting more inhabitants. The cost of a propiska is
 often beyond the financial means of most migrants or refugees, who usually do not
 register. However, those without propiskas are not eligible for social or health serv-
 ices, nor can they send their children to school. Moreover, former Presidential
 
 
 1002
 Human Rights Commissioner Sergey Kovalev, Human Rights Watch/Helsinki, and
 others charged that law enforcement officials use the propiska system as a means
 to discriminate mainly against people from the Caucusus.
 Laws on the propiska system were declared illegal. However, in practice, cities
 maintained systems which controlled the movement of people. Since many ethnic
 Russians tend to assume that a great deal of crime is committed by darker-skinned
 peoples, such peoples are the target of checks and searches more often than lighter-
 skinned peoples. Discrimination occurs against darker-skinned peoples in    r
 cities throughout Russia, but especially in the biggest cities where they are con-
 centrated, like Moscow.
 On July 17, the Council of Ministers issued a decree entitled "On Ratification of
 Rules of Registration* by which local authorities may refuse to register an individ-
 ual for temporary or permanent residence based on certain conditions which include
 "unsuitable housing conditions, objections from family members, and other condi-
 tions envisioned by Russian law." The decree, which has the force of law, requires
 that citizens register if they intend to remain in a locality more than 10 days on
 vacation or business. It states that "only in cases of serious illness of the tempo-
 rarily registered citizens or their relatives, or in other circumstances preventing the
 citizen from leaving the place of temporary residence, may the period of stay be ex-
 tended." Former Russian Human Rights Commssioner Sergey Kovalev and Human
 Rights Watch condemned this decree as an infringement upon the freedom of move-
 ment which allows the possibility of arbitrary enforcement by corrupt local authori-
 ties.
 The Government issues two distinct types of assports, one for foreign travel and
 one for foreign emigration. If a citizen has hadaccess to classified material, police
 and intelligence service approval is necessary to receive a passport for foreign trav-
 el. It is often difficult for such persons to get a passport within 5 years of having
 left their former work. Persons denied foreign passports can appeal the decision to
 a commission chaired by the Deputy Foreign Minister. The commission meets
 monthly and has been able to resolve a great many of these cases.
 In 1995, 289 passports were issued as a result of reviews of cases by the Ivanov
 Commission, and between 200 and 250 persons are awaiting emigration passports.
 Between 5,000 and 6,000 are awaiting passports for travel because they at one point
 were privy to secret information or worked in the defense or security sectors. Rus-
 sian law allows for travel and emmigration passpots to be withheld, but the Ivanov
 Commission's reviews allow for citizens to appeal restrictions.
 The Constitution provides all citizens with the right to emigrate. It does not re-
 strict the emigration of citizens to any country and does not pro ibit those who have
 left Russia from returning. Several "poor relative" cases (i.e., situations in which
 permission to emigrate is refused until they have received the approval of certain
 close relatives--an approval which often means a cash settlement) were resolved
 during the year. Some refugees who have sought haven in Russia, such as Kurds,
 have left the country because of the difficulties they encountered in securing the
 propiskas necessary to live in urban areas. Others, including Tariel Broyev, director
 of the International Kurdish Cultural Center in Moscow andhis brother Revas, who
 are of Georgian origin, have alleged that they were harassed by the police and
 therefore have left.
 Although Russia is a party to the 1951 U.N. Protocol on Refugees and its 1967
 Protocol, and does allow refugees the right of first asylum, most refugees do not
 want to remain in Russia. Third country nationals apply to the U.N. High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees (UNHCR) for processing. A large number of workers and stu-
 dents from Africa and Asia, who came to work in accordance with treaties between
 their countries and the former Soviet Union, remain in Russia. The Government has
 not deported them but encourages their return home.
 There are reports that UNHCR officers have been barred from entering the tran-
 sit area of Sheremetyevo II airport in Moscow. Only the UNHCR Office Representa-
 tive and his deputy have diplomatic credentials; other UNHCR officials, including
 protection officers, do not. Airport officials have said that they can allow access to
 the transit area only to accredited diplomats, even though until the fall of 1995 pro-
 tection officers did have access. Denial of access to UNHCR officials to the airport
 areas contradicts the agreement between UNHCR and the Russian Federation.
 UNHCR officers reportedy witnessed the deportations of dozens of asylum seekers,
 some to the countries from which they had fled and where upon return they faced
 a well-founded fear of persecution. This may have prompted the Russian govern-
 ment to deny access to UNHCR officials.
 Significant numbers of ethnic Russians continue to arrive from parts of the former
 Soviet Union. The Federal Migration Service reported that 1,146,000 ethnic Rus-
 sians moved to Russia in 1994, primarily from central Asian and Baltic states. FMS
 
 
 1003
 does have a small program in place to assist these people, but they are basically
 on their own. The International Organization for Migration (IOM) has a substantial
 program in place to aid Russians who leave parts of the former Soviet Union and
 come to Russia. A presidential decree offering Russian citizenship to citizens of the
 former Soviet Union who return to Russia was scheduled to expire on February 6.
 However, it was extended until December 31, 2000. The decree allows people to
 apply either abroad or in Russia. However, in order to apply within Russia, one
 must present a propiska.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides citizens with the right to change their government at
 both the federation and regional levels. They have exercised this right in practice
 over the past 4 years. Several regional elections were held during the year. itizens
 voted on December 17 in parliamentary elections, which domestic and international
 observers declared to be free and fair. However, no international observers mon-
 itored the elections in Chechnya, due to concerns about the preelection conditions
 (see Section 1.q.) Throughout the campaign, access to the mass media was inhibited
 only by parties ability to pay.
 The Federal Assembly consists of two chambers. The lower chamber, or the
 Duma, consists of 450 deputies, half elected in single mandate constituencies, half
 by party lists. In the December parliamentary elections, 43 political blocs appeared
 on the ballot.
 The upper chamber, the Federation Council, was elected in December 1993. In
 September President Yeltsin issued a decree stating that the Council would be com-
 posed of the heads of administration and legislative leaders of each of Russia's 89
 regions. A law delineating this composition was passed by the Duma in December.
 The decree entered into full force at the end of the term of the Council elected in
 December 1993.
 President Yeltsin was elected to a 5-year term in 1991. The Constitution provides
 the President and the Prime Minister with substantial powers, which they used in
 the absence of effective opposition from the Parliament and courts. Presidential elec-
 tions are scheduled to be held in June 1996, for a 4-year term. Most regional leaders
 have been appointed by President Yeltsin rather than being chosen in popular elec-
 tions. The heads of 21 ethnic republics have been elected, as well as the mayors of
 Moscow and St. Petersburg and 20 other subjects of the Russian Federation. Thus,
 by year's end 43 of 89 heads of subjects of the Russian Federation had been elected.
 The Constitution does not limit the political activity of any societal group, includ-
 ing women. The political bloc "Women of Russia" holds 8 percent of the seats in the
 Duma. A total of 39 of the Duma's 450 deputies are women. Some members of reli-
 gious and national minorities hold positions of leadership at the local, regional, and
 national level, including as deputies in the Duma.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Many Russian    human    rights gups operate relatively freely. Most are
 headquartered in Moscow and have branches throughout the country. Some of the
 more prominent domestic human rights organizations are the Moscow Center for
 Prison Reform, the Society for the Guardianship of Penitentiary Institutions, the
 Glasnost Fund Memorial, the Moscow Research Center for Human Rights, the Sol-
 diers' Mothers' Committee, and the Mothers' Rights Foundation. Most groups inves-
 tigated and publicly commented on human rights issues generally without govern-
 ment interference or restrictions. However, the Glasnost fund, and others monitor-
 ing internal security agencies have encountered problems, such as beatings as well
 as other abuses (see Sections L.a. and 1.d.).
 In addition, government authorities confiscated documents on human rights viola-
 tions committed during the Chechen conflict from a Russian nongovernmental dele-
 gation in December. According to the Director of Customs at the airport, the officials
 were FSB agents. The participants eventually got through airport security and at-
 tended the meeting in Stockholm. They were prohibited from taking with them cer-
 tain materials. However, those materials had already been sent abroad.
 International human rights organizations function generally unrestricted. How-
 ever Human Rights Watch reported that Russian forces denied it access to the
 northern Caucusus region three times and that Russian soldiers detained two of the
 organization's representatives in Groznyy and confiscated tapes of interviews with
 witnesses to human rights abuses. In addition, Russian forces at times denied inter-
 national organizations access to towns, including Samashki and Gudermes, imme-
 diately after capturing them. The Russian Government agreed to permit the OSCE
 
 
 1004
 
 to investigate human rights abuses in Chechnya in keeping with the Assistance
 Group's mandate. OSCE observers have investigated some human rights violations
 and brought the information to the attention of OSCE authorities in Vienna. How-
 ever, there has been little follow up on this information.
 The President's Commission on Human Rights, formerly chaired by Sergey
 Kovalev, focused its attention on human rights questions in Chechnya. A Member
 of Parliament, Sergey Kovalev also served as Russia's Human Rights Ombudsman.
 He was dismissed from that post in March by deputies who were angered by his
 critical comments about the conduct of the war in Chechnya. In August aides to the
 President reportedly prepared a decree dismissing Kovalev as Chairman of the pres-
 idential Human Rights Commission and transforming the unit into a "complaint let-
 ter department:' Kovalev had been criticized for referring to the President as a "con-
 stitutional criminal" during testimony before the Constitutional Court on Chechnya.
 President Yeltsin did not sign the decree. In January 1996, Kovalev resigned from
 the Commission, publicly releasing a critical letter accusing President Yeltsin of
 backtracking on human rights. Shortly thereafter, the President's Human Rights
 Commission issued a critical report on the status of human rights in Russia for 1994
 and 1995.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination based on race, sex, religion, language,
 social status, or other circumstances. However, both official and societal discrimina-
 tion still exist.
 Some nongovernmental groups attempted to incite violence against other political
 or societal groups. Self-proclaimed Fascist Aleksey Vedenkin was arrested in Feb-
 ruary after threatening to shoot Human Rights Commission Chairman Sergey
 Kovalev and others opposed to the war in Chechnya. Vedenkin was to be tried on
 the basis of the anti-Fascist decree approved by President Yeltsin in 1994, but he
 was released when the President, in honor of the 50th anniversary of the end of
 World War H, granted amnesty to those charged with certain categories of crime.
 Some groups attempted to stir up hatred against Jews, peoples from the Caucasus,
 and Roma (Gypsies), who were most frequently singled out for verbal or physical
 abuse by fellow citizens.
 Russian and foreign human rights organizations have recorded information on at-
 tacks against, and maltreatment of, homosexual prisoners throughout Russia in vio-
 lation of international norms. Homosexual prisoners are segregated from hetero-
 sexual prisoners and, regardless of the charges or crimes on which they have been
 detained or convicted, are housed with persons accused of sex crimes. In such an
 environment, human rights organizations assert, they are ostracized by the rest of
 the rison population and subject to further abuse.
 Women.-According to government statistics, 15,000 women were killed by their
 husbands in 1994. The Ministry of Internal Affairs recorded 54,000 cases of spousal
 abuse in 1994, a figure which most nongovernmental observers, such as the Center
 for Gender Studies, regard as conservative. Figures for 1995 were not yet available.
 According to a report by Human Rights Watch, violence against women in Russia
 is on the rise. Domestic violence is widespread and laely unreported. According
 to most observers, police are reluctant to intervene in such cases, which they report-
 edly view as internal family matters.
 There are no laws on domestic violence, and there are no official statistics con-
 cerning rape or physical abuse of women. Women often do not report such crimes.
 Hospitals and members of the medical profession readily provide assistance to
 women who have been assaulted. However, some doctors are reluctant to become in-
 volved in trying to ascertain the details of a sexual assault, fearing that they will
 be required to spend long periods of time in court.
 There is credible evidence that women encounter considerable discrimination in
 employment, and that they are often the last hired and the first to be fired. Accord-
 ing to Human Rights Watch, women account for 90 percent of worker layoffs.
 Human Rights Watch accused the Government of participating in discriminatory ac-
 tions against women, contending that, as the direct employer or contractor of com-
 panies doing the direct hiring, the Government must enforce employment laws on
 women; however, the Government seldom enforces these laws. Employers prefer to
 hire men and save on maternity and child care costs and avoid the perceived
 unreliability that accompanies the hiring of women with small children. On the
 other hand, women comprise the majority of teachers and librarians and appear to
 be strongly represented within city administrations.
 Children.-The Constitution assigns the Government some responsibility for safe-
 guarding the rights of children. The Kovalev commission has drawn up a coin-
 
 
 1005
 1rehensive program in defense of children's rights which it intends to present to the
 ament. However, for the most part abuse of children and the situation of such
 groups as orphans and children and juveniles in pretrial detention facilities received
 little socie  attention. The Russian Association of Orphanages reported that the
 condition of orphans in post-Soviet era Russia worsened due to financial constraints
 on the federal budget and the lack of a charitable tradition in Russia.
 There is no pattern of societal abuse directed at children. The State endeavors to
 provide, within its reduced means, for the welfare of children.
 The most vulnerable group of children in society are orphans and the mentally
 retarded, who are often given up by their parents to state-run institutions. The
 plight of these children received considerable media attention in 1995. Abuses of
 children in such institutions have been well documented. Human rights groups
 strongly believe that the treatment of children in detention facilities appears to vio-
 late international norms. The well-being of children in institutions for the disabled
 also suffered due to government budget constraints.
 People With Disabidities.-The Constitution does not directly address the issue of
 discrimination against disabled persons. The Society for the Defense of Invalids is
 working to broaden public awareness and understanding of issues concerningpeople
 with disabilities. Although laws exist which prohibit discrimination, the Govern-
 ment has not enforced them. The meager resources the Government devotes to as-
 sisting disabled persons is provided to veterans of World War Il and other military
 conflicts. Special institutions exist for children with various disabilities. However,
 as the Society for the Defense of Invalids has observed, "Russian society, like Soviet
 society before it, places value only on what a person can do, build, or earn, which
 excludes the disabled." The Government does not mandate access to buildings for
 the disabled anywhere in the Russian Federation.
 Indigenous People.-The State Committee for the Development of the North,
 based in Moscow, is tasked with representing and advocating the interests of indige-
 nous people. With only a small staff, its influence is limited. Local communities
 have been formed in some areas to study and make recommendations regarding the
 preservation of the culture of indigenous people. People such as the Buryats in Sibe-
 ria, the Tatar and Bashkiri in the Urals, the peoples of the north, including the
 Enver, Tafarli, and Chukchi, and others have worked actively to preserve and de-
 velop their cultures, as well as the economic resources of their regions. Most believe
 that they are treated equally with ethnic Russians within the Russian Federation.
 Roma (Gypsies) and peoples from the Caucasus, especially Chechnya, however, face
 particular problems and discrimination and have been subjected to verbal and phys-
 ical abuse (see Section 1.g. for discussion of the war in Chechnya).
 Since 1993 discrimination against people from the Caucasus and Central Asia in-
 creased concurrently with new measures at both the federal and local levels to com-
 bat crime. With wide public support, law enforcement authorities targeted people
 with dark complexions for harassment, arrest, and deportations from urban centers
 during periods of domestic crisis. This trend continued in 1995. Human Rights
 Watch reported that law enforcement agents in Moscow "routinely detained, intimi-
 dated and extorted money from and beat people of color, mainly people from the
 Caucasus and Central Asia. . - Following the beginning of the military conflict in
 Chechnya, noted the group, "detention and harassment of ethnic Chechens in Mos-
 cow became more frequent and more brutal." Former Human Rights Commissioner
 Srgey K~ovalev Human Rights Watch and charged that the propiska system dis-
 proportionately discriminated against people from the Caucasus area.
 Rtligious Minorities-Muslims, who comprise approximately 10 percent of Rus-
 sia's population, continue to encounter societal prejudices and antagonism.
 Jews in Russia continue to encounter some forms of societal discrimination. There
 have been no reports that Jews were hindered in the practice of their religion. How-
 ever, anti-Semitic themes continued to figure prominently in extremist publications
 and some Russian politicians made anti-Semitic remarks. President Yeltsin's anti-
 Fascist decree of July and his commitment to prosecute political extremists whose
 activities violated the Constitution were viewed initially by some members of Jewish
 communities as positive developments. However, this decree apparently has not
 been used or enforced.
 American representatives of Jehovah's Witnesses congregations in Russia reported
 that the Channel 5 television station in St. Petersburg aired libelous stories about
 their religion and its practices in Russia. They chaed that such stories about "for-
 eign" religions were encouraged by local leaders of the Orthodox Church.
 Members of the Russian branch of the Japanese Aum Shini Kyo cult reported
 societal harassment after the cult was implicated in a Tokyo subway gas attack. In
 April a Moscow court froze the cult's assets. The cult's Moscow organization was
 sued by the Youth Defense Committee, a public organization which has taken on
 
 
 1006
 the case, for torture, extortion and abuse of civil rights. The case was pending at
 year's end.
 In certain areas of the country other religions, including Buddhism various Chris-
 tian faiths, and shamanism are practiced in accord with minority traitions.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The law provides workers with the rights to join or
 form trade unions, and some 50 to 55 million workers (over 70 percent of the work
 force) are nominally organized. However, this number includes members of the suc-
 cessor organization to the official Communist unions, which are themselves orga-
 nized as the Federation of Independent Trade Unions of Russia (FNPR). The numer-
 ical dominance of FNPR, its continued control over the extensive property and real
 estate of its predecessor, and its still substantial role in the distribution of social
 benefits, function as practical constraints to the right to freedom of association.
 Moreover, almost all of the official unions include management as part of the bar-
 gaining unit.
 In practice, the leaders of FNPR unions tend to remain dependent on enterprise
 managers or local political elites. FNPR uses the leverage it has as the guardian
 of social benefits, including health care and vacation facilities, to dissuade workers
 from joining independent unions. Labor market analysts cite polls showing that the
 majority of workers either do not know that they belong to a union at all, or belong
 solely because they believe that they would not be covered by social insurance or
 receive other benefits if they did not pay dues to the official union.
 On the national level, trade unions exist independently of the Government, politi-
 cal parties, and other political forces. The independent, or "free," labor unions sup-
 ported a wide variety of political blocs in the December parliamentary elections. Po-
 litical parties do not control or interfere in the function of any of the trade unions.
 At the national level, even the FNPR plays a very independent political role. On
 the regional and local levels, FNPR unions are often closely associated with lower-
 level political bosses.
 Unions may freely form federations-two new national groupings of independent
 trade unions came into existence during the year-and affiliate with international
 labor bodies.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-While collective bargaining
 is protected under the law, its practice is limited by the frequent refusal of enter-
 prise management to negotiate with independent labor unions. For example, the
 general director of a provincial aerospace factory told labor unionists that he would
 not bargain with an independent union even though it had met all registration re-
 quirements. Significant antiunion discrimination by management exists, although
 labor law theoretically prohibits such discrimination. Government policy and an
 economy rapidly adapting to the free market have forced enormous reductions in
 workers employed in large industrial enterprises (which were staffed according to
 Soviet precepts). In this environment, enterprise managers (with the encouragement
 of FNPR unionists) easily find ways to ensure that independent union activists are
 among the first affected by large-scale layoffs and the last included in retraining
 programs or rehired, according to analysts who follow organized labor. In some in-
 stances, factory management has tried to pressure the Government to declare indus-
 trial action illegal or has simply fired strike leaders.
 The judicial system has reversed a number of such decisions over the past year
 and has generally improved its record in defending worker rights. For example, in
 January, a Samara oblast court ordered the reinstatement of some 40 workers fired
 from the VAZ auto works in November 1994 for participating in a strike sponsored
 by a small independent trade union. Factory management claimed that the job ac-
 tion was not a strike but an illegal work stoppage. Union leaders reported that the
 court later went a step further, ordering that an activist who had been given an
 unfavorable work assignment after the strike be returned to his original duties.
 There have been no reports of constraints on worker rights in Russia's several ex-
 port processing zones (EPZ's).
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Labor Code prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor. However, some observers believe that government enforcement
 of this provision is ineffective. There were limited reports of army recruits being
 forced to serve as personal servants of more senior soldiers (see Section 1.c.).
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Labor Code bans regular em-
 ployment for children under the age of 16. In certain cases, children 14 or 15 years
 of age may work in internship or apprenticeship programs. The Labor Code regu-
 lates the working conditions of children under the age of 18, including prohibiting
 dangerous work and nighttime and overtime work. However, growth in entre-
 preneurial manufacturing and trading, and in the informal economy, has led to the
 
 
 1007
 employment of more children under the age of 14 in recent years. These child work-
 ers usually sell consumer goods, such as magazines and cigarettes, on the streets
 or in kiosks. Their entrance into the labor force reflects the straitened economic con-
 ditions in which many families live. This pressure and the deterioration of the edu-
 cational system create a gap between child labor legislation and reality.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The monthly minimum wage at the end of
 1995 was roughly $12.87 (60,500 rubles). While this figure clearly does not con-
 stitute a living wage under prevailing conditions, very few people receive the official
 minimum. At the same time, much of the population continues to reside in low-rent
 or subsidized housing, and receive various social services from enterprises or mu-
 nicipalities. The official minimum wage is primarily a benchmark figure for calculat-
 ing university stipends, old age pensions, civil service wages, and a host of other
 social benefits.
 Nonpayment of wages is the primary reason for the vast majority of strikes. Wage
 arrears are a potential cause of social unrest over the next few years and a matter
 of concern for the Government. For example, the settlement of coal strikes in Rostov
 Oblast (in February) and Primorskiy Kray (in May) over wages owed to miners in
 the state-supported coal sector required the attention of then First Deputy Prime
 Minister Anatoliy Chubays. Russian labor experts believe that wage arrears amount
 to a violation of International Labor Organization standards on acceptable condi-
 tions of work.
 The Labor Code provides for a standard workweek of 40 hours, with at least one
 24-hour rest period. The law requires premium pay for overtime work or work on
 holidays.
 The law establishes minimum conditions of workplace safety and worker health,
 but these standards are not effectively enforced. In factories, workers wear little
 protective equipment, enterprises store hazardous materials in open areas, and
 smoking is permitted near containers of flammable substances. The Labor Code does
 establish workers' right to remove themselves from hazardous or life-threatening
 work situations without endangering their continued employment. Coal miners in
 the northern settlement, Vorkuta, won reinstatement to their jobs through the local
 court system after one such refusal. Nevertheless, the right to a safe and healthy
 work environment remains under pressure in an economic environment where in-
 dustry is shrinking and unemployment is a constant fear.
