Russia
Russia slipped deeper into authoritarianism in 2005, as a series of political
changes that President Vladimir Putin proposed in the aftermath of the
September 2004 Beslan massacre became law. In November, the State Duma
took the first step toward approving a draconian law that, if enacted, would
substantially curtail the activities of nongovernmental organizations (NGOs)
in Russia.
The armed conflict in Chechnya continues unabated. In March 2005,
Human Rights Watch concluded that enforced disappearances by Russian
forces and their proxies in Chechnya are so widespread and systematic that
they constitute crimes against humanity.
The government took modest but important steps in 2005 to resolve some of
the country’s entrenched human rights problems, including the brutal hazing
of conscripts in the armed forces that has claimed dozens of lives and contributed
to hundreds of suicides in recent years.
The North Caucasus
Events in 2005 demonstrated the continuing inability of the Russian government
to bring peace to Chechnya and its neighboring regions. The conflict
continues to claim civilian lives every day.
Enforced disappearances continue to be the conflict’s hallmark abuse, with
local groups estimating that between two thousand and five thousand people
have “disappeared” since 1999 including, according to official figures, more
than 140 in the first nine months of 2005. The “disappearances” have followed
a clear pattern: the victims are overwhelmingly men between the ages
of eighteen and forty, and are always unarmed at the time of apprehension.
The perpetrators, in the majority of cases, are clearly identifiable as Russian
troops or as belonging to pro-Moscow Chechen commandos. Most “disappearances”
have happened in two standards sets of circumstances: in large
Russian raids during which troops blocked off and systematically search
entire villages or towns, or during targeted raids in the middle of the night.
The Russian government, though long aware of both the frequency and pattern
of enforced disappearances, has taken few steps to stop the practice.
As part of Russia’s policy of “Chechenization” of the conflict, pro-Moscow
Chechen forces under the command of Ramzan Kadyrov have played an
increasingly active role in the conflict. In 2004 and 2005, they gradually
replaced federal troops as the main perpetrators of “disappearances.” They
run their own prisons—entirely outside any official penitentiary structure—
where they detain, and often ill-treat, hundreds of people. These troops are
also responsible for the reprehensible practice of taking hostages among relatives
of rebel leaders as a way of forcing the latter to surrender. The Kremlin
not only tolerates these practices but has effectively endorsed them by naming
Ramzan Kadyrov deputy prime minister of Chechnya and bestowing a
Hero of Russia award on him.
Chechen rebels also continue committed egregious violations of human
rights. Following the death of rebel leader Aslan Maskhadov in March, they
stepped up their campaign against civil servants and regular police both in
Chechnya and the neighboring regions of Ingushetia and Dagestan.
Only a few cases against servicemen and police officers charged with abuses
against Chechen civilians have reached the courts. In March 2005, a court
found police officer Sergei Lapin guilty of abuse of authority for ill-treating
Zelimkhan Murdalov and sentenced him to eleven years in prison. In two
other cases, juries acquitted servicemen charged with the murder of nine
people. In the majority of cases involving serious abuses, however, military
and civilian prosecutors have failed to conduct meaningful investigations. In
many cases, investigators have failed even to question eyewitnesses. Unable
to secure justice within Russia, hundreds of victims have filed applications
with the European Court of Human Rights.
Hostilities between law enforcement agencies and insurgents in the
Kabardino-Balkaria region dramatically illustrate the increasing instability in
the North Caucasus. On October 13, 2005, armed insurgents launched a
major attack on police stations, the airport, and government buildings in
Nalchik, the region’s capital, taking several hostages. The hostilities reportedly resulted in more than 130 deaths, including at least forty-four civilians
and local police officers. Although Chechen rebel leader Shamil Basayev
claimed responsibility for the attack, most insurgents appeared to have been
locals.
Political Rights and Freedoms
In 2005, the government pushed through a package of political changes that
increased President Putin’s power. New legislation abolished direct elections
for governors, ended single constituency voting in parliamentary elections,
established new membership requirements for political parties seeking to
participate in parliamentary elections, and raised the minimum threshold for
entry of these parties into the State Duma from 5 to 7 percent.
Under the new legislation, Russia’s president nominates candidates for all
regional governorships. Regional parliaments have the right to reject these
candidates but if they do so three times, the president can dissolve the parliament.
In 2005, President Putin nominated candidates for more than thirty
governorships, all of whom were rapidly approved by the regional parliaments.
The changes to election laws are likely to make the next State Duma even
more monolithic than today’s. The end of single constituency voting will cost
most independent deputies their seats. The new rules also require that political
parties have at least fifty thousand members in order to be able to compete
in parliamentary elections.
When Mikhail Kasyanov, a former prime minister, hinted he might run for
president in 2008, law enforcement bodies suddenly opened investigations
into alleged wrongdoing during his term in office. The prosecution of
Mikhail Khodorkovsky and Platon Lebedev, the former head and a key shareholder
of the Yukos oil company, ended in guilty verdicts and an eight-year
prison term for each. Many observers believe the men were prosecuted primarily
because the Kremlin perceived them as a political threat.
Human Rights Defenders
Pressure on NGOs escalated in 2005. A proposed new law, adopted in the
first of three required readings in the State Duma in November, would dramatically
increase the government’s powers to interfere with their work and
would close down foreign NGOs operating in Russia. The law was still pending
at this writing.
NGOs that work on human rights issues in Chechnya came under increasing
fire in 2005. These groups, the activists who lead them, and the people they
work with increasingly faced administrative and judicial harassment, and, in
the most severe cases, persecution, threats, and physical attacks. For example,
the authorities opened two criminal cases against the Russian-Chechen
Friendship Society, accusing it of inciting racial hatred and violating tax laws.
If found guilty, Stanislav Dmitrievsky, its director, could face five years in
prison.
Although harassment of critical NGOs that do not work on Chechnya was
less severe, the working environment deteriorated significantly in 2005.
Government officials at both the federal and regional level stepped up their
verbal attacks on these groups. In a number of regions, officials used legislation
that prohibits extremism to shut down NGOs while in others they selectively
used registration procedures or audits to harass groups of which they
disapproved.
Entrenched Problems
The government made some modest steps in 2005 toward resolving
entrenched human rights problems in large state institutions but still need to
take more far-reaching measures to fully address these concerns. Torture and
ill-treatment of criminal suspects by police, institutionalization and poor
treatment of orphans, and inhumane treatment of persons in psychiatric
institutions remain widespread and unaddressed.
The Ministry of Defense signed a memorandum of understanding with the
human rights ombudsman that allows for monitoring of human rights conditions in military bases. It also announced that it would start regularly publishing
information on deaths in the armed forces. Despite these positive
steps, violent hazing continued unabated, with the defense ministry announcing
that thirteen conscripts had died as a result of hazing and two hundred
others had committed suicide in the first nine months of 2005.
The government’s record on combating HIV/AIDS has been mixed.
Although high-level officials paid considerably more attention to the problem
than in previous years and increased budget allocations to address
HIV/AIDS-related concerns, steps to undo a 2004 measure to decriminalize
small-scale possession of narcotic drugs threatened to undermine HIV prevention
work. Criminalization of small-scale possession of narcotic drugs
drives drug users away from HIV prevention services out of fear of police
abuse and arrest, and exposes them to health risks in prison that would put
them at risk of HIV or exacerbate existing HIV infection.
Key International Actors
While many global leaders in 2005 expressed concern over the post-Beslan
political changes, they otherwise continued to signal warm support for the
Russian president. German Chancellor Gerhardt Schroeder and President
Putin attended each other’s birthday parties, and Italian Prime Minister
Silvio Berlusconi praised Putin as a “true democrat.” The European Union
and the United States failed to forcefully address the deteriorating human
rights situation in Russia during summits with Russian leaders.
Several international organizations have voiced concern over the shrinking
political space in Russia. The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of
Europe criticized the prosecution of Mikhail Khodorkovsky and Platon
Lebedev, saying that “the prosecutions went beyond the mere pursuit of justice
to include such elements as to weaken an outspoken political opponent,
intimidate other wealthy individuals and regain control of strategic economic
assets.” In its newly adopted country strategy for Russia, the European Bank
for Reconstruction and Development noted the continuing concentration of
power in the executive and observed that “in the absence of a vibrant civil society and without vibrant political debate in legislature, policy making will
fail to benefit from the diversity of views in the electorate.”
Criticism of Russia’s conduct in Chechnya remains muted. The international
community continues to call for a peaceful solution of the conflict without
offering a clear vision of how lasting peace could be achieved. In contrast to
previous years, in 2005 the European Union failed to table a resolution
expressing concern about the Chechnya conflict at the U.N. Commission on
Human Rights. Russia continues to refuse access to Chechnya to the U.N.
special rapporteurs on torture and extrajudicial executions.
The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe continues to criticize
abuses both by Russian troops and their proxies, and by the Chechen rebels.
The Council of Europe Committee for the Prevention of Torture conducted
its seventh visit to the region in December 2004, but the Russian government
has not allowed the publication of any of its reports on Chechnya. In
February 2005, the European Court of Human Rights found the Russian
government guilty of violating the right to life and the prohibition of torture
with respect to a number of Chechen civilians who had died in 1999 and
2000 at the hands of Russian troops.