 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
 
 The Soviet Union is a one-party, centralized state in which
 a small group within the Communist Party attempts to direct all
 political, economic, social, cultural and other developments.
 Although the Soviet constitution formally provides for all
 internationally recognized human rights, in fact there is
 little tolerance for actions and practices incompatible with
 Communist Party control. Suppression of constitutional rights
 is accomplished under the auspices of a number of broadly-worded
 provisions stating that constitutional rights may not be
 exercised in a manner contrary to the interests of society as
 defined by the party.
 The primary instrument for the suppression of dissent
 within the Soviet Union remains the Committee for State
 Security -- the KGB. This organization is one of the largest
 employers in the country. Its divisions devoted to domestic
 operations number several hundred thousand men and include the
 Border Guards, a corps devoted to surveillance of economic
 crimes, an armed forces directorate which infiltrates and
 controls the military, and numerous other directorates which
 infiltrate almost every social organization so these will not
 serve as fronts for organized opposition.
 The KGB concentrates on protecting party rule by attempting
 to suppress all dissent, seal all information flowing to the
 Soviet people from outside influences (controlling borders,
 jamming broadcasts, infiltrating writers' unions, operating
 systems of local informers, etc.), stifle nationalism and
 religion, and assure complete conformity with the party line.
 There are organic links between this police system and the
 party and the other organs of state control, such as the
 ministry of internal affairs, which run the network of prisons,
 forced labor camps, and 'psychiatric* hospitals.
 The Soviet government's intolerance for activity deemed
 incompatible with Communist Party control continued to be
 particularly evident in 1981. The precise number of persons
 who are presently.imprisoned, exiled, or undergoing forced
 labor for-engaging in dissident activities is not known, but
 the number is believed to be about 10,000. A few of the more
 outstanding recent examples of detention of dissidents are the
 following:   the continued forced exile of Academician Andrei
 Sakharov in the closed city of Gorkiyj the continued detention
 of Anatoliy Shcharanskiy; the prison terms meted out to the
 psychiatric watch group member Feliks Serebrov and the group's
 consulting psychiatrist, Anatoliy Koryagin, to Helsinki Watch
 Group member Ivan Kovalev, to long-time dissident Anatoliy
 Marchenko, to Ukrainian human rights activist Raisa Rudenko, to
 (887)
 
 89-510 0 - 82 - 57
 
 
 888
 Lithuanian-American human rights activist Vytautas Skuodis, to
 Jewish activists Evgeniy Lein, Kim Fridman, Osip Lokshin,
 Vladimir Tsukermann, Vladimir Kislik, and Stanislav Zubko, and
 to a number of Protestant activists; the internal exile of
 psychiatric watch group member Irina Grivnina and Jewish
 activist Viktor Brailovskiy; and the continuing use of
 psychiatric treatment to suppress dissent as, for example, in
 the case of dissident Yuriy Ternopolskiy, Lithuanian
 Pentecostal Edward Bulakh and Lithuanian-American human rights
 activist Algirdas Statkevicius.
 Another area in which the Soviet authorities engage in
 extensive domestic violations of human rights is in the area of
 emigration. Restrictions on Jewish, Armenian and Volga German
 emigration have increased greatly in the last year. Jewish
 emigration is now at a ten-year low.
 A detailed examination of the Soviet Union's external
 conduct is beyond the scope of this report, but several
 developments nevertheless require brief mention. Soviet armed
 forces continue to occupy Afghanistan, and their number there
 has recently been increased to 90,000 men. Soviet practices in
 Afghanistan have continued to include the reported use of
 chemical weapons, "trick" explosives, and the indiscriminate
 bombing, shelling, and terrorizing of the Afghan population.
 In Poland, there is little doubt that Soviet authorities have
 played a major behind-the-scenes role in the effort to crush
 Solidarity. Thus, Soviet authorities have a major
 responsibility for the situation in which the Polish people now
 find themselves, and for the efforts of the present Polish
 government to turn back the clock and halt social progress.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom
 from:
 a. Torture
 Reports from a variety of sources indicate that
 mistreatment of prisoners during interrogation continues to
 occur, but systematic torture and physical abuse of prisoners
 as a means of obtaining confessions have not been prevalent.
 Prisoners have more frequently been subjected to such
 psychological pressure as isolation, extended interrogation,
 and threats against their families.  (See also the section on
 abuse of psychiatry, below.)
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment:
 There are four types of such punishment: the treatment of
 prisoners in Soviet labor camps, the use of psychiatric
 treatment against political dissenters, forced internal exile,
 and forced emigration.
 Prison Camps: Approximately 4 million Soviet citizens are
 undergoing forced labor, half of them confined to prisons and
 camps. Working inmates comprise nearly 4 percent of the Sovet
 work force, engaging in a wide variety of economic activity.
 Although article 20 of the Russian Republic criminal code
 states that "punishment does not have the goal of causing
 physical suffering or the destruction of human
 
 
 889
 dignity," a number of reliable sources have described the stark
 conditions in Soviet labor camps. These conditions include
 isolation, inadequate protection against extremely cold
 weather, a poor diet causing hunger and, eventually, medical
 problems associated with malnutrition; compulsory, hard labor
 in difficult conditions; inadequate medical care; and frequent,
 arbitrary deprivation of the prisoners' limited rights to
 receive correspondence and family visits. Prisoners are denied
 the right to practice their religion and may be punished for
 attempts to do'so.
 Psychiatric Treatment: The Soviet government continues to
 use pseudo-scientific procedures to confine perfectly sane
 political and religious activists to special psychiatric
 hospitals (SPHs) run by the ministry of internal affairs. In
 these SPHs, the "patients" are kept under control by "therapy"
 which amounts to little more than torture through the
 administration of unbalanced doses of powerful and painful
 drugs such as sulphazin, insulin, sanapax, seduxin, and
 motiden-depo. Some sources estimate that up to 1,000 sane
 persons are confined in Soviet psychiatric hospitals for
 political reasons. Another 3,000 - 4,000 persons are confined
 to SPHs simply for complaining about deficiencies in the Soviet
 bureaucratic apparatus. As evidence of this, in May 1981, the
 Soviet ministry of health's chief neuro-psychiatrist publicly
 stated at the seventh All-Union Congress of Neuropathologists
 and Psychiatrists that 1.2 percent of patients in Moscow
 psychiatric hospitals had been hospitalized "in connection with
 visits to state agencies to present groundless complaints and
 slanderous statements." In 1977, the World Psychiatric
 Association adopted a resolution condemning political abuse of
 psychiatry and naming the Soviet Union as an offender in this
 regard.
 Internal Exile: The practice of exiling political
 dissenters to isolated Siberian villages, which dates back to
 tsarist times, continues under Soviet power. Exile often
 follows upon prison and, in practice, means confinement in a
 remote village in conditions of extreme cold, a scarcity of
 cultural amenities, and the unavailability of most fresh
 foodstuffs. These harsh conditions are mitigated only by the
 privilege of receiving food parcels and the freedom to move
 about within a limited area, to find work, and to arrange one's
 own accommodations.
 The most notorious example of this practice continues to be
 the forced exile of Academician Andrei Sakharov to the closed
 city of Gor'kiy. Although Gor'kiy is a large city, and
 therefore has more of the amenities of life available than the
 average place of internal exile, the Soviet authorities
 continue to deny Dr. Sakharov normal contact with his
 scientific colleagues, friends or acquaintances, and to subject
 him to such arbitrary treatment as surveillance, searches of
 his apartment, and interference with his receipt of mail and
 telephone communications. Other examples of forced exile
 include Moscow Helsinki monitor Vladimir Slepak, who is in
 exile in Tsoktokhangil, Siberia, and Ukrainian poet Ivan
 Svitlychniy who is in exile in the Altai region where adequate
 medical care for the stroke he recently suffered is reportedly
 unavailable.
 Forced Emigration: In recent years, the Soviet government
 has forced a number of Soviet citizens to emigrate from the
 USSR. There were several instances of this in 1981, sometimes
 involving revocation of citizenship while the Soviet citizen
 was traveling abroad.
 
 
 890
 Death Penalty: The Soviet criminal code authorizes the
 death penalty for a variety of offenses, including some
 economic crimes such as fraud, black marketeerinq and
 embezzlement. The Soviet press occasionally reports
 executions, several of which were carried out in 1981.
 However, statistics on capital punishment, as well as other
 crime statistics, are not published by the Soviet government.
 c. Disappearances
 Dissidents are often arrested and held for some time
 without charges being brought against them. In arrest cases,
 the Soviet authorities eventually allow arrestees to notify
 family and friends of their arrest or confirm it upon being
 questioned by interested parties.
 d. Arbitrary arrest and imprisonment
 Legal Basis for Prosecution: Although politically-inspired
 prosecutions often are made on trumped-up criminal charges,
 certain provisions of the Soviet criminal code normally are
 used for the prosecution of individuals who are attempting to
 exercise internationally-recognized human rights. The
 provisions of law are made purposely vague, enabling the Soviet
 authorities wide discretion in the choice of whom to prosecute
 and whom not to prosecute. Under the RSFSR criminal code,
 these provisions are:
 -- article 190-1, "The dissemination of deliberately
 hostile fabrications slandering the Soviet state and social
 system." This article, introduced in 1966 after the trial of
 Soviet writers Sinyavskiy and Daniel, carries a maximum penalty
 of three years' imprisonment;
 -- article 190-3, "The organization of, or active
 participation in, a group activity violating public order,"
 which carries a maximum penalty of three years' imprisonment;
 -- article 70, "Anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda,"
 which carries a maximum penalty of seven years' imprisonment
 and up to an additional five years' internal exile;
 -- article 227, "The infringement of the person and the
 rights of citizens under the appearance of performing religious
 ceremonies," which carries a maximum penalty of five years'
 imprisonment;
 -- article 64, "Treason," which includes unlawful attempts
 to leave the country.  (The maximum penalty is death, but a
 sentence of up to 15 years deprivation of liberty plus five
 years exile is often imposed.) Yuriy Fedorov and Aleksiy
 Murzhenko, the remaining imprisoned members of the group
 convicted in Leningrad in 1970 for trying to seize an empty
 airliner on the ground to fly out of the U.S.S.R., were
 convicted under article 64.
 In addition, there are similar provisions to those in the
 RSFSR criminal code in the other Republic criminal codes.
 Soviet authorities have sometimes used criminal code provisions
 against "parasitism," "hooliganism," and illegal commerce or
 "speculation" to harass persons for political activity.
 Detention and Disappearance: According to the Soviet Code
 of Criminal Procedure, pre-trial detention can last as long as
 nine months, and prisoners are not entitled to consult with a
 
 
 891
 lawyer until after the conclusion of the pre-trial
 investigation. In 1981, there were no reported instances of
 pre-trial detention exceeding nine months, but in recent years
 such detention on occasion has exceeded one year.
 Political Prisoners: It is difficult to estimate the
 number of political prisoners in the USSR. Large areas of the
 country are closed to foreigners, and reports of trials in
 these and other remote regions may not become known to foreign
 observers. An unknown number of political prisoners have been
 convicted of "ordinary" crimes and therefore were incarcerated
 in camps for common criminals rather than in the special camps
 reserved for political prisoners. The available Soviet and
 Western data indicate that the number of political prisoners is
 about 10,000. The Moscow Helsinki Monitoring Group has
 reported the names of more than 700 political prisoners, but
 believes that there are many more.
 e. Denial of a fair, public trial
 Communist Party control of Soviet society extends to the
 legal and judicial system and has often been exercised to
 negate constitutional guarantees of the objectivity and
 independence of the judicial process in political cases. All
 lawyers belong to "colleges of-advocates" which are under the
 overall control of the USSR ministry of justice. Approximately
 70 percent of all lawyers are party members, other judicial
 personnel are subject to similar party and governmental
 constraints. Defendants in "political" cases can choose a
 lawyer only from among those given a special government
 clearance for "secret" matters. Even the most honest and
 vigorous defense, however, is of limited utility in a Soviet
 political trial, there is no known instance of an acquittal
 verdict in a political trial since the Bolshevik Revolution in
 1917. (There have, however, been numerous "rehabilitations"
 following release from prison).
 The Soviet government has often taken actions which tend to
 undermine even the appearance of a fair judicial process.
 Defendants in political trials are often subjected to adverse
 pre-trial publicity in the government-controlled press. In
 addition, Soviet authorities have employed a number of
 techniques to ensure that most political trials in practice are
 closed to the public, including close relatives of the
 defendant. The location and date of a trial often are
 announced on short notice and may be changed with little
 warning. Special passes often are required for entrance to the
 trial, and courtrooms frequently are packed with government
 supporters. Observers outside the courtroom sometimes are
 harassed or detained by the police.
 f. Invasion of the home
 Citizens of the USSR are guaranteed the inviolability of
 their homes under article 55 of the Soviet Constitution, and,
 in theory, no one may enter a home against the will of the
 resident "without legal grounds." In practice, this provision
 has little restraining effect on Soviet investigatory agencies,
 and illegal searches of residences, including those of
 diplomats, have been reported frequently.
 2. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 
 
 892
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion, and Assembly:
 The Soviet constitution of 1977 provides for most commonly
 accepted civil and political liberties, including, according to
 article 50, "Freedom of speech, press, assembly, meetings,
 street processions and demonstrations." However, article 39 of
 the Soviet constitution states that "enjoyment by citizens of
 their rights and freedoms must not be to the detriment of the
 interests of the society or the state." In practice, the
 regime has not hesitated to imprison persons for exercising
 basic human rights.
 All Soviet media are controlled by the party and the
 government. Publications, films, radio and television scripts
 are subject to censorship by the Main Administration for
 Safeguarding State Secrets in the Press (Glavlit). Soviet
 journalists are subject to the discipline of the Communist
 Party and subordinate to the directives of their editorial
 superiors, themselves trusted members of the party. Therefore,
 Soviet journalists are collaborators in, and executors of, the
 official policies of the Soviet government.
 Openly dissident views on important questions of policy do
 not appear in the Soviet media, and no criticism of the party,
 the government, and the leadership is permitted except to
 correct an administrative abuse, such as inefficient
 implementation of domestic policy which has already been
 decided by the leadership, or to.discredit an individual
 responsible for violating party norms. Open criticism of
 officials takes place only when decided upon by higher
 officials. Criticism of higher state officials is much more
 common than criticism of higher Party officials. Within the
 small political elite much wider-ranging policy debate and
 criticism is expressed by texts which, when carefully read,
 have a second meaning. This mode of policy debate appears
 intended to maintain, to the population at large, the
 appearance of unanimity within the political elite, and thus to
 prevent the diffusion of political participation beyond the
 elite. Such policy debate does not call into question the
 existing political and social system. A limited and
 intermittent opportunity for free expression, even to the point
 of attacks on the government and the system, exists through
 "samizdat," or the illegal circulation of writings in
 manuscript. Conditions confine this opportunity to a limited
 social stratum. The authors of literary and political samizdat
 materials have been subject to such penalties as loss of
 employment, internal exile, confinement in labor camps and
 prisons, and incarceration in mental hospitals.
 The Soviet government continues to maintain tight control
 over the work of foreign journalists and the circulation of
 foreign newspapers in the USSR. Overt censorship of wire
 transmissions of news stories out of the country is infrequent,
 but the authorities harass selected foreign journalists and, in
 some cases, either deny them visas or curtail already issued
 visas. The Soviets have taken some steps to improve the
 working conditions of foreign journalists, such as the issuance
 of multiple entry-exit visas, in connection with Soviet
 undertakings under the Helsinki Final Act.
 The Soviet authorities use their control of the mail and
 the telephone circuits to monitor and to restrict contact
 between Soviet dissidents and citizens of other countries. In
 addition, there is nothing to prevent Soviet authorities from
 using their absolute control of the means of communication to
 
 
 893
 monitor on a widespread basis contacts between Soviet
 citizens. This, and the existence of widespread informer
 networks often inhibit the ability of average Soviet citizens
 to engage in free and private communication with each other.
 The Soviet government jams Western radio broadcasts directed at
 the Soviet Union, contrary to understandings under the Helsinki
 Final Act. Beginning in December 1981, jamming stations
 located in the Soviet Union have also been used to jam Western
 radio broadcasts to Poland.
 Soviet authorities also attempt to repress cultural
 expression using many of the techniques mentioned above. The
 teaching of Jewish cultural traditions is actively discouraged;
 groups which promote the Ukrainian language are jailed;
 Lithuanians, Latvians, and Estonians are persecuted for seeking
 to preserve their national identities; and Muslims in Soviet
 Central Asia face systematic efforts to eradicate Islamic
 traditions and customs.
 Article 52 of the Soviet constitution guarantees the "right
 to profess or not to profess any religion and to conduct
 religious worship or atheistic propaganda." In practice,
 however, religious believers are subjected to many
 restrictions. The Russian Orthodox Church is believed to be
 heavily infiltrated and manipulated by the state security
 services. Orthodox priests have been jailed for failing to
 preach automatic adherence to government positions. Soviet law
 on religious associations requires groups of more than 20
 persons to register with the authorities and prohibits
 religious believers from engaging in charitable activity,
 conducting evangelical activity, and providing religious
 training to children. In some instances, the authorities have
 removed children from families which have permitted or have
 conducted such instruction. Unregistered believers, such as
 some Baptists, Jehovah's Witnesses, Seventh Day Adventists,
 Pentecostals, and others, also may be subject to a wide variety
 of repressive measures, including harassment at school or place
 of employment, denial of access to housing, dismissal from
 work, and imprisonment for violating Soviet law on religion.
 Muslim supporters of unregistered mullahs in Soviet Central
 Asia also face repression. Many Soviet believers, including
 such Pentecostals as the Vashchenko and Chmykhalov families
 still in refuge in the U.S. Embassy in Moscow, want to emigrate
 from the USSR to escape such harassment and to practice their
 religion freely.
 The official Soviet media feature large amounts of
 anti-religious propaganda, but materials actively arguing for a
 religious viewpoint are not allowed to appear. The Communist
 Party, defined in the Soviet Constitution as the "leading and
 guiding force in Soviet society," is, according to its rules,
 an atheistic organization. Membership in the party, considered
 incompatible with religious belief, is, in effect, a
 requirement for advancement to most senior positions in the
 country.
 The regime is especially sensitive to anything it considers
 to be religious manifestations of dissent, such as Roman
 Catholicism in Lithuania, Moldavia, and Ukraine, Islam in
 Central Asia, and Judaism. There have been numerous reports of
 discrimination against Jews by denial of access to higher
 education and the professions. Occasional attacks on Zionism
 in the media appear intended to arouse anti-Semitic feelings
 among the Soviet population at large. During 1981, authorities
 widened a campaign against Hebrew cultural seminars and
 
 
 894
 lanquage classes, prosecuting organizers under criminal
 articles carrying harsh penalties.
 Article 51 of the Soviet constitution grants Soviet
 citizens the right to associate in social organizations "in
 accordance with the aim of building Communism." In practice,
 social organizations in the USSR are subject to the control of
 the authorities, who suppress any which appear to challenge the
 interests of the regime. For example, most members of the
 "Helsinki Watch" committees, private Soviet groups which have
 attempted to monitor the performance of the Soviet government
 in fulfilling the provisions of the Helsinki Final Act, and of
 the "Psychiatric Watch" committee, which has attempted to
 expose Soviet abuse of psychiatry in connection with the
 confinement of dissidents in mental hospitals, have been tried
 and sentenced to imprisonment or to internal exile.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel,
 Emigration and Repatriation
 Freedom of movement is neither guaranteed by law nor
 permitted in practice. Although Soviet citizens are generally
 free to move about within the territory of the USSR, travel in
 certain areas, such as some frontier regions or areas of
 military significance, requires special permission. All Soviet
 adults are issued identity documents or internal passports
 which must be carried on one's person during travel in the USSR
 and used to register visits of more than three days with the
 local authorities. In practice, the vast majority of the
 country remains closed to foreigners.
 The right to choose one's place of residence, although
 formally guaranteed by law, in practice is subject to
 restrictions. All persons are required to register at their
 place of residence. The authorities limit the issuance of
 residence permits in some large cities, such as Moscow and
 Leningrad, where housing is at a premium. Until 1976, workers
 on state and collective farms did not receive internal
 passports and could not travel from their home areas without
 permission. Although these state and collective farm workers
 are now legally entitled to passports, actual implementation of
 this provision is uncertain. Former prisoners are prohibited
 from settling in certain areas. Certain national minorities
 such as the Crimean Tatars, Meskhi, and Volga Germans are
 prevented from returning to their traditional homes from which
 they were deported during World War I.
 The USSR has ratified the U.N. Charter and other
 international documents, such as the International Covenants on
 Civil and Political Rights and on Economic, Social, and
 Cultural Rights, in which the right to leave one's country and
 return thereto is enumerated, but in practice the regime also
 denies Soviet citizens this right. Reunification of divided
 families is the only officially recognized basis for emigration
 from the Soviet Union. Laws and regulations concerning travel
 and emigration are not publicly disseminated, except for those
 concerning passport fees.
 Emigration procedures are cumbersome and expensive, though
 costs have come down in recent years. The cost of a passport
 for emigration to a "capitalist" country is 200 rubles
 (approximately $284), compared to 400 rubles in 1976. Soviet
 citizens who want to emigrate to Israel, the majority of all
 would-be emigrants, must renounce their Soviet citizenship.
 This procedure costs 500 rubles (approximately $715), compared
 to 800 rubles in 1976.
 
 
 895
 Costs and cumbersome procedures aside, emigration from the
 Soviet Union is still difficult. It frequently involves a
 variety of administrative and extra-legal sanctions, including
 loss of employment, harassment, social ostracism, and long
 delays. Many Soviet Jews have waited for more than ten years
 for permission to emigrate.
 There was a continued sharp drop in the number of Jews
 allowed to emigrate in 1981, only 9,459 having left in that
 year, compared to 21,471 during 1980 and 51,331 in 1979. Many
 Soviet Jews attribute this decline to the deterioration of
 East-West relations in the past several years and to Soviet
 fears of a Jewish "brain-drain." Jewish sources estimate that
 there still are more than 200,000 Soviet Jews who possess the
 letters of invitation (vyzovs) from Israel required by Soviet
 authorities for applications to emigrate. The number of both
 ethnic Germans and of Armenians emigrating from the USSR also
 declined in 1981. Only 3,117 ethnic Germans and 1,826
 Armenians emigrated during the first nine months of 1981,
 compared to 5,097 and 4,334, respectively, during the same
 months of 1980.
 Currently, approximately 78 Soviet families, numbering some
 233 individuals, are on a United States Government represen-
 tation list of persons who actively seek to join close
 relatives in the United States and who have been refused exit
 permission at least once by the Soviet government.
 At least 14 U.S. citizens living in the Soviet Union have
 been denied permission to leave by the Soviet government,
 several for many decades. In addition, there are at least 11
 long-standing cases in which the Soviet Government has denied
 the Soviet citizen spouse of anAmerican citizen permission to
 emigrate.
 One of the few bright spots in the family reunification
 picture is the case of Liza Alekseyeva, the daughter-in-law of
 Dr. and Mrs. Andrei Sakharov. In December, Soviet authorities
 finally granted her permission to come to the United States to
 be reunited with her husband, Aleksey Semyonov. This
 permission was only granted, however, after a lengthy,
 life-threatening hunger strike by Dr. and Mrs. Sakharov, and
 after international criticism of Soviet intransigence had grown
 to enormous proportions.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 According to article 6 of the Soviet const'itution, the
 Communist Party is "the leading and guiding force of Soviet
 society and the nucleus of its political system, of all state
 organizations and public organizations." No other organized
 political party or group is tolerated. Strict discipline
 prevails within the Communist Party itself, and opposition
 groups within the party are prohibited. The limits of
 intra-party activity are defined by a strictly hierarchical
 structure. Lower-ranking party members havO no real ability to'
 influence or to criticize the decisions of party superiors,
 although participation in the political system is open to all
 citizens who accept the principles of the regime and the
 Communist Party. Discrimination on the basis of race, sex, or
 other grounds is prohibited by the Soviet Constitution.
 However, regime attempts to impose the Russian language on
 minorities have led to demonstrations in Georgia,
 dissatisfaction among Ukrainian intellectuals, and protests by
 other minority peoples. In recent years, there have been
 indications of heavy restrictions on the presence of members of
 
 
 896
 some ethnic groups, espec~ally Jews, but also Muslims, in
 various organizations, including universities, research
 institutes, the officer corps of thle armed forces, and ruling
 bodies of the state and party.
 Soviet trade unions are strictly subordinated to the
 Communist Party and act as agents of the government in
 implementing economic policy and ensuring labor discipline,
 rather than as collective bargaining agents for workers. The
 right to strike is not recognized in the Soviet constitution,
 and strikes are rare. Some brief work stoppages are rumored to
 have occurred in 1981, but they evidently were quickly and
 peacefully resolved. In 1981, in large part owing to
 developments in Poland, the Soviet media have continued to
 devote increased attention to the need for Soviet trade unions
 to play a more active role in satisfying workers' needs. The
 government has continued its policy of repressing any attempts
 to establish independent trade union organizations, and
 activists in past years have been forcibly expelled from the
 USSR, imprisoned, or confined in psychiatric hospitals.
 Non-dissident Soviet workers enjoy, and apparently appreciate,
 a large measure of job security.
 Under the law, women are equal to men in the USSR, and they
 participate in all areas of the country's social, political,
 and economic life. An extensive system of day-care service and
 maternity leave benefits, including, in some cases, as much as
 one year's leave from work, significantly enhance the ability
 of women to secure and to retain employment. However, men
 occupy the great majority of the leading positions in most
 professions, especially politics. Since the establishment of
 the Soviet Union, only one woman has served on the politburo.
 Overt economic discrimination against women does not exist, but
 many more women than men hold the less remunerative positions.
 Soviet authorities in recent years have attempted to repress
 feminist activities. In the non-European areas of the USSR,
 cultural, social, and religious traditions restricting women to
 more "traditional" roles are gradually losing their strength as
 more women, especially in urban areas, receive an education.
 3. Government Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations of Human
 Rights
 The Soviet government contends that all internationally
 recognized human rights are fully protected in the USSR and
 asserts that only "socialism" can truly guarantee human
 rights. The Soviet government rejects foreign criticism of its
 human rights record-as interference in its internal affairs,
 despite the fact that it is a signatory to numerous
 international documents recognizing that human rights are a
 valid subject of international concern. The Soviet media
 feature sharp criticism of supposed violations of human rights
 in the West, especially in the United States.
 The Soviet Union does not permit foreigners to investigate
 the status of human rights in the USSR. International human
 rights organizations such as Amnesty International frequently
 have addressed communications to the Soviet Government
 concerning human rights, but it evidently has refused to reply
 in a substantive manner. It also'has attempted to suppress the
 Moscow chapter of Amnesty International and has published
 attacks on the organization, alleging that it has worked with
 Western intelligence agencies against the Soviet Government.
 
 
 897
 The Soviet government has cooperated with the United States
 government in investigating alleged war crimes during World War
 II by persons who are citizens or residents of the United
 States. In connection with these investigations, the Soviet
 government has permitted U.S. government attorneys to interview
 witnesses in the USSR.
 When the United Nations Human Rights Commission prepares to
 consider allegations of human rights violations in the USSR,
 Soviet representatives generally attempt to bar discussion of
 the alleged violations on procedural grounds. If such
 discussion cannot be avoided, the Soviet representatives deny
 the substance of the allegations.
 Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania: The human rights situation
 in the Baltic republics is not addressed in detail in this
 report, since the United States does not recognize the illegal,
 violent incorporation of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania into
 the Soviet Union in 1940. The status of human rights in the
 three republics is essentially the same as the USSR. The
 Lithuanian Catholic church continues to be subjected to
 particularly heavy pressure. The continuing migration of
 ethnic Russians to the Baltic republics constitutes de facto
 Russification there. Many prominent Baltic activists are in
 prison.
 4. Economic and Social Circumstances
 The population as a whole is adequately fed, clothed,
 housed, educated, and cared for medically, although the quality
 of such services varies widely according to the citizen's
 status and location and often is criticized by Soviet citizens
 and the media. Also, economic freedom of choice continues to
 be substantially restricted, chronic shortages of basic goods
 -- wheat, dairy products, vegetables, fruit, clothing -- exist,
 and there is great disparity in regional distribution of
 foodstuffs and consumer goods.
 According to recent reports, rationing of the most basic
 essentials of life is more widespread than previously thought.
 Income and wealth do not necessarily determine a Soviet
 citizen's standard of living, since one's rank in the various
 elites such as the party, the military, the diplomatic corps,
 and the cultural and sports establishments significantly
 determines one's access to such benefits as foreign travel,
 auto transport, quality consumer goods, larger food selection
 and rations, special medical facilities, and p6id vacations in
 choice resorts. Allocation of privileges is one of the Soviet
 government's most effective means of social control.
 Free, universal health care is guaranteed, at least on
 paper, by the Soviet constitution. In addition, provision for
 the continuation of income during illness is quite liberal.
 Medical standards and the availability of personnel and
 facilities have improved in recent years to a level of about
 half that of the United States. As of 1977, there were 34.5
 physicians and 120.8 hospital beds per 10,000 persons. There
 is considerable disparity in the regional distribution of
 medical facilities, shortages of medicines and vaccines
 persist, medical equipment generally is not as good as in the
 West, and access to the better medicines and medical facilities
 is based on privilege.
 Soviet citizens generally enjoy a diet adequate in
 calories. For instance, the percentage of calorie supply
 
 
 898
 available for consumption as a percentage of caloric
 nutritional requirements in 1977 was 135 percent, quite a bit
 above the necessary minimum.
 In recent years, the negative trends in public health have
 intensified. No statistics on the infant mortality rate have
 been available since the early 1970's. Soviet unwillingness to
 reveal these statistics has led some Western researchers to
 conclude that the Soviet infant mortality rate has begun to
 climb alarmingly. These researchers view this development as
 one indicator, among many, of a general decline in Soviet
 health care standards. There is also strong evidence that the
 incidence of cardiovascular disease is growing, and that male
 longevity is decreasing.
 According to World Bank figures, average Soviet life
 expectancy at birth is now 73 years (many experts believe that
 the actual life expectancy figure is lower), while the overall
 growth of population is 0.9 percent per year. Approximately
 three-fourths of the 262 million people of the Soviet Union now
 come from three major Slavic nationalities (Russian, Ukrainian,
 Belorussian). However, this proportion will drop to two-thirds
 by the end of the century, since the Central Asian and
 Caucasian nationalities will continue to grow at a much faster
 rate. This in turn will have significant implications for the
 structure of the Soviet work force and army, which will, of
 necessity, have a much larger Central Asian component than in
 the past.
 Great improvements in the quality and availability of
 education in the Soviet Union_ have occurred in the past sixty
 years. Literacy among Soviet citizens is practically
 universal, and the young people of most nationalities, with a
 few notable exceptions, can read and write Russian as well.
 Education is free at all levels and is compulsory through the
 tenth year. In 1978, for example, 97 percent of all children
 of primary school age were students; only in certain areas of
 Central Asia and the Caucasus were some children unable to
 attend school. During the 1980-1981 apademic year, there were
 more than 43 million students in grades 1-10, divided nearly
 evenly between rural and urban locations, and about 9.8 million
 students in higher and specialized secondary educational
 institutions. All regular students admitted to institutions of
 higher learning receive stipends indexed to their academic
 achievement. Soviets have great respect for education, and
 competition for scarce seats in the universities and the better
 institutes is keen. Opportunities for education and
 professional advancement created by national development under
 the Soviet regime have led to greater mobility for a large part
 of the Soviet population.
 The 1979 Soviet GNP per capita was $4,110. In evaluating
 this figure, one should remember that the USSR in recent years
 has been spending from 11 - 14 percent of its GNP on defense,
 and that there is a great deal more waste and economic
 inefficiency in the Soviet Union than in Western countries.
 Both these factors operate to depress the spending power and
 standard of living of the average Soviet citizen. At the same
 time, however, relative to many Western countries, much more of
 the Soviet GNP is used to subsidize the basic necessities of
 life such as staple foodstuffs, housing, medical care,
 education, and public transport. In the final analysis, it
 would appear that the typical Soviet citizen has a standard of
 living well above that of many third-world countries, but still
 far below that of the developed states of Western Europe and
 North America.
 
 
 899
 U.S.UVLKSEAS -LUANS AND .KA-4 S- OjLI ;ATIONS AND LOAN AUlrURIZATIJNS
 IU.S.ISCAL YCARb - MILLIONS 01- OULLARS)
 COUNTRY: USSR
 179     1960    1961
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL..           0fU      0.0      0.0
 LOANS................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .. .. ........ . ....  0.0   0.0      (.0
 A.AI ........................ .0.0       0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............      0.0        0.0      0.0
 GRANTS............... .    0.0      0.0      6.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIT.)...         0.0       0.0      0.0
 8.FOO FUR PEAC ......          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS--** .......            0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS............. .0.0              0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL..........          0.0      0.0      0,0
 REPAY. IN $-LOANS ....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. LURR.....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I1-TOTAL    ......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.oEV & WFP.          0.0      0.0      0.0
 VUL.RELEIe AGENCY.....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHkR ECON. ASSIST...          0.j      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .............. .0.              0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.......'.    .... 0.0           0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORP!.S..            0.0     .0.0      0.0
 NARCOTI S                 0.0"     0.0      0.0
 OTHER............    ...  0.0      0.0      0.0
 i1.MIL. ASSIST.-IOfAL,,          0.0      C.0     00
 LOANS...............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............. 0.0             0.0      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS ......           0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.C-ERL)IT SALES-FMS....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.1NTL MIL.O.TRN(....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 O.TRAN-EXLESS STOCK .           0.0     0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 III,.OTAL ECON. E MIL...          0.0      0.0 .    0.0
 LOANS .................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ..........      ..  0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER US LOANS.......            .0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS ....           0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER..............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCb FROM INTIRNAT1UNAL AGENCILS
 1979     1980     1981     1946-81
 TOTAL ........     0.0       0.0      0.0      0.1
 IBRJ               0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 IFC                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDA                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 108                0.0       u.0      0.0      0.0
 ADB                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 Ar.O 8             0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNDP               0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER-UN           0.0       0.0      0.0      0.1
 EEC                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
