Russia
Mass protests following Russia’s December 2011 parliamentary elections
prompted promises of political reforms. However, after his return to the presidency,
Vladimir Putin oversaw the swift reversal of former President Dmitry
Medvedev’s few, timid advances on political freedoms and unleashed an
unprecedented crackdown against civic activism. New laws in 2012 restrict nongovernmental
organizations and freedoms of assembly and expression. New
local laws discriminate against lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT)
people. Abuses continue in the counterinsurgency campaign in the North
Caucasus.
Undermined Reforms
Russia’s international partners initially praised reforms to Russia’s electoral system
that took place early in 2012, when parliament adopted legislative amendments
that restored popular election of regional governors (since 2004, governors
had been appointed by the Kremlin). However, under these reforms, gubernatorial
candidates are required to secure support from local legislatures, which
the ruling party dominates.
Amendments also lowered the minimum number of members for political party
registration from 50,000 to 500 and lowered the threshold of votes a party
needs for parliamentary representation from 7 to 5 percent. However, the ban on
electoral blocs and the requirement that parties field candidates or risk losing
registration attenuated the reforms’ potential to strengthen political pluralism.
The reforms were adopted too late to apply to the December 4, 2011 parliamentary
vote, which saw the ruling party win 49.3 percent of the vote.
Freedom of Assembly
The September 2011 announcement by Medvedev and Putin that they would
essentially switch posts became a tipping point for people dissatisfied with a
decade of “soft” authoritarianism, bringing tens of thousands to the streets of Russia’s capital for unprecedented protests a day after the December parliamentary
vote.
Thousands protested alleged electoral fraud, and riot police attacked some protesters
and randomly detained about 300, some of who were sentenced to 15
days’ detention. Protests and detentions continued in following days in Moscow
and large Russian cities, but police subsequently ceased interfering with mass
rallies.
However, on May 6, the day before Putin’s inauguration, there were clashes in
Moscow between police and demonstrators. By May 8, police detained over
1,000 people, many for simply wearing the protest movement’s symbolic white
ribbons, and even raided several cafes favored by protesters, detaining patrons.
At this writing, 17 people awaited trial for alleged participation in mass disorders
and attacking police, punishable by up to 10 years in prison. Witnesses
and video recordings indicate that some people were detained when they
arrived at the demonstration before they could engage in any action, violent or
otherwise.
One month later, the Duma rushed through amendments that increase by 30-
fold fines for violating rules on holding public events, essentially making them
equivalent to fines for criminal offenses. The amendments also imposed new
restrictions, for example, allowing authorities to compile lists of permanent
public event-free locations.
Freedom of Association
Legislative amendments adopted in July require advocacy groups that accept
foreign funding to register and identify themselves publicly as “foreign agents,”
demonizing them in the public eye as foreign spies. The authorities may suspend
organizations that fail to register for up to six months, without a court
order. The law imposes additional reporting requirements and stiff civil and
criminal penalties.
Golos, the election monitoring organization, faced severe pressure, including a
fine for allegedly violating the election law, a smear campaign in pro-government
media, and hacker attacks. During the parliamentary vote, the authorities harassed Golos election monitors and at times denied them access to polling
stations.
In October, parliament adopted a broad, expanded legal definition of the crime
of treason that could lead to criminal action against those who conduct international
advocacy on human rights issues. Despite his promise to “look into the
law” and possibly narrow down the overly broad and vague definition of treason,
President Putin signed it in November.
Some civil society groups lost an important source of funding in October 2012
when the Russian government expelled the United States government assistance
organization, USAID, and banned its programming in Russia. The Russian
government increased funding to local NGOs, but groups working on sensitive
issues, such as human rights abuses related to counterinsurgency, right to free
and fair elections, and police torture, are unlikely to benefit from it.
Freedom of Expression
In February, the Federal Drug Control Service (FSKN) blocked the Andrey Rylkov
Foundation’s website for including information about methadone, which is classified
as an essential medicine by the World Health Organization for opiate
dependence treatment, but illegal in Russia. The website included international
research findings showing that methadone treatment reduces HIV risk among
heroin and other opiate users and helps them stay on AIDS and TB treatments.
In July, the Duma adopted amendments recriminalizing certain kinds of libel
seven months after it had been decriminalized. The new law provides for harsh
financial penalties instead of prison terms. A special provision “on libel against
judges, jurors, prosecutors, and law enforcement officials” could restrict legitimate
criticism of public officials.
A July law requires internet providers to block web content that a court deems to
be “extremist” or that competent federal agencies deem harmful to children. In
practice, this forces internet-hosting services to block offending websites upon
authorities’ instructions.
In August, three young women from the feminist punk band Pussy Riot were
sentenced to two years’ imprisonment for a forty40-second political stunt in a
Moscow cathedral that criticized Putin and the Russian Orthodox Church’s close
relationship with the Kremlin. The court supported the prosecutor’s view that
the women were motivated by hatred for Christian Orthodox believers. The
authorities could have brought misdemeanor charges, punishable by a fine,
against the women for their disruptive behavior under the code of administrative
offenses but instead pursued criminal charges. In October, one of the
women was given a suspended sentence on appeal and was released from
prison.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
By the end of 2012, legislation banning “homosexual propaganda” was in force
in nine Russian provinces. The “propaganda” bans could be applied for such
things as displaying a rainbow flag or a gay-friendly logo. In May, prominent
Russian LGBT rights activist Nikolai Alekseev became the first person to be fined
under the new St. Petersburg law after he picketed city hall with a poster declaring,
“Homosexuality is not a perversion.”
In 2010, the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) had firmly rejected the
Russian government’s argument that there is no general consensus on issues
relating to the treatment of “sexual minorities.” In spite of the court’s ruling,
Moscow city authorities in both 2011 and 2012 banned the Gay Pride event.
Harassment of Kremlin Critics and Human Rights Defenders
In the lead-up to Putin’s inauguration, authorities in some cities repeatedly tried
to intimidate political and civic activists, and interfered with news outlets critical
of the government through arbitrary lawsuits and detentions, threats by
state officials, beatings, and other forms of harassment. State-controlled media
ran articles seeking to discredit the protest movement and government critics.
Police also threatened several activists’ families.
In June 2012, according to the independent print outlet Novaya Gazeta, the head
of Russia’s Investigation Committee, Alexander Bastrykin, abducted Sergei Sokolov, deputy chief editor of the newspaper, took him to a forest in the outskirts
of Moscow and threatened his life. Bastrykin was not dismissed.
In April, two men attacked Elena Milashina, a Novaya Gazeta journalist, inflicting
multiple bruises and kicking out a tooth. Investigators termed the attack a
common mugging and arrested and charged two people who Milashina said did
not resemble the attackers.
In October, Leonid Razvozzhaev, a political activist under investigation on suspicion
of organizing riots during the May 6 demonstration in Moscow, was
allegedly kidnapped in Kiev, Ukraine. He had stepped out of the office of the
local partner organization of the United Nations High Commissioner on
Refugees (UNHCR) during a break in his asylum interview, when he disappeared.
Several days later he reappeared in custody in Russia. According to
Razvozzhaev, after the kidnapping he was forced to sign a confession under
duress while in incommunicado detention. The UNHCR expressed concern over
the situation and called for an investigation. At this writing, Ravozzhaev was in
custody awaiting trial in Moscow.
Human rights defenders working in the North Caucasus remained especially at
risk, and impunity for past attacks continues.
The investigation into the 2009 murder of leading Chechen rights activist
Natalia Estemirova remains inadequate with no progress made in 2012 in bringing
the perpetrators to justice. At this writing, investigators had also yet to hold
accountable the perpetrators of the December 2011 murder of Gadzhimurad
Kamalov. Kamalov was the founder and publisher of Chernovik, Dagestan’s
independent weekly known for its reporting on corruption and human rights
abuses.
In January 2012, Umar Saidmagomedov, a local lawyer who frequently defended
individuals arrested on insurgency-related charges and worked closely with
local human rights activists, died from gunshot wounds in the Dagestani capital,
Makhachkala, together with local resident Rasul Kurbanov. According to official
reports, Kurbanov opened fire on police officials, who responded, killing
both men. Saidmagomedov’s colleagues, however, argued that the circumstances of the killing were different and that law enforcement officials killed the
lawyer in retaliation for his work. Police did not examine this allegation.
The Joint Mobile Group of Russian Human Rights Organizations in Chechnya,
which investigates human rights violations by law enforcement officials in the
region, faced severe harassment. On January 21, police in Nizhny Novgorod
detained one of the group’s leading members, Anton Ryzhov, interrogated him
about the organization’s work, and confiscated his work laptop and memory
sticks for eight months.
In June, Chechen leader Ramzan Kadyrov threatened three Mobile Group lawyers
at a televised meeting they were forced to attend, sending a clear warning to
victims to avoid the organization. In July, federal investigators interrogated
Mobile Group head Igor Kalyapin as part of a criminal inquiry regarding alleged
disclosure of secret information regarding a torture case. This inquiry, which
was still ongoing at this writing, represented the authorities’ third attempt in
two years to open criminal proceedings against Kalyapin.
In the course of 2012, three Chechen activists reported to Human Rights Watch
that they received death threats. One of them chose to leave Chechnya, fearing
for the well-being of family members.
In October, a local group well known for publishing periodic online bulletins on
the situation in Chechnya stopped working. According to the group’s leadership,
their decision resulted from pressure by the authorities.
In May, a police official in Kabardino-Balkaria explicitly threatened Rustam
Matsev, a lawyer with the Memorial Human Rights Center, insinuated that
Matsev supported Islamic insurgents, and warned he could be “eliminated.”
According to Matsev, his complaints against the official to competent authorities
yielded no result.
North Caucasus
The Islamist insurgency remained active, especially in Dagestan. According to
official data, in the first six months of 2012, insurgents perpetrated 116 “terrorist
crimes” in Dagestan, killing 67 people, including seven civilians. In April, in an unprecedented move, the state-supported Sufi community and adherents of
Salafism—a strand of Sunni Islam that promotes a literalist interpretation of the
Koran—signed a resolution for cooperation. The authorities tend to view adherents
of Salafism as supporting the Islamist insurgency. In August, a suicide
bomber killed the region’s leading Sufi sheikh who had actively promoted negotiations
for the April resolution.
Adherents of Salafism are especially vulnerable to persecution and counterinsurgency-
related abuses, such as enforced disappearances, torture, and extrajudicial
executions. According to Memorial, six local residents were “disappeared”
following abduction-style detentions between January and August
2012. Most were adherents of Salafism.
In Ingushetia, four local residents were abducted, two of whom “disappeared”
between January and August, according to Memorial.
In Chechnya, law enforcement and security agencies under Ramzan Kadyrov’s
de facto control continued collective punishment against relatives and suspected
supporters of alleged insurgents. Victims increasingly refuse to speak about
violations due to fear of official retribution, meaning that abuses remain largely
under-reported
Kadyrov’s “virtue” campaign for women in Chechnya continued in 2012, with
pressure on women to wear headscarves in all public places. Women must wear
headscarves in most public buildings. According to local women’s activists,
“honor” killings have become more frequent in Chechnya.
Cooperation with the European Court of Human Rights
At this writing, the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) had issued more
than 210 judgments holding Russia responsible for grave human rights violations
in Chechnya. While Russia continues to pay the required monetary compensation
to victims, it fails to meaningfully implement the core of the judgments
by not conducting effective investigations, failing to hold perpetrators
accountable, and using statutes of limitation and amnesties acts to avoid holding
perpetrators to account.
Palliative Care
Restrictive government policies and limited availability of pain treatment continued
in 2012 to be a major obstacle to the delivery of palliative care. Each year,
tens of thousands of dying cancer patients (up to 80 percent) are denied their
right to adequate relief. Such inexpensive drugs as oral immediate-release morphine
are largely unavailable through the public healthcare system.
In 2012, the Russian Ministry of Health and Social Development acknowledged
the need to significantly increase the number of hospices. But drug regulations
have not been revised, and training of healthcare workers on pain management
still does not meet World Health Organization (WHO) standards.
Disability Rights
In May, Russia ratified the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities (CRPD). However, the 13 million people with disabilities in Russia
continue to face a range of barriers that limit their participation in society,
including inaccessible public buildings and transportation for people with physical
disabilities and confinement of people with mental disabilities to institutions
for long periods of time against their will and without appropriate legal
safeguards for their rights.
Abuses Linked to Preparations for the 2014 Olympic Games
Authorities expropriated property from hundreds of Sochi families for building
venues for the 2014 Winter Olympics. Most homeowners received compensation,
but in many cases amounts were unfair and the process was opaque. In
September, authorities forcibly evicted a family of six without any compensation.
Some migrant workers building sports venues and other infrastructure for the
Olympics reported that employers were failing to provide contracts or promised
wages and demanded excessively long working hours.
Some journalists reporting on Olympics-related concerns faced censorship and
threats of dismissal. Activists faced harassment and arrest. For example, police in early fall detained three activists who peacefully voiced concerns about a proposed
thermal power plant. Administrative charges against two of them were
later dropped.
Key International Actors
Many actors were forthright in their criticism of the restrictive legislation
described above. Concerns centered on the shrinking space for vibrant civil
society. For example, the re-criminalization of libel was flagged as a “step backwards”
by the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) and
the Council of Europe’s Parliamentary Assembly (PACE). The UN commissioner
for human rights expressed “concern” that the law would “stifle all criticism of
government authorities.”
Similarly, the “foreign agents” law was adopted despite public criticism by key
international actors, including the UN, the US, and the European Union; the
Council of Europe’s (CoE) secretary general said the law did “not belong to a
democratic society.”
Most of these governments and institutions publicly voiced concern about the
Pussy Riot trial, legislative amendments restricting public assemblies, the new
treason law, and homophobic legislation.
A PACE resolution adopted in October welcomed electoral reforms while cautioning
that other developments “must call the authorities’ real intentions into
question.”
The International Olympic Committee (IOC) intervened with the Russian authorities
on cases involving human rights abuses occurring in the run-up the 2014
Winter Olympics. However, the IOC has not insisted on comprehensive reforms
to prevent and remedy violations.
In October, the European Parliament called for a visa ban and asset freeze
against Russian officials allegedly responsible for the death in custody of
whistleblower tax lawyer Sergei Magnitsky and recommended that the European
Council draw up a list of implicated Russian officials. At this writing, a vote was
pending on similar legislation in the US Congress, named for Magnitsky, which would apply to government officials around the world involved in the torture or
killing of whistleblowers. In response, Russia banned entry for US officials
allegedly involved in abuses in counterterrorism operations in Afghanistan.
In November, the UN Committee Against Torture (CAT) reviewed Russia’s periodic
report and noted persistent problems with torture and inhuman and degrading
treatment by law enforcement officials.