USSR
The country report on the Soviet Union continues to serve as a model for human rights reporting in its scope, thoroughness, attention to individual cases and coverage of new developments. Although the United States made improvement in Soviet-American relations a priority in 1987 and signed a major nuclear disarmament agreement, human rights repKjrting has not been affected. The report is balanced, careful to give credit where credit is due, yet attentive to actual practices rather than promised performance. Thus, while Soviet government spokespersons in 1987 periodically announced such changes as a softening of the criminal code, the abolition of the system of internal exile, and an amendment of the regulations governing psychiatric confinement, the report treats these announcements cautiously pending implementation. Regrettably, the need for this caution became apparent at year's end when, as the report notes, a hardening of official attitudes placed a damper over stated plans for liberalization.
The report covers most of the positive human rights developments in 1987: the release of political prisoners and the virtual moratorium on poUtical arrests and trials in Moscow and Leningrad; the sharp increase in the number of Jews, Germans and Armenians permitted to emigrate; the proUferation of independent groups and pubUcations; the reopening of telephone communication between Soviet human rights monitors and Western coUeagues; the lessening of censorship in the Soviet press and the emergence of investigative journaUsm; the relaxation of restrictions on travel and emigration abroad for ordinary Soviet citizens, and the granting of permission to Soviet emigres to travel to the USSR as tourists or to visit family; the increased freedom for cultural expression; the publication of long-banned works; and the revelation of long-hidden historical truths. At the same time, the report is justifiably tempered by the negative developments and the persistence of repression: the continued use of house arrest and short-term detentions to deter dissenters,
165
Critique
particularly in the non-Russian republics; the bureaucratic obstruction of travel and emigration despite new regulations; the continued confinement of political offenders in labor camps and prisons, where conditions have worsened; the deaths of two political prisoners in Soviet custody; the violent suppression of religious communities that wsh to practice their faith freely; the progressive crackdowns on large demonstrations throughout the year; and the continued abuse of psychiatry.
With such great changes under way, an overwhelming amount of information is now available from official and unofficial sources. Monitoring developments has become a Herculean task for all Soviet watchers. Generally, the State Department and the U.S. Embassy in Moscow have proven themselves adequate to the job. In the past, we had urged that the report provide more exact statistics on the nimiber of political prisoners, the level of emigration, and the extent of prosecution after nationalist unrest. These have now been supplied. In addition, the Soviet press has now become an important source for information on psychiatric abuse, police brutality and other human rights problems. The State Department has made a commendable effort to monitor both central and hard-to-obtain provincial Soviet newspapers, and the report contains frequent references to important articles in each.
It is the purpose of this critique to point out areas in which the report might be strengthened. But the following suggestions should be viewed in the context of a report which, on the whole, does an exemplary job of human rights reporting.
The report notes that the promised liberalization under Secretary-
General Mikhail S. Gorbachev may amount to nothing if the political climate
chills or if Gorbachev loses power:
Reforms are taking place at the direction of the party and are primarily the product of political decisions, not the result of legal reform. The improvement in Soviet human rights performance which took place in 1987 have yet to be reinforced by reform laws....
The report also condemns, as it should, the new emigration law for making immediate family reunification the only legal basis for emigration, thus codifying the Soviet's refusal to recognize the right to leave and return to one's
166
USSR
country. In doing so, however, the report faik to note that the very fact of enacting public laws to replace secret regulations is an important and positive step towards establishing the rule of law, although in this case the provisions of the law fall far short of expectations.
From one perspective, which the report adopts, the new emigration law puts fresh obstacles in the path of prospective emigrants. From another perspective, however, it enables ordinary citizens to lay claim to written, publicized instructions on travel, with the hope of avoiding the arbitrariness of the past. The rate of applications for individual travel from the Soviet Union to the United States increased substantially, which shows that the new regulations are in fact expanding ordinary citizens' knowledge of and willingness to invoke their legal entitlements. This positive aspect of the codification process should have been noted along with the negative aspect cited.
The State Department seems to be of two minds in its treatment of the emerging independent groups, numbering 30,000 by official reports but acknowledged to be even more numerous by Soviet sociologists. The introduction to the report downplays the development. It recognizes that the handling of dissent has changed in the last year and that the boxmdaries of the permissible have been extended, including that "a small but apparently growing number of Soviet citizens have begun to organize unofficial groups and issue unofficial publications that provide a forimi for public discussion. But it makes the pessimistic observation that "dissident sources described the changes as primarily in the sphere of what it was possible to say and much less in what it was possible to do." According to the introduction: "Fear of [the] possibilities [of persecution] restrains the vast majority of people in the Soviet Union from attempting to exercise the basic rights of freedom of speech, assembly, or religion,"
This generally negative assessment of the prospect for independent organization contrasts with the more favorable account given later in the report in the section on freedom of assembly, where the report notes:
public associations are organized by the authorities or are subject to their strict control, and the Government suppresses attempts to function independently of its supervision. Nevertheless, current conditions have fostered the growth of a.
167
Critique
large number of unofficial or informal organizations that
provide a forum for discussion....[emphasis added]
In the same section, the report concludes: "The proliferation of these groups, with the opportunity they provide for public discussion, is one of the most significant developments in the human rights situation in the USSR." We fully concur with this assessment; the fact that efforts to build civil society are now so widespread indicates that they must have existed to some extent even during the Brezhnev years of "stagnation" and will likely survive even if in the future there are political reversals at the top. The introduction to the report should have taken into account that more balanced presentation in the body of the report.
At the beginning of the section on arbitrary interference with privacy, the report states that authorities "often selectively restrict contact between citizens and foreigners, often intercepting mail or cutting off telephone conversations." Before 1985, it was the case that activists' mail was often confiscated and telephone conversations, particularly with fore^ers, were frequently cut ofï. In fact, by 1985, most activists who had somehow managed to escape arrest had their telephone service discontinued. But as the report states later in the same section, "[i]t has now become common practice for Soviet human rights activists to telephone Western human rights organizations" — presumably the type of conversation most likely to be cut off. Although, as the report mentions, foreign supporters failed to get through to four women refuseniks in June 1987 during a planned commemoration of International Children's Day, foreign supporters in Seattle and elsewhere were able to reach the organizers of the independent group Press Club Glasnost on December 10,1987, Human Rights Day, while they were conducting human rights workshops. Several activists have had their telephones disconnected, but most continue to have service, although their conversations are monitored.
In the section on the Soviet government's attitude towards investigation of human rights violations, the report mentions the international seminar of the Press Club Glasnost held in December 1987. The event is described in a negative light as an example of government repressiveness: some participants from other republics or from abroad were prevented from travelling to Moscow, and officials deliberately complicated the logistics of renting a hall. While these
168
USSR
official obstructions were mounted, the same event should also have been cited as an example of increased government tolerance, since, far from breaking up the meeting, the authorities acquiesced to an unprecedented gathering of 400 people from many Soviet cities, many of whom had never attended such an independent public forum and expressed their thoughts openly.
The report's usual attention to fresh information and changmg trends at times gives way to boiler-plate paragraphs drawn from past reports, even when there is but a single example in 1987 to back up the generalization, or none at all. In a discussion of political provisions of the criminal code, for example, the report states:
[T]he authorities continue to use criminal code provisions against "parasitism," "hooliganism" and "illegal commerce" or "speculation" to harass persons for political activity. Dissidents are sometimes fired from their jobs, then threatened with arrest or even in some cases arrested for "parasitism" because they have no jobs. The authorities also reportedly fabricate charges for criminal offenses, such as the possession of drugs or weapons, or even more extreme crimes, such as rape.
This statement had generally been true before Gorbachev came to power in 1985. Several Jewish activists were tried for drug possession and at least one Ukrainian Helsinki member was sentenced on tnunped-up charges of rape. But to our knowledge there were no dissidents arrested for parasitism in 1987, nor were there any other cases of serious trumped-up criminal charges like rape, or weapons or drug possession. A few activists may have been threatened with arrest for parasitism, but no measures were taken against them. A peace activist imprisoned on phony alimony charges was released after six months. Indeed, the only case that the report cites to back up its statement is that of Hare Krishna Valentin Yaroshchuk, who had been charged with resisting the militia, an offense often used against street demonstrators even when they do not resist. Yaroshchuk was placed in psychiatric detention, without a trial, in 1985, and was free by 1987. Although the practice of short-term administrative jailings of 10 or 15 days continues as a method of harassment, the use of trumped-up criminal charges ap{>ears to have been discontinued at this time.
169
Critique
The report at times suffers from a partial vision of Soviet society based on its often unilateral reliance on the segment of society that the State Department identifies as its "dissident sources." Particularly since the struggle to build a civil society is placing an ever-increasing role in the ability of Soviet citizens to exercise basic human rights, it is important that human rights reporting follow the progress of all groups, including those of varjing shades on the political spectrum and those of varying degrees of independence from official structures. The repression of the outer limits of dissent is informative about the real limits of glasnost, but it cannot be taken as a complete measure in itself of the human rights environment.
Although the report does not identify the "dissident sources," it makes clear by the information it provides that it is referring to a certain spectrum of moderate to radical human rights activists and other dissidents. These groups, such as the Moscow Himian Rights Society, have traditionally captured press and State Department interest more than others. The report, however, neglects to cover what could be called "the leftist opposition," which is made up of activists who were not associated with the human rights movement of the 1960s and 1970s or vwth some veteran political "dissidents" who now tend to make up the rightist opposition. (The terms "right" and "left" can be misleading in the Soviet context because at times they mean "radical" and "conservative" with respect to the established government.) The leftist opposition includes groups like the Federation of Socialist Clubs, led by Boris Kagarlitsky, a 29-year-old sociologist who was imprisoned for some months under Brezhnev but was released after pressure from European Communist parties and his agreement to cooperate with the authorities. It also includes the Circle of Social Initiative, coordinated by Gleb Pavlovsky, also a former political prisoner. These activists have successfully staged large public congresses of independent clubs (notably in August 1987 and January 1988), but have faced difficulties with the authorities and attacks in the press, and their future is uncertam.
The report fails adequately to address certain expanded freedoms that have occurred within the officially approved realm. The pressure of glasnost has forced some traditional government-front groups, such as the Soviet Peace Committee, to form spin-offs more appealing to youths and to hold some open
170
USSR
public discussions. Some officially approved publications at the cutting edge of glasnost, such as Ogonyok, have also held lively, open forums. These developments, while clearly under the control of the Party, should also have been mentioned in the report, because the opportunities that they provide for greater freedom of expression and activism within approved settings tend to involve greater numbers of people than those provided by more radical dissident groups, which many yoimg people still avoid either because they view them as marginal or because they fear arrest.
The report gives extensive coverage to the issue of political prisoners, but in places the information is garbled. Although the munber of political prisoners released in 1987 was greater than in any period since the 1950s, the contmued detention of more than 300 known political prisoners and the mistreatment of ex-prisoners persists as a very serious hiunan rights problem. The report correctly states that "in 1987 the Soviets released over 300 political prisoners." But it mistakenly claims that "a number of them... had already completed their terms." This is not true. Approximately 255 persons were released from prison, labor camp or exile, before the end of their sentences. Another 70 were released from psychiatric hospitals, where they had been confined without a definite term. In addition to these 325, there were approximately 200 people who were released after they had reached the end of their terms.
The report provides a detailed account of political prisoners in Perm Labor Camp who have been sentenced to special-regimen incarceration (with the harshest conditions) for "anti-Soviet activity" under Article 70 of the Penal Code. The authorities view these individuals as "recidivists" and have stubbornly failed to release them. The prisoners have been transferred to Perm 35, a camp where strict-regimen (one degree less severe) prisoners are usually kept (not to "Special Regimen Camp 35," as the report mistakenly calls it), but the prisoners have remained under special regimen even in the new facility, and those who were in punishment cells or solitary confinement remain in that status in Perm 35.
Those on special regimen in Perm Labor Camp 36-1 have suffered some of the worst conditions of detention in the Soviet Union, but the report, in saying that conditions there are "the most brutal," is somewhat misleading.
171
Critique
There are accounts of equally severe conditions, including beatings and starvation rations, at other facilities, such as Chistopol Prison, and certain criminal camps, such as Zhanatas. The report points out that "many political prisoners" died in Perm 36-1, and mentions the four Helsinki monitors who died in this facility after prolonged mistreatment. Ten prisoners (both political and common criminal) died between 1984 and 1986. The victims were under both strict and special regimen in various camps of the Perm complex.
Regrettably, the report does not cover other forms of mistreatment of inmates that continued throughout 1987, including prolonged incarceration in punishment and isolation cells, the frequent cancellation of family visits and mail privileges, and the beatings of political prisoners by wardens or fellow common-criminal inmates. These factors, far more than the regjmen or locality, contribute to the severity of the conditions of detention. Indeed, there is evidence that the use of certain of these punishments increased in 1987 as frustrated labor-camp directors attempted to gain cooperation from the political prisoners who had the misfortune of remaining in custody after others had been released. In many instances, the authorities also transferred political prisoners to KGB prisons or other transit facilities to force confessions, recantations, or agreements to refrain from future activism. The Soviet authorities deceptively claimed that the political prisoners who were released had themselves asked for clemency, when in fact, many had reluctantly signed "pardon requests" that had been forced upon them as a price for gaining their freedom. Others refused to sign anything and remained imprisoned. Some recently released political prisoners now in the West have described the torment of the punishment cells, where prisoners are fed every other day on meager diets, and are subjected to prolonged periods of cold, beatings, and deprivation of family visits and reading and writing materials.
The report notes correctly that there have been no reports of disappearances in recent years. Rather than employing this explosive term, it carefully describes how the official Soviet press began to criticize the practice of not notifying next of kin when psychiatric detentions are made, which had the effect of forcing concerned relatives to initiate their own inquiries. In this separate context, however, the report should have mentioned that in 1987 a number of
172
USSR
political prisoners who supposedly had been transferred from labor camps to exile or from special psychiatric hospitals to ordinary psychiatric hospitals could not be located for long periods by family members or friends. For example, Ukrainian Helsinki Group member Levko Lukyanenko did not turn up at the exile address supplied by officials; his whereabouts were discovered only when he made contact from exile with relatives.
Ever since Alexander Solzhenitsyn's The Gulag Archipelago, a subject of intense scrutiny by the media and the general public has been the number of political prisoners in the Soviet Union. This cannot be determined reliably because the government does not release statistics and does not permit independent inspection of camps and other detention facilities. In addition, relatives sometimes are afraid to report political arrests to human rights workers or to foreigners, and the vastness of the USSR makes gathering information difficult.
We are pleased to see that the report corrects a tendency in past years on the part of many in the West to make estimates about the numbers of political prisoners without real substantiation. The number cited in the past was 10,000. This year, the report correctly cites the most reliable list, compiled by former political prisoner and Soviet emigre Dr. Kronid Lubarsky, which included about 400 known cases at the time of the report's deadline. (It has declined to about 385 persons.) The report then correctly qualifies this by stating that the "number of political prisoners is much higher, however, although their identities are not known," reflecting the fact that Soviet human rights monitors have estimated the actual number of political prisoners at one or two thousand more than the known number. For example, many of the approximately 500 political detainees released in 1987 provided well-documented repKDrts of some 75 political prisoners left behind in such facilities who previously had not been known in the West, most of whom had been tried under political, not criminal, articles.
Unfortunately, the report's caution is undercut by a later statement that misleadingly implies that a much larger number of political prisoners may exist. The report asserts:
prominent political and religious figures are segregated and kept in special labor camps... but many lesser known activists are tried on non-political criminal charges (e.g., speculation,
173
Critique
parasitism, hooliganism, resisting arrest) and are treated as ordinary criminals, and therefore might not be included in statistics on political convictions. To the contrary, human rights monitors do include lesser known cases in their lists; indeed, most of the cases are of lesser known prisoners. A large nimiber of people in the USSR are tried for such non-political criminal charges as hooliganism or resisting arrest; occasionally these charges are levied against dissidents. When it can be determined that those charged are in fact imprisoned for their exercbe of internationally recognized human rights, they are included in lists.
In addition, by referring to "activists [who] are tried on non-political criminal charges" such as speculation, hooliganism and resisting arrest, the report blurs the distinction between two categories of victims: political prisoners, who might be confined in political or criminal labor camps, and common criminals, who have suffered unnecessarily harsh punishment for what are viewed as minor offenses in the West (hooliganism, speculation, illegal enterprise). The failure to make this distinction reflects the report's inadequate treatment of important aspects of the lack of due process, the mistreatment of criminals, and other defects of the Soviet criminal justice system, even though the Soviet press has begun to acknowledge these problems. For example, the report describes Party control over political trials but neglects to mention that criminal trials are also subject to arbitrary or unjust influence from the Party and the police.
The report also mistakenly assumes that prisoners who are tried for political crimes (e.g. Art. 70,190-1) are kept segregated. While a small number of prominent religious or political figures are held in what are called the "political" facilities (Perm and MordoNia labor camps and Chistopol Prison), others — both prominent and lesser known — are kept in "criminal" camps and psychiatric hospitals throughout the Soviet Union, and are exiled throughout Siberia and other remote areas.
The report errs in stating that press attacks on persons who seek to emigrate or agitate for human rights continued at a "less frequent [level] in 1987 than in the past." In fact, there were far more press attacks in 1987 on refuseniks
174
USSR
and human rights activists, and the attacks were far more vicious than in previous years. The introduction only alludes to this by noting that, rather than subject dissidents to trial, Soviet officials have "used other means of intimidation." Savage and libelous articles in the press have been the most handy method, supplemented by beatings and surveillance. Officials have reluctantly tolerated the growth of independent or informal clubs and groups, some openly political in nature. But they have resorted to polemics and attacks in the press to counteract the influence of these groups on public opinion. Because activism increased in 1987, press attacks have also risen. They are directed not just at people who are about to be arrested or who have already been arrested, as was the case in the past, but are used to defame people who remain free but whose independent activities are perceived as threatening to the state.
In several places, important subjects have been treated superficially and deserve more explicit coverage. The report devotes a few vague sentences to restraints on research, stating flatly that "academic freedom in the Western sense does not exist," but it fails to substantiate this statement by noting, for example, the continued use of a system of closed stacks [spetskhran] in research institutes and public libraries to restrict and monitor scholars' activities. In the same manner, the report mentions that while freedom of expression expanded in 1987, the "range of political sensitivities remains broad." The taboo areas that remain are not specified, although some items could be cited: the military budget; the number of troops in Afghanistan; the number of Soviet casualties there; the extent of political prisoner releases; and the number who remain in detention.
The report correctly acknowledges that the most significant development in the area of freedom of expression has been the "proliferation of unofficial publications." But it mistakenly states that "unlike past samizdat journals, current journals are written and edited by persons who do not hide their identities." In fact, in the past, many samizdat editors did publicize their names on their journals, and that is precisely why they were arrested and tried. The distinction between past and present samizdat is a more subtle one: pre-glasnost publishers used more caution and secrecy during the preparation and dissemination of their works to prevent confiscation. Glasnost-era publishers
175
Critique
speak about their work openly over the phone and in their apartments, and issue publications at press conferences.
The report repeatedly mentions an unpublished directive of August 1985 designed to prevent persons vsith records of incarceration from resettling in large cities. The directive was often used against former political prisoners. But despite threats of expulsion from Moscow soon after he returned early in 1987, Alexander Ogorodnikov, the activist mentioned in the report, remained in residence in Moscow throughout 1987. Another prominent activist not mentioned, biolo^t Sergei Kovalyov, who had earlier been shown the directive, was able to regain a one-year residence permit in Moscow. Indeed, many political prisoners who originally had residence permits in Moscow have now regained them. But a few continue to be barred from residing in the capital, including Alexander Podrabinek, an expert on psychiirtric abuse, and Vasily and Galina Barats, Pentecostals who were brutally beaten and sent to a remote area without a trial.
A subject best left out of the report imless something more conclusive can be said is the Soviet government's cooperation with the United States on investigatili allegations that war crimes were committed by persons who are now U.S. citizens or residents. Ukrainian and Baltic groups, among others, have contended that the Soviet government makes false allegations of Nazi collaboration against former Soviet citizens in order to have a convenient method to persecute them for anti-Soviet activity. The report notes lamely that there have been "complaints...of KGB interference in the depositions, and possible disinformation in the lists." If possible, the State Department should make a more concrete statement about the reliability of Soviet information, the sources of complaints, and the evidence for disinformation.
The report carries separate sections on the three Baltic nations, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, in keeping with a long-standing U.S. policy not to recognize the forcible Soviet annexation and occupation of these countries. The report correctly identifies the major problem for these nations as the Rus-sianization of the population, achieved by Moscow's heavy-handed central organization of industry, manufacturing and construction in the area; the influx of Russian and other Slavic workers, who dilute the already diminishing native
176
USSR
populations; and the removal of products to other republics at the expense of the Baltic nations, which once had significantly higher standards of living.
Waves of mass protest occurred regularly in the Baltic nations during 1987, and was at first largely tolerated by authorities. But the report correctly notes that organizers often suffered reprisals after the demonstrations, and the police and KGB began to prevent demonstrations by displays of force before scheduled marches and harassment of potential demonstrators at their homes and workplaces.
177
Critique
