Russia
In 2004 Russia endured the worst terrorist attack in its modern history.
The year also saw further erosion of fundamental rights that underpin
the country’s fledgling democracy. Now entering its sixth year, the
bloody war in Chechnya continues unabated with both sides committing
numerous and unpunished human rights abuses. The government
once again failed to take on Russia’s numerous entrenched human rights
problems, including widespread police torture and violent hazing in the
armed forces.
Political Rights and Freedoms
Throughout his first term in office, Russian President Vladimir Putin
kept Russia experts guessing about the role of democracy and human
rights in his vision for Russia’s political development. While speaking of
a commitment to democracy, he presided over slow but deliberate
moves to marginalize opposition forces. While Putin expressed support
for the free press, his administration gradually established control over
television channels and other key news sources. By his reelection in
2004, both the political opposition and independent television had been
obliterated. Yet Putin continues to present himself as a believer in
democracy and human rights—and most of the international community
continues to believe him.
In September 2004, a few days after the worst terrorist attack in Russia’s
history ended in the massacre of hundreds of children, their parents and
teachers at a school in Beslan, North Ossetia, Putin revealed his vision.
In a speech to the nation, he linked terrorism to the collapse of the
Soviet Union and the deficiencies of Russia’s transition to democracy,
and announced a package of political measures that would take the
Kremlin’s already overwhelming dominance of Russian politics to a new
level. The proposals would give the president de facto power to appoint
governors, even more sway over the parliament, or State Duma, and increase the executive’s influence over the judiciary. Though many
Russians were privately unhappy with these proposals, checks and balances
on the president’s power had already eroded so badly there was no
force capable of stopping the proposals.
Russia’s political institutions may have been flawed and dysfunctional
when Putin came to power in 1999, but public debate of policy issues,
one of the great achievements of glasnost and a basic element of any
democracy, was vigorous. Political parties of different persuasions
clashed regularly in parliament over issues ranging from foreign affairs
to agricultural policy. The electronic and print media, though dominated
by oligarchs who used them as tools to promote their own interests,
presented a wide variety of different opinions. Regional governors were
a force to be reckoned with, and the courts had gained a degree of real,
though limited, independence from the executive. Finally, a sophisticated
and expanding community of nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs) had started playing a role in policy-making.
Four years on, this picture is dramatically different. Public debate on
key policy issues has all but disappeared. The pro-presidential United
Russia party controls more than two-thirds of all seats in the State
Duma, enough to adopt any law or even change the constitution.
Opposition parties have been either decimated or eliminated altogether,
partially a result of the deeply flawed elections of December 2003.
During this election campaign and the presidential election that followed,
television media shamelessly promoted United Russia and a few
other Kremlin-favored parties while constantly vilifying the opposition.
After a two-year long assault on the independent electronic media, all
television stations are firmly under Kremlin control, as are most radio
stations. Television news has become monotone, perpetually portraying
the president in a positive light and avoiding criticism of his policies.
Most programs featuring live debate on political issues have been cut. 
Only a small number of newspapers and internet publications provide
some plurality of opinion, but their readership is marginal.
After convincing regional governors to give up their seats in Russia’s
senate as a concession to Putin early in his presidency, the Kremlin
gradually destroyed them as an independent political force. Through
intensive meddling in gubernatorial election campaigns, using its sway
over television media and its enormous administrative resources, the
Kremlin effectively made the gubernatorial candidates dependent on its
support. By September 2004, the governors’ power had been reduced to
such an extent that not one of them dared publicly to criticize Putin’s
proposal to scrap gubernatorial elections.
It is conventional wisdom that the executive has also sought to increase
its influence over the judiciary. Opinion polls show that few Russians
believe that the courts are independent. The Kremlin’s use of selective
criminal prosecutions against perceived opponents, like Mikhail
Khodorkovskii, and scientists working with foreigners on sensitive topics,
has put considerable pressure on the courts. Indeed, in several of
these cases, like that of arms researcher Igor Sutiagin, the courts have
recently found defendants guilty on highly dubious charges. In another
such case, the Supreme Court overturned scientist Valentin Danilov’s
acquittal of espionage charges and ordered a retrial, at which he was
found guilty. After Beslan, Putin proposed establishing executive control
over the nomination of members of a key Supreme Court body that
supervises the hiring and dismissal of judges—another erosion of the
independence of the judiciary.
Until recently, the NGO community was the only part of civil society
that had not faced any significant meddling by the Kremlin. However,
in May 2004 Putin used his state-of-the-nation speech to launch an
attack on NGOs. He accused them of “receiving financing from influential
foreign foundations and serving dubious groups and commercial
interests,” and of forgetting “about some of the most acute problems of the country and citizens.” Just days after the address, the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs accused humanitarian organizations in Chechnya of
using their missions as a cover for anti-Russian activities. One of the
central Russian television stations, TVC, devoted an hour-long primetime
program to denouncing the work of human rights groups, accusing
them of what the presenter called their “hatred” for Russia. Along the
same lines, a political analyst close to the Kremlin, Gleb Pavlovskii,
rebuked rights activists for being “engrossed” in Western ideals.
The day after President Putin’s state-of-the-nation address, on May 27,
masked intruders ransacked the office of a major human rights organization
in Tatarstan that provides legal support for victims of torture.
The group continues to face harassment from law enforcement agencies,
as do many other regional human rights NGOs. In October, an
influential member of parliament called for an investigation into the
Committee of Soldiers’ Mothers, Russia’s oldest and most widespread
grass roots human rights organizations, which helps victims of violent
hazing in the Russian military.
Chechnya
The Chechnya conflict entered its sixth year, with the Kremlin continuing
to insist that it was successfully restoring peace in the republic.
However, the assassination of pro-Moscow Chechen president Akhmad
Kadyrov in May 2004, and a series of terrorist attacks linked to the conflict,
belied Russia’s claims of normalization. As in earlier years, Russian
troops committed hundreds of enforced disappearances and extrajudicial
executions, and tortured detainees on a large scale. They did so with
almost complete impunity. Official statistics released in September
reveal that since the beginning of the Chechen war in 1999, a total of
twenty-two servicemen are serving active prison terms for crimes committed
against civilians. Russian troops also stepped up their pattern of
harassment of Chechen applicants to the European Court of Human
Rights.
Chechen rebels were responsible for numerous direct and indiscriminate
attacks on civilians, both inside Chechnya and elsewhere in Russia.
They conducted devastating terrorist attacks, including the hostage-taking
and murder of several hundred people at a school in Beslan. They
also assassinated Akhmad Kadyrov and numerous local Chechen leaders
working with the Russian authorities.
Entrenched Problems
The government failed to make use of Russia’s current economic prosperity
to reform state institutions that have entrenched human rights
problems. Despite his image of a can-do leader, Putin’s administration
has not devised or implemented sound strategies to deal with systematic
hazing practices in the armed forces, torture and ill-treatment of criminal
suspects by police, poor treatment of children in orphanages, and
inhumane treatment of persons committed to psychiatric institutions.
The administration also failed to take effective steps to fight a rapidly
spreading HIV epidemic that is being fueled by human rights abuses.
The only area where truly significant reform has taken place is in the
prison system, where overcrowding has eased.
Key International Actors
The international community believed for years that Putin’s lip service
to democratic principles was sincere. Although many Western leaders
expressed concern about Putin’s plans to abolish gubernatorial elections,
several continued to insist that Russia was on the right track. Neither
the U.S. nor E.U. governments developed a strategy for Russia that
spelled out diplomatic or economic consequences for Russia’s turn
toward authoritarianism. Although a European Commission document
in early 2004 frankly assessed the situation in Russia and observed that
the E.U. can “influence developments in Russia if it is ready to take up
difficult issues... in a clear and forthright manner,” for too long the E.U.
did not follow this observation.
The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe continued to be
one of the few international bodies willing to frankly assess and openly
discuss the situation in Chechnya. It adopted sharply worded resolutions
in October that called for a real accountability process for crimes
committed in the conflict. In October, the European Court of Human
Rights held hearings on the first six applications by Chechens. The
U.N. Commission on Human Rights failed for the third consecutive
time to adopt a resolution expressing concern over the situation in
Chechnya. Despite repeated requests, the U.N. Special Rapporteurs on
torture and extrajudicial executions were not able to visit Chechnya.