 RWANDA
 The largely Tutsi Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF), which took power following the
 civil war and genocide of 1994, is the _principal political force and controls the Gov-
 ernment of National Unity. President Pasteur Bizimungu, an ethnic Hutu, and Vice
 President and Minister of Defense Paul Kagame, an ethnic Tutsi, both belong to the
 RPF. The mainly Hutu Republican Democratic Movement retains the office of Prime
 Minister. Prime Minister Pierre Rwigema, a Hutu, runs the Government on a daily
 basis and is responsible for relations with the National Assembly. The judicial sys-
 tem functions only on a limited basis as in 1996.
 The Minister of Defense is responsible for internal security and military defense;
 the Minister of Interior is responsible for civilian security matters. The security ap-
 paratus consists of the Rwandan Patriotic Army (RPA) and the gendarmerie, which
 is largely made up of RPA soldiers. Civilian police with limited arrest powers work
 throughout the country. Security forces committed numerous serious human rights
 abuses.
 The economic situation remains difficult. The interethnic violence from 1990 on-
 ward and especially in the massive genocide in 1994 resulted in the neglect and
 massive destruction of much of the country's economic infrastructure, including util-
 ities, roads, and hospitals. Most citizens are subsistence farmers, and food produc-
 tion even before the war had barely kept pace with population growth. Small-scale
 commercial activities'are on the increase, but the industrial base remains neglected.
 Gross Domestic Product is about $180 per year.
 The Government continued to be responsible for numerous serious human rights
 abuses. Citizens do not have the right to change their government. The RPA used
 brutal tactics and killed hundreds of civilians. Some killings were for political rea-
 sons, some were acts of revenge, and some were committed during security sweeps.
 Prison conditions are harsh and life threatening. Authorities hold more than
 120,000 prisoners in overcrowded jails; most are accused of participating in the 1994
 genocide. Due process rights provided in the Constitution are not assured. Genocide
 trials, which began at the end of 1996, continued, with approximately 200 cases
 completed. Trials for every accused person now held by the authorities are expected
 to take years to complete. Throughout the year, the Government released small
 numbers of suspects who had no completed files or were ill or elderly. At year's end,
 approximately 3,000 had been released. However, some of these suspects were sub-
 
 
 sequently rearrested. There were also reports of some revenge killings of those re-
 leased. The authorities harassed and threatened journalists, and freedom of assem-
 bly and association, political activity, and freedom of movement are restricted. Dis-
 crimination and violence against women and discrimination against indigenous peo-
 ple are problems.
 The genocidal militias that massacred Tutsis and moderate Hutus in 1994 contin-
 ued their campaign of ethnic extermination. Insurgents, including returned refu-
 gees, committed many politically motivated killings, including the killing of Tutsi
 survivors of the genocide, Tutsi refugees from the Democratic Republic of Congo, ex-
 patriate human rights monitors, and aid workers. The militias, composed of mem-
 bers of the defeated army, the former Rwandan Armed Forces (Ex-FAR) and
 Interahamwe genocide gangs, tried to intimidate foreigners, increased friction be-
 tween the security forces and the Hutu population and created insecurity on the
 roads.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-The RPA committed thousands of
 killings, including individuals and families, in security sweeps, and in revenge for
 earlier killings by insurgent militias (see Section 1.g.). The RPA response to insur-
 gency was brutal.
 Human rights field operations monitors estimated that the RPA killed more than
 2,000 persons in May and June, and 918 during July and August. It is not known
 how many of these deaths were the result of military operations and how many
 were premeditated extrajudicial reprisals. The U.N. Field Operations monitors re-
 ported large numbers of deaths of unarmed civilians in security sweeps, including
 elderly persons, women, and children, as well as insurgents and their suspected col-
 laborators. From January through August, the RPA may have killed as many as
 6,000 persons. The RPA admits to civilian killings, but says that its troops cannot
 distinguish between insurgents wearing civilian clothing and innocent bystanders.
 The Government acknowledged thousands of deaths, but claimed that the majority
 were insurgents killed in combat operations. For example, for May and June, the
 Government listed 200 to 300 civilians and 1,800 insurgents killed by the RPA, and
 500 civilians by insurgents.
 On January 16, Evaniste Burakali, an outspoken member of the National Assem-
 bly and the Liberal Party, was killed by an RPA soldier in a personal dispute. The
 soldier was subsequently arrested and is being held for trial.
 In August authorities arrested eight soldiers for killing civilians and looting their
 homes during military action against Hutu rebels.
 In AugustU.N. Field Operations observers reported 62 separate incidents involv-
 ing 109 deaths, in which soldiers, gendarmes, or local police killed suspects allegedly
 attempting to escape or evade arrest. Many of these deaths were considered possible
 extrajudical executions. The RPA generally does not take many prisoners.
 On October 4, Jean-Baptiste Safari, known to be a sympathizer of the exile oppo-
 sition group Forces of Resistance for Democracy, was killed outside his home, alleg-
 edly by soldiers or members of the RPA. No arrests have been made.
 In November there were reports of RPA action against suspected Ex-FAR infiltra-
 tion posts in volcanic caves near Kanama. The RPA admits military activity around
 the caves, and that it sealed off caves in an attempt to seize infiltrators. Human
 rights groups claim that many civilians also hiding in the caves died when the en-
 trances were sealed. Journalists visiting the area confirmed that there were some
 deaths, but could not estimate the number. According to local residents, killings at
 the caves began in 1994 (see Section 1.g.).
 Beginning in Autumn, insurgents staged several attacks on local communal jails,
 attempting to free Hutu prisoners. Insurgents killed dozens in these assaults. In
 many cases, liberated prisoners later returned voluntarily to the jails.
 There are some indications that 88 prisoners whom the Ex-FAR unsuccessfully at-
 tempted to free from a communal jail in Giceye on November 17 may have been
 killed by the RPA after the attack. The Government stated that the Ex-FAR killed
 the prisoners after their attempt to free them had failed by throwing grenades
 through the grilled windows.
 In September, four army officers convicted of involvement in a 1995 massacre of
 civilians in Kanama were convicted and sentenced to 28 months in prison. The offi-
 cers were found guilty of failure to assist the victims.
 There were many credible reports of serious human rights abuses by RPA troops,
 including the killing of Hutu refugees in the eastern portion of the Democratic Re-
 public of the Congo in early to mid-year. (see Section 1.g.).
 
 
 Harsh prison conditions and mistreatment contributed to the deaths of many in-
 mates (see Section 1.c.).
 Insurgent militias, which included returned refugees, former members of the FAR,
 and Interahamwe gangs, committed hundreds of killings both for political reasons
 and in pursuit of ambitions to eliminate Rwanda's Tutsis by violence. While the in-
 surgent militias appeared to be operating with military tactics and objectives in the
 first part of the year, by late summer their efforts had degenerated into a desultory
 continuation of the 1994 genocide. The insurgents targeted genocide survivors, Tutsi
 refugees from the Democratic Republic of Congo, and local Hutu politicians.
 In January a group of Interahamwe attacked a hospital in Kabaya, killing three
 hospital workers. The following day, Interahamwe summarily killed 12 other civil-
 ians in Giciye. On January 18, insurgents killed three Spanish aid workers and seri-
 ously injured one of their colleagues. On February 4, insurgents killed two U.N.
 human rights monitors, one a British citizen, the other a Cambodian, and three
 Rwandans who were traveling with them.
 On April 28, insurgents killed 17 school girls and their expatriate teacher in an
 ethnically motivated attack. In several incidents in May and June, insurgents at-
 tacked buses and killed Tutsi passengers. An Interahamwe group killed 17 genocide
 survivors in Mutura on August 18.
 Insurgents massacred 136 Tutsi refugees from the Democratic Republic of Congo
 in a machete attack on the Mudende refugee camp, also in Mutura, on August 22.
 Approximately 500 attackers, including women and teenagers, indiscriminately
 killed their victims, including women, children, and the elderly, all of whom were
 unarmed.
 On November 20, Hutu insurgents attacked the Bulinga jail, freeing approxi-
 mately 550 prisoners. The RPA claimed that it had killed some 200 insurgents in
 resulting battles. By mid-December, 470 of the released prisoners had voluntarily
 surrendered themselves to authorities.
 On December 12, Hutu insurgents again attacked the Mudende refugee camp for
 Conglese Tutsis, killing more than 300 persons, including many women and young
 children, using machetes and nail-studded clubs.
 On December 19, Hutu insurgents attacked a bus in the central part of the coun-
 try, killing 19 persons.
 b. Disappearance.-There were reports of disappearances, particularly in connec-
 tion with RPA antiinsurgent activity. Human rights observers note, however, that
 due to the tense security situation it is often difficult if not impossible to character-
 ize definitively whether the disappearance of missing persons was voluntary or due
 to the use of force or whether the persons who disappeared were killed or had joined
 insurgent forces. Many of those who disappeared may be held in military detention.
 Some were released after questioning.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Torture is .contrary to the Fundamental Law, and there were no reports of system-
 atic torture. Various observers have accused local authorities of using excessive
 force in arrests and interrogation, but there have been no documented cases.
 Prison conditions are harsh and life threatening. There were sporadic reports of
 isolated deaths due to mistreatment. Overcrowding is a serious problem, and sani-
 tary conditions are so bad that there are many deaths due to disease. Credible
 sources reported 860 deaths during the year form preventable disease and the de-
 bilitating effects of overcrowding. There are approximately 120,000 persons held in
 some 250 prisons and jails having a design capacity of 17,000. Work on new deten-
 tion centers began in 1996 and these facilities remain under construction. Hundreds
 of children are incarcerated with adults throughout the prison system (see Section
 5). In January the Government began releasing small numbers of genocide suspects
 whose files had not been completed, or who were ill or elderly (see Section L.a.).
 However, the Government rearrested some of these suspects after protests from
 genocide survivor groups and local communities.
 The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), human rights organiza-
 tions, diplomats, and journalists have regular access to the prisons. The ICRC feeds
 detainees in the 14 main prisons, and also provides additional expertise and
 logistical and material support to improve conditions for detainees. New detention
 centers are being built.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The justice system began to function reg-
 ularly to a certain extent, hearing nongenocide criminal and civil complaints in ad-
 dition to genocide cases. Under the circumstances of an overburdened system, the
 Government has little capacity to ensure due process. Arrest procedures improved
 during the year, but in many cases formal requirements were not met. At year's
 end, the Government had conducted about 200 genocide trials.
 
 
 280
 
 The Government arrested genocide suspects at the rate of 800 per week; arrests
 diminished near the end of the year. Arrests are often based on oral complaints and,
 it is believed, at times on false accusations. The genocide suspects are primarily
 Hutu, and they amount to about 10 percent of the adult male Hutu population.
 Throughout the year, the Government released a small number of prisoners in an
 attempt to comply with the law requiring that detainees without completed files be
 let go by the end of the year, and to release a number of ill and elderly prisoners.
 Best estimates were that about 100 persons were released per week countrywide.
 In late November, the authorities in Gikongoro released 150 prisoners, all of whom
 reportedly did not have files. At year's end, approximately 3,000 had been released.
 Protests from survivors' groups and the local population were so intense that the
 entire group was rearrested and returned to custody.
 Exile is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public TriaL-The judicial system again began functioning in
 1996. Never a model of free and fair justice, the system collapsed during war and
 genocide of 1994. The Government, with the help of the international community,
 is attempting to rebuild the judiciary and appoint lower court officials.
 The law provides for public trials with the right to a defense. There are only a
 few trials of criminal suspects and there have been only about 200 genocide trials.
 Despite lengthy incarceration of about 120,000 genocide suspects, genocide trials
 continue at a slow pace, and only began at the end of December 1996.
 In August 1996, the Parliament passed a new genocide law, designed to elicit con-
 fessions in exchange for reduced sentences for the vast majority of those involved
 in the genocide. Trials are envisioned for only the most highly p laced organizers of
 the massacres and for those who participated with special zeal. In July the U.N.
 Tribunal seized seven suspects in Nairobi, Kenya; these included former  ime Min-
 ister Jean Kambanda and former senior military commander Gratien Kabiligi. The
 U.N. transported them to tribunal headquarters in Arusha, Tanzania.
 To date few confessions have been made under plea bargaining provisions of the
 1996 genocide law. Approximately 100 death sentences have been handed down in
 genocide trials held by the Government. None have yet been carried out.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Fundamental Law prohibits such practices. Authorities generally respect these pro-
 hibitions, and prosecute violations.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law In Internal Con-
 flicts.-The RPA used excessive force in suppressing the insurgency along the north-
 western border and killed many civilians. No complete death total is available, but
 the U.N. Human Rights Field Office reported that 2,022 persons were killed by the
 RPA in May and June alone (see Section L.a.). This total comprised insurgents and
 civilians. There were credible reports that the RPA routinely killed suspected insur-
 gent collaborators and their families, including women and children. In early March
 in Ruhengeri, an RPA regiment reacted brutally in responding to an attack on a
 government convoy, and systematically executed at least 100-perhaps as many as
 400-civilians suspected of collaborating with insurgents. The RPA commanders in
 Ruhengeri were arrested, court-martialed in November, and sentenced to prison
 terms. A military court convicted five officers and one sergeant of failure to stop the
 killings. The battalion commander received a prison sentence of 44 months; the oth-
 ers received 60-month sentences.
 Cyabingo commune was the site of much RPA killing. In May an RPA unit search-
 ing for infiltrators fired on a communal meeting there, killing 35 civilians. Following
 an insurgent attack on a military post on May 16, an RPA cordon and search oper-
 ation killed 175 persons in Muhoro sector. On May 24, the RPA killed some 250 ci-
 vilians during an identity card check in Rubabi and Ruvumu sectors.
 Following an attack by insurgent infiltrators on the marketplace of Kanama, near
 Gisenyi, in early August, RPA units again overreacted; they killed more than 100
 civilians in reprisal attacks in Kahama, Mutura, and Rwerere during a 3-day period.
 Prisoners in local jails were killed, although it is not known if they were killed by
 the RPA, insurgents, or others. Troops looted the market and seized privately owned
 vehicles. Vice President Kagame visited the scene of these killings and ordered an
 investigation. Military authorities arrested 29 RPA officers and men, including the
 battalion commander on various charges. They were subsequently court-martialed.
 In July Vice President Paul Kagame acknowledged in a press interview that gov-
 ernment forces participated in the overthrow of the Mobutu regime by the Alliance
 of Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Congo/Zaire (ADFL). There were many
 credible reports of serious human rights abuses by government troops, including the
 killing of Hutu refugees as troops took a lead role in capturing major towns and
 pursued remnants of Hutu insurgent groups. At year's end, a U.N. investigatory
 
 
 mission was conducting an investigation into these reports and reports of serious
 abuses by other forces operating in the same areas.
 In November there were reports of RPA action against suspected former FAR in-
 filtration posts in volcanic caves near Kanama. The RPA acknowledged that there
 was military activity around the caves, and that it sealed off several cave entrances
 in an attempt to flush out infiltrators. Human rights groups claim that many civil-
 ians also hiding in the cave died when the entrances were sealed. Journalists who
 visited the caves confirmed that some people died in the caves, but could not esti-
 mate how many.
 In the first part of the year, insurgents fighting around Ruhengeri appeared to
 have a military structure and objectives, but by year's end the violence seemed to
 have no coherent planning, and appeared to concentrate instead on elimination of
 ethnic Tutsis. Insurgents committed hundreds of killings, including massacres in
 refugee camps (see Section L.a.).
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Fundamental Law provides for freedom of
 the press; however, the Government at times harassed the media.
 The Government harassed journalists whose reporting was contrary to official
 views. In February the Government expelled a Reuters correspondent from the
 country for allegedly inaccurate reporting. On April 28, journalist Appolos
 Hakizamana was killed under suspicious circumstances. No arrests have been made.
 There are several privately owned newspapers, the Government-owned Radio
 Rwanda, and a sporadically operating television station. The Government signed an
 agreement to rebroadcast British Broadcasting Corporation programs on f.m. in
 1998.
 The university reopened in 1996; academic freedom is respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Fundamental Law pro-
 vides for freedom of peaceful assembly, but authorities may legally require advance
 notice for outdoor rallies, demonstrations, and meetings. Political activity below the
 executive committee of political parties level was suspended in an agreement of the
 parties.
 The National Revolutionary Movement for Democracy and Development (MRND),
 and the Coalition for Defense of the Republic, both implicated in planning and exe-
 cuting the 1994 genocide, have been banned by law. As part of the Arusha Accords,
 the remaining political parties agreed to refrain from partisan public debate during
 the 5-year transition period.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The 1991 Constitution provides for freedom of religion,
 and the Government respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for these rights, and the Government gen-
 erally respects them in practice. More than 1 million refugees returned to Rwanda
 in the last 2 months of 1996, and the resettlement generally proceeded smoothly.
 However, insurgent warfare and ethnic violence were frequent occurrences in the
 northwestern prefectures of Ruhengeri and Gisenyi.
 The Government of Tanzania expelled several hundred Rwandan citizens in No-
 vember- the authorities readily received them.
 The return of an additional 200,000 persons during the year has reduced the doc-
 umented presence of Rwandans outside the country to fewer than 20,000.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens do not have the right to change their government through democratic
 means. The 1992 powersharing agreement crafted in the Arusha negotiations and
 ratified by the 1993 Arusha Accords was not fully implemented prior to former
 President Habyarimana's death in April 1994, but it remains the basis of planning
 and the apportionment of ministries. Despite the events of 1994, the RPF brought
 representatives of four other opposition parties into the Government after the its
 military victory, but none of these officials were elected. An appointed multiparty
 National Assembly is now functioning, with nine political parties represented, in-
 cluding the RPF.
 There are no legal restrictions on the participation of women in political life, but
 women remain underrepresented in politics and government, including both the
 Cabinet and the National Assembly. The Batwa ethnic group is also underrep-
 resented.
 
 
 282
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude-Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation -of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A -wide variety of local and international human rights -groups operate without
 -government restriction, investigating and publishing their findings on human rights
 violations. They include the'U.. High Commissioner for Human Rights, which op-
 erates a feld office with branches throughout the country and nongovernmental or-
 ganizations (NGO's), including Journalists sans Frontieres. Government officials are
 generally cooperative and responsive to their views. However, the Government
 sharply criticized the U.N. human rights field office because its monitors and inves-
 tigators, in observing U.N. security guidelines, do not travel outside Kigali and base
 their reports on interviews with self-described witnesses, not on firsthand observa-
 tion.
 In October vice presidential spokesman Emanuel Gasana said that the conclu-
 sions in a Human Rights Watch/Africa report about Rwandan involvement in
 killings in the Democratic Republic of Congo were false.
 The ICRC is active in visiting prisons.
 The International War Crimes Tribunal for Rwanda had yet to conclude its first
 trial. The Government in 1996 criticized the tribunal *for its slow start, but wel-
 comed signs that-the tribunal was pursuing a more aggressive arrest policy in 1997.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides that all citizens are equal before the law, without dis-
 crimination on the basis of race, color, origin, ethnicity, clan, sex, opinion, religion,
 or social-standing. However, the Government provides only limited enforcement of
 these provisions.
 Women.-Violence against women continues. Wife beating and domestic violence
 are normally handled within the context of the extended family and rarely come be-
 fore the courts.
 -Despite constitutional provisions, women continue to face serious discrimination.
 Women traditionally perform most of the subsistence farming and play a limited
 role in the modern sector. They have only limited opportunities for education, em-
 ployment, and promotion. The Family Code of 1992 has generally improved the legal
 position of women in matters relating to marriage, divorce, and child custody, but
 still does not meet the constitutional commitment to gender equality. For example,
 it formally designates men as heads of households. Also, the absence of succession
 laws limits a woman's right to property, thus eopardizing her status and ability to
 provide for her family should she survive her husband. The omission is particularly
 onerous in the postgenocide period, since widows are very numerous and surviving
 male relatives, who would normally inherit and provide for them, are relatively few.
 Children.-The Government is attempting to provide an education and health
 care to every child. More than 50,000 children were separated from theirparents
 during the 1994 genocide and national upheaval. Many who are still children re-
 main in the care of strangers or international organizations.
 Although the penal code prohibits the imprisonment of children with adults, the
 Government reports that hundreds of children are in fact incarcerated with adults
 throughout the prison system.
 People With Disabilities.-Although there are no laws restricting people with dis-
 abilities from employment, education, or other state services, in practice few dis-
 abled persons have access to education or employment. There are no laws or provi-
 sions that mandate access to public facilities.
 Indigenous People.-Less than 1 percent of the population comes from the Batwa
 ethnic group. These indigenous people, survivors of the Pygmy (Twa) tribes of the
 mountainous forest areas bordering the Democratic Republic of Congo, exist on the
 margins of society and continue to be treated as inferior citizens by both Hutus and
 Tutsis. The Batwa have been unable to protect their interests, which center on ac-
 cess to land and housing. Few Batwa have gained access to the educational system,
 resulting in minimal representation in government institutions. There is no reliable
 information on specific human rights abuses perpetrated against the Batwa popu-
 lation since the 1994 upheaval.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Before April 1994, an estimated 85 percent
 of citizens were Hutu, 14 percent were Tutsi, and 1 percent Batwa. The subsequent
 mass killings and migrations probably affected the ethnic composition of the popu-
 lation, but the extent of the changes is unknown. The Government has called for
 ethnic reconciliation and committed itself to abolishing policies of the former govern-
 ment that had created and deepened ethnic cleavages. It eliminated references to
 ethnic origin from the national identity card, a provision of the 1993 Arosha Ac-
 cords. The Government has not statutorily addressed the issue of ethnic quotas in
 
 
 283
 education, training, and government employment. It has partially integrated more
 than 2,000 former government soldiers into RPA forces, although not by the formula
 prescribed by the 1993 Arusha accord. Tutsi clergy and businessman, who were well
 represented in these sectors of society, were killed in great numbers in the genocide.
 Following the 1994 victory by the RPF, Tutsis returning from exile took over many
 of the business and professional positions formerly held by Hutus and Tutsis.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-In practice there is no functioning labor movement,
 ven the massive disruptions caused by the 1994 genocide. Although preconflict
 abor law technically remains in effect, the Government is unable to implement its
 provisions. Unions are only slowly regrouping and asserting themselves.
 The Constitution provides for the right to create professional associations and
 labor unions. Union membership is voluntary and open to all salaried workers, in-
 cluding public sector employees. There are no restrictions on the right of association,
 but all unions must register with the Ministry of Justice for official recognition.
 There are no known cases in which the Government has denied such recognition.
 Unions are prohibited by law from having political affiliations, but in practice this
 is not always respected.
 Organized labor represents only a small part of the work force. More than 90 per-
 cent of workers are engaged in small-scale subsistence farming. About 7 percent
 work in the modern (wage) sector, including both public and private industrial pro-
 duction, and about 75 percent of those active in the modern sector are members of
 labor unions.
 Before 1991 the Central Union of Rwandan Workers (CESTRAR) was the only au-
 thorized trade union organization. With the political reforms introduced in the Con-
 stitution, CESTRAR officially became independent of the Government and the out-
 lawed MRND.
 The Constitution provides for the right to strike, except for public service workers.
 A union's executive committee must approve a strike, and a union must first try
 to resolve its differences with management according to steps prescribed by the Min-
 istry of Labor and Social Affairs. The Government never enforced laws prohibiting
 retribution against strikers.
 Labor organizations may affiliate with international labor bodies. CESTRAR is af-
 filiated with the Organization of African Trade Union Unity and the International
 Confederation of Free Trade Unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Constitution provides for
 collective bargaining, although only CESTRAR had an established collective bar-
 gaining a,,ement with the Government. In practice, since most union members are
 in the public sector, the Government is intimately involved in the process (see Sec-
 tion 6.e.).
 The law prohibits antiunion discrimination, and it has not occurred in practice.
 There are no formal mechanisms to resolve complaints involving discrimination
 against unions.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced labor,
 and there are no reports that it occurs in practice. Although the law does not specifi-
 cally prohibit forced and bonded labor by children, such practices are not known to
 occur.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-Except in
 subsistence agriculture, the law prohibits children under age 18 from working with-
 out their parents' or guardians' authorization, and they generally may not work at
 night. The minimum age for full employment is 18 years, and 14 years for appren-
 ticeships 14 years, providing that the child has completed primary school. The Min-
 istry of Labor has not enforced child labor laws effectively. The law does not specifi-
 cally prohibit forced or bonded labor by children, but such practices are not known
 to occur (see Section 6.c.).
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Ministry of Labor sets minimum wages in
 the smallmodern sector. The minimum wage is $1.08 (310 Rwandan francs) or an
 8-hour workday. The Government, the main employer, effectively sets most other
 wage rates as well. The minimum wage is insufficient to provide a decent standard
 of living for a worker and family. Often families supplement their incomes by work
 in small business or subsistence agriculture. In practice, however, workers are will-
 ing to work for less than the minimum wage.
 � Officially, government offices have a 40-hour workweek. Negotiations in 1993 be-
 tween the unions, Government, and management were held to reduce the workweek
 from 45 to 40 hours in the private sector as well; however, no such reduction has
 yet occurred. Hours of work and occupational health and safety standards in the
 
 
 284
 modern wage sector are controlled by law, but labor inspectors from the Ministry
 of Labor enforce them only loosely. Workers do not have-the right to remove them-
 selves from dangerous work situations without jeopardizing their jobs.
