 Rwanda is a one-party state which has been ruled by Major
 General Juvenal Habyarimana since his accession to power in a
 nonviolent coup in 1973. Founder of the single party, the
 National Revolutionary Movement for Development (MRND),
 Habyarimana was reelected for another 5-year term as President
 in December*1988 by nearly 99 percent of the electorate. The
 President sets government policy after consultation with the
 Council of Ministers. The National Development Council (the
 legislature), established in 1982, votes on and adopts laws
 but is not independent from the MRND. Legislative candidates
 must be approved by the party, which normally approves two
 candidates per seat.
 The major organizations responsible for administration of
 justice include the Ministry of Justice, which organizes and
 administers the prison system, the judicial police, which is
 composed of employees of several ministries who are
 responsible'for apprehending criminals, collecting evidence,'
 and maintaining case records, and the gendarmerie, a special
 branch of the Rwandan armed forces. -In addition, the Central
 Intelligence Service in the office of the President can make
 certain decisions, such as denial of passports to Rwandan
 citizens or the extension of visas and residence permits to
 foreigners. These decisions may be appealed directly to the
 President.
 The overwhelming majority of Rwandans are poor subsistence
 farmers. There is little industry, and imports are expensive
 because of the high cost of transport to this landlocked
 country. Food production has managed to keep pace with the
 high population growth rate. Rwanda's economy depends
 heavily on foreign aid and on exports of coffee and tea. The
 Government has a liberal policy toward trade and investment.
 Although human rights continued to be restricted in 1989, some
 progress was made: the Government held a national conference
 of magistrates and judges to discuss improving the
 administration of justice; and organized an international
 conference on the observance of human rights in Africa.
 President Habyarimana released nearly 25 percent of the 13,000
 prisoners in Rwandan jails, reduced many sentences, and
 changed all death sentences to life imprisonment. Prisoners
 guilty of crimes against national security, corruption, or
 multiple offenses were not included. In 1989 there remained
 several major human rights concerns, including the use of
 long-term detention in political and security cases without
 charge or trial and restrictions on the freedoms of religion,
 speech, association, and the right of citizens to change their
 government.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There was no evidence of politically motivated killing at
 government instigation in 1989. In May 1988, an army sergeant
 accused of the murder of a prominent colonel reportedly died
 during interrogation by military and security authorities.
 Subsequently, three officers were arrested in connection with
 the case. These officers remained in prison at the end of
 1989 awaiting the outcome of an ongoing judicial inquest.
 
 
 284
 RWANDA
 b. Disappearance
 There were no unexplained disappearances in 1989.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 There were no reports of torture or other cruel, inhuman
 treatment in 1989. Prison conditions continued to improve in
 1989 as part of a major reform program instituted by the
 former Minister of Justice.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Except for suspects caught in the act of committing crimes,
 arrests are normally made with a warrant following an
 investigation. Persons may be detained for no more than 48
 hours without a warrant. There were no known exceptions in
 1989 to the legally mandated warrant procedures. In most
 cases, charges must be stated formally in the defendant's
 presence within 5 days of arrest. Failure to meet this
 requirement constitutes grounds for dismissal of the charges.
 In practice criminal offenders arrested by judicial
 authorities are not imprisoned without arrest warrants and
 formal arraignment. Persons arrested by Rwandan security
 forces for political crimes may in fact be detained
 indefinitely without being formally charged (see Section 1 e.).
 Under broad preventive detention provisions, persons may be
 held for 30 days if public safety is believed to be
 threatened, if the accused might flee, or if the penalty
 carries a minimum sentence of 6 months. At the end of that
 period, judicial review is mandatory. Detention may be
 prolonged indefinitely for 30-day periods. Persons charged
 with serious crimes often wait 6 months before trial.
 Detainees may appeal their incarceration, and the appeal must
 be heard within 24 hours by a competent judicial authority.
 Ministry of Justice personnel conduct daily official visits to
 prisons to assure that proper documentation exists for each
 detainee. These officials can order detainees released if
 arrest conditions do not conform to the law.
 Rwandan security forces occasionally employ arbitrary arrest
 and detention on political or security grounds. Most
 detentions are short-term, often for less than 24 hours. In
 January 1988, two associates of a Rwandan exile who had been
 implicated in a 1980 coup attempt were arrested and held
 without charge or judicial review. They remained in prison
 without charge in 1989. The security authorities arrested in
 May another Rwandan accused of involvement in the 1980 coup
 attempt and held him throughout the year pending completion of
 an investigation.
 Exile is not practiced. With regard to forced or compulsory
 labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Rwanda has three separate court systems for criminal/civil,
 military, and state security cases. All but security cases
 ultimately may be appealed to the Court of Appeals. Convicted
 criminals must file an appeal within 3 months of the date of
 judgment. The State Security Court has jurisdiction over
 national security charges such as treason. Decisions of this
 
 
 285
 Court may not be appealed before the Court of Appeals. If
 procedural violations are alleged in security cases, these may
 be brought before the Court of Cassation. If the Court of
 Cassation finds that procedural.vi-olations occurred, the case
 is sent back to the State Security Court and tried by a
 different panel of judges.
 The judiciary is -statutorily independent an& expected to apply
 the penal code impartially, but in practice the Government
 exercises.infl-uence in political and security cases. The
 President appoints and dismisses magistrates. Laws passed in
 1982 strengthened the independence of the judiciary by
 improving the process of selecting judicial personnel and more
 closely defining their functions. The administration of
 justice-has been hampered by poor management and a generally
 low level of education among civil servants. The Ministry of
 Justice conductstraining programs for officials and judges
 and plans to establish a magistrate training center. In 1989
 approximately 70 of the top judges and prosecutors attended a
 magistrates' workshop organized by the Ministry of Justice.
 All defendants are constitutionally entitled to counsel, but
 because of a shortage of lawyers (there are only about 20
 private lawyers in.Rwanda, most of whom work in Kigali),
 defendants'normally are not represented at trial. Family and
 other nonprofessional advisors are permitted. Trials are
 public, and those which arouse extensive public interest are
 often.broadcast to the street to permit persons who cannot be
 seated in the courtroom to follow the proceedings. Persons
 charged with minor crimes usually are released on their own
 recognizance pending trial.
 Bail is not available in Rwandan law. The majority of
 Rwandans awaiting trial or sentencing enjoy "liberte
 provisoire," or provisional release, which is routinely
 granted provided that the defendant is not likely to flee
 justice, has a fixed residence, and is not likely to harm or
 be harmed by the public. A Rwandpn awaiting trial or
 sentencing in prison may petition the court for provisional
 release. In the Kigali court district, approximately 85
 percent of all prisoners awaiting trial or sentencing receive
 provisional release.
 At the end of 1989, Rwanda was holding three political
 prisoners who allegedly are close to an exiled minister
 implicated in a 1980 coup attempt. Dr Aloys Sebiziga, a
 medical doctor, has been detained in Kigali prison since May
 1989 for allegedly supplying medicines and funds to Col.
 Alexis Kanyarengwe, a former Minister of the Interior, who is
 currently in self-imposed exile in Tanzania. Dr. Sebigiza has
 not been formally charged with any crimes, nor has a date been
 set for trial. In addition to Sebigiza, Callixte
 Sinaruhamagaye and Claude Bahitansi, the brother and a close
 friend of the former Minister, have been detained in Kigali
 prison without.charges since January 1988.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Although Rwandan law forbids arbitrary searches, Rwandans are
 subject to occasional interference in their private lives.
 Police normally are required to have warrants before entering
 a private residence, but, using the pretext of checking
 required documentation, authorities in practice gain entry
 inta homes without warrants. There'is no evidence that the
 
 
 286
 RWANDA
 Government monitors private correspondence, and the receipt of
 foreign publications is permitted.
 All Rwandans are required to be members of the MRND and to pay
 party dues.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The law theoretically guarantees freedom of speech and press,
 but these statutory assurances are not observed. Open
 criticism of government policies and officials is rare,
 although in 1989 published criticism of state-managed
 industries was not uncommon. Candidates in the 1988
 legislative elections were restricted to expressing opinions
 and advocating policies consistent with party doctrine.
 Members of the National Development Council in the past have
 criticized government policies from the floor of the Council.
 The Government controls radio broadcasting (the most important
 medium in reaching the public since there is no functioning
 television system in Rwanda) and produces a daily press
 bulletin and a weekly newspaper. Two Catholic church
 publications sometimes print muted criticism of political and
 economic conditions. Such criticism is tolerated and
 occasionally even encouraged by the Government. There is no
 record of any journalist having been arrested for what he has
 written. The Government has cautioned the press to avoid what
 it regards as "harmful* criticism of leaders. It maintains
 that the press should devote its'efforts to "promoting
 development." Books and imported publications are not
 censored. Academic freedom is limited, but there were no
 known incidents in 1989 involving restrictions on academic
 freedom of inquiry and research at the university.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly is limited. No public meetings or
 demonstrations are permitted if there is any chance they will
 result in expressions of overt opposition to government
 policies. The Government permits private associations, but it
 requires that they be registered officially and accorded legal
 recognition.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is provided for in the Constitution, but
 the Government continues to discriminate against, and local
 officials harass, several small groups, including the
 Jehovah's Witnesses. The Government denied the Witnesses*
 request for legal recognition in October 1988 on the grounds
 that they constitute a threat to law and order and disturb the
 peace. Government officials have said that the Witnesses,
 right to practice their religion will not be otherwise impeded
 (see Section 5).
 Foreign clergy are able to practice their religion and
 organize missionary activities. Worship is freely permitted,
 and Christian churches are numerous. There are several
 mosques in the capital and elsewhere; Muslims are permitted to
 practice their religion throughout the republic.
 
 
 287
 RWANDA
 The population is 70 percent"Christian-and approximately four
 percent Muslim, with the remainder following traditional
 African or no religions practices. Probably 80 percent of the
 Christians aze Roman-Catholic, but-Protestant denominations
 are active. The Government depends upon church-sponsored
 schools for a considerable portion of education in Rwanda
 (over 85 percent of-secondary-schools are church-sponsored).
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Freedom of movement and residence within Rwanda is restricted
 by laws and regulations which require all residents to hold
 national identity cards and residence and work permits.
 People who wish to spend more than 3 days in a township other
 than their own must .obtain permission from the authorities of
 the area they-will-be visiting. Police conduct periodic
 checks, especially in urban areas, and return all those not
 egistered in-the locality to their own township. Property
 owners who do not require tenants to show valid documentation
 are subject-to .fines and even imprisonment. Undocumented
 tenants are subject to expulsion.
 A major deterrent to foreign travel was eliminated in 1987,-
 when the Government abolished the requirement for posting
 substantial deposits (as much as $600) with passport
 applications. Citizens now need only pay a $20 nonrefundable
 fee for a passport, but they still must apply for and receive
 an exit visa before undertaking foreign travel. The exit visa
 process involves-9 security check conducted by the Central
 Intelligence Service. Unexplained refusals appear to be less
 frequent than in-the past. Properly documented Rwandans may
 emigrate.
 There are an estimated 225,000 Rwandan refugees in neighboring
 countries. Most are ethnic Tutsis who fled Rwanda during the
 .revolution of 1959 and subsequent ethnic violence associated
 with independence in 1962. Official polidy permits these
 peopae to be repatriated on a case by case basis if the
 refugee does not. represent a security risk, and if land is
 available in Rwanda. The lack-of land in this tiny and
 :heavily populated country effectively precludes any
 significant repatriation. The Government's stated view is
 -that demographic pressures and-strained economic resources
 - peclude-any large-scale return of.,these refugees. It has
 encouraged countries hosting--the refugees to naturalize them;
 this has not been well received by Rwanda's neighbors.
 Despite these difficulties, in 1989 approximately 50 refugees
 returned to Rwanda from Burundi, although many more reportedly
 returned outside official channels.
 Rwanda hosts 19,000 Burundi refugees (mainly Hutu) who fled
 the 1972 massacres. In mid-1988, 47,000 Burundi nationals
 fleeieg-ethnic violence again sought refuge in Rwanda. The
 Rwandan Government-refused'to accord official refugee status
 to this latest group but did grant temporary asylum. Rwanda
 has received widespread praise for its efforts to meet the
 temporary humanitarian needs of these refugees. Most of them
 returned voluntarily to Burundi by the end of 1988 as the
 result of a procedure negotiated by.a quadripartite group
 composed of Rwanda, Burundi, Zaire, and the United Nations
 High Commissioner for Refugees. In late 1989, there were
 approximately 1,200 Burundi refugees remaining in Rwanda.
 Nine hundred were from the August 1988 influx, and about 300
 arrived from the same area of Burundi in October 1989,
 apparently as a result of an isolated incident.
 
 
 288
 RWANDA
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Rwandans have no opportunity to change their government
 through democratic means. The MRND, the sole body permitted
 political activity, makes all policy decisions and nominates
 all candidates for public office. It, in turn, is dominated
 by the President who also holds the position of president of
 the MRND. He chooses the Central Committee members and is the
 only constitutionally recognized candidate for President.
 Every citizen is automatically a party member and is required
 to pay party dues representing 2 days' pay per year.
 Delegates are both elected and appointed to the Party's
 governing national congress, which meets every 2 years. The
 essential function of the congress is to endorse the programs
 presented by the party leadership. The 1988 congress rejected
 calls for the election of local party officials by secret
 ballot rather than the raising of hands.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Rwanda cooperates with visiting delegations from such human
 rights groups as Amnesty International (AI) and the
 International Committee of the Red Cross. U.S. Embassy
 officials visited Kigali prison to inspect conditions and
 interview political prisoners on several occasions in 1989.
 There wer no reports of requests for outside investigations
 of alleged human rights violations in 1989. The Ministry of
 Justice hosted an international conference on human rights in
 March which was attended by representatives from all
 neighboring countries as well as representatives from the
 United Nations, the Organization of African Unity, and AI.
 The conference focused on the observance of human rights in
 central Africa.
 There are no local organizations monitoring and reporting on
 human rights practices in Rwanda.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 In 1959 the majority Hutu ethnic group (89 percent of the
 population, according to the 1978 census) overthrew the Tutsi
 monarchy. In 1962 Belgium granted internal autonomy and then
 independence to a Hutu-led government which overwhelmingly won
 a U.N.-supervised election. These developments marked the end
 of the traditional, feudal society in which the Hutu had lived
 in subjugation under the Tutsi for centuries, and the
 beginning of a more modern society that places greater
 emphasis on individual rights.
 The Constitution states that "all citizens are equal before
 the law, without any discrimination, notably that of race,
 color, origin, ethnicity, clan, sex, opinion, religion, or
 social position." The legal requirement that ethnic origin be
 listed on identity documents serves to ensure that informal
 quotas corresponding to the Hutu/Tutsi ratio in society are
 not exceeded. This system tends to limit the access of Tutsis
 to education and important positions in the Government and
 military. Private business is the only aspect of society in
 which the Tutsis wield any significant influence.
 
 
 289
 The Government actively prosecuted Jehovah's Witnesses in
 Rwanda from 1984 to 1986. In 1986, 296 Witnesses had been
 convicted of penal code violations including disrespecting the
 national flag, and 400 Witnesses were being held in custody
 pending trial. Under growing international pressure, the
 Government reversed its position on Witnesses in 1988,
 released all Witnesses held in prison, and ended its legal
 campaign against them. Since then, the Minister of Justice
 has held meetings with local officials to sensitize them to
 the Government's policy regarding Jehovah's Witnesses.
 Jehovah's Witnesses occasionally are arrested by local
 officials acting in ignorance of government policy, but they
 are normally released immediately when their cases are brought
 to the attention of the general prosecutor in Kigali, who has
 jurisdiction over all such cases. Despite this revised
 policy, there was renewed harassment of Witnesses in 1989 and
 incidents based on religious discrimination; one businessman
 lost his position for reasons related to his Jehovah's Witness
 religion.
 Women perform most of the agricultural labor and have
 benefited less than men from social development. Despite the
 language in the Constitution,-women's rights to property are
 limited, and women are not treated equally in divorce
 proceedings. Moreover, women have fewer opportunities for
 education, employment, and promotion. Family planning
 services are inadequate but are improving, and the President
 has been an outspoken advocate of family planning efforts.
 There are few organizations promoting women's interests.
 URAMA, a women's association which is an adjunct of the sole
 political party, was formed in 1989. The Government has
 completed revision of the Rwandan family code, which was
 awaiting at the end of 1989 the President's signature to take
 effect. The new code modernizes Rwandan-laws concerning
 marriage, divorce, the status of children born out of wedlock,
 child custody, and other elements of family law.
 Violence against women is socially accepted, especially in the
 countryside, but it is neither encouraged nor permitted by
 law. In public places, women are often observed to be subject
 to low level aggression: shoving, pushing, etc. Wife beating
 exists, but there are no studies available which show the
 extent of the problem. When reported, wife beating is
 punished by the courts, but rarely do these cases come to
 litigation. The Government has not addressed the issue of
 violence directly, but it has acted to improve the situation
 of women, largely by encouraging family planning and
 appointing women to positions of responsibility in the
 Government. The President has publicly advocated greater
 rights for women.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The Rwandan economy consists predominantly of small scale
 subsistence farming. There is very little industry, and hence
 few workers in the modern wage economy, which accounts for
 perhaps 7 percent of the work force in both private and public
 sectors. Labor organizations have only recently begun to
 develop, and the Government is guiding this evolution through
 a sole labor union, the Central Union of Rwandan Workers
 (CESTRAR). The Union is integrated into the sole political
 party, the MRND. Other workers, associations no longer have
 the right to exist independently but must affiliate with
 CESTRAR. Union membership (open to all salaried workers) is
 
 
 290
 optional. CESTRAR's leadership is focusing on nonwage-related
 work conditions and on providing training opportunities and
 credit union facilities to its members.
 In theory, CESTRAR members have the right to strike, but only
 with the approval of the Executive Committee--in effect, the
 Government. There was one strike in 1989. On October 21-22,
 a number of employees struck at the Bralirwa brewery in
 Gisenyi, apparently over a dispute with a fellow employee.
 The CESTRAR director played a pivotal role in mediating the
 dispute. As part of the settlement, the employee in question
 was transferred to Kigali.
 CESTRAR is affiliated with the Organization of African Trade
 Union Unity and the Organization of Central African Workers.
 It maintains friendly ties with foreign trade union
 organizations, including the American Federation of Labor and
 Congress of Industrial Organizations. Rwanda has been a
 member of the International Labor Organization since 1962, but
 has ratified neither Convention 87 regarding freedom of
 association nor Convention 98 on collective bargaining.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The right to organize "professional organizations" and to
 engage in collective bargaining with employers granted by the
 labor code is exercised within the framework of CESTRAR.
 Government control of CESTRAR combined with the small size of
 the wage economy is a significant constraint on the collective
 bargaining process. In practice, collective bargaining for
 wages does not occur in Rwanda. There are no export
 processing zones in Rwanda."
 c. Prohibition of Forced and Compulsory Labor
 Forced labor is prohibited by Rwandan law and does not occur
 in practice (see Section 6.e.).
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Except in the subsistence agriculture sector, which is the
 area of employment of most Rwandans, children under 18 are not
 permitted to work without their parents' or guardian's
 authorization, and they may work at night only under
 exceptional circumstances on a temporary basis. The Minister
 of Labor may grant work permission to a child under 14. Child
 labor outside the agricultural sector is uncommon.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Minimum wage rates in the small modern economic sector are set
 by the Ministry of Labor. The current minimum wage is
 approximately $1.50 per day; higher minimum wages apply to
 certain professions. The minimum wage is inadequate to
 provide a decent standard of living for urban families and is
 often supplemented by work in petty commerce or agriculture.
 Hours of work and occupational health and safety in the modern
 wage sector are controlled by law and enforced by labor
 inspectors from the Ministry of Labor. Government offices and
 most private sector companies have a 43-hour workweek, which
 includes Saturday morning community service.. Rwandan wage
 earners in both the public and private sectors are accorded
 1 weekday afternoon free for participation in sports and
 leisure activities. Saturday morning community service hours
 are counted as part of the regular work service hours, and
 therefore supplemental wages are not required.
 
 
 291
