 RWANDA
 Rwanda is governed by an interim Government under a powersharing arrange-
 ment in which President Juvenal Habyarimana retains predominant executive, leg-
 islative, and judicial authority in accordance with the 1991 Constitution. Respon-
 sibility for day-to-day government operations rests with a five-party coalition Gov-
 ernment headed by a Prime Minister from an opposition party.
 The interim Government took a major step forward in its promised transition to
 multiparty democracy when it signed a Peace Accord on August 4 with the Rwandan
 Patriotic Front (RPF), ending 3 years of war. The Peace Accord, the result of more
 than a year of intense negotiations between the two sides, is designed to overcome
 the major cause of the war, ethnic rivalry between Hutus and Tutsis, who comprise
 about 85 and 14 percent of the population respectively. The United Nations Security
 Council voted on October 5 to send a peacekeeping force to Rwanda to assist in the
 implementation of the Accord.
 The Peace Accord had not been implemented by year's end, but, when imple-
 mented, will shift many presidential powers to a new multiparty government, create
 a transition national assembly composed of deputies appointed by 17 political par-
 ties, and establish a joint high command for an integrated (government and HPF)
 army and gendarmerie. The establishment of these transition institutions will usher
 in a 22-month transition period intended to end with multi party elections.
 The Peace Accord calls for an integrated army and gendarmerie composed of 60-
 percent government and 40-percent RPF forces. Rwanda's security apparatus con-
 sists of the Armed Forces (FAR), including the army, responsible for external secu-
 rity, and the gendarmerie, responsible for internal security; the local police; and the
 internal and external intelligence services. A National Security Council, consisting
 of the Ministries of Defense, Interior, and Justice, which are responsible for these
 services, coordinates the activities of the security institutions. In the wake of re-
 newed hostilities between the Government and the RPF in February, members of
 both armies committed serious human rights abuses against civilians.
 The overwhelming majority of Rwandans are subsistence farmers. The modest in-
 dustry and food production has barely managed to keep pace with the high popu-
 lation growth rate. The economy depends heavily on ex orts of coffee and tea, and
 on foreign aid. Rwanda has an agreement with the World Bank and the Inter-
 
 
 227
 national Monetary Fund for a structural adjustment program, but the war has dis-
 rupted economic recovery; and economic growth remains dependent on postwar eco-
 nomic recovery.
 Human rights abuses that plagued the first quarter of 1993 diminished consider-
 ably as the peace process progressed toward the signing of the Peace Accord and
 its implementation. Those abuses stemmed from dissatisfaction on the part of the
 former sole party, the National Revolutionary Movement for Development (MRND),
 over the powersharingarrangement agreed to on January 9 between the multiparty
 Government and the RPF. That dissatisfaction triggeredethnic violence that killed
 over 300 persons and displaced 4,000 persons, mainly minority Tutsis and opposi-
 tion political p arty members. Citing this violence as a cease-fire violation, the RPF
 attacked in February, killing a number of civilians, mostly Hutus, including some
 who were politically prominent. In withdrawing, government soldiers looted, raped,
 and killed a number of civilians. The February ighting temporarily displaced an-
 other 600,000 people, bringing the total number of those displaced by war to nearly
 1 million.
 During this same period, security forces responsible for civilian safety outside the
 war zone occasionally arrested, bt, and sometimes tortured and killed persons sus-
 pected of sympathy with the RPF. Early in the year, an international commission
 composed of 10 specialists from various countries investigated past and present
 human rights abuses. The commission's report, issued in March, and the unresolved
 political killings in May and August of a prominent politician and a well-known
 local government official kept alive fears of the possible existence of a death squad.
 As installation of the broad-based government approached following signing of the
 August 4 Peace Accord, sporadic incidents of violence claimed the lives of several
 civilians in widely scattered rural areas.
 Despite the disruptions of the first quarter, the Government was able subse-
 quently to hold elections in many localities based on competition among multiple
 candidates from different political parties, including the RPF. Opposition parties
 won about half of those local elections. Women, however, are poorly represented in
 the present and emerging political system. They face extensive legal and societal
 discrimination and are often victims of domestic violence. In the first quarter, they
 were frequently victims of rape by soldiers.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Kiing.-There were extensive political and
 other extrajudicial killings in the ethnic and political violence which erupted in
 northwestern Rwanda in anuary followin discontent over the powersharing
 ment between the Government and the  pPF. The violence, which targeted   t
 and supporters of political parties other than the MRND, resulted in over 300
 deaths and the temporary displacement of 4000 persons. Youth from the MRND
 and their ally, the Coalition for the Defense of the Republic (CDR), were responsible
 for carrying out many of the killings. Women and children were among the victims.
 (See also Section 1.g.)
 Subsequently, under pressure from the RPF in peace talks, the Government re-
 moved several local and regional officials for suspected involvement in this ethnic
 and political violence. However, an interministerial commission found that local au-
 thorities had, by and large, responded appropriately to the violence, and the Govern-
 ment took little disciplinary action. It reassigned many of these local officials to im-
 portant posts, and none had been brought to trial on either civil or criminal charges
 yyersend.
 In the aftr rmath of the ethnic violence in the first quarter, the authorities
 charged about 400 persons with arson or murder. Approximately one-third of these
 had been tried by year's end, and 77 were convicted in trials generally believed to
 be fair, with sentences ranging from prison terms to the death penalty.
 The RPF was guilty of political and extrajudicial killings during its February of-
 fensive, includingtargetinglocal officials such as judges (see Section 1.g.).
 Following the RPF attack, persons suspected of being RPF sympathizers, usually
 Tutsies b sometime oppositiron party members, lost their lives at the hands of the
 Rwandan military or other party members. Human rights organizations documen.ed
 cases north of Kigali, ust south of the war front, where the military shot to death
 Tutsis, sometimes whoie families or sometimes just the men, usually at checkpoints.
 Other cases indicated that the military beat to death detainees, usually held for
 laTing proper identification, including at least five detainees in a military camp in
 central Kigali. Gendarmes abducted three Tutsi (Bagowe) students from the cam-
 pus of an Adventist University in February. Their bodies, along with two others,
 
 
 were subsequently found near the school. Human rights monitors reported that as
 many as four unclaimed bodies, showing signs of beatings or bullet wounds, were
 buried in Kigali each day in late February. Most of these extrajudicial killings re-
 main unsolved, although a military court has convicted some soldiers for vengeance
 killings.
 Allegations of the existence of Rwandan death squads persisted. In May unknown
 assailants killed a prominent opposition politician and in August a well-known local
 official. A report in March from an International Commission of Inquiry into Viola-
 tions of Human Rights in Rwanda since October 1, 1990, also gave some supAort
 to these allegations. The Commission, comprised of human rights monitors from
 eight countries, spent 2 weeks in Rwanda in January, and its report identified indi-
 viduals suspected of involvement in death squad activity. Several persons identified
 in the report subsequently denied the allegations, and the credibility of one of the
 Commission's witnesses, who claimed he had participated in death squad activities,
 had not been establshed by year's end.
 b. Disappearance.. -Local human rights monitors documented at least 10 dis-
 appearances in 1993. Most cases involved individuals suspected of being RPF sym-
 pathizers who were last seen in the custody of gendarmes or government military
 personnel or are believed to have been arrested or abducted by government authori-
 ties. In one case, a returning Rwandan refugee of Tutsi origin was stopped and
 questioned by MRND youth and subsequentlybeaten and taken to a gendarme bri-
 gade headquarters in  ai on suspicion of being an RPF sympathizer. He has not
 been seen since. In addition to these documented cases, local human rights organi-
 zations looked into several other cases of reported disappearances. In most cases,
 however, the local human rights monitors were unable to verify that the individuals
 existed.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Torture, although not explicitly outlawed, is contrary to the Constitution and Peace
 Accord, which together constitute the fundamental law of the land.
 Early in the year, security forces somemetes used torture as part of interrogations.
 During the first quarter, their mistreatment of civilians, especially Tutsis, increased
 sharply. Security forces responsible for civilian safety outside the war zone occasion-
 ally arrested, beat, tortured, and killed persons suspected of sympathy with the RPF
 (see Section l.a.). These abuses decreased markedly after the Minister of Defense
 ordered an end to abusive behavior at military checkpoints.
 There were many incidents of arbitrary beatings by security forces and political
 p arty youth groups in the politically charged atmosphere of January and February.
 In January MRND and CDR youth blocked roads and attacked Thtsis and political
 opponents in the northeast of the country. In one case, MRNDCDRyouth beat
 Rwandan employees of Care International in their homes for suspected symahy
 with the RPF. Local security forces did not intervene to end the violence.
 Government soldiers frequently rahd women and high school girls as they with-
 drew from the front in the face of the RPF advane (see also Sections 1.g. and 5).
 Credible reports indicate that one gendarme in the gendarmerie interrogation
 unit, which was trained in non-abusive interrogation techniques in 1992, tortured
 at least five persons in 1993. One victim, a soldier detainedin a military camp on
 suspicion of attempted assassination, was later transferred to the Kigaliprison and
 released after being acquitted of illegally carrying a grenade. The gendarme was
 transferred to another post after human rights watchers alerted superiors to his be-
 havior.
 Prisons are overcrowded, poorly maintained, and occasionally the site of deadly
 violence among prisoners. Delegates of the International Committee of the Red
 Cross (ICRC) have regular access to prisoners and gendarme brigades. ICRC also
 has access to military camps but not to detainees, if any, held there.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Except for suspects caught in the act of
 committing crimes, the law requires that arrests be made with a warrant following
 an investigation. Under the law, persons may be detained for no more than 48 hours
 without a warrant. Within 5 days of arrest, charges must be stated formally in the
 defendant's presence, or the Court of Appeals must approve a public prosecutor's re-
 quest for a 30-day preventive detention order.
 Preventive detention is permitted if public safety is believed to be threatened, if
 the accused might flee, or if the penalty carries a minimum sentence of 6 months.
 Detention may be prolonged indefinitely, but judicial review is mandatory every 30
 days. Detainees may appeal their incarceration, and the appeal must be heard with-
 in 24 hours by a competent judicial authority. These procedures apply to all persons
 suspected of crimes and are generally respected in practice. Failure to meet any of
 these requirements constitutes grounds for release of the arrested person and dis-
 
 
 missal of the case. Bail is not available under Rwandan law, but suspects are often
 released on their own recognizance pending trial.
 During February, following resumption of hostilities between government forces
 and the RPF, the military arrested and detained a number of civilians, usually
 Tutsi, suspected of complicity with the RPF. They were detained temporarily by the
 military in military camps in Gisenyi, Gitarama, and Kigali, allegedly for not having
 proper identification papers. Intervention by the Minister of Defense or action by
 human rights groups generally resulted in the release of these detainees or their
 transfer to civilian prisons. These arrests were not widespread, as was the case after
 the outbreak of war in 1990, and the judicial system was not involved.
 There are no known cases of politicians or journalists being arrested or detained
 in 1993 for expressing views critical of the Government. No action has been taken
 in the security cases pending since 1992 against three journalists who remain at lib-
 erty. Illegal detentions in criminal cases continue to be common due to delays in
 processing and unfamiliarity of untrained magistrates with judicial procedures.
 Pretrial detainees, who comprise the majority of prisoners, may wait for a year
 or more for a court date due to the backlog of cases. There are no known cases of
 political detainees still in custody, either in prisons or military camps. Following the
 signing of the Peace Accord, the ICRC returned 12 prisoners of war (POW's) held
 by the RPF to the Government and the Government returned 6 POW's to the RPF.
 Exile is not practiced as a form of punishment. However, thousands of Rwandans
 mainly Tutsi, have been in exile for over 30 years in neighboring countries and
 abroad. Between 2,000 and 4,000 such exiles or their children comprised the RPF
 invasion force in October 1990. The Peace Accord incorporates into law the right of
 return; a December 1991 law grants blanket amnesty to refugees and exiles who
 choose to repatriate.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judicial system has separate court systems
 for criminal/civil cases and military cases. Decisions may be appealed to the appro-
 priate regional court of appeals. At the request of counsel or of defendants, the Cour
 de Cassation will review civil and criminal cases for errors in procedure or in the
 application of the law. Errors can result in retrial by another panel of judges. The
 State Security Court, abolished by the Peace Accord, had been defunct since the coa-
 lition Government announced its abolition in mid-1992.
 The judicial system is susceptible to government influence and manipulation. Al-
 though the Constitution provides for an independent judiciary it also makes the ju-
 dicial system dependent on the executive branch and gives the President ultimate
 authority to appoint and dismiss judges. Also, the judicial system is hampered by
 the low educational level of the vast majority of judicial officials, the lack of mate-
 rial and equipment for the courts, and the absence of compiled jurisprudence.
 The revitalization of the magistrature, anticipated following passage of a law in
 1992 enhancing the role of magistrates in decisions affecting the judiciary, did not
 occur. Instead, controversy over the legality of the leadership and initial decisions
 of the newly constituted Superior Council of Magistrates paralyzed the judicial sys-
 tem. In addition, Rwanda had no Minister of Justice during the first 6 months of
 1993.
 All trials are public. Defendants are constitutionally entitled to counsel but often
 are not represented at trial by counsel because of a shortage of lawyers. There are
 only about 40 trained private lawyers in Rwanda, mostly in Kigali, and approxi-
 mately 100 officially recognized "legal agents" who may represent defendants in
 court.
 There were no known political prisoners in custody at year's end.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the respect of privacy of individuals, correspondence, and
 communications and declares that the home is inviolable. These provisions are gen-
 erally respected, but occasionally Rwandans are subject to interference in their pri-
 vate lives. During a brief period following renewed hostilities in February, gen-
 darmes looking for hidden weapons entered homes in several parts of Kigali without
 the required warrants, sometimes in the middle of the night or just before dawn.
 The military conducted a predawn search of homes of suspected RPF sympathizers
 in the commune of Murambi in December, beating occupants in the course of search-
 ing for weapons.
 Surveillance of political parties, associations, and individuals is not practiced.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-Both government and RPF forces committed extensive violations of humani-
 tarian law. A cease-fire established in July 1992 between the Government and the
 RPF held until February and then was reestablished in March. During the month-
 long RPF offensive, an undetermined number of deaths and injuries to combatants
 and civilians occurred from artillery, mortars, and small arms fire.
 
 
 230
 
 Retreating soldiers came to be regarded with fear by the populace because of their
 undisciplined looting and raping. They-not the fighting-were responsible for much
 of the damage to houses schools and clinics in the war zone.
 Both the military and the RPP are suspected of responsibility for a "killing field"
 containing scores of human skeletons in the war zone of northeastern Rwanda, in
 an area that changed hands several times during the February hostilities.
 The RPF committed many human rights abuses against civilians during its Feb-
 ruary offensive. Credible reports indicate that in the first days of the attack in the
 Ruhengeri area, the RPF used grenades against groups of civilians and targeted for
 death specific authorities, including several judges and a local administrator impli-
 cated in the deaths of Bagogwe, a Tutsi subgroup. There was no evidence, however,
 to support allegations that the RPF used chemical weapons against displaced per-
 sons or that it massacred hundreds of Rwandans trapped behind RPF lines.
 The number of displaced persons reached nearly 1 million, 600,000 displaced for
 the first time and 350,000 re-displaced, some for the fourth time. A massive relief
 oeration to assist displaced persons was mounted by the Government, the ICRC,
 the local Red Cross, international organizations, nongovernmental organizations
 and bilateral donors. Relief assistance continued, but most of the newly displaced
 had returned to their homes by the end of August, following the signing of the Peace
 Accord. The combatants permitted the !CRC and the World Food Program to bring
 in relief supplies from Uganda through the combat zone before and after the Feb-
 ruary offensive, although there were substantial interruptions.
 There were also random acts of violence involving grenades, land mines, and
 bomb explosions for which no one claimed responsibility. About 50 judicial cases in-
 volving mines are pending, but none had come to trial by year's end. Armed robbery,
 often involving use of grenades, common in urban areas, resulted in numerous
 deaths and injuries. Some sich robberies may have been linked to political intimida-
 tion.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 andpress. Except in areas experiencing violence, freedom of speech was widely exer-
 cised by political parties, human rights associations, the private press, and the gov-
 ernment media.
 Although the electronic media is expanding, the government-owned and operated
 radio station dominates the media and is the most important means of reaching the
 public. Since the opening to a multi party system in 1991 and the appointment of
 an opposition minister to head the Ministry of Information in 1992, the radio com-
 monly airs opposing viewpoints, including criticism of government policies. Political
 groups have complained about being denied access for their press releases and cov-
 erage for their political activities and positions. The new government-owned and op-
 erated television station, which broadcasts on weekends and now reaches 70 percent
 of the country, is considered more balanced in its news coverage than the radio.
 The press,'both government and private, became more professional in its report-
 ing and, consequently, more tolerated by authorities and prominent individuals.
 Three newspapers dominate the print media: a government-owned weekly, an inde-
 pendent Catholic biweekly, and a private rural-oriented monthly.
 The press law pirvides for stiff penalties for insulting the President and requires
 editors to file copies of each edition of their papers with specified authorities, includ-
 ing the public prosecutor, prior to distribution, but this has resulted neither in cen-
 sorship nor self-censorship. The authorities did not arrest or detain any journalists
 during 1993 and took no action against three journalists, who remain at liberty
 charged with security violations pending since 1992. Unknown percons assassinated
 a television journalist in front of his home in April, but it is unclear whether his
 death was connected with his work. No one was arrested for the crime. Another
 journalist, Afrika Janvier, who claimed while in custody that he had participated
 in "death squad" activities, chose to remain in prison pending appeal of his convic-
 tion for defamation of the President.
 Political, ethnic, and regional tensions often affect professorial appointments in
 the national university system, but there was no apparent ideological pressure on
 teaching, research or curriculum.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of peaceful assembly. Permits for outdoor rallies, demonstrations, and meet-
 ings require 6-day advance notice, but political party rallies are routinely held
 throughout the country, except in combat zones, without official interference or ob-
 struction.
 Unauthorized demonstrations in January, particularly by party youth, both in
 Kigali and in the north of the covntry, resulted in property damage, numerous inju-
 
 
 ries, and some deaths. After hostilities resumed, the President called on political
 parties to suspend party rallies and meetings. Oposition parties objected publicly
 to this proposal, but they never tested it. Normalpolitical activity resumed after a
 cease-fire was reestablished in March.
 Citizens were generally free to join the political party of their choice, but some-
 times MRND and CDR party youth used violence against persons affiliated with a
 different party or with no party (see Sections L.a and 1.c.). Political parties, now
 numbering 18, and civic associations, which have proliferated since 1991, must reg-
 ister with the Ministry of the Interior and with the Ministry of Justice, respectively.
 There were no instances of registrations being denied.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Freedom of religion is provided for in the Constitution
 and is generally accorded to religious communities. At the end of 1992, the Govern-
 ment dropped its objections to the Jehovah's Witnesses, who are now free to practice
 their religion. Christianity predominates with the largest segment of the population
 adhering to Catholicism. Muslims constitute a small minority but freely practice
 their religion.
 There was no discrimination against foreign clergy, and no restrictions on con-
 struction of places of worship, training of clergy, religious publishing, or religious
 education.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation. -Freedom of movement and residence are restricted by laws and regula-
 tions which require all residents to hold national identity cards and residence and
 work permits. Police conduct periodic checks, especially in urban areas, and return
 all those not registered in the locality to their own commune. Property owners who
 do not require tenants to show valid documentation are subject to fines and even
 imprisonment. Undocumented tenants are subject to expulsion.
 A nightly curfew, introduced following the outbreak of war in 1990, was extended
 following resumption of hostilities in February, and then lifted after the Peace Ac-
 cord was signed, except in the former war zone. Military checkpoints, too, were in-
 creased when hostilities resumed but nearly eliminated afer August.
 Passports for foreign travel are normally obtained by Rwandans who seek them.
 Following the signing of the Peace Accord, the Government began issuing passports
 upon request to Rwandan refugees and exiles. Emigration is not restricted.
 The Peace Accord protocol on refugees incorporates into law the right of refugees
 to return. Estimates of refugees and exiles living in neighboring countries and else-
 where range from 500,000 to more than 1 million. Most are ethnic Tutsis and their
 descendants, who fled Rwanda in 1959 and during subsequent ethnic violence asso-
 ciated with independence in 1962. Individual refugees and exiles, including some
 Tutsis from Burundi, began to return in 1993, but planning continued for organized
 return of those who desire government assistance. A 1991 law grants amnesty to
 refugees for crimes committed before the law went into effect.
 Nearly 300,000 refugees from Burundi poured into Rwanda in October to escape
 ethnic violence following the abortive coup attempt and assassination of Melchior
 Ndadaye, Burondi's first president of Hutu origin. These refugees are situated in
 camps along the length of the Rwandan border with Burondi. Prior to this recent
 influx, Rwanda was hosting approximately 23,000 refugees, mainly Hutus from Bu-
 rundi, most of whom had fled massacres in 1972. Most retained Burundi citizenship
 but were integrated into Rwandan society. Between the time of the Burundi Presi-
 dent's election in June 1993 and his assassination in October, more Burundi refu-
 gees sought repatriation than could be immediately accommodated. During this pe-
 riod, almost all who had fled to Rwanda after violence in 1988 and 199f, as well
 as some who had been in Rwanda since 1972, repatriated under the auspices of the
 United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. Some of these repatriates re-
 turned to Rwanda after the coup attempt, having lost family members in the subse-
 quent ethnic violence.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens did not have the ability to change their government through democratic
 means. Nevertheless, under a powersharing agreement reached in 1992, four opposi-
 tion parties participated in a five-party coalition Government with President
 Habyarimana and the former sole party, the MRND. Nearly one-quarter of the dep-
 uties in the legislature declared themselves members of parties other than the
 MRND. The Peace Accord, which had not gone into full effect by the end of the year,
 defers nationwide, multiparty elections for President and Parliament, calle for
 under the 1991 Constitution, until the end of the 22-month transition period.
 The U.N. Security Council voted on October 5 to send a new U.N. force to Rwanda
 to assist with implementation of the Peace Accord. The U.N. mission will be respon-
 
 
 232
 sible for assisting in providing security for Kigali so that the broad-based govern-
 ment can be installed, for monitoring government and RPF observance of the cease-
 fire and adherence to the Peace Accord provisions on the integration of the armed
 forces, for assisting in providing security for returning refugees, and for monitoring
 the security situation in the period leading up to elections.
 The Peace Accord signed in August and the 1991 Constitution together constitute
 the Fundamental Law of Rwanda. The Accord calls for President Habyarimana to
 remain President during the transition period with the prime minister to come from
 a different political party. Government ministers and deputies in the 70-person leg-
 islature, the transition national assembly, are to be named by their political parties
 to positions distributed among the parties according to formulas worked out at the
 peace negotiations. Six parties, including the RPF, will comprise the government
 and 17 parties are authorized to hold seats in the legislature (two parties declined).
 The enlarged transition government will be responsible for developing an electoral
 law, establishing an electoral commission, and drafting a new constitution, to be
 submitted to national referendum.
 There are no legal restrictions on the participation of women in political life, but
 women are poorly represented in politics and government. Three women held min-
 isterial portfolios, including that of Prime Minister, and several, representing dif-
 ferent parties, served as deputies in the legislature. Toward the end of the year, po-
 litical parties began selecting deputies to be named to the new transition national
 assembly. While the selection process was not yet complete at year's end, it appears
 that the new Assembly will have considerably fewer female deputies than the pre-
 vious legislature. Former female deputies report that their chances of competing on
 an equal footing with men within a competitive party system are nil.
 Although there are no legal restraints to their participation in the political proc-
 ess, the Twa (Pygmies) are not represented in key positions, including any in
 Rwanda's emerging political parties.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Rwanda has nine human rights organizations, five formed in 1990 and 1991 and
 four formed in 1993. Those formed earliest, which have joined together in a consor-
 tium, regularly investigate allegations of human rights abuses, make representa-
 tions to public officials, publish press releases and reports of investigations, and
 generally seek redress on behalf of victims. These organizations have been instru-
 mental in alerting officials to abuses of authority and in prompting early interven-
 tions to redress or contain ethnic violence, arbitrary arrest, or torture (see Sections
 L.a. and 1.d.).
 While their work was generally unhindered, individual human rights monitors ex-
 perienced intimidation and sometimes violent harassment from unidentified sources.
 For example, an unknown assailant attempted to assassinate human rights monitor
 Alphonse Nkubito on November 14. He sustained injuries from grenade fragments.
 Local officials in some areas where abuses occurred prevented access to human
 rights monitors or warned citizens against talking to them. Prominent human rights
 monitors frequently received threatening anonymous phone calls.
 The more recently formed associations trace all human rights problems in Rwan-
 da to the war launched by the RPF in 1990, a view shared by the MRND and au-
 thorities supportive of the President. They were largely inactive, but one published
 a commentary criticizing the International Human Rights Commission's findings
 (see below). A National Human Rights Commission with investigative authority,
 called for in the Rule of Law Protocol of the Peace Accord, has yet to be established.
 Rwanda cooperates with outside governmental and nongovernmental human
 rights groups. in January an "International Commission of Inquiry on Violations of
 Human Rights in Rwanda since October 1, 1990," composed of experts from eight
 countries, spent 2 weeks investigating past and then-current human rights abuses.
 Its report, released in March, accused government officials, including President
 Habyarimana, of responsibility for massacres. In response, the President and Prime
 Minister issued a joint statement acknowledging past wrongs and setting forth pro-
 posals for preventing future abuses. There has been minimum followup.
 Rwandan human rights monitors are in frequent contact with international
 human rights grups and receive considerable financial support from abroad. The
 International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) continued to have unrestricted ac-
 cess to prisons and gendarmeries, but the Government again denied the ICRC re-
 quest for access to detainees, if any, in military camps.
 
 
 233
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides that all citizens are equal before the law, without any
 discrimination because of race, color, origin, ethnicity, clan, sex, opinion, religion, or
 social standing. Rwanda's political parties' law bans parties based on ethnic origin
 or religious affiliation. In practice, a number of groups experience discrimination.
 Women.-Despite Constitutional provisions, women continue to face serious de
 facto discrimination. Women play only a minor role in political life and the modern
 economy and traditionally perform most of the subsistence farming. They have lim-
 ited opportunities for education, employment, and promotion. According to a 1991
 U.N. study, females receive only 33 percent of the schooling of males. In support
 of women's rights, President Ha arimana encouraged family planning, and a new
 Family Code went into effect in 1992. The Code generally improves the legal posi-
 tion of women in marriage, divorce, and child custody, but it still does not meet
 Rwanda's international and constitutional commitments to gender equality. For ex-
 ample, it formally recognizes men as heads of households. Also, the absence of suc-
 cession laws limits a woman's right to property, thus jeopardizing her status and
 ability to provide for her family, should she survive her usband.
 Violence against women, including wife beating, occurs and is thought to be wide-
 spread. Cases involving domestic volence rarely come before the courts. Instead,
 wife beating and domestic violence are normally handled within the context of the
 extended family. A woman seeking family help is generally thought to be seeking
 advice about how to improve her conduct. Only if family counseling fails is the mat-
 ter likely to be tsken to outside entities, such as the courts, and divorce is usually
 the next step. Although the number of groups promoting women's interests have
 proliferated since the opening to democracy, none addresses directly the issue of vio-
 lence against women.
 Rm     became a maor issue as soldiers left the front following renewed hostilities
 roary (see                         s .c.).
 Children.-The Government does not have a specific policy nor any resources ear-
 marked for children's welfare.
 By law, the State is required to pay for the education of orphans, prohibit impris-
 onment of minors with adults, protect minors from labor exploitation, and provide
 for a foster parent system. In practice, funds and oversight mechanisms to imple-
 ment these pro grams do not exist.
 Indigenous teople.-Less than 1 percent of the population comes from the Twa
 ethnic group. These indigenous people, survivors of the Pygmy tribes of the moun-
 tainous forest areas bordering Zaire, exist on the margins of society and continue
 to be treated as second-class citizens by both Hutus and Tutsis. The Twa have not
 been able to protect their interests which center on access to land and housing. Few
 Twa have gained aciess to the education system, resulting in minimal representa-
 tion in government structures.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Ethnicity is a sensitive issue as a result of
 Rwanda's ethnic imbalae and its historical legacy. About 85 percent of the popu-
 lation is Hutu, 14 percent Tutsi, and 1 percent Twa. Citizens cary identity docu-
 ments that clearly identify ethnic origin, but the Peace Accord requires that this ref-
 erence be eliminated. A policy of ethnic quotas, which allocates positions to ethnic
 group members in proportion to their numbers, has in practice limited access of
 Tutsis to education, training, and government employment. No provision is made for
 the Twa. Procedures introduced by the coalition Government in place since 1992
 have reduced the impact of the quota system on access to secondary school and
 eliminated some employment barriers. The projected integration of government and
 RPF samed frces, ipart of the peace settlement, would redress the virtual absence
 of Tutsis in the security apparatus of the country. Apparently as a consequence of
 public sector discrimination, Tutsis are well represented in the private sector and
 the clergy.
 People with Disabilities.-There are no laws restricting people with disabilities
 from employment, education, or other state services, but i practice, few handi-
 capped persons have had access to education and thus to employment. Nor are there
 any laws or provisions to assure access of the disabled tonpublic premises. The num-
 ber of handicapped is increasing among both civilians and military injured in bomb,
 landmine, andigrenade incidents associated with the war or armed assaults. The
 military is in the process of training war-wounded soldiers for productive employ-
 ment within or outside the military.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Assciation.-The 1991 Constitution provides all Rwandans the
 right of association and freedom to create professional associations and labor unions.
 
 
 Union membership is open to all salaried workers, including public sector employ-
 ees, and is optional. There are no restrictions on the right of association but all
 unions must register with the Ministry of Justice for official recognition. There are
 no known cases in which the Government has denied such recognition. Unions are
 prohibited by law from having political affiliations.
 Organizedlabor represents only a small part of the total work force; most Rwan-
 dan workers--over 90 percent-are engaged in small-scale subsistence farming.
 About 7 percent of the total labor force is employed in the modern (wage) sector,
 including both public and private industrial production, and about 75 percent of
 those active in the modern sector are members of labor unions.
 Before 1991 the Central Union of Rwandan Workers (CESTRAR) was the only au-
 thorized trade union organization in the country. With the political reforms intro-
 duced by the 1991 Constitution, CESTRAR officially became independent of the
 Government and the MRND, but in practice it still has close informal ties to that
 arty. CESTRAR, which is a federation of 17 labor unions, has approximately
 0,000 members and represents about 42 percent of the labor force in the modern
 sector.
 In 1993 the Government officially recognized the Union of Primary School-
 teachers, bringing to five the number of unions recognized since 1991. In competing
 for membershi with CESTRAR, these five unions have decided to consolidate their
 recruitment e forts and enhance their bargaining power by forming a loose confed-
 eration to be called the Confederation of Liberal Syndicates (COSYU). The other
 independent unions in COSYU are: The United Association of Health Personnel in
 Rwanda; the Interprofessional Union of Workers of Rwanda; the Union of Secondary
 Schoolteachers; and the Association of Christian Unions (representing public and
 private sector workers, small businessmen, and some subsistence farmers).
 The Constitution provides to all workers, except workers in the public service sec-
 tor, the right to strike. Union members have the right to strike with the approval
 of their executive committee, provided they first try to resolve their differences with
 management according to certain steps prescribed by the Ministry of Labor and So-
 cial Affairs. Laws prohibiting retribution against strikers exist but have never been
 enforced.
 In 1993 there were several strikes against public and private sector firms. One
 involved workers within CESTRAR's own executive bureau who had not been paid
 in several months. Neither CESTRAR nor the other labor unions officially organized
 these strikes. Workers' demands focused on wages, benefits, and working conditions.
 Although the strikes were wildcat in nature, the Government treated them as legiti-
 mate and acted as a facilitator in the workers' negotiations with management. In
 most cases, CESTRAR played a supporting role (except in its own labor dispute).
 Labor organizations may affiliate with international labor bodies. CESTRAR is af-
 filiated with the Organization of African Trade Union Unity and the International
 Confederation of Free Trade Unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Constitution grants
 workers the right to defend their rights through collective action. Only CESTRAR
 has an established collective bargaining agreement with the Government. Although
 newly established labor unions have yet to develop similar procedures, their mem-
 bers are not prevented from engaging in collective bargaining. In practice, as most
 workers are in the public sector, the Government is intimately involved in the proc-
 ess (see Section 6.e. below).
 There are no legal bars to antiunion discrimination, but such discrimination has
 not occurred in practice. There are no formal mechanisms to resolve complaints in-
 volving discrimination against unions.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced and Compulsory Labor.-Forced labor is prohibited by law
 and is not known to occur in practice.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children. -Except in the subsistence agri-
 culture sector, which involves most Rwandans, by law children under 18 are not
 permitted to work without their parents' or guardians' authorization, and they may
 work at night only under exceptional circumstances on a temporary basis. Labor
 laws set the minimum age for full employment at 18 years and for apprenticeships
 at 14 years, providing the child has completed primary school. The Minister of
 Labor, who is responsible for enforcement, has the right to permit a child under the
 age of 14 to work, but this has reportedly never been tested in practice. Enforce-
 ment of child labor laws is lax; nevertheless, apart from children working in family-
 owned businesses, child labor outside the agricultural sector is uncommon.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Minimum wage rates in the small modern sec-
 tor of the economy are set administratively by the Ministry of Labor. The minimum
 wage is $1.08 (150 Rwandan francs) for an 8-hour workday. The Government, the
 
 
 main employer in the country, effectively sets most other wage rates as well. The
 minimum wage is inadequate to provide a decent standard of lving for urban fami.
 lies and is often supplemented by work in small business or subsistence agriculture.
 In practice, the minimum wage rate is self-enforcing since workers will not work
 for less.
 Government offices have a 40-hour workweek by law. Negotiations between the
 unions, government, and management are under way to reduce the workweek from
 45 to 40 hours a week in the private sector as well. Hours of work and occupational
 health and safety standards in the modern wage sector are controlled by law but
 only loosely enforced by labor inspectors from the Ministry of Labor. Workers do not
 have the right to remove themselves from dangerous work situations.
