 RWANDA
 Rwanda is a one-party state. The present Government came to
 power in a non-violent coup in 1973 and has since been
 confirmed in office by two uncontested elections. Rwanda's
 President, Major General Juvenal Habyarimana, is also the
 founder of the single party, the National Revolutionary
 Movement for Development. Government policy is set by the
 President in consultation with the party's Central Committee
 and the Council of Ministers. Laws are adopted by the
 National Development Council (the legislature), which was
 established in 1982. In December 1983, President Habyarimana,
 the sole candidate, was reelected along with a new slate of
 deputies. Although all of the legislative candidates had to
 be approved by the party, the race was open to almost all who
 chose to run.
 Rwanda's pre-independence traditional feudal society,
 dominated by the Tutsi ethnic group (10 percent of the
 population, according to the 1978 census), was transformed in
 1959 by a revolution of the majority Hutu (89 percent of the
 population) into a society with a stronger emphasis on
 individual rights. An ethnic majority government confirmed
 these internal changes at independence in 1962. During the
 next decade, Hutu efforts to redress the social, economic, and
 educational imbalance led to division and corruption among
 Hutus and sporadic ethnic strife. This gave rise to the coup
 d'etat which brought President Habyarimana to power.
 In 1984, a cabinet reshuffle brought into office a new
 Minister of Justice, one of whose tasks has been to implement
 the commitment to human rights enunciated by the President in
 his inaugural address on January 8. Measures included a
 general amnesty of several thousand 'common law* prisoners, a
 tightening up of pre-charging detention regulations, removal
 of the security officers responsible for abuses in 1983, and a
 program of prison reform.
 Most Rwandans are poor rural farmers. There is little
 industry, and imports are expensive because of high
 transportation costs. Nevertheless, Rwandan economic
 development has managed to keep pace with the country's 3.7
 percent population growth rate. A new National Labor
 Organization was launched in 1984.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no reports of politically motivated killings or
 summary executions in Rwanda in 1984.
 b. Disappearance
 Unexplained disappearances have not occurred in recent years.
 Arrests are made openly, and all trials except those for
 national security cases are public.
 
 
 254
 RWANDA
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 While torture is not specifically proscribed by law, the
 Constitution states, 'The human person is sacred: its
 inviolability is assured." Following the beating of three
 women in a hotel in late November 1983, the Government
 undertook an investigation, at the end of which they
 discharged the police officers responsible.
 Corporal punishment is not permitted. Prisoners receive equal
 treatment but neglect, overcrowding, and inadequate guard
 training have rendered prison conditions generally poor. A
 new prison with better facilities has been opened near Kigali,
 which should help improve the situation. The new Minister of
 Justice has made the improvement of the prison system his
 first priority. All classes of prisoners may now have monthly
 visits by their families.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Except for suspects caught committing crimes, arrests normally
 occur with the service of a warrant following investigation.
 Except in rare cases where the defendant is not available,
 charges must be formally stated in the defendant's presence
 within five days of arrest. Failure to meet that provision is
 grounds for dismissal of the charges. Under preventive
 detention provisions, however, persons may be held for 30
 days. At the end of that period, a judicial review is
 mandatory. If warranted, the detention can be prolonged
 indefinitely in 30-day periods. These provisions have not
 been invoked during the past year. Detainees may appeal their
 incarceration, and the appeal must be heard within 24 hours by
 a competent judicial authority. There have been no known
 exceptions to the legally mandated warrant procedures and no
 detentions for political offenses in 1984.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Although all defendants are constitutionally entitled to
 representation, a shortage of lawyers makes it difficult for
 the accused to prepare an adequate defense. Family and other
 non-professional counsel is permitted.
 The judiciary is statutorily independent and expected to apply
 the penal code impartially, but the President names and
 dismisses magistrates. New laws in January 1982 strengthened
 somewhat the independence of the judiciary by improving the
 nominating process and more closely defining the exercise of
 judicial functions and the promotion and discipline of
 judicial personnel. Rwanda has three separate court systems
 to deal with criminal/civil, military, and state security
 cases. All but security cases may ultimately be appealed to
 the court of appeals. A separate state security court has
 original jurisdiction over treason and other national security
 charges. In previous years, some cases tried before this
 court have resulted in innocent verdicts.
 Amnesty International adopted 24 prisoners of conscience in
 1983. These prisoners had been arrested in 1980 and inter
 alia convicted of distributing tracts which criticized senior
 government officials. In 1984, 16 of these prisoners were
 released.
 
 
 255
 RWANDA
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Rwandans are subject to some interference in their private
 lives, following practices inherited from the former monarchy
 which ruled the country for several hundred years. Police are
 normally required to have warrants before entering a private
 residence. Using the pretext of checking required
 documentation, police authorities can gain unwarranted entry
 into homes. A person can move out of his home commune only
 with the permission of the mayor of the commune into which he
 wishes to move; the Government can bar a person from specific
 employment, but not all employment; and people must carry
 identification cards. On the other hand, there is no evidence
 of the monitoring of private correspondence, and the receipt
 of foreign publications is permitted. There is no
 interference with the right to marry or have children as one
 chooses.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedoms of speech and press are guaranteed by law, but public
 criticism of the Government is conspicuously lacking. This is
 probably due as much to the tradition of respecting authority,
 which became engrained in the national character during the
 long history of the now defunct monarchy, as from fear of
 sanctions. Some members of the National Development Council
 have criticized government policies and practices from the
 floor of the Council. Candidates in the December 1983
 legislative elections were prohibited from expressing private
 opinions or advocating policies at rallies, which are
 carefully focused by party officials upon party doctrine. No
 private campaigning was permitted.
 Radio broadcasts, a daily press bulletin, and a weekly
 newspaper are produced by the Government. Two Catholic Church
 publications sometimes print muted criticism of political and
 economic conditions. Such criticism is tolerated and
 occasionally even encouraged by the Government. There is no
 record of any journalist having been arrested for what he has
 written. The Government has cautioned the press, however, to
 avoid what it regards as 'harmful* criticism of leaders and
 maintains that the press should devote its efforts to
 'promoting development.' Books and imported publications are
 not censored, and academic freedom is respected. Faculty
 members at universities can conduct research and draw
 conclusions as they see fit.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly is limited. There have been no public
 meetings or demonstrations to express overt opposition to
 government policies. The Government permits private
 associations, but requires that they be registered and
 accorded legal recognition before they may function.
 The Constitution guarantees the right to unionize and strike,
 and in August 1984 a labor confederation was formed. This
 confederation is organized under the guidance of the party,
 which must approve its choice of officers. All member unions
 of the confederation will have the right to strike, but only
 with the approval of the executive bureau of the
 
 
 256
 RWANDA
 confederation. In the meetings attendant on the
 confederation's creation, the responsibility of labor to
 contribute to the development of the nation and to transcend
 parochial interests of individual workers and trades were
 recurrent themes. Despite obvious limitations, the
 confederation will provide a voice for Rwanda labor which has
 not previously existed. In addition, the Government has
 permitted seminars on labor issues, organized by unofficial
 local labor bodies, which receive some support from foreign
 labor considerations and the International Labor Organization..
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is protected constitutionally and
 respected in practice. The population is some 70 percent
 Christian and one percent Muslim, with the remainder following
 traditional or no religious practices. Eighty percent of the
 Christians belong to the Roman Catholic Church, but there are
 active Protestant denominations as well. The Government does
 not openly favor one religion over another, although the
 Catholic Archbishop of Kigali is a member of the party's
 Central Committee, and all but one or two members of the
 Council of Government are Catholic. The President and other
 Catholic government and party officials regularly attend
 special services of all denominations. The Government depends
 upon church-supported schools for a considerable portion of
 education in Rwanda (e.g., over 85 percent of secondary
 schools are church-supported).
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Freedom of residence within Rwanda is restricted by laws and
 regulations, which require people to hold national identity
 cards and residence and work permits. People who wish to
 spend more than three days in a commune other than their own
 are required to obtain permission from the communal
 authorities where they will be visiting. Property owners who
 do not require renters to show valid documentation are subject
 to fines and even imprisonment. 'Clandestine* renters are
 subject to expulsion.
 Foreign travel is closely controlled through the granting or
 refusal of passports, preceded by a security check of each
 applicant. As a result Rwandans often are denied permission
 to travel abroad, usually without formal explanation. In
 addition, a refundable deposit of about $400 is required for
 each passport issued for unofficial travel. This is
 ostensibly to cover the cost of any subsequent repatriation,
 but has the effect of discouraging travel and conserving
 foreign exchange.
 Rwandans may emigrate provided they are properly documented.
 People who left Rwanda as refugees during the revolution or
 for other reasons may be repatriated on a case-by-case basis.
 It is also possible for them to return for short family
 visits, traveling on a "laissez-passer" from the country of
 refuge. Family members remaining in Rwanda may also obtain a
 "laissez-passer" from Rwanda for visits to neighboring
 countries, without having to go through all the formalities of
 a passport application. Rwanda's high population density and
 shortage of land greatly restrict prospects for repatriation
 and resettlement of refugees. Consequently, although Rwanda
 recognizes the citizenship claims of some of the over 30,000
 
 
 257
 RWANDA
 refugees forced into the country from Uganda in October 1982,
 not all of these people have yet been able to leave refugee
 camps for permanent resettlement in Rwanda.
 The refugee camps are well managed and food supplies are
 adequate. In June, troops fired on a group of refugees who
 were attempting to organize opposition to the appointment of a
 block captain. This incident appears to have been a one-time
 occurrence. The Government will not permit any significant
 economic activity which would give the camps an aspect of
 permanency, as long as there is a chance that the Ugandan
 Government will take some of the refugees back. In early
 1983, the Governments of Rwanda and Uganda agreed on a
 procedure for the definitive settlement of the problem through
 the determination of citizenship. Although the interviews
 have been completed, and Rwanda has recognized the citizenship
 of more than 1,000 of the affected people, Uganda's final
 adjudication of the 27,000 persons claiming Ugandan
 citizenship is still pending. The Rwandan Government, the
 United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, and other
 international donors cooperate in operating the camps.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of
 Citizens to Change Their Government
 Rwandans have no opportunity to change their government
 through a free choice of alternative legislative proposals and
 candidates from opposing parties for public office. The
 Constitution institutionalizes the Council of Ministers, the
 legislature, and above all, the power of the President and the
 party. All policy decisions and nominations of candidates for
 public office are made by the party, which is the *single
 political entity beyond which no political activity can be
 exercised.* The party in turn is dominated by its President,
 who chooses the Secretary General and Central Committee and is
 the only constitutionally recognized candidate for President
 of the nation.
 Every citizen is automatically a member of the party and
 theoretically must pay party dues on a sliding scale
 representing one to two days' pay per year. Delegates are
 elected and appointed to the governing national congress,
 which meets every five years, but the essential function of
 the congress is to endorse the program presented by the party
 leadership.
 Elections for public office are contested only by candidates
 approved by the party. Elections provide an occasion to
 confirm rather than change the direction of government.
 Candidatures for the legislative seats of the National
 Development Council may be vetoed by the President.
 The National Development Council has shown a keen interest in
 financial questions, suggested modifications to some proposed
 legislation, and developed specialized committees to
 facilitate its work, but it has not ventured to initiate
 legislation on its own. However, when a member of the
 legislature and former Minister of Social Affairs, Felicien
 Gatabazi, was accused in 1984 of misappropriation of refugee
 funds, the Council defeated a government motion to lift his
 parliamentary immunity. The action became moot at the end of
 the legislative session, when the immunity lapsed in any case,
 but the vote showed that some parliamentary freedom of action
 is possible.
 
 
 258
 RWANDA
 Rwanda's 10 percent Tutsi minority, which dominated the
 country politically and socially before independence, has been
 relegated to a minor role in government, civil service, and
 military in proportion to its numerical representation in the
 population. Women as yet play a marginal role in political
 life. Nevertheless, 9 of 70 legislative deputies are women,
 and there is 1 woman among the 21 members of the party's
 Central Committee.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged
 Violations of Human Rights
 Rwanda participates in African and U.N. human rights
 activities and has made a concentrated effort in recent years
 to improve its human rights record. It hosted an
 international human rights colloquium in 1978, participated in
 an investigation of human rights in the Central African
 Republic in 1979, and helped draft the human rights convention
 of the Organization of African Unity in 1981. Representatives
 of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) have
 made periodic visits to prisons, including Ruhengeri where the
 Lizinde conspiracy prisoners are held. (Theoneste Lizinde,
 the former head of the security police, allegedly led a plot
 in 1980 to overthrow the Government.) In its 1984 report,
 Amnesty International was concerned about 24 prisoners of
 conscience convicted in the 1980 conspiracy and other
 political prisoners who were allegedly subjected to
 deliberately harsh conditions of imprisonment. However,
 Amnesty International also noted some improvements in prison
 conditions during 1983 and that President Habyarimana had
 asked the Minister of Justice and the Roman Catholic
 Archbishop of Kigali to investigate allegations of harsh
 conditions of imprisonment. The results of the investigation
 were not published, but at least 16 of the Lizinde conspiracy
 prisoners were released in 1984. There were no reports of
 requests for outside investigations of alleged human rights
 violations in 1984. Freedom House terms Rwanda 'not free.*
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Rwanda is one of the world's poorest and most densely
 populated countries (6 million people and 3.7 percent annual
 growth in 1984). Adjusted gross national product (GNP) per
 capita has more than doubled since 1970, but still totaled
 only $261 in 1982. Some 95 percent of Rwandans earn their
 living from subsistence farms averaging less than 2 acres, and
 rural income distribution is relatively even. Urban dwellers
 are marginally more prosperous but suffer unemployment, with
 wages lagging behind moderate inflation. The right to own
 property alone or in association is protected. The creation
 of a National Population Office in 1981 and increasing family
 planning resources represent an awakening recognition of the
 need to curtail high population growth.
 Rwanda's principal export crop is coffee, which accounts for
 about 70 percent of foreign exchange earnings and provides the
 bulk of government revenues. The country has little industry
 and must pay high transportation costs (which increased 40
 percent in 1984) to move goods along a 1,100-mile road and
 railroad link to the sea via Uganda and Kenya. Real economic
 growth in recent years has stayed ahead of population growth,
 but prospects that it will continue to do so in the long term
 are dim. Rwanda's trade, investment, and banking policies
 
 
 259
 RWAND4
 encourage modest private sector economic activity. About 85
 percent of Rwanda's small businessmen are Rwandans, and the
 proportion is growing. Foreign investment is stagnant.
 Development goals and projects equally address all regions and
 population groups. Life expectancy has increased from 41
 years in 1968 to about 47 years in 1984, while infant
 mortality has remained at a level of about 127 per 1,000 live
 births (1984). In 1977, Rwandans received about 97 percent of
 their caloric nutritional requirements, and 35 percent of the
 population had access to safe water in 1976. Adult literacy
 stood at 50 percent in 1980, and primary school enrollment as
 a percentage of primary school age children in the population
 expanded from 49 percent in 1960 to 87 percent in 1981.
 The Constitution states, 'All citizens are equal before the
 law, without any discrimination, notably that of race, color,
 origin, ethnicity, clan, sex, opinion, religion, or social
 position." However, the requirement that ethnic origin be
 listed on identity documents helps to insure that informal
 quotas corresponding to the Hutu/Tutsi ratio in society are
 not exceeded. Tutsis are employed in all economic sectors,
 but are better represented in private business than in
 government.
 Women do most of the agricultural labor and have benefited
 less than men from social development. Despite the language
 in the Constitution, women's rights to property are limited,
 and they are not treated on the same basis as men in divorce
 proceedings. Moreover, women have fewer chances for
 education, employment, and promotion, often because the men in
 their lives (fathers, uncles, and husbands) prefer them to
 remain in uneducated traditional roles at home. Family
 planning services are still inadequate but are improving.
 There are virtually no day care services for women who have
 children but wish to work. There are few organizations
 promoting women's interests, and efforts to establish a
 national union of Rwandan women within the male-dominated
 political movement have been unsuccessful.
 
 
 260
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: RWANDA
 1982     1983     1984
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         9.0      8.6     12.8
 LOANS ............... .     0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        9.0      8.6     12.8
 A.AID  .. .....................  6.5    5.3      8.3
 LOANS .............. ... 0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ......... ....     6.5      5.3      8.3
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)..         0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......        2.4      3.2      4.4
 LOANS .............. ... 0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        2.4      3.2      4.4
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE II-TOTAL .........        2.4      3.2      4.4
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.         0.3      0.4      0.4
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        2.1      2.8      4.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...         0.1      0.1      0.1
 LOANS .............. ... 0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............       0.1      0.1      0.1
 PEACE CORPS ......        0.1      0.1      0.1
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL..          0.0      0.1      0.0
 LOANS .............   ... 0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ............       . 0.0     0.1      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS .........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG...          0.0      0.1      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK..          0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS .......         0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...         9.0      8.7     12.8
 LOANS .............. ... .0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        9.0      8.7     12.8
 OTHER US LOANS ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER ..............  ....  0.0     0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1982     1983     1984     1946-84
 TOTAL ........    52.8     54.2     39.6    432.4
 IBRO               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IFC                0.0      0.0      0.3      1.1
 IDA               40.9     36.3      9.0    218.4
 IDB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFDB              10.4     10.4     30.3     108.8
 UNDP               1.5      5.3      0.0     33.6
 OTHER-UN           0.0      2.2      0.0      10.3
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0     60.2
 
 
