Rwanda
Ten years after the end of a genocide and war, the Rwandan government
has created a veneer of stability by suppressing dissent and limiting
the exercise of civil and political rights. It often cites the need to
avoid another genocide as the purported justification for such repressive
measures. Victorious militarily in 1994, the ruling Rwandan Patriotic
Front (RPF) also won elections ending a transition period in 2003, bolstering
its margin of victory by fraud, arrests, intimidation, and appeals
to ethnic fears and loyalties.
In 2004, the RPF further reinforced its control by attacking civil society
organizations, churches, and schools for supposedly disseminating
“genocidal ideology.” Authorities arrested dozens of persons accused of
this crime.
Judicial authorities carried out a sham trial of a former president and
seven others, but few other trials. Tens of thousands of persons
remained jailed on accusations of genocide, some of them detained
more than ten years, and the prosecutor general estimated that another
500,000 persons would be accused of genocide.
In the course of reforming the judicial system, authorities obliged
judges and judicial personnel, more than five hundred of them, to
resign. Fewer than one hundred were re-appointed to positions in the
new system. During this year nearly half the 106 mayors were also
obliged to resign. Authorities insist that those removed lacked competence
or were corrupt, a remarkable charge given the numbers and
responsibilities of those removed.
Limits on Civil and Political Rights
In 2003, a parliamentary commission charged the leading opposition
party with “divisionism” and called for its dissolution. Although there was no further official action against the party, it vanished from the
scene. In June 2004 a similar parliamentary commission called for the
dissolution of the League for the Protection of Human Rights in
Rwanda (LIPRODHOR), the leading human rights organization in
Rwanda, and of four other civil society organizations, said to have
spread “divisionism” or its more extreme manifestation, “genocidal ideology.”
Fearing immediate arrest, a dozen LIPRODHOR staff members
fled the country. In its lengthy report, the commission also charged
more than 300 persons, many Protestant and Catholic churches, international
organizations like Care International, Pax Christi, Trocaire,
and Norwegian People’s Aid, as well as a staff member who administered
grants for the Dutch embassy in Rwanda with supporting the dissemination
of “divisionism” and “genocidal ideology.” It asked that
11.11.11, a Belgian coalition that funded many organizations in
Rwanda, be prohibited from operating in the country. The commission
offered no significant proof for any of its charges, which it made publicly
in parliament and over the national radio. Still suffering the consequences
of the 1994 genocide, Rwandan authorities understandably seek
to end ideas that might contribute to genocide, but the parliamentary
commission seemed intent on eliminating not just those ideas but also
public criticism of government policies, discussion of crimes committed
by the RPF, and expression of support for candidates opposed to the
RPF.
Authorities continue to harass and arbitrarily detain those who tried to
organize a political alternative to the RPF. Pierre Gakwandi and
Leonard Kavutse, both arrested on charges of divisionism prior to the
presidential elections and named in the 2003 parliamentary commission
report, remained in pre-trial detention. Others accused of “divisionism”
lost employment or were deprived of their passports.
The government frequently invokes the role of the media in inciting the
1994 genocide as justification for restricting press freedom, leaving only
one independent newspaper struggling to survive. In March 2004, the editor-in-chief and senior journalist of that newspaper, Umuseso, fled the
country after receiving death threats from a high-ranking government
official. This editor was the third to flee Rwanda since the journal
began publishing in 2000. His successor, detained or interrogated at
least four times in the remaining months of the year, was tried on accusations
of divisionism and defaming a high-ranking RPF official. In late
November he was acquitted of the divisionism charge and punished
with only token fines and damages on the other charges, a decision that
gave some hope for greater press freedom.
Justice and Impunity
In June 2002, Rwanda launched a system of state-run popular justice
called gacaca to deal with most of the one hundred thousand genocide
suspects who had spent years in pretrial detention. But by late 2004
only ten percent of some eleven thousand gacaca courts had held pretrial
hearings and none had actually tried any suspects. Gacaca was supposed
to reduce the prison population but persons confessing to guilt as
part of the process have named tens of thousands of new suspects.
Authorities estimate that five hundred thousand more persons may yet
be accused, an astonishing number that raises questions about why so
many persons waited until ten years after the crime to accuse suspected
perpetrators. Some convicted persons are to serve half their sentence at
home in a work-release program, but the details for its operation had
not been set at the end of 2004.
Meant to involve everyone in the community, gacaca has failed to
attract widespread participation, in part because it was seen as one-sided
justice: although originally mandated to try war crimes committed by
RPF soldiers during the period of the genocide, gacaca courts have not
been allowed by authorities to consider such cases. Acknowledging that
attendance at gacaca was poor in eight of twelve provinces, authorities
reformed the system in mid-2004, simplifying the procedure and reducing
the number of judges for each jurisdiction. In addition, authority to consider war crimes was struck from the mandate, thus eliminating any
possibility of justice for RPF crimes under this form of popular justice.
Gacaca jurisdictions were authorized to reopen cases of persons previously
acquitted by the standard courts, thus violating the usual protection
against double jeopardy. To deal with the problem of flagging
attendance, the revised law requires citizens to participate and sets punishments
for those who fail to attend.
In early 2003, the president granted conditional release to some 24,000
persons who had confessed their guilt for genocidal crimes. Although
those released are supposed to face trial at some point, few Rwandans
believe that they will do so. The possibility that thousands of confessed
criminals would never account for their crimes in public proceedings
further undermined the legitimacy of gacaca in the eyes of some
Rwandans.
In April 2004 former President Bizimungu, former Minister
Ntakirutinka and six co-defendants were brought to trial after spending
two years in pre-trial detention. The accusations against Bizimungu
included several treason-related charges, illegal possession of a firearm
and embezzlement of public funds. Despite the gravity of the charges
and the number of accused, the prosecution presented its case in only
six days. Prosecution witnesses against Bizimungu and Ntakirutinka
repeatedly contradicted themselves and each other. The judge denied
their right to fully cross-examine some witnesses and refused to allow
them to call others. The prosecution presented a single witness against
the other six co-defendants. His evidence was inconsistent, uncorroborated
and later challenged by seven defense witnesses. Despite the
weakness of the prosecution case, the court convicted all eight, sentencing
Bizimungu to ten years in prison, Ntakirutinka to ten years in
prison, and the others to five years each. All eight defendants remain in
detention awaiting appeal. Until the end of 2004, the Rwandan government opposed investigations
of RPF crimes by the U.N. International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) and itself did little to investigate and prosecute its soldiers for
war crimes and crimes against humanity committed during the genocide
or subsequently. Unless the ICTR tries some of those accused, RPF soldiers
will escape punishment for their crimes, reinforcing past patterns
of impunity.
Key International Actors
Burdened by guilt over their inaction during the genocide, many foreign
donors generously support the Rwandan government—credited
with having ended the genocide—while ordinarily overlooking its
human rights abuses. U.N. Security Council members issued only a
mild reprimand when the matter of Rwandan obstruction of ICTR
investigations was brought before them. Documentation of illegal
Rwandan exploitation of DRC resources by a U.N. panel in 2002 and
2003 elicited only mild criticism. Foreign leaders also generally
applauded the 2003 elections even though observers, including those of
the European Union, reported widespread abuses.
In 2004 the United Kingdom, Rwanda’s most generous donor, reportedly
twice suspended or threatened to suspend aid in order to restrain
Rwandan intervention in the DRC. South Africa also supposedly
brought pressure to bear on Rwanda for the same reason. But the U.K.
and others still hesitated to criticize abuses inside Rwanda, although the
European Union did finally issue mildly critical letters concerning the
Bizimungu trial and the attack on civil society for “genocidal ideology.”
Rwanda sharply rejected these reproofs.