 RWANDA
 Rwanda, overpopulated and poor, is a one-party state under the
 leadership of President Juvenal Habyarimana who is also the
 founder and president of the National Revolutionary Movement for
 Development. Guided by the precepts of the movement, Government
 policy is set by the President in consultation with the party
 central committee, the Council of Government, composed of 16
 cabinet ministers appointed by the President, and the National
 Development Council, a parliamentary body inaugurated in 1982
 with substantive but limited power.
 Rwanda's traditional feudal society, dominated by the Tutsi
 ethnic group (14 percent of the population), was transformed in
 1959 by a revolution of the majority Hutu group (85 percent of
 the population) into a society with a stronger emphasis on
 individual rights. An ethnic majority Government confirmed these
 internal changes at independence in 1962.      During the next
 decade, Hutu efforts to redress the social, economic, and educa-
 tional imbalance which had developed under the Tutsi monarchy
 led to division, corruption, and sporadic ethnic strife.   This
 situation culminated in a coup d'etat in 1973 in which President
 Habyarimana took power. His Government seeks national unity and
 full participation of all ethnic groups in national life through
 a quota system aimed at assuring a fair distribution of jobs,
 education, and advancement opportunities.
 Human rights, including those relating to the integrity of the
 person and civil liberties, are generally honored in Rwanda in
 practice as well as principle. The preamble of the 1978 Constitu-
 tion states the concern of the Rwandan people "to assure protection
 of the person and to promote respect of fundamental liberties
 conforminq to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights."  This
 generally conforms to the practice. The Constitution further
 enumerates a list of protected rights.
 In 1982 the Rwandan human rights situation was not marked by
 any dramatic developments, but the inauguration of a legis-
 lative assembly was an encouraging basic step toward broader
 political participation. The Government indicated its continuing
 interest in working toward prison reform, respect for individual
 rights, protecting security without brutality, strengthening the
 independence of the judiciary, and pursuing a rurally-oriented
 development policy designed to improve the life of the country's
 poorest people. Deficiencies continued to exist in the application
 of justice, the occasional high-handed treatment of refugees
 and foreigners, and the inferior status of women.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Killing
 No instances of killing for political motives have come to
 light in Rwanda during 1982.
 b. Disappearance
 Unexplained disappearances have not occurred in recent years.
 Arrests are made openly.   A few high officials of the previous
 regime have not been accounted for since their imprisonment in
 1973. These cases have received little publicity.
 
 
 241
 c. Torture
 While torture is not specifically proscribed by law, the Consti-
 tution states, "the human person is sacred its inviolability is
 assured."  If identified, authorities who violate this provision
 and beat criminal suspects during interrogation are prosecuted.
 In April 1982 a local Catholic Church paper reported that a
 tailor arrested and tortured in connection with a 1980-81 case
 involving a former state security officer was found innocent of
 the charge for which he was arrested.      He was subsequently
 awarded one million Rwandan francs (approximately $10,000)
 in compensation for an amputated arm and broken leg.       The
 award, however, was one-tenth of the claim and the officer
 accused of torture reportedly was promoted.
 d.  Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 Corporal punishment is not permitted as part of or in lieu
 of prison sentences. In its 1981 survey Freedom House reported,
 however, that "beating of prisoners and suspects may be common."
 Amnesty International noted unverified reports that political
 detainees were physically ill-treated.
 If caught using violence, prison officials generally are disci-
 plined. Other than separation by sex and age, prisoners receive
 equal treatment. General neglect, however, and inadequate guard
 training, food, medical supplies, and outdated and badly overcrowded
 buildings render prison conditions poor.     A new prison with
 better facilities has been under construction for several years
 but is not yet finished. Meanwhile, church and other organizations
 continue their efforts to improve existing prison conditions. In
 May 1982 the Minister of Justice confirmed that prison reform is
 planned but reforms have not begun.
 e. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Suspects are detained if caught committing crimes.    Otherwise
 arrests occur with the service of a warrant following investi-
 gation. Several types of warrants issued by regional judicial
 authorities are used to detain suspects. There have been no
 reports in 1982 of instances where proper warrants were not
 obtained. If the charges appear sufficient, a suspect is formally
 arrested.   Except in rare cases where the defendant is not
 available, charges must be formally stated in the defendant's
 presence within five days of arrest. Detention in excess of this
 period is grounds for dismissal of the charges. Authorities who
 do not respect this provision can be subject to administrative
 discipline although there are no instances on record where
 administrative discipline was ever applied. Under preventive
 detention provisions, however, persons may be held for thirty
 days. At the end of that period, a judicial review is mandatory.
 If warranted, the detention can be prolonged indefinitely in
 30-day periods.   Detainees may appeal    their incarceration.
 According to law, an appeal must be heard within 24 hours by a
 competent judicial authority. Since this procedure apparently has
 rarely been successful, it is rarely invoked by defendants.
 That the foregoing arrest and imprisonment standards are not
 always upheld was clearly indicated in March 1982 when the
 Minister of Justice met with police criminal investigators and
 prison directors in the wake of a heavy-handed criminal crackdown
 which aroused public protest. He stressed that a police arrest
 report must be filed in one to five days with the public prosecutor.
 
 
 242
 The Minister told prison directors that they should not accept an
 accused individual without a file from competent judicial authorities
 and should resist pressure from administrative authorities
 to simply   imprison someone without proper documentation.
 In August 1982 the Minister emphasized that police must uphold
 public security while respecting individual rights and avoiding
 brutality.
 f. Denial of Public Trial
 Although all defendants are constitutionally entitled to representa-
 tion, the lack of legally trained people especially for the
 defense of the accused has traditionally hampered the judicial
 process in Rwanda. Family and other counsel is permitted.   The
 judiciary is statutorily independent and expected to apply the
 penal code impartially. New laws in January 1982 strengthened the
 independence of the judiciary by improving the nominating
 process and more closely defining the exercise of its functions,
 promotions, and discipline.  However, the President still names
 and dismisses magistrates.    Rwanda has three separate court
 systems to deal with criminal/civil, military, and state security
 cases.   Military tribunals handle only military personnel.
 Criminal/civil and military cases may ultimately be appealed to
 the court of cassation, which is the supreme judicial authority.
 A separate court of state security has original jurisdiction
 over treason and other national security charges.       Persons
 tried before this court enjoy the same protection and due
 process as those tried before other courts, but do not have
 the right to appeal beyond asking the court of state security
 to reexamine their case.
 g. Invasion of the Home
 Police are required to have warrants in order to enter and
 search private residences. Warrants are issued by local judicial
 authorities. These procedures generally are respected.
 2. Respect for Civil and Political Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Radio broadcasts, a daily press bulletin, and a newspaper
 that appears at irregular intervals are produced and controlled
 by the Government.  Two self-censored church publications print
 sometimes sharp criticism of political and economic issues. Such
 criticism is tolerated and occasionally even encouraged by the
 Government.   The Government has cautioned the press to avoid,
 however, what it regards as "harmful" criticism of leaders, and
 maintains that the press should devote its efforts to promoting
 development.  Books and imported publications are not censored
 and academic freedom is respected.    Although belonging to the
 movement, some members of the National Development Council have
 been willing to criticize government policies and practices.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly generally is respected, although cautiously
 exercised in the political arena to avoid government disapproval.
 For example, public meetings or demonstrations to express overt
 opposition to government policies do not take place. The Consti-
 tution guarantees the right to unionize and strike, but aside
 from cooperatives Rwanda has no labor organizations.   Although
 the labor movement in Rwanda traces its roots to before indepen-
 dence, difficulties in securing continued financial support from
 
 
 foreign union sources plus divisions within the movement's
 executive bureau reduced labor union activities in Rwanda
 to a minimal level.   However, the movement and the Government
 are now taking steps (including a September 1982 seminar organized
 with the help of international labor bodies) to establish a
 national labor movement.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 This freedom is protected constitutionally and respected in
 practice in a country which is some 60 percent Christian,
 1-2 percent Muslim, with the remainder following traditional
 faiths.   Eighty percent of the Christians belong to the Roman
 Catholic Church, but there are many active Protestant denominations
 as well. The Government requires religious denominations to
 register before they may function. There is no overt favoritism
 toward one religion, although the Catholic Archbishop of Kigali
 is a member of the movements's central committee, and all but one
 or two members of the cabinet are Catholic. The President and
 other government party officials regularly attend special services
 of all denominations. The Government, in fact, depends upon
 church-supported schools for a considerable but declining
 portion of education in Rwanda (e.g., over 85 percent of secondary
 schools are church supported).
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Freedom of movement is limited internally by policies
 discouraging migration and by a lack of new lands available
 for settlement.   In June 1982 the Rwandan Government arrested
 long-term Burundi Hutu refugees near the Burundi border and
 in Kigali, apparently on the basis of a Zaire/Burundi/Rwanda
 agreement that each country control opposition political activity
 aimed at another state. The arrests were made without a public
 statement of charges, but were reported in the Belgian press. As
 a condition for their release, the Rwandan Government has insisted
 that the refugees be resettled elsewhere in the country with the
 help of the UN High Commission for Refugees.
 In spite of Rwanda's inability to repatriate former nationals,
 in October 1982, long term Rwandan residents of Uganda began to
 move back into Rwanda.     By the end of October, Rwanda had
 absorbed approximately 40,000 people along with 50,000 head
 of cattle.    This massive influx of people and animals has
 severely taxed the resources of a country as poor and as densely
 populated as Rwanda.
 The Government controls issuance of passports. A refundable
 deposit of about $500 is required for each passport, ostensibly
 to encourage return home and to conserve scarce foreign exchange.
 Occasionally the Government abuses these powers by withholding
 passports without explanation or as a result of administrative
 inefficiency until the purpose of the travel has passed.
 e. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Rwanda is organized under the aegis of the National Revolu-
 tionary Movement for Development, which is the "single political
 entity beyond which no political activity can be exercised." All
 power resides primarily with the President. The movement-organiza-
 tion parallels the Government and encompasses delegates elected
 from the movement membership as well as appointed officials. The
 Government places high value on achieving national consensus
 
 
 244
 through contact with the people.   All Rwandans are encouraged
 to vote after reaching the age of 18.      The Tutsi minorty,
 who represent approximately 14 percent of the population and
 who prior to independence dominated Rwanda politically, are
 only represented in the Government to a minor extend.        At
 the national level, the Secretary General and the central
 committee of the movement are all appointed by the President
 of the Republic in his capacity as President of the movement.
 Delegates to the governing national congress of the National
 Revolutionary Movement for Development include representatives
 of prefectural committees which comprise government administra-
 tors and elected delegates. Communes are represented by the
 "bourgmestre" (appointed) and the vice chairman of the
 council (elected).   Government civil servants and employees
 of parastatal organizations and private industries form
 special movement cells and elect their own leaders and
 delegates to national meetings.     About half of the members
 of the congress are elected and the remainder are appointed.
 Every citizen is automatically a member of the movement.
 Although no opposition groups are permitted and national
 leaders are not overtly criticized, national elections
 are contested by several movement candidates, and there is
 some debate about policies and procedures within the existing
 party structure.   For example, the Government's first draft
 of the 1978 Constitution was thoroughly debated, dissected,
 and finally completely rewritten to conform to concerns
 articulated through the movement structure.
 The National Revolutionary Movement for Development selects
 candidates for local and national Government office.     Local
 council elections were held in 1980.     The movement and the
 Government held elections for the Parliamentary National
 Development Council inaugurated on January 6, 1982.
 Although the Constitution provides that all laws promulgated
 by the Government must be approved by the 64 member council,
 which includes four women and one Tutsi, most power remains
 with the executive branch. The Parliamentary National
 Development Council, however, has the power to initiate and
 draft legislation jointly with the executive branch. In
 less than a year the council has demonstrated considerable
 initiative and has made the Government particularly sensitive
 to financial questions.
 3.     Government Attitude Regarding International and Non-
 governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations of
 Human Rights
 Rwanda is an active participant in African and United
 Nations human rights issues. It hosted an international
 human rights colloquium in 1978 and participated in an
 international investigation of human rights in the Central
 African Empire in 1979. Rwanda participated in the drafting
 of the Organization of African Unity Human Rights Convention
 in 1981. Representatives of the International Committee of
 the Red Cross (ICRC) visited Rwanda in June 1981 to consider
 projects to improve prison conditions. The Rwandan authorities,
 however, declined to agree with the ICRC's standard conditions
 for visiting political detainees.
 In 1982 there were no reports of requests for outside
 investigations of alleged human rights violations apart from
 the case involving the arrest and resettlement of refugees
 from Burundi and Amnesty International investigation of
 prisoners detained in connection with State Security mentioned
 above. In this instance, the Government reluctantly cooperated
 with the UNHCR's effort to help resolve the situation.
 
 
 245
 4. Economic, Social, and Cultural Situation
 Rwanda remains one of the world's poorest and most densely
 populated countries, despite some progress during recent years in
 meeting economic and social needs.    Adjusted gross national
 product (GNP) per capita has doubled from 1970 but totaled only
 $204 in 1979. Thirty percent of the urban and 90 percent of the
 rural population were calculated to be below the absolute poverty
 level in 1977.   Some 95 percent of Rwandans earn their living
 from subsistence farms averaging less than two acres. Traditional
 land tenure patterns prevail, and rural income distribution is
 relatively even.  Urban dwellers are marginally more prosperous
 but suffer unemployment with wages lagging behind inflation.
 The right to own property alone or in association is protected.
 Rwanda's population totals some 5.2 million people (1981).
 According to recently reworked national census figures, Rwanda's
 population grew at an average annual rate of 3.7 percent during
 1970-78.  The creation of a national population office in 1981
 and a growing allocation of resources to family planning represent
 a gradual recognition of the need to cope with high population
 growth.
 Rwanda's relatively small monetary economy is based on the export
 of coffee, which accounts for about 70 percent of foreign exchange
 earnings and provides the principal basis for government revenues.
 Petroleum products and manufactured products are imported.  The
 country has little industry and must pay high transportation
 costs to move goods along a 1,100 mile road link to the sea via
 Uganda and Kenya. Real economic growth over the past five years
 has stayed barely ahead of population growth. Rwanda's trade,
 investment, and banking policies encourage modest private sector
 economic activity. About 85 percent of Rwanda's small businessmen
 are Rwandans, and the proportion is growing. Foreign investment,
 however, is stagnant.
 The Government gives priority to integrated rural development,
 focusing on increased food production, expanded health services,
 and improved education.  Life expectancy has increased from 41
 years in 1968 to about 45 years in 1980 while infant mortality
 stood at 127 per 1000 live births in 1970.   In 1977, Rwandans
 received about 98 percent of their caloric nutritional requirements,
 while 68 percent of the population had access to safe water in
 1975. .Literacy grew from 16 percent in 1962 to 23 percent in
 1975, and primary school enrollment expanded from 49 percent in
 1960 to 70 percent in 1979.
 The Constitution states, "All citizens are equal before the
 law, without any discrimination, notably that of race, color,
 origin, ethnicity, clan, sex, opinion, religion, or social
 position."   In education and employment an informal quota
 policy applied in both the public and private sectors restricts
 Tutsis in rough proportion to their numbers in the total population.
 The requirement that ethnic origin be listed on identity documents
 ensures that these informal quotas are not exceeded, but Tutais
 are nevertheless, found at all levels of employment. The President
 regularly reminds his countrymen that all citizens are equal and
 exhorts them to work together for the betterment of the nation.
 Despite some progress in meeting economic and social needs
 women have benefited less than men.     Sexual discrimination
 is outlawed by the Constitution, but women are second-class
 citizens before the law.  For example, their rights to property
 are limited.  Women are discriminated against in the job market
 and have fewer chances for education, employment, and promotion.
 Family planning services are inadequate but improving, and there
 are no organizations promoting women's issues apart from a
 recently established women's organization within the male-dominated
 movement.
 
 
 246
 U.5.0VtR$A3S -LCANS AND GRANTS- OILIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YE8xS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: RW A'wCA
 1930     1981      1982
 1.4CON. ASSIST.-TOTAL..,          4.1       7.4      9.0
 LOANS .............. ........ 0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ..............        4.1       7.4      9.0
 AAD..................1.. . ..9        3.4      6.5
 LOANS.. ..............       0.0       0.0      0.0
 iRANTS ................    1.9       3.4      6.5
 (SEC.SUP.AS-IST.)...          0.0      0.0       0.0
 o.F0OJ FUR PEAC  .......         2.2       3.      2.4
 LOANS ...............   ..... 0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ............. ....   2.Z       3.9      2.4
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........         0.3       0.0      0.0
 RZPAY. IN $-LOANS .....         0.0       0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FU . CURR .....         0.0       0.0      0.0
 TITLE  Il-TOTAL .........         2.2      3.9      2.4
 E.RELIEt.LC.JEV   dF?.          0.3       0.1      0.3
 V L.RELZ-F  ASENCY .....        1.9       3.1      2.1
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...          0.0       0.1      0.1
 LOAN 5.............  .    ...        0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ..........   .    ... .00       0.1      0.1
 PEACe CORPS ......         0.0      0.1       0.1
 NARCOTICS ........         0.. 00            0.0
 OTHER ............         0.0      0.0       0.0
 Ii.MIL. ASIST.-TOTAL...          0.1       1.5      0.0
 LOANS ..............         0.0       1.5      0.0
 GRANT S................    0. 1       0.0      0.0
 A.MA? SRANTS,, ...              0.0       0.0      0.0
 6.C.RtII S ALES-FMS..         0.0       1.5      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.E).TRN..             0.1       0.0      0.0
 J.TRAN-XCSS STOCK              0.3       00       0.0
 .UTHE-I RANTS ........         0.0       0.0      0.0
 Ill.TOTAL t0N' MIL ..            4.2       3.9      9.0
 LOANS ..............         0.0       1.5      0.0
 GRANT3 ................    4.Z      7.4       9.0
 UTHSR JS LOANiS........          0.0       0.0      0.0
 .)AN  LOAN7                 .       0.0       0.
 EX IM  A    O . .......      0.0   0           0.0
 ALL VtEk .................00              0.0      0.0
 AS'ISTANC: e;UM INTEFNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1?EC     1lo1      1 32-    1946-82
 T;TAL .........    36.5     3S.0     10.4     279.7
 16RD                j.U      0.0      0.0       0.0
 IFC                 0.U      0.c      0.0       0.5
 IDA                25        0.U       0.0    115.7
 IOo                 U.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 A1l J.                         0.0    0.0      0.0
 AFD6                4.1     33.      10.4     68.1
 UN)P                3.5      4.1       0.0     25.F
 OTHER-UN            2.4      0.0       0.0      3.1
 EEC                 0,u      U.U      0.0      60.2
 
 
 247
