Nigeria
Widespread government corruption, political and intercommunal violence, police
torture and other abuses continue to deny ordinary Nigerians their basic human
rights. During 2007 Nigerian government actors including the police, military, and
elected officials committed serious and persistent abuses against Nigerian citizens
with near-complete impunity. Hopes for improvement in the human rights
situation were dashed when the April 2007 presidential and parliamentary elections
were marred by fraud, violence, and intimidation so pervasive as to destroy
all confidence in the results. The declared victors were Umaru Yar’Adua as president,
and the ruling People’s Democratic Party with a landslide parliamentary
majority.
The violence and fraud surrounding elections reflected entrenched patterns of
corruption and human rights abuse that have long pervaded Nigeria’s political
system. The country has earned well over US$223 billion in oil revenues since the
end of military rule in 1999, but millions of Nigerians still lack access to basic
health and education services because so much of the money has been lost to
corruption and mismanagement. A process of electoral reform embarked upon in
2007 shows signs of promise but cannot succeed unless underlying patterns of
impunity and criminality in the political system are addressed.
Rule of Law and Impunity
Politically powerful individuals and members of Nigeria’s security forces who
stand accused of serious human rights abuses and other crimes are seldom held
to account. Numerous powerful ruling party politicians have been implicated in
mobilizing armed gangs responsible for election-related violence and also in
orchestrating the open rigging of the 2007 elections, but no investigation has
been undertaken. Nor have federal authorities taken any action to ensure
accountability for past atrocities such as the Nigerian military’s complete destruction
of the Bayelsa state town of Odi in 1999 or its massacre of several hundred
civilians in Benue state in 2001.
Nigeria’s judiciary has won widespread respect for its increasing independence,
ruling against the government in numerous politically-charged cases related to the elections. But all too often the federal government has impeded rather than
supported those efforts. The judiciary itself is flawed, especially the criminal justice
system: magistrates and judges routinely accept confessions extracted under
torture and allow spells of extended pretrial detention that may last for months or
even years.
Law enforcement agencies have also subverted the rule of law. Police openly and
routinely torture criminal suspects and others, and have killed more than 8,000
Nigerians in the past eight years; the police carried out 785 largely unexplained
killings of alleged “armed robbers” during the current inspector general’s first 90
days in office in 2007. At the same time, police have refused to investigate prominent
politicians implicated in political violence and other human rights abuses.
Intercommunal and Political Violence
While large-scale massacres like those in Kaduna in 2002 and Yelwa in 2004 did
not occur in 2007, intercommunal violence remained common. Since the end of
military rule, more than 11,000 Nigerians have died in over 500 violent sectarian
and political clashes. The underlying causes of this strife are varied and complex,
since the ethnic, religious, and other tensions that provoke it often overlap with
and exacerbate one another. Many government policies discriminate against individuals
not deemed to be ethnic “indigenes” (descendants of the original inhabitants)
of their communities and this has made issues of local citizenship increasingly
contentious. Many Nigerians believe the government’s failure to combat the
nation’s grinding poverty lies at the heart of many conflicts that appear to be ethnic
or religious in nature, as competition for scarce economic resources becomes
increasingly desperate.
Security forces have generally failed to prevent or suppress political violence,
most notably before and during the April elections, a period that witnessed well
over 100 incidents of election-related violence that left some 300 people dead.
When voters were driven away from polling areas by gangs of thugs employed by
politicians, the police very often turned a blind eye.
Conflict and Poverty in the Niger Delta
Nigeria’s oil-rich Niger Delta has become increasingly militarized and insecure.
Scores of civilians were murdered by armed gangs and security forces in 2007,
and the violence further impeded the impoverished region’s development.
Numerous armed groups have risen to prominence in the Delta. Many of these
groups claim to be fighting for greater local control of the region’s oil wealth,
while simultaneously engaging in various forms of violent criminal activity including
the kidnapping for ransom of more than 200 expatriate oil workers and a
handful of locally prominent Nigerians.
Much of the insecurity that plagues the Delta is directly related to failures of governance
at all levels. Despite massive budget increases due to rising oil prices,
federal, state, and local governments have made no effective effort to address the
grinding poverty and environmental degradation that lies at the heart of political
discontent in the region. Instead, many regional political figures have been directly
implicated in sponsoring and arming militia groups that have carried out violent
abuses.
After the April elections, fighting between armed gangs linked to prominent
Rivers state politicians engulfed the state capital Port Harcourt, claiming dozens
of civilian lives. A military intervention in August resulted in more civilian deaths.
Politicians whose gangs rigged the elections in 2003 and 2007, laying the foundation
for the crisis, have not been held to account.
Human Rights Concerns in the Context of Sharia
Since 2000, Sharia (Islamic law) courts have had jurisdiction over criminal cases
in 12 of Nigeria’s 36 states. Sharia has provisions for sentences that amount to
cruel, inhuman, and degrading treatment, including death sentences, amputations,
and floggings. Although capital sentences have been thrown out on appeal
or simply not carried out, Sharia courts continue to hand down death sentences.
Many trials in Sharia courts fail to conform to international standards and do not
respect due process even as defined by Sharia legislation: defendants rarely have
access to a lawyer, are not informed about their rights, and judges are often poorly
trained. The manner in which Sharia is applied discriminates against women, particularly in adultery cases where standards of evidence differ based on the sex
of the accused. State governments in northern Nigeria have continued to enforce
oppressive Sharia laws targeting gay and lesbian Nigerians. In August, 18 men
were arrested under suspicion of participating in a “gay wedding” ceremony in
Bauchi state. The federal government has abandoned its obligation to combat
such discriminatory laws, and backed repressive anti-gay legislation of its own in
early 2007, though this has not been passed.
Freedom of Expression and Attacks on Civil Society
Nigerian civil society and the country’s independent press are generally free to
criticize the federal government and its policies, and a vibrant public debate
exists around such issues. However, many local media outlets enjoy considerably
less freedom than their national counterparts, and some have been subjected to
intimidation or harassment by state and local authorities. In June 2007 authorities
in the Federal Capital Territory demolished the new offices of Africa
Independent Television (AIT), a move that was widely seen as a reprisal for AIT’s
critical coverage of the 2007 elections and of former President Olusegun
Obasanjo’s failed bid to secure a third term in office. In March prominent human
rights campaigner Anyakwee Nsirmovu, director of the Institute for Human Rights
and Humanitarian Law in Port Harcourt, received death threats and was attacked
by a gang of armed men. The assault and threats were likely a reprisal for his outspoken
criticism of corrupt state and local government officials in Rivers state.
Key International Actors
Because of Nigeria’s political significance and its status as a major oil producer,
key governments—notably the United Kingdom and the United States—and organizations
such as the African Union and the Commonwealth have been unwilling to
exert meaningful pressure on Nigeria over its human rights record. Observer missions
fielded by the European Union and various US-backed organizations issued
reports that were highly critical at the conduct of the April 2007 polls. But beyond
this, none of Nigeria’s foreign partners has strongly condemned the ongoing patterns
of corruption and abuse put on display then. Nor have international partners demanded meaningful human rights improvements from the new government.
Multinational oil companies operating in the Niger Delta have been central, if
often unwilling participants in the region’s conflicts and dysfunctional political
dynamics. The companies have largely failed to meet their basic responsibilities
toward the communities impacted by their operations. They have done little to
prevent human rights abuses committed by security forces assigned to protect
their operations, and
have not done enough to curb environmentally harmful gas flares and oil spills
caused by ageing and poorly-maintained infrastructure.
Extrajudicial Executions, Collective Punishment, and
Arbitrary Detention
By mid-2007 Rwanda National Police officers had killed at least 20 detainees in
apparent extrajudicial executions. The frequency of such killings began to
increase in late 2006, following publicity surrounding the killings of several genocide
survivors and others involved in the gacaca jurisdictions.
Faced with demands for increased protection of survivors, officials ordered collective
punishments, including beatings and fines, for persons living in neighborhoods
where survivors and others involved in gacaca had suffered property loss
or damage. Those punished were not tried but were held responsible for the
alleged offenses merely because they lived in the vicinity.
In 2006 Kigali city officials closed an irregular detention center after Human
Rights Watch reported that people were being detained there in harsh conditions,
without legal procedure, sometimes for months at a time. However, early in 2007
officials reopened the facility, again detaining scores of children and others
picked up from city streets.
Gacaca Jurisdictions
The gacaca law was amended in May 2007 to increase the number of gacaca
courts in order to speed trials of an estimated 818,000 persons accused of genocide.
The law also changed the categorization of crimes, so that more suspects
will be referred to gacaca jurisdictions, rather than to conventional courts.
Previously gacaca courts could impose no sentence longer than 30 years but the
amended law authorizes them to impose life imprisonment. As before, accused
persons have no right to counsel in gacaca jurisdictions. The amended law also
provides for suspended sentences and for more use of community service as an
alternative to incarceration.
By October some 47,000 persons were sentenced to community service and some
10,000 were carrying it out, including breaking rocks for road construction or terracing
agricultural land. At this writing authorities continue to insist that gacaca courts would finish trials by early 2008, although tens of thousands of cases
remain outstanding in late 2007.
Popular trust in gacaca appears to have declined as numerous cases of faulty procedure,
judicial corruption, and false accusations became known. In August, a
gacaca appeals court upheld the 19-year prison sentence of human rights activist
Francois-Xavier Byuma, even though his original trial was marred by grave procedural
errors. The trial judge was known to have a prior conflict with Byuma but
had refused to recuse himself, as law required and Byuma requested. Byuma,
head of an association for the defense of childrens’ rights, had previously investigated
allegations that the judge had raped a minor. The judge also failed to
accord Byuma the right to defend himself fully.
Justice
In a prominent trail known as “the media case”, the appeals court of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)—the international court trying
genocide and other crimes committed in 1994—upheld in part the conviction of
Jean-Bosco Barayagwiza, Ferdinand Nahimana, and Hassan Ngeze for inciting
genocide, but reduced Baragwiza’s sentence by three years and the sentence of
the others, from life to 30 years and 35 years in prison respectively. The ICTR is
due to end trials in 2008 but several cases will likely not be heard before the
deadline and may be transferred to national jurisdictions. In November 2007 the
ICTR transferred two cases to French courts for trial. In an effort to assure that
cases would be transferred to its courts, Rwanda created special prison facilities
and assured the ICTR judges that fair trials would be held.
In July Rwanda abolished the death penalty, a requirement for Rwandan courts to
receive cases from jurisdictions that prohibit it, including the ICTR. Death sentences
were commuted to life imprisonment; persons convicted of genocide, like
others found guilty of particularly brutal crimes, may be sentenced to serve their
terms in solitary confinement.
In April President Paul Kagame pardoned former president Pasteur Bizimungu,
imprisoned for 15 years on charges of forming a criminal association and inciting
rebellion after he attempted to form a political party to rival the dominant Rwandan Patriotic Front. Former minister Charles Ntakirutinka, imprisoned for 10
years on the same charges, remained in jail. The two were detained for two years
before being convicted in April 2004 in a trial that fell short of international standards.
Human Rights Defenders and Journalists
Mindful of harsh official repression in 2004, most human rights organizations
practiced some measure of self-censorship, but the League for the Defense of
Human Rights of the Great Lakes (LDGL) spoke out on some sensitive issues,
including the police shooting of detainees. It also criticized the lack of civil society
participation in the African Peer Review Mechanism (APRM) process that evaluates
political space for opposition and civil society.
Officials had previously refused to recognize the Community of Indigenous
Peoples in Rwanda (CAURWA), which defends the rights of the Batwa minority
(some 30,000 people), claiming its name and purpose were “divisionist” and
therefore illegal. After the African Peer Review experts criticized Rwanda’s hostility
to diversity among its citizens, the government accorded legal status to the
organization, but only after it changed its name. The group no longer refers to its
members as “indigenous people” but as potters, because many Batwa are, or
used to be, potters.
Officials repeatedly chastised journalists for irresponsible reporting and in
September 2007 one minister suggested in a televised debate that several of
them were colluding with regional rebel groups. President Kagame regularly held
press conferences but sometimes responded angrily to probing questions. In
February, shortly after journalist Jean-Bosco Gasasira raised harassment of the
press by intelligence agents in one such press conference, assailants attacked
and beat him with iron bars. A suspect in the attack has been linked with senior
military intelligence officials. He has not been brought to trial.
Throughout the year journalists were interrogated, detained without charge for
several days or dismissed from their jobs after criticizing the government. In
October high-ranking civilian and police officials twice warned journalists that they faced serious consequences if press criticism were to continue. One journalist
feared for his life and left the country.
Recruitment of Child Soldiers in Rwanda
In early 2007 Congolese Tutsi refugees, some of them children, were recruited in
refugee camps in Rwanda and taken for military service in the forces of rebel general
Laurent Nkunda, fighting against the Congolese government. Rwandan
authorities at first denied all knowledge of the recruitment but later agreed to a
UNHCR proposal to curb such activity.
Growing Inequality and Land-Related Abuses
The United Nations Development Program (UNDP) reported that Rwandan economic
growth, praised by the international community, was promoting large,
growing, and potentially destabilizing inequalities between classes, regions, and
between men and women. The cabinet angrily forced the minister who had
approved the report to disavow it. Government employees involved in producing
the report were sanctioned and one of its Rwandan authors was denounced publicly
by an official.
Officials began implementing a new land policy that, among other measures,
requires farmers to plant a single crop designated for their region. In Musanze
District an RPF leader who headed the local cooperative obliged farmers to uproot
crops to plant potatoes. The farmers then had to sell the potatoes to the cooperative
at a price they judged unfair.
Key International Actors
Donors, generally satisfied with Rwanda’s apparent economic growth and less
aggressive stance in the DRC, said little publically about Rwanda’s human rights
performance. But several, including the United States and the United Kingdom,
which are major supporters, intervened privately on at least two occasions to
protest police killings of detainees and to inquire about increased killings of survivors
and others. No further killings by police have been reported since their
intervention. Belgium, a major donor to gacaca jurisdictions, and the UK also raised questions about several blatantly unfair gacaca cases. The European Union
acknowledged that criticisms of gacaca were justified and expressed concern
about the proposed hasty completion of trials.