 RWANDA
 Rwanda, overpopulated and very poor, is a one-party
 state under the leadership of President Juvenal
 Habyarimana, who is also the founder and president
 of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development
 (MRND). The government is relatively well-managed
 and honest although there have been charges of sub-
 stantial corruption in high places. Progress toward
 democratization and the full resumption of constitutional
 government continued in 1981 with the election at the
 end of the year of a parliamentary national development
 council with limited power.
 Guided by the precepts of the MRND, government policy
 is set by the president in consultation with the
 council of government composed of 16 cabinet ministers
 appointed by the president. The preamble of the
 1978 constitution states the concern of the Rwanda
 people "to assure protection of the person and to
 promote respect of fundamental liberties conforming to
 the Universal Declaration of Human Rights." The
 constitution further enumerates a list of protected
 rights. Rurally oriented development policies are
 aimed at improving life for the country's poorest
 citizens. Deficiencies exist in the inconsistent
 application of justice, occasional high-handed treat-
 ment of refugees and foreigners, and the inferior
 status of women.
 Rwanda's traditional feudal society dominated by the
 Tutsi (14 percent of the population), was transformed
 in 1959 by a revolution of the majority Hutu group
 (85 percent of the population) into a more egalitarian
 society with a stronger emphasis on individual rights.
 A broadly based majority government confirmed these
 internal changes at independence in 1962. During
 the next decade, Hutu efforts to redress the social,
 economic, and educational imbalance which had
 developed under the Tutsi monarchy led to division,
 corruption, and sporadic ethnic strife. This situation
 culminated in a coup d'etat in 1973 in which President
 Habyarimana took power. His government seeks national
 unity and full participation of all ethnic groups
 in national life through a equitable quota system
 aimed at assuring equitable distribution of jobs,
 education and advancement opportunities.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person,
 Including Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 While torture is not specifically proscribed by law,
 the constitution states "the human person is sacred; its
 inviolability is assured." If identified, authorities
 who violate this provision and beat criminal suspects
 during interrogation are prosecuted. There were no
 reports of torture verified during 1981.
 
 (197)
 
 
 198
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Summary executions do not occur. Corporal punishments
 are not permitted as part of or in lieu of prison
 sentences. In its 1981 survey, Freedom House reported
 that "beating of prisoners and suspects may be common."
 Amnesty International noted unverified reports that
 political detainees were physically ill-treated. If
 caught using violence, prison officials are disciplined.
 Other than separation by sex and age, prisoners allegedly
 receive equal treatment. General neglect, however.
 and inadequate guard training, food, medical supplies,
 and outdated and badly overcrowded buildings render
 prison conditions poor. A new prison with better
 facilities has been under construction for several
 years but is not yet finished. Meanwhile, church
 and other organizations continue their efforts to
 focus high-level attention on the need to improve
 existing prison conditions, but they have achieved few
 concrete results.
 c. Disappearances
 Unexplained disappearances have not been a problem
 in recent years. Arrests are openly made. Suspects
 are detained if caught committing crimes or with
 the service of a warrant following investigation.
 While little publicized, a few high officials of the
 previous regime have not been accounted for since
 their imprisonment in 1973.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Several types of warrants issued by regional judicial
 authorities are used to detain suspects. There have
 been no reports of instances where proper warrants
 were not obtained. If upon examination the charges
 appear sufficient, a suspect is formally arrested. A
 suspect may be held five days without charges. Deten-
 tion in excess of this period provides grounds for
 dismissal of charges. Authorities who do not respect
 this provision are subject to administrative discipline.
 Under preventive detention provisions, however, persons
 may be held for thirty days. At the end of that period,
 a judicial review is mandatory. If deemed warranted, the
 detention can be prolonged indefinitely in thirty-day
 periods. Detainees may appeal their incarceration.
 According to law, an appeal must be heard within 24
 hours by a cotapetent judicial authority. Since this
 procedure apparently has rarely been successful, it is
 not often invoked by defendants.
 e. Denial of Public Trial
 Except for rare absentia cases, charges must be formally
 stated in the defendant's presence within five days of
 his or her arrest. All defendants are constitutionally
 entitled to a defense Since legal counsel is in short
 supply, however, family and other counsel is permitted.
 The judiciary is statutorily independent and expected to
 apply the penal code impartially.
 
 
 199
 Rwanda has three separate court systems to deal with
 criminal/civil, military, and state security cases.
 Each has its own original and secondary jurisdictions
 and appellate procedures. The criminal/civil system is
 divided into local, regional, and appeals courts.
 Military tribunals, which handle only military personnel,
 are established as needed with first appeal to a standing
 military court. Criminal/civil and military cases may
 ultimately be appealed to the court of cassation, which
 is the supreme judicial authority.
 A separate court of state security has original jurisdiction
 over treason and other national security charges. Persons
 tried before this court enjoy the same protection and due
 process as those tried before other courts, but do
 not have the right of appeal beyond asking the court
 of state security to reexamine their case. The committee
 of state security was convened for the first time in
 September 1981 to hear the case of ex-Kajor Theoneste
 Lizende and 48 codefendants. The trial closed on November
 25, 1981 with a guilty verdict by the state security court
 against 25 of the codefendants including death sentences for
 leaders LiLinde and Kagenza. Twenty-four people were
 acquitted of charges.
 While deficiencies result from a shortage of trained
 legal personnel, acceptable legal standards were largely
 met in 1981 except for the politically-oriented LLzinde
 case. Lizinde,. formally head of the national security
 service, was arrested with 40 people in April 1980.
 National security, corruption, and other charges against
 them and others arrested later in the year were blurred
 and not formerly specified publicly until their open
 trial began in September 1981.
 f. Invasion of the Home
 Police are required to have warrants in order to enter
 and search private residences. Warrants are issued by
 local judicial authorities. These procedures generally
 are respected. No violations of the home such as
 bugging, demolition, or sealing doors and windows are
 practiced.
 2. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Includings
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion, and Assembly
 These freedoms are expressly provided for in the
 constitution with the caveat that they be exercised in
 compliance with the law. Radio broadcasts a daily
 press bulletin, and a newspaper that appears at irregular
 intervals are produced and controlled by the government.
 Two self-censoring church publications, however, print
 mild criticism of government policies. Such criticism
 is tolerated and sometimes even encouraged by the
 government. The government has cautioned the press to
 avoid harmful criticism of leaders, and maintains that
 it should devote its efforts to promoting development.
 Books and imported publications are not censored
 and academic freedom is respected. The government
 in fact, depends uponchurch-supported schools to
 provide a considerable but declining portion of
 education in Rwanda.
 
 89-510 0 - 82 - 14
 
 
 200
 Freedom of assembly generally is respected, although
 cautiously exercised in the political arena to avoid
 government disapproval. For example, public meetings
 or demonstrations to express political opposition do
 not take place. The constitution guarantees the right
 to unionize and strike. There is no national trade
 union movement, but the government encourages local
 employee organizations under the aegis of the MRND.
 In practice, aside from cooperatives, there are no
 genuine labor organizations.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within The Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Freedom of movement is limited internally by policies
 discouraging migration and by a lack of new lands
 available for settlement. There is little immigration
 or emigration apart from refugees, with respect to whom
 Rwanda's record is mixed. Over the years it has welcomed
 about eight thousand Burundian refugees, mostly Hutus,
 and integrated them into Rwandan Society. Several
 thousand more refugees from Uganda and Zaire have
 also spent time in Rwanda prior to repatriation.
 However, on at least two occasions in 1980, Rwanda
 summarily expelled about eight resident refugees in
 violation of its responsibilities under the United
 Nations Convention on the Status of Refugees. While
 these refugees were not forcibly repatriated to their
 countries of origin, such fears persist particularly
 among Ugandan refugees. In early 1981 the government
 expelled three Burundian refugees for "security
 reasons." In 1965, legislation was adopted which denied
 restitution of property to returning refugees thereby
 effectively discouraging the repatriation of the some
 150,000 Rwandan Tutsi refugees who fled to Burundi and
 Tanzania during 1959-1965.
 The government controls issuance of passports for which
 a deposit of about $400 is required for security
 reasons and to conserve scarce foreign exchange. The
 government also controls issuance of visas to foreigners
 on security grounds. Occasionally these powers are
 abused. For example, in 1980 foreigners had their
 visas revoked and were summarily expelled in contravention
 of Rwanda law, reportedly, at the request of neighboring
 governments. They were not forced, however, to return
 to their country of origin.
 c. Freedom to Participate In The Political Process
 Rwanda is one-party state with power residing primarily
 with the president. All Rwandans are encouraged to
 vote after reaching age 18. Nearly 98 per cent of the
 eligible voters participated in the constitutional
 referendum and presidential plebiscite of December 1978,
 when Juvenal Habyarimana was elected President. According
 to the 1978 constitution, Rwanda is organized under the
 aegis of the Mouvement Revolutionnaire National pour Le
 Developpent (MRND), which is the "single political
 entity beyond which no political activity can be
 exercised." The MRND organization parallels the
 government and encompasses elected as well as appointed
 officials. At the national level, the secretary general
 and central committee of the MRND are all appointed by
 the president of the republic in his capacity as president
 of the MRND.
 
 
 201
 Delegates to the governing National Congress of the
 NRND include prefectural committees which comprise
 government administrators and elected delegates.
 Communes are represented by the lbourgmestrel (appointed)
 and the vice-chairman of the communal council (elected).
 Government civil servants and employees of parastatal
 organizations and private industries form special
 MRND cells and elect their own leaders and delegates to
 national meetings. About half of the members of the
 congress are elected and the remainder are appointed.
 Every citizen is automatically a member of the MRND.
 Although no opposition groups are permitted and national
 leaders are not overtly criticized, elections are
 contested by several MRND candidates, and there is some
 debate about policies and procedures within the existing
 structure. For example, the government's first draft of
 the 1978 constitution was thoroughly debated, dissected,
 and finally completely rewritten to conform to concerns
 articulated through the MRND structure.
 The NRND selects candidates for local and national
 office. Local councils were elected in 1980. The HRND
 and the government vigorously promoted participation
 in elections for the parliamentary national development
 council held on December 28, 1981. Although the 1978
 constitution provides that all laws promulgated by the
 government must be approved by the newly elected 64
 member council, most power still remains with the
 executive branch. The new legislature, however, will
 be empowered to initiate and draft legislation jointly
 with the executive branch.
 4egisiation and decrees are automatically reviewed by
 the constitutional court to ascertain conformance to
 the constitution. In two cases in 1980, concerning a
 new charter for the national university and the establish-
 ment of a national population office, executive decrees
 were rejected by this court on constitutional grounds
 and returned for redrafting. The court objected to
 strictures on academic freedom and student associations
 in the university charter and, with respect to the
 population office, sought clarification on the rights
 of families.
 3. Government Attitude And Record Regarding
 International And Nongovernmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations Of Human Rights
 Rwanda ip an active participant in African and United
 Nations human rights issues. It hosted an international
 human rights colloquium in 1978 and participated in an
 international investigation of human rights in the
 Central African Empire in 1979.
 Rwanda participated in the drafting of the Organization
 of African Unity Human Rights Convention. While there
 were no reports of requests in 1981 for outside investi-
 gations of alleged human rights violations, representa-
 tives of the International Committee of the Red Cross
 (ICRC) visited Rwanda in June to consider projects to
 improve prison conditions. The Rwandan authorities,
 however, declined to agree with the ICRC's standard
 conditions for visiting political detainees.
 
 
 202
 4. Economic and Social Circumstances
 Rwanda remains one of the world's poorest and most
 densely populated countries despite some progress
 during recent years in meeting economic and social
 needs as signaled by World Bank indicators. Adjusted
 gross national product (GNP) per capita has doubled
 from 1970 but totaled only $200 in 1979. Thirty
 percent of the urban and 90 percent of the rural
 population were calculated to be below the absolute
 poverty level in 1977. Some 95 percent of Rwandans
 earn their living from subsistence farms averaging less
 than two acres. Traditional land tenure patterns
 prevail, and rural income distribution is relatively
 even. Urban dwellers are marginally more prosperous
 but suffer serious under-and unemployment with wages
 lagging behind inflation.
 Rwanda's population totals some 5 million people; it
 has grown at an average annual rate of at least 2.8
 percent during 1970-79, the fertility rate is 6.9
 children per family. The creation of a national
 population office in 1981 and a growing allocation of
 resources to family planning represent a gradually
 awakening recognition of the need to cope with Rwanda's
 high population growth rate.
 Rwanda's relatively small monetary economy is based on
 the export of coffee which accounts for about 70
 percent of foreign exchange earnings and provides the
 principal base for government revenues. Most fuels and
 manufactured products are imported. The country has
 little industry and must pay high transportation costs
 to move goods along a 1,100 mile road link to the sea
 via Uganda and Kenya. Real economic growth over the
 past five years has stayed barely ahead of population
 growth. Rwanda's trade, investment, and banking
 policies have encouraged private sector economic
 activity. Parastatal enterprises and cooperatives
 complete the economic picture, specially in rural
 areas. About half of Rwanda's small businessmen are
 Rwandans, and the proportion is growing.
 The government attaches priority to integrated rural
 development, focusing on increased food production,
 expanded health services, and improved education.
 Life expectancy has increased from 41 years in 1968 to
 about 46 years in 1978 while infant mortality stood at
 187 per 1000 live births in 1970. As of 1977 Rwandans
 received about 98 percent of their caloric nutritional
 requirements while only 35 percent of the population
 had access to safe water. Literacy grew from 16
 percent in 1962 to 23 percent in 1975 while primary
 school enrollment expanded from 49 percent in 1960
 to 64 percent in 1978.
 The constitution states, "all citizens are equal before
 the law, without any discrimination notably that of
 race, color, origin, ethnicity, clan, sex, opinion,
 religion, or social position." With the exceptions of
 educational and employment opportunities, the anti-
 discrimination clause is generally respected with
 regard to the ethnic minority Tutsi. In education
 
 
 203
 and employment an informal quota policy applied in
 both the public and private sectors restrict Tutsi.
 in rough proportion to their numbers in the total,'
 population. The requirement that ethnic origin be
 listed on identity documents ensures that these
 informal quotas are not exceeded. In fact, the Tutsi
 enjoy much greater opportunities than might be expected
 in light of Rwanda's legacy of a Tutsi-dominated
 feudal regime which ruled until recently, and the Tutsi
 are found at all levels of employment. The president
 regularly reminds his countrymen that all citizens
 are equal and exhorts them to work together for the
 betterment of the nation.
 Despite some progress in meeting economic and social
 needs, women have benefited less than men. Sexual
 discrimination is outlawed by the constitution, but
 women are second-class citizens before the law. For
 example, rights to property are limited. Women are
 discriminated against in the job market and have fewer
 chances for education, employment, and promotion.
 Family planning services are inadequate, and there are
 no organizations promoting women's issues apart from
 a proposed women's organization within the male-
 dominated MRKD.
 
 
 204
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANIS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.So-fISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: RWANDA
 1979     1980      1981
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...          6.4      4.1       7.4
 LOANS .................     0.0      0.0       0.0
 GRANTS.............          6.-t      4.1      7.4
 A.AID ..       ........ ......  5.3      1.9      3.4
 LOANS ...........     .. ...  0.0   0.0       0.0
 GRANTS.............     ... 5.3       1.9      3.4
 (SECSUPP.ASSIST.)...          0.0      0.0       0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE.......          1.0       2.2      3.9
 LOANS..............          0.0      0.0       0.0
 GRANTS... ...........       1.0       2.2      3.9
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........         0.0       0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS.....          0.0       0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR.....          0.0       0.0      0.0
 TILE I-TOTAL.........          1.0       2.2      3.9
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.          0.0       0.3      0.8
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....          1.0      1.9      3.1
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...         '0.1       0.0      0.1
 LOANS...............       0.0       0.0      0.0.
 GRANTS............      .  0.1       0.0      0.1
 PEACE CORPS......          0.1      0.0       0.1
 NARCOTICS*...*            0.0      0.0       0.0
 OTHER............. 0.0             0.0       0.0
 IIMIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...          0.0       0.1      1.5
 LOANS................      0.0      0.0'      1.5
 GRANIS............... .   0.0       0.1      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS...........         0.0       0.0      0.0
 BeCREUIT SALES-FS ....         0.0       0.0      1.5
 C.INTL MIL.EO.TRNG....          0.0       0.1      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...          0.o       0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........         0.0       0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & NIL             6.4       4.2      8.9
 LOANS...........            0.0       0.0      1.5
 GRANTS..............        6.4       4.2      7,4
 OTHER US LOANS..........          0.0       0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS.......          0.0       0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER...........             0.0       0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROm INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1979     1980      1981     1946-81
 
 TOTAL........    17.9     38.5     53.0
 IBRO               0.0      0.0      0.0
 IFC                0.3      0.0      0.0
 IDA               14.0     28.5     15.0
 IOB                0.0      0.0      0.0
 AOB                0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFOB               0.0     .4.1     33.9
 UNOP               3.6      3.5     .4.1
 OTHER-UN           0.0      2.4      0.0
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 284.1:
 0.0
 0.8
 130o.5
 0.0
 0.0
 57.7
 26.8
 8.1
 60.2
 
 
