Rwanda
As in previous years, Rwandan authorities in 2006 tightly controlled the country’s
political space. Some local elections were marred by accusations of fraud or
other unfair practices. Although many citizens enjoyed relative security, hundreds
of others were illegally detained and some of them physically abused by police or
members of the Local Defense Forces. Rwanda drew some positive comment by a
peer review team of the New Economic Partnership for Africa (NEPAD) but was
criticized for restricting political space and not recognizing diversity.
Gacaca courts, meant to combine customary conflict resolution mechanisms with
criminal justice for the 1994 genocide, began operating throughout Rwanda in
2006, but with some courts failing to observe procedural rules. In conventional
courts several noteworthy cases, one involving former President Pasteur
Bizimungu, failed to meet international fair trial standards. In another case, a
priest was sentenced to 12 years in prison for minimizing the genocide.
Gacaca Jurisdictions
In July 2006 gacaca jurisdictions, previously engaged in gathering information
about the genocide, began trials nationwide. Establishment of appeals courts
lagged behind, limiting the possibility of recourse for those who felt wrongly
judged. Among the estimated 700,000 persons accused, more than 47,000 hold
local administrative posts and 45,000 are themselves gacaca judges. Officials
aim to have completed all trials by 2007, and some courts spend only a few hours
hearing each case. Some 50,000 persons confessed their crimes in hopes of
receiving reduced sentences, but hundreds of them saw their confessions rejected
as untruthful or incomplete and were refused any reduction in sentences, the
maximum being 30 years. Prison populations seemed likely to increase rather
than decrease, as had been intended when the gacaca jurisdictions were established.
The jurisdictions supposedly draw legitimacy from popular participation, but
many Rwandans do not trust them and either boycott the sessions or attend
under duress. Courts jailed dozens of witnesses and defendants for refusing to
speak completely or truthfully, in some cases without following due process to determine their actual guilt. In some cases judges used their power to settle personal
or political scores: for example, a panel of judges jailed journalist Jean-
Leonard Rugambage for 11 months on apparently false charges after he published
an article on corruption in gacaca jurisdictions. In this case, as in some others
where judges acted inappropriately, gacaca officials intervened and held that
arrest procedures had been illegal. Because gacaca courts do not hear accusations
of crimes committed by soldiers of the Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF), now
the dominant political force in Rwanda, the system appears to deliver one-sided
justice.
In 2005 nearly 20,000 Rwandans fled to Burundi and still many others fled in
2006, many because they feared action by gacaca jurisdictions. In one exceptional
case, a Tutsi man said he fled because a local administrator pressed him to
make a false genocide accusation. Very few received asylum in Burundi, and all
except some 5,000 had returned to Rwanda by October 2006.
Confronting Divisionism and Genocidal Ideology
In a continuing campaign against “divisionism” and “genocidal ideology,”
authorities compiled a list of hundreds of persons suspected of such ideas.
Banned by the constitution, “divisionism” is vaguely and broadly defined in a
2001 law. A priest was sentenced to 12 years’ imprisonment in September 2006
for minimizing the genocide. In a sermon he had suggested it was wrong to call
persons who participated in genocide “dogs.” During the trial, the prosecutor
allegedly said that those convicted of genocide were not human and should properly
be called “dogs.”
Performance of the Judiciary and Fair Trial Concerns
From 2002 to 2004 Rwandan courts came to a virtual standstill as reforms meant
to increase their efficiency were implemented. In the first months of 2006 judicial
activity was again stalled because extensive administrative reforms, implemented
January 1, meant that territorial divisions no longer corresponded to jurisdictions.
When the courts resumed work in 2006 more than 12,000 penal cases were
pending, with some 70,000 of the most serious cases of genocide also scheduled
to be tried in the conventional courts.
In January 2006 the Supreme Court heard the appeal of former President Pasteur
Bizimungu, former minister Charles Ntakirutinka, and six co-accused convicted in
a 2004 trial. After two years in detention, Bizimungu and Ntakirutinka had been
tried for creating a criminal association, spreading rumors to incite rebellion, and
plotting to overthrow the government; the six co-accused were charged with creating
a criminal association. The conduct and outcome of the trial had raised issues
of fairness: one prosecution witness told the court that he had been beaten by
police and detained for two years to force him to testify, and one of the coaccused
was also threatened in an effort to get him to testify falsely against the
others; the court refused to allow the defendants and their counsel to fully crossexamine
witnesses; and the prosecution relied largely on the testimony of a single
witness who repeatedly contradicted himself and was contested by seven
defense witnesses. In 2004 the court had sentenced Bizimungu to 15 years in
prison, Ntakirutinka to 10 years, and the others to five years each. In its January
2006 decision the Supreme Court reversed the conviction of the six co-accused
but maintained the convictions and sentences of Bizimungu and Ntakirutinka.
In another case based largely on the testimony of a single witness, former Head
of External Security Col. Patrick Karegeya was convicted of desertion and insubordination,
stripped of his rank, and sentenced to 20 months in military prison.
Karegeya had been detained without charge for five months in 2005.
In 2006 a US District Court rejected confessions of three Rwandans accused of
murdering US citizens at Bwindi, Uganda, in 1999. The judge held that the confessions
had been coerced by Rwandan police and intelligence agents through
“unconscionable conditions and abuse” while they held the accused at Kami military
camp. The US Justice Department appeared unlikely to pursue the case, leaving
in question the fate of the three who had been drugged and brought to the US
in 2003 by US officials in an exercise of extraterritoriality.
Freedom of Expression and Pressure on Civil Society
After harsh criticism of the press by high officials, including President Paul
Kagame, in the early months of 2006 several journalists were followed by unidentified
men, threatened by phone, or detained for official questioning. One journalist
was beaten by armed men who told him to warn a colleague that they wanted no further interference with their work. As during the previous year, some journalists
chose to leave the country rather than work in such conditions.
Most human rights organizations and some journalists practiced self-censorship,
fearing reprisals by officials. When the League for the Defense of Human Rights in
the Great Lakes (LDGL) documented electoral irregularities, it was castigated by
the chairman of the National Electoral Commission, who said that the LDGL must
have wanted “violence, delays, and confusion” in the voting process. Intelligence
agents appeared to follow closely the activities of human rights organizations,
and RPF leaders pressured one organization to elect persons it favored to leadership
posts.
Local-Level Democracy
In February-March 2006 Rwandans voted for local authorities. In contests at the
lowest administrative levels, voters lined up behind their chosen candidates.
Contests for officials at the next higher level used secret ballots, but observers
reported numerous irregularities, including stuffing of ballot boxes and intimidation
of candidates. Disputes over the results led to confrontations between voters
and election officials in some areas. In a number of contests, only one candidate
stood for election.
In June unidentified assailants assaulted a district mayor who had been in conflict
with senior figures of the RPF. He was later forced to resign and fled the country.
Illegal Detentions, Torture, and Ill-Treatment
Police and members of Local Defense Forces illegally detained and abused hundreds
of persons, many of them street children and members of other vulnerable
groups in Kigali, the capital, during the first months of 2006. Kept in dilapidated
warehouse buildings at an unofficial detention center, hundreds of detainees suffered
from lack of food, water, and medical care. Children were abused by adult
detainees and women reported rape by security personnel. After Human Rights
Watch published a report on the center, authorities closed it, forcing most
detainees to leave in the middle of the night.
Evictions and Curbs on Land Use
As part of the “modernization” of Kigali, houses built without authorization in the
poor sectors of the city were demolished. Though officials claimed that 15 days’
notice was provided prior to demolition, many residents said this was untrue.
As Rwanda moves to implement wide-ranging land reform adopted in 2005, officials
of two districts ordered residents to cut down their banana plantations and
replace them with ornamental trees or more productive crops. Following public
outcry in one district, officials said that residents would not be forced but only
“persuaded” to comply.
Key International Actors
In 2006 many international donors continued to provide generous financial and
political support to Rwanda. In one rare case of criticism on a human rights issue,
the European Commission expressed concern over the illegal detention of street
children.
The peer review mechanism of the New Partnership for African Development
(NEPAD) gave Rwanda a generally favorable report but criticized its apparent
“desire to obliterate distinctive identities,” including that of the minority Batwa,
and the “‘rehearsed’ participation in public affairs as determined by political
authorities.” Concerned about limits on political space, the team recommended
recognizing “the need for political parties and civil society to operate freely.”
After praising gacaca as a potentially useful innovation, the team raised concerns
about the extent of its legitimacy among Rwandans. The team also asked why the
percentage of Rwandans living in poverty had increased despite five years of
efforts supposedly meant to improve their status. President Kagame responded
by criticizing the team’s methodology and defending the practices in question.