 RWANDA
 Since coming to power in 1973, President Juvenal
 Habyarimana has made continued progress on human rights a
 key objective of official policy. The Rwandan Government
 emphasizes development of rural areas to improve the lot
 of its poorest citizens and has undertaken efforts to make
 local justice more consistent. Lack of resources rather
 than appropriate policies impedes faster human rights
 progress.
 Since 1978 Rwanda has made progress in returning to con-
 stitutional rule. A constitution was drafted, openly de-
 bated and substantially modified prior to adoption by na-
 tional referendum in December 1978. A subsequent presi-
 dential plebiscite confirmed President Habyarimana in his
 duties. The sole political party, the National Revolu-
 tionary Movement for Development, is being revamped in
 preparation for local elections in late 1979, to be
 followed by the election of a national assembly in 1980
 or 1981.
 During the past year, Rwanda has been in the forefront of
 the African human rights movement. A colloquium on human
 rights and economic development in Africa was held in
 Rwanda in July 1978. In May 1979 Rwanda was selected as
 part of a five-nation African fact-finding team to inves-
 tigate human rights violations in the Central African
 Empire. A Rwandan jurist participated in the study of
 Latin American and European Human Rights Commissions with
 the ultimate objective of creating a similar institution
 for Africa.
 Rwanda's traditional feudal society dominated by the
 Tutsi (14 percent of the population) and led by a monarch,
 was overturned by revolution in 1959 by the majority Hutu
 group (85 percent of the population) and replaced by an
 egalitarian society with a stronger emphasis on individ-
 ual rights. A broadly based majority government confirmed
 these internal changes at the time of political indepen-
 dence in 1962. During the decade that followed, Hutu
 leaders actively sought to redress the social, economic,
 and educational imbalance which had developed under the
 Tutsi monarchy. This led to division, corruption, and
 sporadic ethnic strife culminating in a coup d'etat in
 1973.
 The current government seeks national unity and full par-
 ticipation of all ethnic groups in national life through
 a proportional quota system aimed at guaranteeing to each
 an equitable share of jobs, education, and advancement
 opportunities.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Torture is not used, although criminal suspects are some-
 times subjected to beatings during interrogation. If
 identified, authorities who engage in this practice are
 
 (155)
 
 
 156
 prosecuted. At least one police officer is currently
 being prosecuted for use of violence against a detainee.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Rwandan prison authorities generally respect the integri-
 ty of the person. If apprehended using violence, prison
 officials are disciplined. General neglect, lack of re-
 sources for guard training, food and medical supplies, as
 well as outdated and overcrowded buildings render prison
 conditions poor. Local Red Cross and church officials
 generally have access to the prisons, as do consular offi-
 cers for imprisoned third country nationals. On September
 13, 1979, in a speech to the Ministry of Justice offi-
 cials, the President discussed the rights of prisoners and
 set forth the government's objectives to humanize the pri-
 sons. A more lenient revised penal code becomes effective
 in January 1980.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 In January 1979 the President granted amnesty to some pri-
 soners and halved the sentences of others. However, the
 government has not accounted for a few high officials of
 the previous regime imprisoned in 1973.
 The massive exodus of rural people toward the urban center
 of Kigali overwhelms the city's capacity to support and
 employ them, resulting in high crime levels. Unemployed
 immigrants are regularly rounded-up and sent back to the
 countryside or placed in youth camps for skills training.
 President Habyarimana has publicly stressed that the five-
 day preventive detention provision of the legal code must
 not, under any circumstances, be violated.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Occasionally prisoners have waited up to two years with-
 out being tried. Some are not even formally arraigned.
 The government is keenly aware of these deficiences which
 result from a dearth of trained judges, lawyers, court
 clerks and even basic office equipment. The government
 is undertaking a program of upgrading the administration
 and dispensation of justice through respect for the law,
 training programs, seminars, and recruitment of university
 law graduates into the Magistrate Corps. The judiciary
 is independent of executive or military control.
 2. Government Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education:
 The main priority of the government as reflected in the
 five-year plan is rural development. The plan emphasizes
 an integrated and balanced development strategy aimed at
 reaching the majority of the population. It focuses on
 increasing food production and providing health services,
 housing and vocational education, primarily in rural areas
 where 95 percent of Rwandans live. In the past year,
 Rwanda has also recognized the need to slow its 3.2 per-
 cent rate of demographic expansion in order to ensure an
 
 
 157
 improved quality of life for future generations. Rwanda's
 poverty is widespread. Farms average less than two acres
 in size. Land is privately controlled. Mildly regressive
 taxes fall most heavily on coffee and other export crops.
 A large portion of government resources is devoted to the
 attainment of development objectives for which external
 assistance is also actively sought and productively em-
 ployed.
 Senior government and military officials are encouraged to
 engage in private business, with inevitable conflicts of
 interest. A national commission was established in 1979
 to monitor behavior and regulate any abuses that might
 arise. Petty corruption is not widespread, and offenders
 are punished if apprehended.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Includ-
 ing:
 a. Freedom of Speech, Religion, Press and
 Assembly
 Freedom of religion and assembly are generally respected,
 although cautiously exercised to avoid government dis-
 approval. Limited criticism of government policies and
 performance is tolerated and sometimes even encouraged.
 There are few channels for public expression of views.
 The press, largely run by a parastatal organization,
 reaches few people. There is no television; however,
 radio coverage of the nation is fairly complete.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 Freedom of movement is limited internally by policies to
 restrain rural-urban migration and by lack of available
 new lands for settlement or farming. Rwanda and its
 neighbors are negotiating emigration from over-populated
 Rwanda to nearby agricultural lands. The government con-
 trols issuance of passports for security reasons and to
 conserve scarce foreign exchange by minimizing travel out-
 side Rwanda.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Rwanda's government, although authoritarian, places high
 value on achieving national consensus through active con-
 tact with the people. All Rwandans are encouraged to par-
 ticipate in the vote at age 18. Nearly 98 percent of the
 eligible voters participated in the constitutional refer-
 endum and presidential plebiscite in December 1978. Under
 the new constitution, Rwanda is organized under the aegis
 of the National Revolutionary Development Movement (MRND)
 which seeks to embody the economic, social and political
 aspirations of the nation. MRND provides candidates for
 local and national office. MRND officials and local gov-
 ernment councils are scheduled to be elected in 1979 with
 national assembly elections planned for January 1981. The
 constitution gives the elected legislature an important
 voice in the political process.
 The government continues to pursue a policy of decentral-
 ized decision-making, giving individual communities a
 greater say in managing day-to-day affairs.
 
 
 158
 The waning of traditional social pressures is permitting
 women to become more active outside the home. The consti-
 tution specifically prohibits sexual discrimination and
 recognizes only monogamous marriages. Government pro-
 grams to involve women more fully in development are un-
 derway, but there is room for much more progress.
 The right to unionize is guaranteed in the constitution.
 There is no national trade union movement, but the govern-
 ment encourages local employee organizations. All workers
 in the private sector enjoy the right to strike, as long
 as this does not impinge on other people's freedom to
 work. In practice, aside from cooperatives, there are few
 labor organizations and almost no strikes.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights:
 In June 1979, Rwanda participated in an international in-
 vestigation of human rights violations in the Central
 African Empire. The Department of State is aware of no
 recent requests for outside investigations of alleged
 human rights violations in Rwanda.
 
 
 159
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 
 COUNTRY: RWANDA
 
 1977     1978     1979
 
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...
 LOANS...............
 GRANTS.............
 A.AIO ..............*
 LOANS..............
 GRANTS.............
 CSEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE....
 LOANS..............
 GRANTS.............
 TITLE I-TOTAL..........
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS.....
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR....
 TITLE I-TOTAL.......o.
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & wFP.
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY.....
 CoOTHER ECON. ASSIST...
 LOANS..............
 GRANTS.............
 CONTR. TO IFI....
 PEACE CORPS......
 OTHER..........
 II.MIL* ASSIST.-TOTAL...
 LOANS ......  . ***..
 GRANTS.............
 AoMAP GRANTS..........
 B.CREOIT SALES-FMS....
 C.INTL NIL.ED.TRNG....
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...
 E.OTHER GRANTS........
 III.TOTAL ECON. & NILo..
 LOANS.*..........
 GRANTS........
 
 OTHER US LOANS,.......
 EX-IM BANK LOANS.......
 ALL OTHER..............
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL
 
 1.8      3.5
 0.0      0.0
 1.8      3.5
 0.2      1.7
 0.0      0.0
 0.2      1.7
 0.0      0.0
 1.5      1.6
 0.0      0.0
 1.5      1.6
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 1.5      1.6
 0.7      0.1
 0.8      1.5
 0.1      0.2
 0.0      0.0
 0.1      0.2
 0.0      0.0
 0.1      0.2
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 1.8      3.5
 0.0      0.0
 1.8      3.5
 0.0      0.3
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.3
 AGENCIES-COMMITMENTS
 
 1977     1978     1979     1946-79
 
 TOTAL........
 IBRD
 IFC
 IDA
 ID
 ADO
 AFOB
 UNOP
 OTHER-UN
 EEC
 
 27.6
 0.0
 0.0
 14.0
 0.0
 0.0
 12.5
 1.0
 0.1
 0.0
 
 22.8
 0.0
 0.0
 15.0
 0.0
 0.0
 2.6
 2.7
 2.5
 0.0
 
 194,6
 0.0
 0.8
 88.7
 0.0
 0.0
 19.7
 19.4
 5.8
 60.2
 
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 
 ----------------------------------------------------------
 
 
