 RWANDA
 The human rights situation in Rwanda is improving,
 against a background of authoritarian traditions and
 violent revolution at independence when the Hutu
 majority (85 percent) overturned Tutsi (14 percent)
 minority rule. In Rwandan society there has always
 been greater emphasis on the security and harmony
 of one's position within family and clan structures
 than on individual freedoms.
 In the fall of 1978, President Juvenal Habyarimana, in
 consultation with Government and party (National Revolu-
 tionary Development Movement) leaders, began the process of
 returning Rwanda to democratic constitutional rule. A
 referendum on the new Constitution took place in December
 1978, with national elections to follow in 1979.
 During the first decade of independence, Hutu govern-
 mental policies were blatantly "compensatory" in an
 effort to ensure that the Hutus enjoyed the favored
 positions which the Tutsis previously held. Although
 much less pronounced today, discrimination remains a
 highly charged political issue. The Habyarimana
 Government supports full participation of all ethnic
 groups in the economic sector through a proportional
 quota system aimed at guaranteeing to each an equitable
 share of jobs and educational and advancement oppor-
 tunities.
 Since coming to power in 1973 President Habyarimana has
 made continued progress on human rights a key objective
 of official policy. The Rwandan Government emphasizes
 development of rural agricultural areas to improve the
 lot of its poorest citizens, and efforts to make local
 justice more consistent.
 A colloquium on human rights and economic development in
 Africa was held in Rwanda in July 1978. It was co-
 sponsored by the law faculty of the National University
 of Rwanda and the Washington-based Institute for Inter-
 (142)
 
 
 143
 national Law and Economic Development. The colloquium,
 which attracted participants from six Francophone
 African countries, was highlighted by lively discus-
 sions of traditional and modern views of human rights
 in Africa.
 1. Respect for Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Systematic torture is not used, although sometimes
 criminal suspects are subjected to beatings during
 interrogation.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Rwandan prison authorities generally respect the
 integrity of the person. However, beatings are some-
 times used to enforce discipline. Prison conditions
 are generally poor.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 Arbitrary arrest and imprisonment occur when unemployed
 migrants from rural areas are rounded up in the capital
 city and sent back to the countryside for failure to
 have work permits. These sweeps are intended to reduce
 the robbery and theft attributed to unemployed city
 dwellers.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Occasionally prisoners wait up to two years without
 being tried. Some prisoners are not even formally
 arraigned. This results mainly from Rwanda's almost
 total lack of trained judges, lawyers, court clerks or
 even basic office equipment. The Rwandan Government is
 keenly aware of these deficiencies and has requested
 assistance from the United States and others to estab-
 lish a judicial training center in the capital city.
 Graduates of the first two classes of the Rwanda
 National University Law School are beginning to fill
 key positions on the bench and at the bar.
 
 
 144
 e. Invasion of the Home
 Sanctity of the home is respected.
 2. Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 Since taking power in 1973, the Habyarimana Government
 has defined its goal as satisfying the material needs
 of the impoverished Rwandan people. The Five-Year Plan
 focuses on increasing food production and providing
 health services, housing and vocational education,
 primarily in rural areas where 97 percent of Rwandans
 live. The 49 percent increase in the 1977 development
 budget underscored these governmental priorities.
 The government policy to involve women more fully in
 development is retarded by traditional social pressures.
 Senior government and military officials are encouraged
 to engage in private business, with inevitable conflicts-
 of-interest. Unless abused, these conflicts are not
 regarded as objectionable by most Rwandans. Petty
 corruption is not widespread and offenders are punished
 if apprehended.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Includ-
 ing:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Religion, Press
 and Assembly
 Freedom of thought, religion and assembly are generally
 respected although cautiously exercised to avoid
 government disapproval. Limited criticism of govern-
 ment policies and performance is tolerated and some-
 times even encouraged. However, there are few channels
 for public expression of views. The press and radio
 reach few people and are mostly government-controlled.
 There is no television. In September 1978 the Govern-
 ment removed the ban on labor unions when it advocated
 a policy encouraging the formation of local labor
 
 
 145
 and employee organizations. The organizations will be
 free from government controls.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 Freedom of movement is limited internally by policies
 to restrain rural-urban migration under high unemploy-
 ment conditions and by lack of available new lands for
 settlement or farming, and externally by strict controls
 on the issuance of passports. The Government has
 relaxed restrictions on other internal movement and is
 encouraging emigration into neighboring countries from
 over-populated Rwanda. Rwanda and its neighbors are
 negotiating to ease restraints on movement by individ-
 uals across their borders.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 In December 1978 Rwanda held a national constitutional
 referendum and a presidential plebiscite in which
 President Habyarimana was elected to a five-year
 term of office. Under the provisions of the new
 Constitution, Rwanda has a single political party (the
 National Revolutionary Development Movement), an
 elected National Assembly (the First Republic Assembly
 was dissolved after the 1973 coup) and an autonomous
 judiciary. According to the timetable, the Rwandan
 people will choose representatives to the National
 Assembly in early 1979. The Constitution gives the
 elected legislature an important voice in the political
 process. During the past year, local administration,
 taxation and decision-making were largely decentralized,
 thereby giving individual communities a much greater
 say in managing day-to-day affairs.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-Governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Sensitive to its own violent history and to outside
 criticism, Rwanda has been cool toward perceived
 challenges to its national sovereignty. Representa-
 tives of the United Nations High Commission for Refugees
 
 
 146
 (UNHCR) failed in their attempts to investigate and
 moderate ethnic bloodletting in the early 1960s. In
 1973 the current Government was similarly unwilling to
 allow the International Committee of the Red Cross to
 probe conditions in prisons where convicted officials
 of the former regime were held. The Department of
 State is aware of no recent requests for such visits.
 
 
