 RWANDA
 Rwanda is governed by an authoritarian regime led by President
 (Major General) Juvenal Habyarimana, who is also the founder
 and President of the National Revolutionary Movement for
 Development, Rwanda's only political party. Government
 policy is set by the President in consultation with the
 Party's Central Committee, the presidentially appointed
 Council of Ministers, and the National Development Council,
 a legislative body inaugurated in 1982, which has limited
 power. In staged 'elections" in December 1983, President
 Habyarimana, the only candidate, was reelected President,
 and the electorate chose new deputies from party sanctioned
 candidates to the National Development Council.
 Rwanda's traditional feudal society, dominated by the
 Tutsi ethnic group (10 percent of the population, according
 to the 1978 census), was transformed in 1959 by a revolution
 of the majority Hutu group (89 percent of the population)
 into a society with a stronger emphasis on individual
 rights. An ethnic majority government confirmed these
 internal changes at independence in 1962. During the next
 decade, Hutu efforts to redress the social, economic, and
 educational imbalance which had developed under the Tutsi
 monarchy led to division and corruption among Hutus and
 sporadic ethnic strife. This situation culminated in a coup
 d'etat in 1973 which brought President Habyarimana to power.
 During 1983, the Government violated the constitutionally
 guaranteed civil rights of many Rwandans in its campaign to
 rid the urban areas of unemployed residents. Denied the right
 to defend themselves, many citizens were forcibly relocated
 to rural areas for allegedly being vagrants, or in the case of
 200 young women, sent to "reeducation centers' for alleged
 prostitution.
 Most Rwandans continue to subsist as poor rural farmers.
 There is little industry, and imports are expensive because
 of high transporation costs. In spite of government efforts
 to promote rural development and industrial production,
 economic growth just barely matches population growth.
 Although the law prohibits discrimination, members of
 the minority Tutsi tribe are subject to informal quotas
 and women remain second-class citizens.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Unlawful or Arbitrary Deprivation of Life
 There were no reports of politically motivated killings
 or summary executions in Rwanda in 1983.
 b. Disappearance
 Unexplained disappearances have not occurred in recent years.
 Arrests are made openly. A few high officials of the previous
 regime have not been accounted for since their imprisonment in
 1973. These cases have received little publicity, and there is
 
 (278)
 
 
 279
 no ongoing official investigation or effort to account for them.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 While torture is not specifically proscribed by law, the
 Constitution states, "The human person is sacred; its
 inviolability is assured." Nevertheless, in one recent case,
 security officials brutalized three women, one of whom was a
 Rwandan, visiting from Burundi, who were meeting friends at
 the club of a Kigali hotel. In full view of many patrons of
 the hotel, the women were severely beaten for no apparent
 offense and taken away to a detention center. Beatings and
 interrogations continued throughout the night. The Rwandan
 woman was forced to sign statements denouncing her family,
 still residing in Rwanda, as enemies of the state, and
 her two Burundi friends as whores and spies. The women were
 released the next day and expelled. While the Government
 does not condone violence, this incident reflects serious
 lack of control over the sometimes arbitrary and brutal
 behavior of security officials. The Government conducted
 its own investigation, which confirmed the facts, and
 promised to take disciplinary action against the security
 officials identified as responsible for the violent incident.
 Prisoners convicted of political offenses are severely restricted
 from contact with their families. With no explanation given,
 the Government canceled family visits that had been scheduled
 for July 5, 1983, with the prisoners convicted in the 1981
 Lizinde case for security offenses against the state. During the
 campaign against Ivagabondage,l detainees' heads were shaved on
 detention, and they were subjected to minor physical and verbal
 abuse during interrogation by agents of the Central Intel-
 ligence Service and the police. Corporal punishment is not
 permitted as part of or in lieu of prison sentences. Prisoners
 receive equal treatment. General neglect, however, and inadequate
 guard training render prison conditions poor. A new prison with
 better facilities has been under construction for several years
 but is not yet finished.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Except in the obvious case where suspects are detained if
 caught committing crimes, arrests normally occur with the
 service of a warrant following investigation. Several types
 of warrants issued by regional judicial authorities are used
 to detain suspects. Except in rare cases where the defendant
 is not available, charges must be formally stated in the
 defendant's presence within five days of arrest. Detention
 in excess of that period without that provision being met is
 grounds for dismissal of the charges. Under preventive
 detention provisions, however, persons may be held for
 30 days. At the end of that period, a judicial review
 is mandatory. If warranted, the detention can be prolonged
 indefinitely in 30-day periods. Detainees may appeal their
 incarceration, and the appeal must be heard within 24 hours
 by a competent judicial authority. There have been no known
 exceptions to the legally mandated warrant procedures or any
 known cases of preventive detention besides the morality
 
 30-231 0 - 84 - 19
 
 
 280
 campaign cases. There have been no known detentions for
 political offenses.
 The legal standards for detention, however, clearly were not
 respected during the campaign against "vagabonds" and
 "delinquents.*
 In 1983, constitutionally guaranteed human rights were
 infringed on by the Government's campaign to rid the urban
 areas of people without employment or other visible means of
 support in order to reduce crime. The relocations per se
 are legal in Rwanda, but in these cases the affected people
 did not enjoy due process. Since the accused had no opportunity
 to defend themselves, many miscarriages of justice occurred.
 Abuses were especially prevalent in the cases of young women
 who kept company with foreigners. Approximately 200 women
 found themselves labeled as "prostitutes" and were sent to
 "reeducation centers" or exiled to their rural communes.
 The excesses of some officials in the campaign were criticized
 in the local press, but it was not until foreign press
 criticism reached Rwanda in early May that the relocation
 campaign abated. President Habyarimana has, nevertheless,
 continued to deplore the presence of "vagrants' in the
 cities and to criticize casual relationships between young
 Rwandan women and foreigners. Most deportees, who were in
 fact employed, have been permitted to resume their jobs.
 Nevertheless, deficiencies continued to exist in the appli-
 cation of justice and in the occasional highhanded treatment
 of foreigners and refugees by security officers.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 " Although all defendants are constitutionally entitled to
 representation, the lack of lawyers makes it difficult
 for the accused to prepare an adequate defense. Family and
 other counsel is generally permitted.
 The judiciary is statutorily independent and expected to
 apply the penal code impartially. New laws in January
 1982 strengthened somewhat the independence of the judiciary by
 improving the nominating process and more closely defining
 the exercise of judicial functions and the promotion and
 discipline of judicial personnel. Nevertheless, the
 independence of the judiciary is limited. The President
 names and dismisses magistrates. Rwanda has three separate
 court systems to deal with criminal/civil, military, and
 state security cases. All but security cases may ultimately
 be appealed to the Court of Appeals. A separate Court
 of State Security has original jurisdiction over treason
 and other national security charges.-' Persons tried before
 this court in principle enjoy the same protection and due
 process as those tried before other courts, but in practice
 may be denied legal counsel, the right to call witnesses, or
 a full presentation of evidence against them. Nevertheless,
 in the April 1983 trial of the last 26 people charged in the
 aftermath of the Lizinde case, 22 were found innocent.
 
 
 281
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Corresondence
 Rwandans are subject to some interference in their private
 lives. Police are normally required to have warrants before
 entering a private residence. Using the pretext of checking
 required documentation, police authorities can gain unwarranted
 entry into homes, but there were no known cases in 1983.
 Many traditions of interference with the private life of
 individuals inherited from the days of the preindependence
 monarchy continue through the present but in a somewhat
 different form. Before 1959, the absolute monarch controlled
 all aspects of the activities of his subjects, such as where
 they could live, where they could work, how many cattle they
 could own, etc. Today, a person can move out of his home
 commune only with the permission of the mayor of the commune
 into which he wishes to move; the Government can bar a person
 from specific employment, but not all employment; people
 must carry identification cards. On the other hand, there is
 no evidence of the monitoring of private correspondence, and
 the receipt of foreign publications is permitted. There is no
 interference with the right to marry or have children as one
 chooses.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedoms of speech and press are guaranteed by law but restricted
 in practice. Individuals avoid speaking out against the Govern-
 ment for fear of losing their jobs, although some members of the
 National Development Council have criticized government policies
 and practices in the Council and privately. Candidates in the
 December legislative elections were prohibited, as in the 1981
 legislative elections, from expressing private opinions or ad-
 vocating policies at rallies, which are carefully focused by
 party officials upon party doctrine about which no debate is
 allowed. No private campaigning was permitted.
 Radio broadcasts, a daily press bulletin, and a weekly
 newspaper are produced by the Government. Two self-censored
 Catholic Church publications sometimes print sharp criticism
 of political and economic issues. Such criticism is tolerated
 and occasionally even encouraged by the Government. No journal-
 ist has been arrested in recent years, if ever. The Government
 has cautioned the press, however, to avoid what it regards
 as *harmful" criticism of leaders and maintains that the
 press should devote its efforts to "promoting development."
 The local press lauded the Government's campaign against
 "delinquents" to improve security, but criticized police
 brutality and its indiscriminate execution. The press,
 however, has not raised the subject of human rights. Books
 and imported publications are not censored, and academic freedom
 is respected. People hired at universities can conduct re-
 search and draw conclusions as they see fit.
 
 
 282
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly is cautiously exercised in the political
 arena to avoid government disapproval. Public meetings or
 demonstrations to express overt opposition to government
 policies do not take place, for fear of government reaction.
 The Government permits private associations, but requires, as
 in the case with religious denominations, that they be regis-
 tered and accorded legal recognition before they may function.
 The Constitution guarantees the right to unionize and strike,
 but Rwanda has no officially recognized labor organization. The
 party has been examining a project for over a year to create
 a party affiliated labor organization but without results thug
 far. In the meantime, the Government has permitted seminars
 on labor issues organized by unofficial local labor bodies,
 which receive some support from foreign labor organizations,
 such as the African-American Labor Center and the International
 Labor Organization.
 In the fall, students went on strike for two weeks at the
 university to protest a new academic regulation which was
 implemented without their prior notification or consultation.
 Although students blocked one of the country's main highways
 and destroyed public property, the President forbade the use
 of force, and the strike ended peaceably when the Government
 reached a compromise with the students.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 This freedom is protected constitutionally and respected
 in practice. The population is some 70 percent Christian
 and one percent Muslim, with the remainder following tradi-
 tional or no religious practices. Eighty percent of the
 Christians belong to the Roman Catholic Church, but there
 are active Protestant denominations as well. In enforcing
 its registration requirement, the Government does not openly
 favor one religion over another, although the Catholic
 Archbishop of Kigali is a member of the party's Central
 Committee, and all but one or two members of the Council of
 Government are Catholic. The President and other government
 and party officials regularly attend special services of all
 denominations. The Government, in fact, depends upon
 church-supported schools for a considerable portion of
 education in Rwanda (e.g., over 85 percent of secondary
 schools are church supported).
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel,
 Emigration, and Repatriation
 Freedom of movement within Rwanda is.heavily restricted
 by laws and regulations, which require people to hold national
 identity cards, residence permits, and work permits. People
 who wish to spend more than three days in a commune other
 than their own are required to obtain permission from the
 communal authorities where they will be visiting. Property
 owners who do not require renters to show that their documen-
 tation is in order are subject to fines and even imprisonment.
 "Clandestine" renters are subject to expulsion.
 Foreign travel is closely controlled through the issuance
 
 
 283
 of passports, which is preceded by a security check of
 each applicant. As a result Rwandans can be and often are
 denied the right to travel abroad, usually without a formal
 explanation. In addition, a refundable deposit of about $400
 is required for each passport issued for unofficial travel.
 This is ostensibly to cover the cost of any subsequent
 repatriation, but has the effect of discouraging travel and
 conserving foreign exchange.
 Rwandans may emigrate provided they are properly documented.
 People who have left Rwanda as refugees during communal dis-
 turbances or for other reasons may be repatriated only on a
 case-by-case basis. Rwanda's high population density and
 shortage of land greatly restrict prospects for repatriation
 and resettlement. Consequently, although Rwanda recognizes
 the citizenship claims of some of the over 30,000 refugees
 forced into the country from Uganda in October 1982, only a
 few of these people have been able to leave refugee camps
 for permanent resettlement in Rwanda.
 The refugee camps are well managed. A small hospital has
 been established which provides the refugees with medical
 care as good as most Rwandan citizens receive. Food supplies
 are adequate, and there is plenty of clothing. Some of the
 children are receiving elementary education, and a few
 churches have been erected. The useful life of the refugee
 tents is coming to an end, but it is expected these will be
 replaced promptly. Unemployment and boredom are the major
 long-term problems in the refugee camps. The Government
 will not permit any significant economic activity which
 would give the camp an aspect of permanency, as long as
 there is a chance that the Ugandan Government will take back
 some of these people. The Government, the United Nations
 High Commission for Refugees, and other international
 donors are involved with administering the camps.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to
 Change Their. Government
 Rwandans have no opportunity to change their government
 through a free choice of alternative legislative proposals
 and candidates from opposing parties for public office. The
 Constitution institutionalizes authoritarian power in the
 President of the party and the nation. All basic policy
 decisions and nominations of elected officials, such as the
 President and legislators, are made under the authority of
 the National Revolutionary Movement for Development, which
 is the "single political entity beyond which no political
 activity can be exercised." The party in turn is dominated
 by its President, who chooses the.Secretary General and
 Central Committee of the party and is the only constitu-
 tionally recognized candidate for President of the nation.
 Every citizen is automatically a member of the party.
 Delegates are elected and appointed to the governing National
 Congress, which meets every five years, most recently in
 June 1983. While there was some debate at the June session,
 
 
 284
 national leaders were not openly criticized, and the essential
 function of the Congress was to endorse the program presented
 by the party leadership, including the nomination of the
 party's president by the Central Committee.
 Elections for public office are contested only by candidates
 approved by the party. Elections provide an occasion to
 confirm rather than change the direction of government.
 Candidatures for the legislative seats of the National
 Development Council may be vetoed by the President. During
 the December 1983 legislative campaign, candidates were
 presented by the party but not allowed to discuss issues.
 While the electorate had a choice between two party candidates
 for each of the 70 legislative seats, there were no opposition
 party candidates.
 The Constitution provides that all laws promulgated by the
 Government must be approved by the National Development
 Council, which can also initiate legislation. Most power
 nevertheless remains with the executive branch. Although
 the National Development Council has shown a keen interest
 in financial questions, suggested modifications to some
 proposed legislation, and developed specialized committees
 to facilitate its work, it has not ventured to initiate
 legislation on its own, nor did its predecessor body under
 the first republic.
 Rwanda's 10 percent Tutsi minority, which dominated the
 country politically and socially before independence,
 has been relegated to a minor role in government, civil
 service, and military. Women play only a marginal role in
 political life.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Rwanda participates in African and U.N. human rights activities.
 It hosted an international human rights colloquium in 1978
 and participated in an international investigation of human
 rights in the Central African Republic in 1979. Rwanda
 helped draft the Human Rights Convention of the Organization
 of African Unity in 1981. Representatives of the International
 Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) visited Rwanda in June
 1981 to consider projects to improve prison conditions,
 but they did not visit political detainees because Rwandan
 authorities declined to agree with the ICRC's standard
 conditions for such visits.
 In 1983, there were no reports of requests for outside investi-
 gations of alleged human rights violations. Throughout the
 year, the United Nations High Commission for Refugees continued
 its support for the more than 30,000 Banyarwanda refugees
 from Uganda. The International Labor Organization successfully
 arranged in 1983 for oommunal authorities to provide provisional
 work permits to itinerant craftsmen who do not have a
 regular employer. In its February Matchbox publication,
 Amnesty International drew attention to Donat Murego, one of
 26 prisoners convicted in November 1981. Subsequently, the
 Government decided to cancel family visits to political
 prisoners which had been planned for July 5, the Tenth
 
 
 Anniversary of the Second Republic. In the fall, however,
 representatives of the International Committee of the Red
 Cross twice visited prisons in Rwanda, including political
 prisoners in Ruhengeri. Last year, Amnesty International
 had received disturbing reports of torture and harsh conditions
 in prisons in Kigali and at Ruhengeri and was concerned by
 the execution in September 1982 of 43 prisoners who had
 been convicted of nonpolitical offenses. Freedom House
 rates Rwanda "not free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Rwanda remains one of the world's poorest and most densely
 populated countries (5'6 million people and 3.7 percent
 annual growth in 1983). Adjusted gross national product
 (GNP) per capita has more than doubled since 1970 but
 still totaled only $250 in 1981. Some 95 pecent of Rwandans
 earn their living from subsistence farms averaging less
 than two acres. Traditional land tenure patterns prevail,
 and rural income distribution is relatively even. Urban
 dwellers are marginally more prosperous but suffer unemploy-
 ment, with wages lagging behind moderate inflation. The right
 to own property alone or in association is protected. The
 creation of a National Population Office in 1981 and increasing
 family planning resources represent an awakening recognition
 of the need to curtail high population growth.
 Rwanda's principal export crop is coffee, which accounts
 for about 70 percent of foreign exchange earnings and
 provides the bulk of government revenues. The country has
 little industry and must pay high transportation costs to
 move goods along a 1,100-mile road and railroad link to the
 sea via Uganda and Kenya. Real economic growth in recent
 years has stayed barely ahead of population growth. Rwanda's
 trade, investment, and banking policies encourage modest
 private sector economic activity. About 85 percent of
 Rwanda's small business representatives are Rwandans, and
 the proportion is growing. Foreign investment, however, is.
 stagnant.
 The Government gives priority to integrated rural development,
 focusing on increased food production, expanded health
 services, and improved education. Development goals and
 projects equally address all regions and population groups.
 Life expectancy has increased from 41 years in 1968 to about
 45 years in 1980, while infant mortality has fallen from 127
 to 102 deaths per 1,000 live births in the decade from 1970
 to 1980. In 1977, Rwandans received about 94 percent of their
 caloric nutritional requirements, while 35 percent of the
 population had-access to safe water in 1976. Adult literacy
 stood at 49 percent in 1980, and primary school enrollment
 expanded from 49 percent in 1960 to 70 percent in 1979.
 The Constitution states, "All citizens are equal before the
 law, without any discrimination, notably that of race,
 color, origin, ethnicity, clan, sex, opinion, religion, or
 social position." The requirement, however, that ethnic
 
 
 286
 origin be listed on identity documents insures that in-
 formal quotas corresponding to the Hutu/Tutsi ratio in
 society are not exceeded. Tutsis are employed in all
 economic sectors, but are better represented in private
 business than in government.
 Women provide most agricultural labor and have benefited
 less than men from social development. Sexual discrimination
 is outlawed by the Constitution, but women are in reality
 second class citizens before the law. For example, women's
 rights to property are limited, and they are not treated on
 the same basis as men in divorce proceedings.
 Women have fewer chances for education, employment, and
 promotion, often because the men in their lives (fathers,
 uncles, and husbands) prefer them to remain in uneducated
 traditional roles at home. Family planning services are
 still inadequate but are improving. There are virtually
 no day care services for women who have children but wish
 to work. There are few organizations promoting women's
 interests. Efforts over several years to establish a
 national union of Rwandan women within the male-dominated
 political movement have not borne fruit. Thus, women
 remain an undeveloped if not neglected human resource in
 Rwanda.
 
 
 287
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: RWANDA
 1981     1982    1983
 ....... ....... ........... ....... ..... ............ .. ..... ..
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        7.4      9.0      8.6
 LOANS ..................  0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        7.4     9.0      8.6
 A.AID  .... ..................  3.4    6.5      5.3
 LOANS ...    ..........   0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................   3.4      6.5      5.3
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......       3.9      2.4      3.2
 LOANS ..................  0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS............ ;       3.9      2.4      3.2
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ..........      0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN $-LCANS .....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN-FOR. CURR .....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  II-TOTAL .........      3.9      2.4      3.2
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.        0.8      0.3      0.4
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....       3.1      2.1      2.8
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...        0.1      0.1      0.1
 LOANS ..................  0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.1      0.1      0.1
 PEACE  CORPS  .....     0.1      0.1      0.1
 NARCOTICS ........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER.... ; .......       0.0     0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        1.5      0.0      0.1
 LOANS ..................  1.5      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............       0.0      0.0      0.1
 A.M-AP  GRANTS  .........     0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....       1.5      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG ....       0.0      0.0      0.1
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. a MIL...        8.9      9.0      8.7
 LOANS ......... ........  1.5      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............       7.4      9.0      8.7
 OTHER  US  LOANS ..........     0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......       0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL  OTHER ................. .0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1981     1982     1983    1946-83
 TOTAL ........    60.5    52.8     48.9    387.6
 IBRD              0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IFC               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.8
 IDA              22.5     40.9     36.3    209.4
 IDB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFDB              33.9     10.4    10.4     78.5
 UNDP              4.1       1.5     0.0     28.4
 OTHER-UN          0.0      0.0      2.2     10.3
 EEC               0.0      0.0      0.0     60.2
 
 
