 RWANDA
 The broad-based Government of National Unity of Rwanda was reorganized in
 August, with the replacement of the Prime Minister and the Ministers of Justice,
 Interior, and Transport and Communication. The largely Tutsi Rwandan Patriotic
 Front (RPF), which came to power in 1994, is the principal Rwandan political force.
 President Pasteur Bizimungu, an ethnic Hutu, and Vice President and Minister of
 Defense, Paul Kagame, an ethnic Tutsi, both belong to the RPF. The reorganized
 Government follows the ethnic and party lines of its predecessor. The mainly Hutu
 Republican Democratic Movement (MDR) retains the post of Prime Minister. Prime
 Minister Pierre Rwigema, a Hutu, runs the Government on a daily basis and is re-
 sponsible for relations with the National Assembly. There is no functioning judicial
 system.
 The national constitution known as the Fundamental Law is comprised of four
 texts: the Constitution of 1991; the Arusha Accords of 1993; the RPF Declaration
 of August 1994; and the Interparty Accords of 1994. These texts apply in a com-
 plicated legal precedence based loosely on their dates of execution.
 The 1993 Arusha Accord, signed by both the RPF and the former government
 headed by then President Juvenal Habyarimana, was intended to promote
 powersharing, ensure integration of the rebel and government armies, ease ethnic
 tensions, and lead to democratic elections. This effort ended in April 1994 with the
 crash of President Habyarimana's aircraft. Hutu extremists massacred hundreds of
 thousands of people, mostly Tutsis, but also murdered Hutu members of the political
 opposition. Both the military and civilian militias carried out the massacres.
 TheRPF responded with a military offensive that routed the Hutu army in July
 1994, causing the wholesale flight of Hutu civilians who feared reprisals. Two-thirds
 of the population was uprooted. More than 1.7 million people fled to bordering coun-
 tries; another 2 million were displaced within Rwanda. Most of the internally dis-
 p laced have now returned to their homes; nearly 2 million refugees remain outside
 Rwanda. Members of the former Hutu extremist Government and the former army
 (FAR), based just across the border in Zaire, threatened to rearm and renew the
 civil war, cross-border incidents continued to exacerbate the troubled security situa-
 tion.
 Vice President Kagame is responsible for security and military defense; the Min-
 ister of Interior is responsible for civilian security matters. The Ministry of Defense
 is responsible for overall internal security. Its security apparatus consists of the
 Government Patriotic Army (RPA) and the Gendarmerie, largely made up of RPA
 
 
 212
 soldiers. These units committed human rights abuses. Unarmed civilian police with
 limited arrest powers work in some rural communues. They report to the
 Borgemestre, or local mayor.
 On December 8 the presence of the U.N. Military Operation in Rwanda
 (UNAMIR) was renewed for a final 3-month period. Its mandate is limited to protec-
 tion of the International War Crimes Tribunal (see Section 4).
 The economic situation remains difficult. The interethnic violence from 1990 on-
 ward and especially in 1994 resulted in the neglect and massive destruction of much
 of the country's economic infrastructure, including utilities, roads and hospitals.
 Most Rwandans are subsistence farmers, and food production even before the war
 had barely kept pace with population growth. Dislocation led to disruption of the
 crop cycle and widespread food shortages.
 Although the security situation is improving, human rights abuses continue.
 These include revenge killings by the military and other killings which appear to
 be political in nature. In April the military fired into a panicked crowd at the inter-
 nally displaced persons camp at Kibeho, killing hundreds. The Government con-
 vened an international commission to investigate the tragedy. Prison conditions are
 horrendous, the judicial system does not function, and due process rights are not
 assured. Authorities hold more than 63,000 prisoners in overcrowded jails. Most are
 accused of participating in the genocide, but the justice system has vet to conduct
 a trial. Citizens do not have the right to change their government. Dissatisfaction
 with movement toward reconciliation, repatriation, and failure of efforts to restart
 the justice system and relieve prison overcrowding led to a cabinet shuffle in Au-
 gust. Discrimination and violence against women are problems.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were credible allegations that
 the military committed killings both for political reasons and in revenge for earlier
 violence.
 In March near Bugarama an RPA unit summarily executed 17 civilians after
 being ambushed by suspected Hutu militiamen. Military authorities arrested all the
 mebers of the RPA unit, who now await court martial.
 Suspicious deaths include the killings in August of two former sub-prefects in
 Gitarama and Gikongoro. Both had been members of the largely Hutu MDR. Au-
 thorities have not established a motive in either case, nor arrested anyone. When
 a judge was killed in Butare in September, the security forces quickly arrested one
 civilian and two soldiers, including the chief of security for that sector.
 In those killings where military forces have been implicated, the RPA has acted
 swiftly. More than 700 RPA soldiers are awaiting court martial on various charges.
 The case of 14 soldiers accused of the killing Hutus in May had not reached final
 disposition by year's end.
 On September 11, members of the RPA killed more than 110 civilians in Kanama
 after an ambush of an RPA vehicle. The Government admitted that this was the
 result of excessive force, and has investigated, but has produced no results by year's
 end.
 In April 13 prisoners died from asphyxiation in an overcrowded holding cell in a
 Kigali gendarme station. The Government condemned the "criminal negligence" of
 the officer in charge and placed him under arrest.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no credible reports of politically motivated dis-
 appearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Degrading, or Inhuman Treatment or Punishment.-
 Torture is contrary to the Constitution and the Arusha Peace Accord, and there
 were no reports of systematic torture. Various observers have accused local authori-
 ties of using excessive force in arrests and interrogation, but there have been no
 documented cases and the Government does not condone this practice.
 With serious problems of overcrowding and sanitation, prison conditions are hor-
 rendous. Authorities estimate that there are approximately 63,000 persons held in
 some 250 prisons and jails having a design capacity of 7,000. At Gitarama, the
 worst of the large prisons, prisoners are housed as tightly as four per square meter.
 In April, 13 prisoners suffocated in an overcrowded Kigali gendarme holding cell
 (see Section La.). The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), human
 rights organizations, diplomats, and journalists have regular access to the prisons.
 The ICRC feeds some 42,000 detainees in the 14 main prisons, and also provides
 additional expertise and logistical and material support to improve conditions for de-
 tainees. New detention centers are being built.
 
 
 213
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Rwanda's justice system is not function-
 ing. Never a model of free and fair justice, the system essentially collapsed during
 the genocide of 1994, when the overwhelming majority of jurists either fled the
 country or were killed. Since that time there have been no genocide trials, and only
 a few trials of petty criminals. It is generally believed that false accusations of in-
 volvement in acts of genocide have resulted in the arrests of thousands of innocent
 people. The Government does not have the capacity to investigate the vast majority
 of these cases. Under these circumstances any arrest can be seen to be arbitrary.
 The Government, on the other hand, sees its duty to be to bring to justice those
 accused of the 1994 genocide. It often makes arrests based on oral complaints, and
 the necessary legal paperwork to proceed to trial is missing in many cases. 63,000
 prisoners now await trial.
 Exile is not practiced. Indeed, the RPF"s primary goal is to end the forced exile
 of Rwanda's Tutsi population. This was the leading cause of the RPF invasion from
 Uganda in 1990.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The courts are not functioning. The Government,
 with the help of the international community, is attempting to rebuild the judiciary
 and appoint lower court officials. By year's end, no trials were being held, and the
 Supreme Court was not in place. The law provides for public trials with the right
 to an attorney.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Fundamental Law prohibits such practices. Authorities generally respect these pro-
 hibitions, and prosecute violations.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-The most serious violence occurred in April, in connection with the Govern-
 ment's effort to close the Internally Displaced Persons (IDP) camp at Kibeho. Most
 of the 120,000 residents were Hutu. Armed camp internees and the RPA engaged
 in brutally violent clashes over a 4-day period, resulting in deaths estimated at 338
 b the Government and as high as 8,000 by some nongovernmental organizations
 (NGO's).
 Apparently encouraged by some of the humanitarian workers inside the camp not
 to leave, hundreds of residents fled to a UNAMIR position at the camp's center, cre-
 ating a humanitarian crisis. Residents threw stones at the military forces, which re-
 sponded with gunfire that killed some 10 people the first day. By the third day of
 the operation there were reliable reports of gunfire directed at the military from in-
 side the camp; there were several stampedes of panicked camp residents apparently
 precipitated by armed Hutu extremist elements in the camp. On April 22, in the
 dusk and rain, a mass of about 5,000 camp residents stampeded in an attempt to
 escape an RPA cordon designed to direct the residents toward registration points
 for their onward journeys. RPA sections were not able readily to communicate with
 one another, soldiers fired into the crowd and killed many people. Many of the
 deaths resulted from machete blows, suggesting that camp residents were under at-
 tack from extremist elements within the camp. The vast majority of camp residents
 departed Kibeho for their home communes immediately after this violence, although
 an estimated several hundred militant holdouts retreated into a hospital and re-
 fused to leave for about a week. Some of these holdouts were killed by armed ele-
 ments among them, apparently to discourage others from leaving. After extensive
 negotiations involving the U.N., the ICRC, and NGO's, these holdouts too eventually
 left the camp.
 The Government responded to criticism of its actions at Kibeho by forming an
 international commission of inquiry. Belgium, France, Great Britain, the Nether-
 lands, Germany, the United States, the Organization for African Unity (OAU), and
 the United Nations each nominated an independent expert to serve on the commis-
 sion along with a representative of the Government. After 2 weeks of investigation
 which included visits to the site and interviews with witnesses and officials, the
 Commission concluded that the tragedy at Kibeho "neither resulted from a planned
 action by Rwandan authorities to kill a certain group of people, nor was it an acci-
 dent that could not have been prevented." The Commission went on to voice its re-
 gret "that U.N. agencies and NGO's were not able to contribute more efficiently to
 the speedy evacuation of IDP's from the camp." The Commission further concluded
 that "unarmed IDF's were subjected to arbitrary deprivation and serious bodily
 harm" committed by both the RPA and by armed elements among the IDP's them-
 selves. The Commission did not address the death toll.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Fundamental Law provides for freedom of
 the press, and the Government generally respects this right in practice. There are
 
 
 214
 
 several privately owned newspapers, the government-owned Radio Rwanda, and the
 UN.-operated Radio UNAMIR
 The university has reopened, and academic freedom is respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Fundamental Law pro-
 vides for freedom of peaceful assembly, but authorities may require advance notice
 for outdoor rallies, demonstrations and meetings. Citizens are legally free to join
 and form political parties, though the National Revolutionary Movement for Democ-
 racy and Development (MRND), and the Coalition for Defense of the Republic
 (CDR), implicated in planning and executing the 1994 genocide, have been banned
 by law. Hutus, however, demonstrated against foreign support of what they termed
 the "illegal regime" in Kigali.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The 1991 Constitution provides for freedom of religion,
 and the Government respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.The Constitution provides for these rights, and the Government re-
 spects them in practice. In August Zaire expelled 13,000 refugees to Rwanda, who
 were received without incident. The Government, aided by international humani-
 tarian organizations, received and processed these refugees, and returned them to
 their homes, largely without incident.
 Nearly all the 2 million Rwandans who fled in July 1994 remain outside the coun-
 try. Voluntary repatriation has been slow. Refugees from the 1959 massacres con-
 tinue to return in increasing numbers. Their arrival put strains on the housing
 stock in some areas. The law provides that owners may not reclaim a house aban-
 doned more than 10 years earlier if it is now occupied.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens did not have the right to change their government through democratic
 means. The 1992 powersharing agreement crafted in the Arusha negotiations and
 ratified by the 1993 Peace Accord was not fully implemented prior to Habyarimana's
 death in April 1994, but remains the basis of planning. Despite the events of 1994,
 the RPF brought representatives of four other opposition parties into the Govern-
 ment after the RPF military victory, but none of these officials were elected. An ap-
 pointed multiparty National Assembly is now functioning, with nine political parties
 represented, including the RPF.
 There are no legal restrictions on the participation of women in political life, but
 women remain poorly represented in politics and government, including both the
 Cabinet and thelational Assembly. The Batwa are also underrepresented.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A wide variety of local and international human rights groups operate without
 government restriction, investigating and publishing their findings on human rights
 violations. They include the URN. High Commissioner for Refugees and Journalists
 sans Frontieres. Government officials are generally cooperative and responsive to
 their views.
 On December 13 the International War Crimes Tribunal announced eight secret
 indictments of genocide suspects. The Government criticized the Tribunal for indict-
 ing only eight persons in the genocide of what it said was more than 1 million vic-
 tims. It also expressed dismay that the names of those indicted were kept secret.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides that all citizens are equal before the law, without dis-
 crimination on the basis of race, color, origin, ethnicity, clan, sex, opinion, religion,
 or social standing. The Government provides only limited enforcement of these pro-
 visions, however.
 Women.-Violence against women continues. Wife beating and domestic violence
 are normally handled within the context of the extended family and rarely come be-
 fore the courts.
 Despite constitutional provisions, women continue to face serious discrimination.
 Women traditionally perform most of the subsistence farming and play a limited
 role in the modern sector. They have only limited opportunities for education, em-
 ployment, and promotion. The Family Code of 1992 has generally improved the legal
 position of women in matters relating to marriage, divorce, and child custody, but
 still does not meet Rwanda's international and constitutional commitments to gen-
 der equality. For example, it formally designates men as heads of households. Also,
 the absence of succession laws limits a woman's right to property, thus jeopardizing
 her status and ability to provide for her family should she survive her husband.
 
 
 215
 Children.-The Government is attempting to provide an education and to guaran-
 tee health care to every child.
 More than 50,000 children separated from their parents during the 1994 genocide
 and national upheaval remain in the care of strangers or international organiza-
 tions. Although the Penal Code prohibits the imprisonment of children with adults,
 the Government indicates hundreds of children are in fact incarcerated with adults
 throughout the prison system. A new detention center for children which was fund-
 ed by the U.N. Children's Fund opened in October, it houses about 150 boys.
 People With Disabilities.-Although there are no laws restricting people with dis-
 abilities from employment, education, or other state services, in practice few dis-
 abled persons have access to education or employment. There are no laws or provi-
 sions that mandate access to public facilities.
 Indigenous People.-Less than 1 percent of the population comes from the Batwa
 ethnic group. These indigenous people, survivors of the Pygmy (Twa) tribes of the
 mountainous forest areas bordering Zaire, exist on the margins of society and con-
 tinue to be treated as second-class citizens by both Hutus and Tutsis. The Batwa
 have not been able to protect their interests, which center on access to land and
 housing. Few Batwa have gained access to the educational system, resulting in
 minimal representation in government institutions.
 There is no reliable information on specific human rights abuses perpetrated
 against the Batwa population during the 1994 upheaval. A group of several hundred
 Batwa refugees were discovered in 1994 living in a forested area outside Goma,
 Zaire, deeply traumatized by the events they had witnessed. They did not clarify,
 however, that they or other Batwa had been caught up in either side of the mas-
 sacre.
 National /EthniclRacial Minorities.-Before April 1994, an estimated 85 percent
 of citizens were Hutu, 14 percent were Tutsi, and 1 percent Batwa. The subsequent
 mass killings and migrations probably affected the ethnic composition of the popu-
 lation, but the extent of the changes is unknown.
 The Government has called for ethnic reconciliation and committed itself to abol-
 ishing policies of the former government that had created and deepened ethnic
 cleavages. It promised to eliminate references to ethnic origin from the national
 identity card, a provision of the 1993 Peace Accord. The Government has not statu-
 torily addressed the issue of ethnic quotas in education, training, and government
 employment. It has partially integrated more than 2,000 former government soldiers
 into RPF forces, although not by the formula prescribed by the 1993 Arusha Accord.
 Tutsi clergy and businessman, who were well represented in these sectors of society,
 were killed in great numbers in the genocide. Following the 1994 victory by the
 RPF, Tutsis returning from exile took over many of the business and professional
 positions formerly held by Hutus and Tutsis.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-In practice Rwanda does not currently have a func-
 tioning labor movement. Although preconflict labor law technically remains in effect,
 the Government is unable to implement its provisions.
 The Constitution provides for the right to create professional associations and
 labor unions. Union membership is voluntary and open to all salaried workers, in-
 cluding public sector employees. There are no restrictions on the right of association,
 but all unions must register with the Ministry of Justice for official recognition.
 There are no known cases in which the Government has denied such recognition.
 Unions are prohibited by law from having political affiliations, but in practice this
 is not always respected.
 Organized labor represents only a small part of the work force. Over 90 percent
 are engaged in small-scale subsistence farming. About 7 percent work in the modern
 (wage) sector, including both public and private industrial production, and about 75
 percent of those active in the modern sector are members of labor unions.
 Before 1991 the Central Union of Rwandan Workers (CESTRAR) was the only au-
 thorized trade union organization. With the political reforms introduced in the Con-
 stitution, CESTRAR officially became independent of the Government and the
 MRND.
 The Constitution provides for the right to strike, except for public service workers.
 A union's executive committee must approve a strike, and a union must first try
 to resolve its differences with management according to steps prescribed by the Min-
 istry of Labor and Social Affairs. The Government never enforred laws prohibiting
 retribution against strikers. Labor organizations may affiliate with international
 labor bodies. CESTRAR is affiliated with the Organization of African Trade Union
 Unity and the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions.
 
 
 216
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Constitution provides for
 collective bargaining, although only CESTRAR had an established collective bar-
 gaining agreement with the Government. In practice, since most workers are in the
 public sector, the Government is intimately involved in the process (see Section 6.e.).
 The law prohibits antiunion discrimination, and it has not occurred in practice.
 There are no formal mechanisms to resolve complaints involving discrimination
 against unions.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced labor,
 and there are no reports that it occurs in practice.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Except in subsistence agriculture,
 the law prohibits children under age 18 from working without their parents' or
 guardians' authorization, and they generally may not work at night. The minimum
 age for full employment is 18 years and for apprenticeships 14 years, providing the
 child has completed primary school. The Ministry of Labor has not enforced child
 labor laws effectively.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Ministry of Labor sets minimum wages in
 the small modern sector. The minimum wage is $1.08 (310 Rwandan francs) for an
 8-hour workday. The Government, the main employer, effectively sets most other
 wage rates as well. The minimum wage was inadequate to provide a decent stand-
 ard of living for urban families. Often families supplement their incomes by work
 in small business or subsistence agriculture. In practice, however, workers will work
 for less than the minimum wage.
 Officially, government offices have a 40-hour workweek. Negotiations in 1993 be-
 tween the unions, government, and management were held to reduce the workweek
 from 45 to 40 hours in the private sector as well, but by the end of 1995 no such
 reduction had occurred. Hours of work and occupational health and safety standards
 in the modern wage sector are controlled by law, but labor inspectors from the Min-
 istry of Labor enforce them only loosely. Workers do not have the right to remove
 themselves from dangerous work situations without jeopardizing their jobs.
