 RWANDA
 Rwanda is a one-party state which has been ruled by Major
 General Juvenal Habyarimana since his accession to power in a
 nonviolent coup in 1973. Founder of the single party, the
 National Revolutionary Movement for Development (MRND), he was
 again confirmed as President in the December 1988 elections.
 The President sets government policy in consultation with the
 party's Central Committee and the Council of Ministers. The
 National Development Council (the legislature), established in
 1982, ratifies laws but is not independent from the MRND.
 Legislative candidates must be approved by the party, which
 normally approves two candidates per seat.
 The major organizations responsible for administration of
 justice include the Ministry of Justice, the judicial police,
 and the gendarmerie, a paramilitary force which receives
 specialized police training. In addition, the Central
 Intelligence Service in the Office of'the President can make
 certain decisions which may not be appealed, such as denial of
 passports to Rwandan citizens or the extension of visas and
 residence permits to foreigners.
 Most Rwandans are poor rural farmers. There is little
 industry, and imports are expensive because of high
 transportation costs. Food production has managed to keep
 pace with the high population growth rate. Rwanda's major
 exports are coffee and tea, and the Government has a liberal
 policy toward trade and investment.
 Restrictions in practice on freedoms of religion, speech,
 association, and the right of citizens to change their
 government continued in 1988. The Government in 1987 released
 295 members of certain religious sects convicted of charges
 (refusal to join a political party) relating to observance of
 their religion. In 1988 the Government denied a request by
 one of those sects, the Jehovah's Witnesses, for legal
 recognition; but it has not interfered with their right to
 practice their religion. Public pronouncements by the
 President and the Minister of Justice frequently refer to the
 importance of human rights. Rwanda hosted in June a seminar
 on the promotion of human rights in Africa. Also in 1988, it
 gave temporary asylum to 41,000 Burundi nationals (mainly
 Hutus) fleeing ethnic violence in northern Burundi.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from: .
 a. Political Killing
 There was no evidence of politically motivated killing at
 government instigation in 1988. In May 1988, an army sergeant
 accused of the murder of a prominent colonel reportedly died
 during interrogation by military and security authorities.
 Subsequently, three officers were arrested in connection with
 the case.
 b. Disappearanqe
 There were no unexplained disappearances in 1988.
 
 
 272
 RWANDA
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 There were no reports of torture in 1988. In the past,
 Amnesty International (AI) has noted allegations of torture
 made in court by political prisoners, involving severe
 beatings and the use of electrical shock treatment. But AI
 also noted the Minister of Justice's efforts to punish
 security and police officials found to have mistreated
 prisoners.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Except for suspects caught in the act of committing crimes,
 arrests are made with a warrant following an investigation.
 There were no known exceptions in 1988 to the legally mandated
 warrant procedures. In most cases, charges must be stated
 formally in the defendant's presence within 5 days of arrest.
 Failure to meet this requirement constitutes grounds for
 dismissal of the charges.
 Under broad preventive detention provisions, persons may be
 held for 30 days if public safety is believed to be
 threatened, if the accused might flee, or if the penalty
 carries a minimum sentence of 6 months. At the end of that
 period, judicial review is mandatory. Detention may be
 prolonged indefinitely for 30-day periods. Detainees may
 appeal their incarceration, and the appeal must be heard
 within 24 hours by a competent judicial authority. Ministry
 of Justice personnel conduct daily official visits to prisons
 to assure that proper documentation exists for each detainee.
 These officials can order detainees released if arrest
 conditions do not conform to the law.
 Rwandan security forces occasionally employ arbitrary arrest
 and detention on political or security grounds. Most
 detentions are short-term, often for less than 24 hours.
 However, in January 1988, several relatives and associates of
 a Rwandan exile who had been implicated in a 1980 coup attempt
 were arrested and held without charge or judicial review.
 They remained in prison without charge at the end of the year.
 Sentencing to exile does not exist. with regard to forced or
 compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The judiciary is statutorily independent and expected to apply
 the penal code impartially, but in practice the Government
 exercises influence in political and security cases. The
 President appoints and dismisses magistrates. Laws passed in
 1982 strengthened the independence of the judiciary by
 improving the process of selecting judicial personnel and more
 closely defining their functions. The administration of
 justice has been hampered by poor management and a generally
 low level of education among civil servants. The Ministry of
 Justice conducts training programs for officials and judges
 and plans to establish a magistrate training center. In 1987
 over 650 magistrates participated in two seminars organized by
 the Ministry, and another 30 magistrates took part in an
 intensive 9-month training program. The Ministry was planning
 another series of training seminars for magistrates, court
 clerks, and judicial administrators.
 
 
 273
 RWANDA
 All defendants are constitutionally entitled to counsel; but
 because of a shortage of lawyers, many defendants are not
 represented at trial. Family and other nonprofessional
 advisors are permitted. Trials are public, and those which
 arouse extensive public interest are often broadcast to the
 street to permit persons who cannot be seated in the courtroom
 to follow the proceedings.
 Rwanda has three separate court systems for criminal/civil,
 military, and state security cases. All but security cases
 ultimately may be appealed to the Court. of Appeals. Convicted
 criminals must file an appeal within 3 months of the date of
 judgment. In April 1987, the President criticized the
 practice of some judges of delaying and backdating the
 issuance of court opinions, thus effectively eliminating the
 possibility of an appeal. He ordered the implementation of
 administrative procedures to stop such abuses. The State
 Security Court has jurisdiction over national security charges
 such as treason. Decisions of this Court may not be appealed
 before the Court of Appeals. If procedural violations are
 alleged in security cases, these may be brought before the
 Court of Cassation. If the Court of Cassation finds that
 jrocedural violations occurred, the case is sent back to the
 State Security Court and is tried by a different panel of
 judges.
 At the end of 1988, Rwanda was holding three prisoners
 convicted of crimes against domestic security. These include
 the former chief of state security, who was involved in a coup
 attempt in 1980. Along with four codefendants, he was
 convicted of murder for the killing of political prisoners and
 was sentenced to death in 1985. His sentence, as well as that
 of one of his codefendants, was commuted to life imprisonment
 in 1988. The other prisoner's sentence has been reduced to 20
 years. Four other prisoners implicatcd in the 1980 coup
 attempt were released from prison in 1988 after completing
 their sentences.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Rwandans are subject to occasional interference in their
 private lives. Police normally are required to have warrants
 before entering a private residence, but, using the pretext of
 checking required documentation, authorities in practice gain
 entry into homes without warrants. There is no evidence that
 the Government monitors private correspondence, and the
 receipt of foreign publications is permitted.
 All Rwandans are required to be members of the MRND and to pay
 party dues.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The law guarantees freedom of speech and press, but these
 statutory assurances are not observed. Open criticism of
 government policies and officials is rare. Such criticism
 increased somewhat in 1987, but appears to have lessened in
 1988. The Government sought to mute critical statements in
 the months leading up to presidential and legislative
 elections, primarily through the increased presence of
 security agents in public places and through occasional
 short-term detentions. Candidates in the 1988 legislative
 
 
 274
 RWANDA
 elections were restricted to expressing opinions and
 advocating policies consistent with party doctrine. Members
 of the National Development Council have in the past
 criticized government policies from the floor of the Council.
 The Government controls radio broadcasting (the most important
 medium in reaching the public) and produces a daily press
 bulletin and a weekly newspaper. Two Catholic church
 publications sometimes print muted criticism of political and
 economic conditions. Such criticism is tolerated and
 occasionally even encouraged by the Government. There is no
 record of any journalist having been arrested for what he has
 written. The Government-has cautioned the press, however, to
 avoid what it regards as "harmful" criticism of leaders. It
 maintains that the press should devote its efforts to
 "promoting development." Books and imported publications are
 not censored. There were no known incidents involving
 restrictions on academic freedom of inquiry and research at
 the university.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly is limited. No public meetings or
 demonstrations are permitted if there is any chance they will
 result in expressions of overt opposition to government
 policies. The Government permits private associations, but it
 requires that they be officially registered and accorded legal
 recognition. For a discussion of freedom of association as it
 applies to labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is provided for in the Constitution, but
 limited government harassment of and discrimination against
 several nonconformist religious groups, including the
 Jehovah's Witnesses, continues. The Government denied a
 Witnesses' request for legal recognition in October. Many
 observers believe this was on the grounds that the group
 refuses to recognize its authority to require citizens to
 salute the national flag, to join the sole political party, or
 to join the army. Government officials have indicated,
 however, that the Witnesses' right to practice their religion
 will not be impeded.
 The population is 70 percent Christian and 1 percent Muslim,
 with the remainder following traditional African or no
 religious practices. Eighty percent of the Christians are
 Roman Catholic, but there are active Protestant
 denominations. The Roman Catholic Archbishop of Kigali, who
 had been a member of the MRND Central Committee, resigned from
 the Committee in January 1986, apparently to bring his status
 into accord with Vatican doctrine. The Government depends
 upon church-sponsored schools for a considerable portion of
 education in Rwanda (over 85 percent of secondary schools are
 church sponsored).
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Freedom of movement and residence within Rwanda is restricted
 by laws and regulations which require all residents to hold
 national identity cards and residence and work permits.
 People who wish to spend more than 3 days in a township other
 than their own must obtain permission from the authorities of
 the area they will be visiting. Police conduct periodic
 
 
 275
 RWANDA
 checks, especially in urban areas, and return all those not
 registered in the locality to'their own township. Property
 owners who do not require tenants to show valid documentation
 are subject to fines and even imprisonment. Undocumented
 tenants are subject to expulsion.
 A major deterrent to foreign travel was eliminated in 1987,
 when the Government abolished the requirement for posting
 substantial deposits (as much as $600) with passport
 applications. Applicants now need only pay a small ($20)
 nonrefundable fee for a passport, and they must hold a valid
 exit visa. Foreign travel is controlled by means of a
 security check of all passport applicants conducted by the
 Central Intelligence Service, but unexplained refusals appear
 to be less frequent than in the past. Properly documented
 Rwandans may emigrate.
 There are an estimated 225,000 Rwandan refugees in neighboring
 countries. Most are ethnic Tutsis who fled Rwanda during the
 revolution of 1959 and subsequent ethnic violence associated
 with independence in 1962. Official policy permits these
 people to be repatriated on a case by case basis if the
 refugee does not represent a security risk, and if land is
 available in Rwanda. The lack of land, therefore, effectively
 precludes any significant repatriation. In 1988 approximately
 24 refugees returned to Rwanda from Burundi. The Government's
 position is that demographic pressures and strained economic
 resources preclude any large-scale return of these refugees.
 It has encouraged countries hosting the refugees to offer to
 naturalize them; this has not been well received by Rwanda's
 neighbors.
 Rwanda hosts some 19,000 Burundi refugees (mainly Hutu) who
 fled the 1972 massacres. In mid-1988, 41,000 Burundi
 nationals fleeing ethnic violence again sought refuge in
 Rwanda. The Rwandan Government refused to accord official
 refugee status to this latest group but did grant temporary
 asylum. Rwanda has received widespread praise for its efforts
 to meet the humanitarian needs of these refugees, most of whom
 had returned voluntarily to Burundi by the end of 1988.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: the Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Rwandans have no opportunity to change their government
 through a free choice of alternative candidates from opposing
 parties. The MRND, the sole body permitted political
 activity, makes all policy decisions and nominates all
 candidates for public office. It in turn is dominated by the
 President, who also holds the position of President of the
 MRND. He chooses the Central Committee members and is the
 only constitutionally recognized candidate for president.
 Every citizen is automatically a party member and is required
 to pay party dues representing 2 days' pay per year.
 Delegates are both elected and appointed to the party's
 governing National Congress, which meets every 2 years. The
 essential function of the Congress is to endorse the programs
 presented by the party leadership. The 1988 Congress
 rejected calls for the election of local party officials by
 secret ballot rather than the raising of hands.
 Only candidates approved by the party may run for the
 legislature, the National Development Council. The President
 also can veto candidates for the Council. Within the
 one-party system, the voters can, and sometimes do defeat
 
 
 276
 RWANDA
 incumbents in elections. Presidential and legislative
 elections are held every 5 years, most recently in December
 1988 when President Habyarimana was reelected to a fourth
 5-year term. There is only one candidate for the presidency;
 each legislative slot has two candidates nominated by the
 party, who are identified on official documents as to their
 ethnic origin. Votes for the President are cast by means of
 color-coded cards indicating a yes or no vote.
 Women play a relatively minor role in Rwandan political life.
 The 25-member MRND Central Committee includes 3 women, and, as
 a result of the December 1988 elections, the National
 Development Council has 12 female deputies out of a total of
 70 members. The Vice President of the Kigali Court of Appeals
 is a woman. A number of women serve on local councils.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Rwanda has taken some steps in recent years to participate in
 human rights activities and to improve its human rights
 record. It receives and cooperates with delegations from
 human rights-groups, including a delegation from Amnesty
 International in May 1986. Representatives of the
 International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) made a regular
 visit to prisons and spent 3 weeks in Rwanda in the fall of
 1987. There were no reports of requests for outside
 investigations of alleged human rights violations in 1988.
 The Ministry of Justice hosted a conference in June on human
 rights which was attended by representatives of 12 Francophone
 African countries. The conference focused on the preparation
 of human rights reports required by U.N. agencies and other
 organizations.
 Rwanda is a signatory to the International Covenants on
 Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights and on Civil and
 Political Rights, as well as the African Charter of Human and
 People's Rights. Rwanda is'also a member of the U.N. Human
 Rights Commission.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 In 1959 the majority Hutu ethnic group (89 percent of the
 population, according to the 1978 census) overthrew the Tutsi
 monarchy. In 1962 Belgium granted internal autonomy and then
 independence to a Hutu-led government which had overwhelmingly
 won a U.N.-supervised election. This movement against the
 Tutsi marked the end of the traditional, feudal society in
 which the Hutu had lived in subordination for centuries, and
 the beginning of a more modern society that places greater
 emphasis on individual rights. During the next decade, Hutu
 efforts to redress the social, economic, and educational
 discrimination suffered under Tutsi rule led to division and
 corruption among the Hutus and to sporadic ethnic strife.
 This gave rise to the coup d'etat which brought President
 Habyarimana, a Hutu, to power in 1973.
 The Constitution states that "all citizens are equal before
 the law, without any discrimination, notably that of race,
 color, origin, ethnicity, clan, sex, opinion, religion, or
 social position." However, the legal requirement that ethnic
 origin be listed on identity documents serves to ensure that
 informal quotas corresponding to the Hutu/Tutsi ratio in
 
 
 277
 RWANDA
 society are not exceeded. The Tutsi minority is in fact
 discriminated against in education and has been relegated to a
 minor role in government, civil service, and the military.
 Private business is the only aspect of society in which the
 Tutsis wield any significant influence.
 Following the Government's steps to restrict the activities of
 some religious groups, there have been incidents of
 discrimination based on religious affiliation. In 1986, for
 example, one high ranking government official reportedly was
 threatened with arrest because of his membership in the
 Jehovah's Witnesses, and three Witnesses were fired from the
 Ministry of Transport and Communication for their religious
 beliefs.
 Women perform most of the agricultural labor and have
 benefited less than men from social development. Despite the
 language in the Constitution, women's rights to property are
 limited, and women are not treated equally in divorce
 proceedings. Moreover, women have fewer opportunities for
 education, employment, and promotion. Family planning
 services are inadequate but are improving, and the President
 has been an outspoken advocate of family planning efforts.
 There are few organizations promoting women's interests, and
 efforts to establish a national women's organization within
 the party have been unsuccessful. The Government is
 completing revision of the Rwandan Family Code. The new Code
 will modernize Rwandan laws concerning marriage, divorce, the
 status of children born out of wedlock, child custody, and
 other elements of family law.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The Rwandan economy consists largely of subsistence farming.
 There is very little industry, and hence few workers in the
 modern, wage economy. Labor organizations have just begun to
 develop, and the Ggvernment is guiding this evolution through
 a new labor union, the Central Union of Rwandan Workers
 (CESTRAR). The Union is integrated into the sole political
 party, the MRND,  Other workers' associations no longer have
 the right to exist independently but must affiliate with
 CESTRAR. CESTRAR's organizers contend that having a variety
 of different labor organizations might threaten national
 unity. CESTRAR's Executive Committee was elected in December
 1987, and a number of training sessions and organizational
 conferences have taken place. Union membership (open to all
 salaried workers) is optional.
 While CESTRAR's mandate is still evolving, initial indications
 are that CESTRAR's leadership intends to focus on
 nonwage-related work conditions and on providing training
 opportunities to its members. In theory, CESTRAR members have
 the right to strike, but only with the approval of the
 Executive Committee--in effect, the Govdrnment. CESTRAR has
 established positive relations with employer organizations to
 improve labor conditions. However, CESTRAR remains primarily
 a political instrument designed to encourage more active party
 involvement by salaried workers. CESTRAR is affiliated with
 the Organization of African Trade Union Unity and the
 Organization of Central African Workers.
 
 
 278
 RWANDA
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The right to organize "professional organizations" and to
 engage in collective bargaining with employers granted by the
 labor code is exercised within the framework of CESTRAR.
 Government control of CESTRAR combined with the small size of
 the wage economy is a significant constraint on the collective
 bargaining process. Labor laws are implemented uniformly
 throughout the country. There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced and Compulsory Labor
 Forced labor is prohibited by Rwandan law and does not occur
 in practice.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Except in the subsistence agriculture sector, which is the
 overwhelming employment of most Rwandans, children under 18
 are not permitted to work without their parents' or guardian's
 authorization, and they may work at night only under
 exceptional circumstances on a temporary basis. The Minister
 of Labor may grant work permission to a child under 14. Child
 labor outside the agricultural sector is uncommon.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Minimum wages in the small modern economic sector are set by
 the Ministry of Labor. The current minimum wage is
 approximately $1.50 per day; higher minimum wages apply to
 certain professions. The minimum wage is inadequate to
 provide a decent standard of living for urban families and is
 often supplemented by work in petty commerce or agriculture.
 Hours of work and occupational health and safety in the modern
 wage sector are controlled by law and enforced by labor
 inspectors. Government offices and most private sector
 companies have a 43 hour workweek which includes Saturday
 morning community service.
 
 
 279
