 RWANDA
 Major General Juvenal Habyarimana has headed the Government
 since his accession to power in a nonviolent coup in 1973. He
 iias confirmed as President in a national referendum in 1978.
 He is also the founder of the single party, the National
 Revolutionary Movement for Development (MRND). Government
 policy is set by the President in consultation with the party's
 Central Committee and the Council of Ministers. Laws are
 ratified by the National Development Council (the legislature),
 which was established in 1982 but does not have any real
 independence from the MRND. In December 1983, President
 Habyarimana, the sole candidate, was reelected along with a
 new slate of deputies. Although the legislative candidates
 had to be approved by the party, the race was open to almost
 all whb chose to run.
 The major organizations responsible for administration of
 justice include the Ministry of Justice, which controls the
 courts, the judicial police, and the prison system; and the
 gendarmerie, a paramilitary force which receives specialized
 police training. In addition, the Central Intelligence
 Service in the Office of the President can make certain
 decisions which may not be appealed, such as denial of
 passports to Rwandan citizens or the extension of visas and
 residence permits to foreigners.
 Most Rwandans are poor rural farmers. There is little
 industry, and imports are expensive because of high
 transportation costs. Food production has managed to keep
 pace with the high population growth rate. Rwanda's major
 exports are coffee and tea, and the Government has a liberal
 approach to trade and investment.
 Although the Constitution provides for a number of fundamental
 human rights, there are restrictions in practice on the right
 to fair public trial, the right of citizens to change their
 government, and freedom of speech, association, and religion.
 The most significant human rights development in 1987 was the
 July prisoner amnesty decreed by the President during the
 country's observance of its 25th anniversary of independence.
 The amnesty included the release of all women and minors
 serving sentences of 20 years or less, and of all other
 prisoners sentenced to 10 years or less; the commutation of
 death sentences to life imprisonment; and the reduction of
 life sentences to 20 years. However, none of the amnesty
 measures applied to seven political prisoners convicted by the
 Court of State Security of crimes agAinst domestic security.
 The amnesty also released the 295 members of certain religious
 sects, convicted in 1986 of charges relating to observance of
 their religion. The Government indicated that in the future
 it intends to resolve such problems with religious groups
 through discussion with those concerned.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no reports of politically motivated killings or
 summary executions.
 
 
 234
 RWANDA
 b. Disappearance
 There were no unexplained disappearances in 1987.
 1
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 There were no reports of torture in 1987. In the past, Amnesty
 International (AI) has noted allegations of torture made in
 court by political prisoners, involving forced confessions and
 electrical shocks, but AI also noted the Minister of Justice's
 efforts to punish security and police officials found to have
 mistreated prisoners.
 The President launched a prison reform program in 1984 aimed
 at improving living conditions, providing vocational training
 for prisoners, and establishing work programs under which
 prisoners earn money to be credited to them upon release.
 while these programs have met with success, prison conditions
 remain generally poor, and guard training is inadequate.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, Exile, or Forced Labor
 Except for suspects caught in the act of committing crimes,
 arrests are made with a warrant following investigation.
 There were no known exceptions in 1987 to the legally mandated
 warrant procedures. In most cases, charges must be stated
 formally in the defendant's presence within 5 days of arrest.
 Failure to meet this requirement is grounds for dismissal of
 the charges.
 Under broad preventive detention provisions, persons may be
 held for 30 days if public safety is believed to be threatened,
 if the accused might flee, or if the penalty carries a minimum
 sentence of 6 months. At the end of that period, a judicial
 review is mandatory, following which, detention can be
 prolonged indefinitely for 30-day periods. These provisions
 were rarely invoked during 1987. Detainees may appeal their
 incarceration, and the appeal must be heard within 24 hours by
 a competent judicial authority. Ministry of Justice personnel
 conduct daily official visits to prisons to assure that proper
 documentation exists for each detainee. These officials can
 release detainees if arrest conditions do not conform to the
 law.
 AI reports that a former army captain has been detained for 14
 months without trial. The Minister of Justice informed AI that
 the officer is accused of subversion, but he gave no details
 of the allegations. This was the only known detention for
 political offenses in 1987.
 Sentencing to exile does not exist. Forced labor is prohibited
 in law and practice.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The judiciary is statutorily independent and expected to apply
 the penal code impartially, but the President appoints and
 dismisses magistrates. Laws passed in 1982 strengthened the
 independence of the judiciary by improving the process of
 selecting judicial personnel and more closely defining their
 functions. The administration of justice has been hampered by
 poor management and a generally low level of education among
 civil servants. The Ministry of Justice is conducting
 training programs for officials and judges and plans to
 
 
 235
 RWANDA
 establish a magistrate training center. In 1987 over 650
 magistrates participated in two seminars organized by the
 Ministry, and another 30 magistrates took part in a more
 intensive 9-month training program.
 All defendants are constitutionally entitled to counsel, but
 due to a shortage of lawyers many defendants are not
 represented at trial. Family and other nonprofessional
 counsel is permitted. Trials are public, and those which
 arouse extensive public interest are often broadcast to the
 street to permit persons who cannot be seated in the courtroom
 to follow the proceedings.
 Rwanda has three separate court systems for criminal/civil,
 military, and state security cases. All but security cases
 ultimately may be appealed to the Court of Appeals. Convicted
 criminals must file an appeal within 3 months of the date of
 judgment. In April 1987, the President criticized the practice
 of some judges to delay and back-date the issuance of court
 opinions, effectively eliminating the possibility of an appeal.
 He ordered the implementation of administrative procedure to
 stop such abuses. The State Security Court has jurisdiction
 over national security charges such as treason.
 The Minister of Justice stated in September 1986 that Rwanda
 was holding 10 prisoners convicted of crimes against domestic
 security. Three of these were released in 1987 after
 completing their sentences, leaving seven political prisoners
 at the end of 1987. This figure includes the former chief of
 State Security, who along with four codefendants was convicted
 of murder and sentenced to death in 1985. The appeals process
 in their cases is still in progress, and it is uncertain
 whether the death sentences will be carried out. AI in its
 1986 Report noted its concern that he and other former
 government officials were tried in secret, apparently without
 counsel, and that the trials did not meet accepted
 international standards.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Rwandans are subject to occasional interference in their
 private lives. Police normally are required to have warrants
 before entering a private residence but, using the pretext of
 checking required documentation, authorities can gain entry
 into homes without warrants.  There is no evidence that the
 Government monitors private correspondence, and the receipt of
 foreign publications is permitted. Rwandans have the right to
 own property.
 All Rwandese are required to be members of the MRND and to pay
 dues to it. Failure to participate in the MRND was one of the
 charges made against the religious sects in 1986.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Statutory assurances of freedom of speech and press often are
 not observed. Public criticism of the government ministers
 and their dependents has increased this year, apparently
 reflecting the President's series of unusally frank speeches
 critical of public administration, but public criticism of the
 military remains rare, and of the President nonexistent.
 Candidates in the 1983 legislative elections were restricted
 
 
 236
 RWANDA
 to expressing opinions and advocating policies sanctioned by
 party doctrine. Members of the National Development Council
 do criticize government policies from the floor of the Council.
 The Government produces radio broadcasts, a daily press
 bulletin, and a weekly newspaper. Two Catholic church
 publications sometimes print muted criticism of political and
 economic conditions. Such criticism is tolerated and
 occasionally even encouraged by the Government. There is no
 record of any journalist having been arrested for what he has
 written. The Government has cautioned the press, however, to
 avoid what it regards as "harmful" criticism of leaders and
 maintains that the press should devote its efforts to
 "promoting development." Books and imported publications are
 not censored, and academic freedom of inquiry and research is
 respected at the university.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly is limited. No public meetings or
 demonstrations are permitted if there is any chance they will
 result in expressions of overt opposition to government
 policies. The Government permits private associations, but
 requires that they be officially recognized nonprofit
 organizations.
 The Government is organizing a new labor union, the Central
 Union of Rwandan Workers (CESTRAR). The first training
 session for CESTRAR delegates was held in August and delegates
 urged the rapid implementation of the Union's organizational
 structure. The Union will be integrated into the sole
 political party, the MRND, although membership (open to all
 salaried workers) will be optional. In theory, members will
 have the right to strike, but only with the approval of the
 Executive Bureau. Other workers' associations will no longer
 have the right to exist independently, but will have to
 affiliate with CESTRAR. Thus, the right to organize
 "professional organizations," granted by the Rwandan labor
 code, and to engage in collective bargaining with employers
 must be exercised within the framework of the central union.
 CESTRAR's provisional organizers contend that having a variety
 of different labor organizations might threaten national unity.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is provided for in the Constitution. The
 population is 70 percent Christian and 1 percent Muslim, with
 the remainder following traditional African or no religious
 practices. Eighty percent of the Christians are Roman
 Catholic, but there are active Protestant denominations. The
 Roman Catholic Archbishop of Kigali, who had been a member of
 the MRND Central Committee, resigned from the Committee in
 January 1986, apparently to bring his status into accord with
 Vatican doctrine. The Government depends upon church-
 sponsored schools for a considerable portion of education in
 Rwanda (over 85 percent of secondary schools are church
 sponsored).
 The Government has in the past imprisoned members of
 unrecognized religious sects, including the Jehovah's
 Witnesses. In 1987, however, the Government's attitude toward
 the several religious sects improved. The President amnestied
 the 295 members of four sects--including 11 members aged 18 or
 less--sentenced in 1986 (in many cases to 10-year terms) for
 offenses related to the observance of their religion. The
 
 
 237
 RWANDA
 Government indicated that in the future it would pursue a
 dialogue with such groups to resolve differences.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Freedom of movement and residence within Rwanda is restricted
 by laws and regulations which require people to hold national
 identity cards and residence and work permits. People who wish
 to spend more than 3 days in a township other than their own
 must obtain permission from the authorities of the area they
 will be visiting. Police conduct periodic checks, especially
 in urban areas, and return all those not registered in the
 locality to their own township. Property owners who do not
 requird tenants to show valid documentation are subject to
 fines and even imprisonment. "Clandestine" tenants are
 subject to expulsion.
 A major deterrent to foreign travel was eliminated in 1987,
 when the Government abolished the requirement for posting
 substantial deposits (as much as $600) with passport
 applications. Applicants now need only to pay a small ($20)
 nonrefundable fee. Foreign travel is controlled by means of a
 security check of all passport applicants conducted by the
 Central Intelligence Service, but unexplained refusals appear
 less frequent than in the past. Properly documented Rwandans
 may emigrate.
 Official policy permits people who left Rwanda as refugees
 during the revolution or for other reasons to be repatriated
 on a case-by-case basis, but the Government discourages any
 mass return on the grounds that the overpopulated land and
 underdeveloped.economy could not sustain the burden.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Rwandans have no opportunity to change their government through
 a free choice of alternative candidates from opposing parties.
 The MRND, the sole body permitted political activity, makes
 all policy decisions and noninates .all candidates for public
 office. It in turn is dominated by its President, who also
 holds the position of Secretary-General of the MRND. He
 chooses the Central Committee and is the only constitutionally
 recognized candidate for President. Every citizen is
 automatically a party member and is required to pay party dues
 representing 2 days' pay per year. Delegates are both elected
 and appointed to the party's governing-National Congress,
 which meets every 2 years. The essential function of the
 Congress is to endorse the programs presented by the party
 leadership.
 Only candidates approved by the party may run for the
 legislature, the National Development Council. The President
 also can veto candidates for the Council. Within the one-party
 system, the voters can and sometimes do defeat incumbents in
 elections.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 *Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Rwanda has made a concerted effort in recent years to
 participate in human rights activities and to improve its
 human rights record. There were no reports of requests for
 
 
 238
 RWANDA
 outside investigations of alleged human rights violations in
 1987, although the Government, before the July amnesty,
 received many letters protesting the incarceration of members
 of unrecognized religious sects, particularly Jehovah's
 Witnesses.
 Representatives of the International Committee of the Red
 Cross (ICRC) made a regular visit to prisons and spent 3 weeks
 in Rwanda in the fall of 1987. A delegation from AI visited
 Rwanda May 3-10, 1986, and received extensive cooperation from
 the Government. The delegation visited a number of prisons,
 interviewed prisoners, including political prisoners, and met
 with the President, the Minister of Justice, and many other
 officials. As a result of this visit, Al submitted to the
 Government its observations and recommendations. In December
 1986, the Government responded with comments, referring to
 safeguards already introduced to prevent arbitrary detention
 and the use of torture.
 Rwanda is a signatory to the International Covenants on
 Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and on Civil and
 Political Rights and the African Charter of Human and Peoples'
 Rights. Rwanda is also a member of the U.N. Human Rights
 Commission.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 In 1959 the majority Hutu ethnic group (89 percent of the
 population according to the 1978 census) overthrew the monarchy
 of the Tutsi ethnic group (10 percent of the population). In
 1962 the Belgians granted internal autonomy and then
 independence to a Hutu government which had overwhelmingly won
 a U.N.-supervised election. This revolution against the Tutsi
 marked the end of the traditional, feudal society in which the
 Hutu had lived for centuries and the beginning of a more modern
 society that places greater emphasis on individual rights.
 During the next decade, Hutu efforts to redress the social,
 economic, and educational discrimination they had suffered
 under Tutsi rule, led to division and corruption among the
 Hutus and to sporadic ethnic strife. This gave rise to the
 coup d'etat which brought President Habyarimana, a Hutu, to
 power.
 The Constitution states that "all citizens are equal before
 the law, without any discrimination, notably that of race,
 color, origin, ethnicity, clan, sex, opinion, religion, or
 social position." However, the requirement that ethnic origin
 be listed on identity documents helps to ensure that informal
 quotas corresponding to the Hutu/Tutsi ratio in society are
 not exceeded. The Tutsi minority has in fact been relegated
 to a minor role in government, civil service, and the military
 but is better represented in private business.
 Following the Government's steps to restrict the activities of
 some religious groups, there have been indications of
 discrimination based on religious affiliation. For example,
 one high ranking government official reportedly was threatened
 with arrest because of his membership in the Jehovah's
 Witnesses sect, and three Witnesses were fired from the
 Ministry of Transport and Communication for their religious
 beliefs.
 Women perform most of the agricultural labor and have
 benefited less than men from social development. Despite the
 
 
 239
 RWANDA
 language in the Constitution, women's rights to property are
 limited,- and women are not treated equally in divorce
 proceedings. Moreover, women have fewer chances for education,
 employment, and promotion, often because society expects them
 to remain in uneducated, traditional roles at home. Family
 planning services still are inadequate-but are improving.
 There are few organizations promoting women's interests, and
 efforts to establish a national women's organization within.
 the party have been unsuccessful to date. Women play a
 marginal role in political life. Nevertheless, there are now
 3 women in -the party's 21member Central Committee, and .9
 women among.the 71 legislative deputies. - There are also a
 number of women on councils at the local level. The Rwandan
 family code currently is being revised.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 In the wage sector,.which comprises only 7 percent of the work
 force, children under 18 are not permitted to work without
 their parents' or guardian's authorization, and they may work
 at night only under exceptional circumstances on .a temporary
 basis. The Minister responsible for labor.affairs may grant
 work permission to -a child under 14.. He also sets the minimum
 wage and overtime rates. The'current minimum wage is
 approximately.$1.5-O per day. Hours of.work and occupational
 health and safety in.the-modern wage sector are controlled-by
 law and enforced by labor inspectors.
 
 I I
 
 
 240
