 RWANDA
 The largely Tutsi Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF), which took power following the
 civil war and genocide of 1994, is the principal political force in the Government of
 National Unity. President Pasteur Bizimungu, an ethnic Hutu, and Vice President
 and Minister of Defense Paul Kagame, an ethnic Tutsi, both belong to the RPF. The
 mainly Hutu Republican Democratic Movement (MDR) retains the office of Prime
 Minister. Prime Minister Pierre Rwigema runs the Government on a daily basis and
 is responsible for relations with the National Assembly. The judicial system is func-
 tioning on a limited basis.
 The Minister of Defense is responsible for internal security and military defense;
 the Minister of Interior is responsible for civilian security matters. The security ap-
 paratus consists of the Rwandan Patriotic Army (RPA) and the gendarmerie, largely
 made up of RPA soldiers. Civilian police with limited arrest powers work in some
 rural communes. They report to the bourgemestre, or local mayor. The RPA and
 gendarmerie committed numerous serious human rights abuses prior to the mass
 repatriation of refugees.
 The economic situation remains difficult. The interethnic violence from 1990 on-
 ward and especially the massive genocide of 1994 resulted in the neglect and wide-
 spread destruction of much of the country's economic infrastructure, including utili-
 ties, roads, and hospitals* Most citizens are subsistence farmers, and food production
 even before the war had barely kept pace with population growth. Small-scale com-
 mercial activities are on the increase, but the industrial base remains neglected.
 The Government continued to be responsible for numerous serious human rights
 abuses, although the country took a major step toward national reconciliation with
 the voluntary return of hundreds of thousands of refugees in November. Citizens do
 not have the right to change their government. The RPA killed hundreds of people;
 some killings were for political reasons, some were acts of revenge. Still other vic-
 tims were innocent civilians, including hundreds of civilians killed in security
 sweeps in the countryside. The number of such abuses dropped after the mass repa-
 
 
 226
 triation, and related military setbacks for Hutu rebels late in the year. Prison condi-
 tions are harsh. Authorities hold more than 80,000 prisoners in overcrowded jails;
 most are accused of participating in the genocide. In November the Government an-
 nounced that it would begin releasing prisoners whose arrest fies do not meet strict
 standards concerning potential guilt. Due process rights guaranteed by the Con-
 stitution are not assured. The Government arrested genocide suspects at the rate
 of about 800 every week during the first 6 months of the year;, the rate dropped
 sharply thereafter. Nearly all such arrests appear arbitrary and are often based on
 oral complaints and unsubstantiated accusations. In late December, the Government
 began to hold the first trials of suspects accused in the killing of some half-million
 people in 1994.
 Ii November and December, more than 1.1 million Rwandan refugees returned
 from Tanzania, and from Zaire in the wake of a rebellion in North and South Kivu.
 The Government welcomed the refugees and assisted them in returning to their
 home communes. Among the returnees were thousands of people suspected of com-
 plicity in the genocide of 1994; however, the Government immediately suspended ar-
 rests of suspected war criminals, except in notorious cases.
 The authorities harassed and threatened journalists, and freedom of assembly,
 movement and political activity are restricted. Discrimination and violence against
 women, and discrimination against indigenous people are problems.
 During the genocide and war of April to July 1994 approximately two-thirds of
 the population was uprooted. More than 1.7 million people fled to bordering coun-
 tries; another 2 million were internally displaced. The internally displaced returned
 to their homes by year's end.
 Hutu insurgents committed many serious human rights abuses, including killings
 of unarmed civilians.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-The RPA committed hundreds of
 killings for political reasons, in revenge for earlier violence, and in security sweeps
 (see Section 1.g.). The RPA killed many civilians during these operations. Many of
 these killings were in response to rebel infiltrations from Zaire.
 Genocide survivors and Hutu politicians at the local level have been the targets
 of infiltrators. On June 18, unknown persons presumed to be infiltratiors killed 15
 genocide survivors and 1 RPA trooper in an attack on a makeshift settlement in
 Kibuye prefecture. These killings were apparently part of an effort to silence wit-
 nesses to the genocide of 1994.
 On March 30, ex-FAR infiltrators killed Andre Ndayobotse, counselor of
 Nyamubembe sector in Nyakabuye prefecture, Cyangugu. On May 10, infiltrators in
 Cyangugu killed Anne Marie Mukandori, the bourgemestre of Karengera Commune.
 The commune of Bugarama was the scene of several murders of local officials and
 their families by infiltrators, deaths due to land mines, and an armed attack by ex-
 FAR soldiers on the municipal offices and jail. These killings took place during
 March and April.
 b. Disappearance-There were a few reports of disappearances, particularly in
 connection with RPA cordon and search operations. Human rights observers report,
 however, that due to the tense security situation and the mobility of returnees, it
 was often difficult or impossible to characterize definitively whether the disappear-
 ance of "missing" persons was involuntary or the result of force. In addition, there
 were a growing number of incommunicado detentions by agents of the State, which
 resulted in the effective disappearance of many persons.
 One particularly blatant and well-documented disappearance occurred on July 11,
 when unknown individuals seized the Bourgemestre of Nyabikenke Commune in
 Gitarama prefecture, and forced him, with his motorcycle, into an RPA truck. He
 has not been seen since and is presumed dead. Police made no arrests.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Torture is contrary to the Fundamental Law, and there were no reports of system-
 atic torture. Various observers have accused local authorities of using excessive
 force in arrests and interrogation, but there have been no documented cases.
 Prison conditions are harsh. Overcrowdin and sanitation are serious problems.
 There are approximately 80,000 persons hell in some 250 prisons and jails having
 a much smaller design capacity.
 The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), human rights organiza-
 tions, diplomats, and journalists have regular access to the prisons. The ICRC feeds
 detainees in the 14 main prisons and also provides additional expertise and
 
 
 227
 logistical and material support to improve conditions for detainees. New detention
 centers are being built.
 d. Arbitrar-y Arrest, Detention, and Exile.-The justice system began functioning
 on a limited basis at midyear, hearing nongenocide criminal and civil cases. Under
 these circumstances in which the Government has little capacity to ensure due proc-
 ess, almost all arrests appeared to arbitrary.
 The Government arrested genocide suspects at the rate of 800 per week in the
 first 6 months of the year; thereafter the rate dropped to 400. Arrests are often
 based on oral complaints and, it is believed, at times on false accusations.
 Exile is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judicial system again began functioning late
 at midyear. Never a model of free and fair justice, the system collapsed during the
 war and genocide of 1994. The Government, with the help of the international com-
 munity, is attempting to rebuild the judiciary and appoint lower court officials.
 The law provides or public trials with the right to a defense. There were only
 a few trials of criminal suspects and a few genocide trials. Despite the lengthy in-
 carceration of about 80,000 genocide suspects, genocide trials only began at the end
 of December.
 In August the Parliament passed a new genocide law, designed to elicit confes-
 sions in exchange for reduced sentences for the vast majority of those involved in
 the genocide. Trials are envisioned for only the most highly placed organizers of the
 massacres and those who participated with special zeal.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Fundamental Law prohibits such practices. Authorities generally respect these pro-
 hibitions and prosecute violations.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-The insurgency along the western border led to many instances of the use
 of excessive force. A typical pattern was for infiltrators from Zaire to kill a local offi-
 cial or attack municipal offices; in many instances, the RPA reaction included the
 killings of innocent civilians. In April the RPA and insurgents killed more than 30
 local residents in Rutsiro commune in Kibuye prefecture in an armed clash between
 the two groups. The RPA and insurgents killed between 40 and 50 persons during
 an armed clash at the detention center in Satinsyi commune, Ginsenyi prefecture.
 Of some 170 killed in 45 aggravated incidents in April, 124 are thought to have
 been killed by agents of the State, and 15 by infiltrators.
 Between July 5 and 13, the RPA killed more than 100 people during military op-
 erations in Gisenyi and Ruhengeri prefectures. Some of those killed were members
 of the defeated former army and Interahamwe militias, but many were reported to
 be unarmed civilians.
 In June, July, and August the army conducted a series of cordon and search oper-
 ations in the countryside in an effort to flush out infiltrators. During these oper-
 ations, the military killed several hundred civilians. Infiltrators also killed many
 persons, including Tutsi survivors of the genocide and local Hutu officials.
 In July some 365 people were killed in 93 separate incidents. 220 deaths were
 in Gisenyi prefecture, the site of the most intensive infiltrations. An estimated 226
 of the killings were attributed, according to human rights observers, to agents of
 the State, including the RPA; 45 were attributed to infiltators. In August about 110
 peo p le were killed by agents of the state.
 Members of the former Hutu extremist government and the former army (ex-
 FAR), based just across the border in Zaire, threatened to renew the civil war, cross-
 border incidents continued to exacerbate the troubled security situation until the ex-
 FAR's military setbacks by Zairian rebels in November and the massive return of
 refugees.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Fundamental Law provides for freedom of
 the press; however, the Government at times harassed and intimidated the media.
 Government agents harassed journalists whose reporting was contrary to official
 views. In August the authorities temporarily closed the Intego, a Kigali weekly
 newspaper after its publisher and two journalists were detained arbitrarily by mem-
 bers of the security forces. The publisher was detained without charge for 1 week
 and was treated harshly. The Government did not officially close or sanction the
 newspaper, but the publisher thought it prudent to suspend operations, prior to re-
 opening in November.
 There are several privately owned newspapers, the government-owned Radio
 Rwanda, and the U.N.-operated Radio Unamir.
 The University has reopened, and academic freedom is respected.
 
 
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Fundamental Law pro-
 vides for freedom of peaceful assembly, but authorities may legally require advance
 notice for outdoor rallies, demonstrations, and meetings. Political activity below the
 executive committee level of political parties was suspended by agreement of the
 parties. The National Revolutionary Movement for Democracy and Development
 (MRND), and the Coalition for Defense of the Republic (CDR), both implicated in
 planning and executing the 1994 genocide, have been banned by law.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The 1991 Constitution provides for freedom of religion,
 and the Government respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for these rights, and the Government gen-
 erally respects them in practice. However, the Government canceled all tourist pass-
 ports effective September 30. Thin action gave the Ministry of the Interior more con-
 trl over the movements of Rwandans outside the country.
 Up to 300,000 Rwandans who fled in July 1994 remain outside the country. Repa-
 triation of 600,000 from Zaire took place in November and December. More than
 50,000 refugees repatriated from Burundi in July and August. In December, 480,000
 additional refugees returned from Tanzania on the basis of decisions made by the
 government of that nation. The Government, aided by international humanitarian
 organizations, received and processed these refugees and facilitated their return to
 their homes, largely without incident.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens do not have the right to change their government through democratic
 means. The 1992 powersharing agreement crafted in the Arusha negotiations and
 ratified by the 1993 peace accord was not fully implemented prior to then-President
 Habyarimana's death in Api 1994, but it remains the basis of planning. Despite
 the events of 1994, the RPF brought representatives of four other opposition parties
 into the Government after the RPF military victory, but none of these officials were
 elected. An appointed multiparty National Assembly is now functioning, with nine
 political parties represented, including the RPF.
 The national constitution known as the Fundamental Law is comprised of four
 lexts: the Constitution of 1991; the Arsha Accords of 1993; the RP' Declaration
 of August 1994; and the Interparty Accords of 1994. These texts apply in a com-
 plicated legal precedence based loosely on their dates of exeution.
 There are no legal restrictions on the p articipation of women in political life, but
 women remain poorly represented in plitics and government, including both the
 Cabinet and the National Assembly. The Batwa ethnic group is also underrep-
 resented.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A wide variety of local and international human rights groups operate without
 government restriction, investigating and publishing their findings on human rights
 violations. They include the Un. High Commissioner for Human Rights, which op-
 erates a field office with branches throughout the country, and nongovernmental or-
 ganizations (NGO's) including Journalists Sans Frontieres. Government officials are
 generally cooperative and responsive to their views. The ICRC is also active.
 The International War Crimes Tribunal, which is to hold trials of genocide sus-
 pects in Arusha, Tanzania, began and subsequently postponed trials in 1996. The
 Government has criticized the tribunal for its slow start.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides that all citizens are equal before the law, without dis-
 crimination on the basis of race, color, origin, ethnicity, clan, sex, opinion, religion,
 or social standing. The Government provides only limited enforcement of these pro-
 visions, however.
 Women.-Violence against women continues. Wife beating and domestic violence
 are norngally handled within the context of the extended family and rarely come be-
 fore the courts. Despite constitutional provisions, women continue to face serious
 discrimination. They traditionally perform most of the subsistence farming and have
 a limited wage-earning role in the modern sector. They have only limited opportuni-
 ties for education, employment, and promotion. The Family Code of 1992 has gen-
 erally improved the legal position of women in matters relating to marriage, divorce,
 and childcustody, but still does not meet the constitutional commitment to gender
 equality. For example, it formally designates men as heads of households. Also, the
 absence of succession laws limits a woman's right to property, thus jeopardizing her
 
 
 229
 
 status and ability to provide for her family should she survive her husband. This
 omission is particularly onerous in the post-genocide period, since widows are very
 numerous and surviving male relatives who would normally inherit and provide for
 them are relatively few.
 Children.-The Government is attempting to provide an education and to guaran-
 tee health care to every child. More than 50,000 children separated from their par-
 ents during the genocide and national upheaval remain in the care of strangers or
 international organizations. Although the Penal Code prohibits the imprisonment of
 children with adults, the Government reports that hundreds of children are in fact
 incarcerated with adults throughout the prison system. A detention center for chil-
 dren funded by the U.N. Children's Fund opened in October 1995; it houses about
 150 boys.
 People with Disabilities.-Although there are no laws restricting people with dis-
 abilities from employment, education, or other state services, in practice few dis-
 abled persons have access to education or employment. There are no laws or provi-
 sions that mandate access to public facilities.
 Indigenous People.-Less than 1 percent of the population comes from the Batwa
 ethnic group. These indigenous people, survivors of the Pygmy (Twa) tribes of the
 mountainous forest areas bordering Zaire, exist on the margins of society and con-
 tinue to be treated as inferior citizens by both Hutus and Tutsis. The Batwa have
 been unable to protect their interests, which center on access to land and housing.
 Few Batwa have gained access to the educational system, resulting in minimal rep-
 resentation in government institutions. There is no reliable information on spediic
 human rights abuses perpetrated against the Batwa population during the 1994 up-
 heaval. A group of several hundred Batwa refugees was discovered m 1994 living
 in a forested area outside Goma, Zaire, its members deeply traumatized by the
 events they had witnessed. They did not confirm, however, whether they or other
 Batwa had been victims of massacres by either side.
 National/Ethnic lRacial Minorities.-Before April 1994, an estimated 85 percent
 of citizens were Hutu, 14 percent were Tutsi, and 1 percent Batwa. The subsequent
 mass killings and migrations affected the ethnic composition of the population, but
 the extent of the changes is unknown.
 The Government has called for ethnic reconciliation and committed itself to abol-
 ishing policies of the former government that had created and deepened ethnic
 cleavages. It promised to eliminate references to ethnic origin from the national
 identity card, a provision of the 1993 Peace Accord. The Government has not statu-
 torily addressed the issue of ethnic quotas in education, training, and government
 employment. It has partially integrated more than 2,000 former government soldiers
 into RPF forces, although not by the formula prescribed by the 1993 Arusha Accord.
 Tutsi clergy and businessman, who were well represented in these sectors of society,
 were killed in great numbers in the genocide. Following the 1994 victory by the
 RPF, Tutsis returning from exile took over many of the business and professional
 positions formerly held by Hutus and Tutsis.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-In practice Rwanda does not have a fully functioning
 labor movement, given the massive disruptions caused by the 1994 genocide. How-
 ever, unions are slowly regrouping and asserting themselves. Although preconflict
 labor law technically remains in effect, the Government is unable to implement its
 provisions.
 The Constitution provides for the right of citizens to create professional associa-
 tions and labor unions. Union membership is voluntary and open to all salaried
 workers, including public sector employees. There are no restrictions on the right
 of association but all unions must register with the Ministry of Justice for official
 recognition. There are no known cases in which the Government has denied such
 recognition. Unions are prohibited by law from having political affiliations, but in
 practice this is not always respected.
 Organized labor represents only a small part of the work force. More than 90 per-
 cent are engaged in small-scale subsistence farming. About 7 percent work in the
 modem (wage) sector, including both public and private industrial production, and
 about 75 percent of those active in the modern sector are members of labor unions.
 Before 1991 the Central Union of Rwandan Workers (CESTRAR) was the only au-
 thorized trade union organization. With the political reforms introduced in the Con-
 stitution, CESTRAR officially became independent of the Government and the
 MRND.
 The Constitution provides for the right to strike, except for public service workers.
 A union's executive committee must approve a strike, and a union must first try
 to resolve its differences with management according to steps prescribed by the Min-
 
 
 230
 
 istry of Labor and Social Affairs. The Government never enforced laws prohibiting
 retribution against strikers.
 Labor organizations may affiliate with international labor bodies. CESTRAR is af-
 filiated with the Organization of African Trade Union Unity and the International
 Confederation of Free Trade Unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Constitution provides for
 collective bargaining, although only CESTRAR had an established collective bar-
 gaining agreement with the Government. In practice, since most union members are
 in the public sector, the Government is intimately involved in the process (see Sec-
 tion 6.e.).
 The law prohibits antiunion discrimination, and it has not occurred in practice.
 There are no formal mechanisms to resolve complaints involving discrimination
 against unions.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced labor,
 and there are no reports that it occurs in practice.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Except in subsistence agriculture,
 the law prohibits children under the age of 18 from working without their parents'
 or guardians' authorization, and they generally may not work at night. The mini-
 mum age for full employment is 18 years and for apprenticeships 14 years, provid-
 ing that the child has completed primary school. The Ministry of Labor has not en-
 forced child labor laws effectively.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Ministry of Labor sets minimum wages in
 the small modern sector. The minimum wage is $1.08 (310 Rwandan francs) for an
 8-hour workday. The Government, the main employer, effectively sets most other
 wage rates as well. The minimum wage was inadequate to provide a decent stand-
 ard of living for an urban family. Often families supplement their incomes by work
 in small business or subsistence agriculture. In practice, however, workers will work
 for less than the minimum wage.
 Officially, government offices have a 40-hour workweek. Negotiations in 1993 be-
 tween the unions, Government, and management were held to reduce the workweek
 from 45 to 40 hours in the private sector as well, but by year's end, no such reduc-
 tion had occurred. Hours of work and occupational health and safety standards in
 the modern wage sector are controlled by law, but labor inspectors from the Min-
 istry of Labor enforce them only loosely. Workers do not have the right to remove
 themselves from dangerous work situations without jeopardizing their jobs.
