Rwanda
Rwanda adopted a number of new laws, including media laws and a revised law
on genocide ideology. The country continued to make impressive progress in
the delivery of public services, such as health care, but freedom of expression
and association remain tightly controlled. The government obstructed opposition
parties and independent civil society organizations, and threatened its critics.
Parliamentary elections resulted in an overwhelming majority for the ruling
party, with no meaningful challenge. The leadership of one of the last remaining
independent human rights organizations was taken over by pro-government
elements.
Despite mounting international concern, Rwanda provided significant military
support to the M23, an armed group responsible for serious abuses against
civilians in eastern Democratic Republic of Congo. In November, the M23 was
defeated by the Congolese army and UN peacekeepers, after Rwanda appeared
to withdraw its support for the M23 during military operations.
Political Parties
The ruling Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF) won parliamentary elections in
September with more than 76 percent of the vote. The only other parties that
presented candidates were those broadly supporting the RPF.
The opposition Democratic Green Party of Rwanda, which had been trying to
register as a party for almost four years, was finally granted registration by the
government in August, on the day before the deadline for parties to submit
their lists of election candidates. As a result, it decided not to take part in the
polls.
Two opposition party leaders arrested in 2010—Victoire Ingabire of the FDUInkingi
and Bernard Ntaganda of the PS-Imberakuri—remained in prison, serving
sentences of respectively eight and four years, Ntaganda for endangering
national security and divisionism, and Ingabire for conspiracy to undermine the
government and genocide denial. Appeal hearings for Ingabire, who was sentenced
in 2012, concluded at the High Court in Kigali on July 31. The judgment is
expected in December.
Sylvain Sibomana, secretary general of the FDU-Inkingi, and Dominique
Shyirambere, another party member, were arrested on March 25, after a confrontation
with police outside the courtroom where Ingabire’s trial was taking
place. They were charged with contempt of public officials, illegal demonstration,
and inciting insurrection or public disorder. Police and judicial officials
questioned them about the possession of T-shirts bearing the slogan “democracy
and justice” and badges calling for Ingabire’s release. On November 22,
Sibomana was found guilty of the first two charges and sentenced to two years
in prison; Shyirambere was sentenced to five months.
Sibomana also faced charges in a second case linked to the prosecution of
eight other FDU-Inkingi members in Karongi, arrested in September 2012 on
charges of inciting insurrection or public disorder after allegedly holding illegal
meetings. On July 11, seven of the original defendants were each sentenced to
two years in prison. Sibomana’s case has since been joined to that of the
eighth, Anselme Mutuyimana. At time of writing, the verdict in Sibomana and
Mutuyimana’s trial had not yet been handed down.
Civil Society Organizations
Government officials were openly hostile toward independent nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs) working on human rights. The pro-government media
echoed these views with public attacks on international human rights organizations
and other perceived critics.
In August, the last effective independent Rwandan human rights organization,
the Rwandan League for the Promotion and Defense of Human Rights (LIPRODHOR),
was taken over by members believed to be sympathetic to the government.
On July 21, these members ousted the organization’s leaders and voted
in a new board, violating the organization’s internal statutes and Rwandan legislation
governing NGOs.
Three days later, the Rwanda Governance Board—the state body with oversight
of national NGOs—recognized the new board. LIPRODHOR, through its ousted
president, has taken the case to court. The case was pending at time of writing.
During the forced handover between the old and new boards, police threatened
LIPRODHOR staff with imprisonment if they did not cooperate with the new
board.
Freedom of Media
New media laws adopted in February appeared to increase the scope for independent
journalism, for example by enshrining journalists’ rights to freedom of
opinion and expression and by introducing media self-regulation. Some radio
stations broadcast call-in programs in which listeners posed critical questions
to political leaders. However, most print and broadcast media continued to be
heavily dominated by pro-government views. Most journalists were unable or
unwilling to engage in investigative reporting on sensitive issues and rarely criticized
government policies, as a result of intimidation, threats, and prosecutions
in previous years.
Saidati Mukakibibi, journalist with Umurabyo newspaper, arrested in 2010, was
released on June 25 after serving a three-year sentence, reduced from seven
years on appeal in 2012. The newspaper’s editor, Agnès Uwimana, whose sentence
had been reduced from seventeen to four years, remained in prison.
On March 25, the High Court in Kigali upheld the conviction of Stanley Gatera,
editor of Umusingi newspaper, who was found guilty of discrimination and sectarianism
in 2012. He was released on July 26 after serving a one-year prison
sentence.
Justice for Genocide
The trial of Léon Mugesera, a former government official extradited from Canada
to Rwanda in 2012 and accused of planning and incitement to genocide, took
place in the High Court in Kigali. It was ongoing at time of writing.
In July, the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) transferred genocide
suspect Bernard Munyagishari to face trial in Rwanda. After preliminary
hearings, the trial of Jean Bosco Uwinkindi, the first such case to be transferred
by the ICTR to Rwanda in 2012, was postponed and had not begun in substance
at time of writing.
Criminal trials of Rwandan genocide suspects on the basis of universal jurisdiction
took place in the national courts of Norway, Sweden, and the Netherlands,
leading to convictions and prison sentences.
A United States court convicted a Rwandan of immigration fraud for concealing
her role in the genocide, stripped her of US citizenship and sentenced her to 10
years’ imprisonment. A genocide suspect in Norway was extradited to Rwanda
while two others in Sweden and Denmark lost their appeals against extradition.
Extradition cases were pending in several other countries, including the UK,
Netherlands, and France.
Genocide Ideology Law
A revised version of the 2008 law on genocide ideology was promulgated in
October. It contains several improvements to the 2008 law, including a more
precise definition of the offense and the requirement to demonstrate intent
behind the crime, thereby reducing the scope for abusive prosecutions.
However, several articles retain language that could be used to criminalize free
speech. The new law reduces the maximum prison sentence from 25 to 9 years.
Unlawful Detention, Torture, and Ill-Treatment
In a trial of 20 people that began in 2012 and concluded in September 2013, a
court in Gasabo, Kigali, failed to investigate claims by defendants that they had
been held in illegal detention centers and tortured. Several defendants,
accused of stealing televisions and other goods, said they had been held
unlawfully, in two unofficial detention centers known as Chez Kabuga and Chez
Gacinya. They stated in court that the police had tortured them to force them to
confess or incriminate others. The judge dismissed their allegations of torture,
saying the detainees had no evidence. The court acquitted 7 defendants and
sentenced the remaining 13 to prison terms of between 3 and 10 years.
Dozens of defendants charged with endangering state security in several group
trials in Musanze claimed they had been detained unlawfully in military camps
or other unrecognized detention centers. Some said they had been tortured.
Many defendants spent lengthy periods in pretrial detention—in some cases,
more than two years—before they were tried in 2013. Some were tried and convicted
without a defense lawyer.
Refugees from Rwanda
Some Rwandan refugees and asylum-seekers faced security threats in their
country of asylum, particularly in Uganda. Joel Mutabazi, a former presidential
bodyguard in Rwanda with refugee status in Uganda, was abducted on August
20 by armed men from a safe-house in a suburb of the capital Kampala where
he had been staying since escaping an attempt on his life in Uganda in July
2012. He was released the same day, thanks to an intervention by the Ugandan
police. On October 25, he went missing from another location where he was living
under 24-hour Ugandan police protection. His whereabouts were unknown
for six days. On October 31, the Rwandan police confirmed he was detained in
Rwanda but refused to disclose where he was held. On November 13, he
appeared before a military court in Kigali with 14 co-accused, charged with terrorism
and other offenses. The Ugandan government claimed that a Ugandan
police officer had erroneously handed Mutabazi to the Rwandan police, without
following correct legal procedures.
Another Rwandan, Pascal Manirakiza, who had fled to Uganda after escaping
from the M23 in eastern Congo, was reported missing in August. He was found
alive but unconscious, with serious injuries, near Kampala.
Rwanda’s Involvement in the DRC
Rwanda provided military support to the M23, a Congolese armed group
responsible for killings of civilians, rape, and recruitment of child soldiers in
eastern Congo. This support included supplies of weapons and ammunition;
the recruitment in Rwanda of young men and boys, some under 16, to fight with
the M23 in Congo; training of M23 recruits by Rwandan military officers; and the
deployment of Rwandan troops in Congo to assist the M23. As in 2012, the
Rwandan government denied providing any support to the M23. In November,
the M23 was defeated by the Congolese army and UN peacekeepers after
Rwanda appeared to stop supporting the group during military operations.
Around 700 M23 fighters fled to Rwanda in March after infighting in the M23,
and additional fighters fled in November when the M23 was defeated. They
included several individuals implicated in serious abuses in eastern Congo, including four named on UN and US sanctions lists. Rwanda has yet to take
steps to investigate alleged abuses by M23 fighters who fled to Rwanda.
M23 leader Bosco Ntaganda, who had long been backed by Rwanda until the
M23 split into two factions in early 2013, surrendered to the US embassy in
Kigali in March and was transferred to the International Criminal Court (see
chapter on Democratic Republic of Congo).
Key International Actors
Several governments and other international actors expressed renewed concern
for Rwandan military support to the M23. Some donors who had suspended or
delayed parts of their assistance to Rwanda in 2012 in response to its support
for the M23 resumed aid but channeled it to different sectors.
The United Kingdom decided not to resume general budget support and redirected
its assistance to education and poverty alleviation programs instead. In
October, the US government suspended military assistance to Rwanda under
the Child Soldiers Protection Act, because of Rwanda’s support to the M23,
which uses child soldiers.