 RWANDA
 The human rights situation in Rwanda today is encouraging,
 especially in light of Rwanda's authoritarian traditions
 and the fratricidal revolution at independence in 1959-
 61. Traditional Rwandan society has only a scant notion
 of the sanctity of the individual. Much more important
 are the security and harmony of the individual's
 position within lineal group structures. Among the
 masses of Rwandans, the 1959-61 social revolution had
 less to do with securing individual freedoms denied under
 the prior feudal system than with substituting majority
 (Hutu) group domination in place of minority (Tutsi) rule.
 During the decade following the revolution, governmental
 policies were blatantly "compensatory" in an effort to
 preempt the favored positions Tutsis previously enjoyed.
 Although policies are now better balanced, discrimination
 remains a highly-charged political issue.
 Since coming to power in 1972 President Juvenal
 Habyarimana has made continued human rights progress a
 key element of official policy.   Rwanda has undertaken an
 effort to provide more consistent local justice. The
 Habyarimana government supports full integration of all
 ethnic groups through a proportional quota system aimed at
 guaranteeing Tutsis an"equitable share of jobs and edu-
 cational and advancement opportunities. Rwanda now
 rightly considers itself an activist on human rights
 issues. It will, for example, in early summer host an
 African Colloquium on Human Rights and Economic Develop-
 ment.
 1.   Respect for integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Torture is not used.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Within the context of traditional values, Rwandan author-
 ities generally respect personal freedoms. Cruel, inhuman
 or degrading punishment is unknown.
 
 
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 Arbitrary arrest and imprisonment do occur. For ex-
 ample, dozens of prostitutes in the capital city are
 regularly rounded up and interned without due process.
 Migrants from rural areas are uprooted and sent back home
 for failure to have work permits in a country where un-
 employment can reach 50 percent or higher. Some thirty
 former regime officials have been held without trial since
 1973.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Rwanda's almost total lack of trained lawyers and jurists
 hinders the prompt and consistent application of justice
 throughout the country. Competent personnel are assigned
 duties considered more pressing in other branches of the
 government. All trials are public.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 Sanctity of the home is respected.
 2.    Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 From the outset in 1973, the Habyarimana government has
 claimed (and convincingly demonstrated) that its goal is
 to satisfy the material needs of the impoverished
 Rwandan people. The party's goal is to mobilize the
 masses in development. The 5-year plan focuses those
 efforts on meeting the basic needs of food production,
 health, housing and vocational education, primarily in
 rural areas where 97 percent of Rwandans live.
 3.    Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a.   Freedom of Thought, Speech, Religion, Press
 and Assembly
 Freedom of thought, religion and assembly are generally
 respected. Persons are not free publicly to criticize
 the government or its leadership and the press is govern-
 ment controlled. Informed discussion of sensitive issues
 does occur, especially in the academic community.
 
 
 96
 b.   Freedom of Movement Within the Country,
 Foreign Travel, and Emigration
 Freedom of movement is limited:  (a) by policies to
 restrain rural-urban migration under high unemployment
 conditions and (b) by strict controls on the issuance of
 passports for any citizens not in the regime's good
 graces. On the other hand, freedom of in-country move-
 ment has been greatly liberalized under President
 Habyarimana, and emigration into neighboring territories
 from over-populated Rwanda is actively encouraged.
 c.   Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Current policies continue to downplay "politics" - and
 therefore political liberties -- in favor of enlisting
 total national participation in the tasks of development.
 There are no national elections, although local community
 councils are now chosen by a non-partisan vote in which
 all adults are eligible to participate. Instead, the
 officially sanctioned National Revolutionary Development
 Movement (MRND), with membership open to all, is tasked
 with organizing and apportioning the developmental burden
 among all sectors of the populace. Although explicitly
 barred from "political" activity, MRND in fact plays the
 quasi-political roles of a consultative and public informa-
 tion organization.
 4.     Government Attitude and Record Regarding Interna-
 tional and Non-Governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Sensitive to its own tragic history and outside criticism,
 Rwanda has been cool toward perceived challenges to its
 "national sovereignty," . U.N. Human Rights Commission
 representatives failed in their attempts lo investigate
 and moderate ethnic bloodletting in-the early sixties.
 And the current government has been similarly unwilling
 to allow outsiders to probe conditions of some thirty
 political prisoners, held since 1973.
 
 
