Rwanda
Rwanda’s development and economic growth continued in 2010, but there were
numerous violations of civil and political rights, and the government failed to fulfill
its professed commitment to democracy. The year was marked by political
repression and restrictions on freedom of expression and association in the runup
to the presidential election. In August President Paul Kagame was re-elected
with 93.8 percent of the vote in an election in which he faced no meaningful challenge.
None of the new opposition parties were able to participate in the elections.
Opposition party members, independent journalists, and other government
critics were subjected to persistent intimidation and harassment, including
arrests, detention, ill-treatment, death threats, and at least two extrajudicial
killings. A prominent government opponent in exile narrowly escaped an attempt
on his life. Human rights organizations encountered hostility and numerous
obstacles to their work.
Trials in the gacaca courts—community-based courts trying cases related to the
1994 genocide—began to wind down, though the deadline for their closure was
postponed several times. The imminent completion of the gacaca process
opened the way for further justice reforms. However, continuing concerns about
fair trials prevented other states, as well as the Tanzania-based International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), from transferring genocide suspects to
Rwanda.
The report of the mapping exercise on the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) by
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights documented
grave crimes allegedly committed by the Rwandan army in 1996 and 1997.
Attacks on Government Opponents
None of the three new opposition parties were able to nominate candidates in
the presidential election. Local authorities prevented the FDU-Inkingi and the
Democratic Green Party from registering as parties. Meetings of the PS-Imberakuri
were disrupted, sometimes violently, by dissident members and other individuals.
The PS-Imberakuri, registered in 2009, was taken over in March 2010 by dissident
members believed to have been manipulated by the ruling Rwandan Patriotic
Front (RPF). In late 2009 the Senate summoned the party’s president, Bernard
Ntaganda, on accusations of “genocide ideology.” In June the police arrested
Ntaganda and raided his house and the party office. The charges against him
included endangering national security, inciting ethnic divisions, and organizing
demonstrations without authorization. By November he was still in prison awaiting
trial.
Victoire Ingabire, president of the FDU-Inkingi, who returned to Rwanda in January
after 16 years in exile, was arrested in April on charges of “genocide ideology,”
“divisionism,” and collaboration with the Democratic Forces for the Liberation of
Rwanda (FDLR), an armed group active in eastern DRC and composed in part by
individuals who participated in the 1994 Rwanda genocide. Ingabire was released
on bail with travel restrictions, but in October was re-arrested following allegations
of involvement in forming an armed group. In November she remained in
detention awaiting trial.
Members of the three new opposition parties received threats related to their
party activities. Several members of the PS-Imberakuri and the FDU-Inkingi were
arrested for attempting to hold a demonstration in June. Some were released, but
others were arrested in July. Several were ill-treated by police in detention. In July
the Green Party’s vice-president, André Kagwa Rwisereka, was found dead, his
body mutilated, outside the town of Butare. The circumstances of his death
remain unclear.
Peter Erlinder, an American and one of Victoire Ingabire’s defense lawyers, was
arrested in May on charges of “genocide denial and minimization,” and “spreading
malicious rumors that could endanger national security.” He was released on
bail three weeks later. The charges against Erlinder, who is also a defense lawyer
at the ICTR, related primarily to articles published in previous years in which he
questioned key events surrounding the genocide.
On June 19 Faustin Kayumba Nyamwasa, a Rwandan general in exile in South
Africa since February, was seriously injured in a murder attempt in Johannesburg.
Once a close ally of President Kagame and former chief-of-staff of the Rwandan army, Nyamwasa has become an outspoken government critic since early 2010.
South African authorities arrested several suspects. Rwanda has requested
Nyamwasa’s extradition, alleging he was behind a series of grenade attacks in
Kigali earlier in the year.
Deogratias Mushayidi, a former journalist and outspoken government opponent
in exile, was arrested in Burundi in March and handed over to Rwandan authorities.
In September Mushayidi was found guilty and sentenced to life imprisonment
on three charges: spreading rumors inciting civil disobedience, recruiting an
armed group to overthrow the government, and using forged documents. He was
also charged with four other offenses, including “genocide ideology” and “divisionism.”
The government continued to use a law on “genocide ideology”—a broad and illdefined
offense—as a tool to silence independent opinion and criticism. In a welcome
development, the minister of justice announced that the law was being
reviewed.
Clampdown on Independent Media
In April the government-affiliated Media High Council suspended the independent
newspapers Umuseso and Umuvugizi for six months, then called for their definitive
closure, alleging, among other things, that some of their articles threatened
national security. The editors of both newspapers fled into exile after receiving
threats. Copies of the first edition of The Newsline, an English-language newspaper
produced by exiled Umuseso journalists, were seized at the Uganda-Rwanda
border in July.
In February Umuseso editor Didas Gasana, former editor Charles Kabonero, and
journalist Richard Kayigamba were found guilty of defamation; they received sentences
of between six months’ and a year’s imprisonment and were ordered to
pay a large fine. In April Umuvugizi editor Jean-Bosco Gasasira was also found
guilty of defamation and fined.
Umuvugizi journalist Jean-Léonard Rugambage, who had been investigating sensitive
cases including the attempted murder of Nyamwasa, was shot dead in June outside his home in Kigali. He had reported being under increased surveillance in
the days before his death.
Three journalists with the Umurabyo newspaper were arrested in July in connection
with articles published in their newspaper; two remain in detention at this
writing, while the other was only held for one day.
Obstructions to the Work of Human Rights Organizations
Human rights organizations operated in a difficult and hostile climate. Rwandan
human rights groups, weakened by years of intimidation, received threats and
were publicly accused by government officials of supporting the government’s
overthrow and armed groups linked to the genocide. Civil society itself was divided:
organizations close to the government publicly denounced those who were
more critical, such as the LDGL and LIPRODHOR, two of the few independent
human rights groups left in the country. Under pressure from individuals close to
the government, several organizations disowned a joint civil society submission
on Rwanda for the Universal Periodic Review at the UN Human Rights Council.
International nongovernmental organizations, including Human Rights Watch,
were repeatedly criticized and discredited by senior government officials and the
pro-government media. Immigration authorities cancelled the work visa in March
of Human Rights Watch’s senior researcher in Kigali, rejected her second visa
application, and forced her to leave the country in April.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
In December 2009 the parliament took a positive initiative by voting against criminalizing
homosexuality. However, continuing negative comments on homosexuality
by some public officials and newspapers reinforced the stigma faced by sexual
minorities.
Gacaca Trials
Gacaca courts were due to end their genocide trials in 2010, but the definitive
completion of the process was repeatedly delayed. The government is developing mechanisms to handle outstanding genocide cases and to adjudicate alleged
miscarriages of justice by gacaca jurisdictions.
Gacaca courts have prosecuted around 1.5 million cases with involvement from
local communities across the country. The conduct of trials before gacaca courts
has been mixed. Some judges delivered fair and objective judgments. Others
handed down heavy sentences, including life imprisonment in isolation, on the
basis of very little evidence. A number of witnesses and judges proved vulnerable
to corruption and outside influence, affecting the outcome of trials and undermining
confidence in the courts. Some defense witnesses were afraid to testify for
fear of being accused of genocide themselves, and there were numerous allegations
that gacaca courts sacrificed the truth to satisfy political interests.
Cases Related to the Democratic Republic of Congo
Laurent Nkunda, former leader of the Congolese rebel group the National
Congress for the Defense of the People (CNDP), remaied illegally detained under
house arrest, without charge or trial, since January 2009. Repeated attempts to
get his case heard in Rwandan courts were thwarted on the basis of legal technicalities.
There were several arrests, disappearances, and at least one killing of Congolese
supporters of Nkunda in Rwanda, including Denis Ntare Semadwinga, who was
murdered in June, and Sheikh Iddy Abbasi, who disappeared after being abducted
in March.
On October 1 the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights published
the report of its mapping exercise on the most serious violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law in the DRC between March 1993 and June
2003 (see chapter on the DRC). Among other things, the report documents grave
crimes allegedly committed by the Rwandan army in 1996 and 1997. While the
Congolese government welcomed the report, the Rwandan government rejected
it, initially threatening to pull out its peacekeepers from UN missions if the UN
published it.
Key International Actors
Most Western donors remained broadly supportive of the Rwandan government
and few expressed public concern about human rights violations. However, in the
pre-election period, and in the face of increasingly critical media coverage of
Rwanda in their own countries, some donor governments raised mostly private
concerns about political and media restrictions with the Rwandan government.
These concerns were also mentioned in the final report of the Commonwealth
Observer Group on the presidential election. Relations between Rwanda and the
UN came under strain following the publication of the UN mapping report on the
DRC.