 RWANDA
 The coalition Government of Rwanda includes 22 ministers drawn from 5 political
 parties. Nine of the ministers are from the Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF), a former
 exile movement that took military control of Rwanda in July in the wake of ethnic
 genocide and 4 months of renewed civil war. Approximately half a million people,
 most of them ethnic Tutsi, were murdered in one of the swiftest, large-scale geno-
 cides in modern history. President Pasteur Bizimungu of the majority Hutu ethnic
 group and Vice President Paul Kagame of the minority Tutsi ethnic group are both
 members of the RPF, a largely Tutsi movement. Prime Minister Faustin
 Twagiramungu, an ethnic Hutu named in the August 1993 Arusha Accord to head
 a transition Government, is a member of the Republican Democratic Movement
 (MDR) party. Prime Minister Twagiramungu and the Council of Ministers run the
 Government on a day-to-day basis. Vice President Kagame, who is Minister of De-
 fense, is responsible for security and military defense.
 The Government faces the task of rebuilding a country shattered by a cycle of as-
 sassination, civil war, genocide, and refugee outflows of massive proportions. The
 1990 invasion by the RPF inflamed the long-simmering ethnic rivalries between the
 Hutu (85 percent) and Tutsi (14 percent) populations. The Arusha Accord, signed
 by both the RPF and the former government headed by then President Juvenal
 ayarimana, was intended to promote powersharing, ensure integration of the
 rebel and government armies, ease ethnic tensions, and lead to democratic elections.
 This effort ended with the crash under suspicious circumstances of President
 Habyarimana's aircraft on April 6, which also took the life of Burundi's President,
 Cyprien Ntaryamira. The death of Habyarimana, who had ruled Rwanda since a
 1973 military coup, unleashed a torrent of political and ethnic killings nationwide.
 Hutu extremists formed a self-proclaimed interim government, and they and their
 supporters massacred hundreds of thousands of people, mostly Tutsi civilians and
 members of the Hutu opposition. Political militias affiliated with Habyarimana's
 National Revolutionary            or Democracy and Development (MEND) and
 the allied Coalition for the Defense of the Republic (CDR) and elements of the
 (former) Rwandan military (FAR) carried out the massacres.
 The RPF responded with a military offensive that routed the Hutu army in July,
 causing the wholesale flight of Hutu civilians who feared Tutsi reprisals. The vio-
 lence uprooted two-thirds of the population. In addition to the mre than 2 million
 persons who fled into neighboring Zaire, Tanzania, and Burundi, as many as 2 mil-
 lion fled their homes to other parts of the country.
 The new Government called for national reconciliation and sought to promote ref-
 ugee repatriation as a necessary first step. The RPF leadership stressed its commit-
 ment to key provisions of the Arusha Accord, including the sanctity of property
 rights and the integration of the FAR and the Rwandan-Patriotic Army (RPA), the
 RPFs military arm. The Government promised to cooperate with the U.N. inter-
 national tribunal that was created on November 8 by Resolution 955 to investigate
 and prosecute those responsible for genocide, war crimes, and other serious viola-
 tions of international humanitarian law committed in Rwanda and neighboring
 states.
 The Ministries of Territorial Administration and Defense of the new Government
 have responsibility for security matters. With United Nations assistance, the Gov-
 ernment has recruited and trained civilian police (gendarmes) to provide internal se-
 curity. The RPA nonetheless remains the chief guarantor of internal security, in-
 cluding control over camps for the internally displaced and centers for processing
 returning refugees, but by year's end it had assumed a lower public profile.
 - The economic situation is extremely difficult. The overwhelming majority of
 Rwandans are subsistence farmers. Their massive dislocation caused disruption of
 the crop cycle and led to widespread food shortages in this densely populated coun-
 try where prewar food production barely kept pace with population growth. Violent
 
 
 201
 conflict damaged much of the national infrastructure, including utilities, schools,
 and hoespitals, and killed or drove into exile many educated Rwandans. For the fore-
 seeable future, the economy will depend heavily on foreign humanitarian, economic,
 and technical assistance.
 The renewal of violence in April set into motion an unprecedented wave of geno-
 cide and other human rights abuses directed primarily at the ethnic Tutsi minority
 population and Hutu opposition. The self-proclaimed interim extremist Hutu govern-
 ment and its extremist supporters massacred approximately half a million civilians
 and committed innumerablie related human rights abuses, including torture, mutila-
 tion, and rape. In the wake of the Tutsi-led military victory in July, additional
 human rights abuses occurred, although on a far smaller scale. RPA soldiers and
 Tutsi civilians committed random revenge killings and seized, occupied, or destroyed
 property owned by (principally Hutu) refugees and displaced persons..
 Many Hutu refugees and displaced persons still fear repatriation, in part based
 on intimidation of would be returnees in refugee camps by Hutu extremists who dis-
 seminate anti-Tutsi hate propaganda and, in part based on fear of reprisal. Mem-
 bers of the former self-proclaimed Hutu extremist interim government and the ex-
 FAR threaten to rearm and renew the civil war, a small number of crossborder in-
 cursions have occurred.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Interity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killings.-President Habyarimana's death on
 April 6 provoked killings of a magnitude unprecedented in Rwandan history. Within
 a half-hour of the plane crash, and before any public announcement, Hutu militia-
 men and soldiers tad constructed roadblocks in Kigali and commenced targeted
 killings. Using preexisting lists of persons to be executed, members of the 700-man
 Presidential Guard and their extremist Hutu civilian supporters unleashed a sys-
 tematic campaign of murder and genocide, killin Hutu Prime Minister Agathe
 Uwilingiyimana and other ministers, plus hundreis of Tutsi and Hutu opposition
 leaders and their families. Over the next four months approximately half a million
 people, most of them ethnic Tutsi, were murdered in one of the swiftest, large-scale
 genocides in modern history. Foreigners were also targeted and killed. Troops from
 the Presidential Guard executed 10 Belgian soldiers from the United Nations Armed
 Mission in Rwanda (UNAMIR) peacekeeping force responsible for security assist-
 ance and implementation of the Arusha Accord. The troops also killed two French
 gendarmes and their wives.
 Some RPF supporters also committed extrajudicial killings. In June, 3 RPA sol-
 diers murdered 13 Hutu priests, including the Archbishop of Kigali, in Kabgayi.
 Hutu refugees in Tanzania reported that RPA troops summarily executed Hutu ci-
 vilians following the April RPF conquest of southeastern Rwanda. There were also
 scattered reports that RPA soldiers summarily executed FAR and Hutu supporters.
 During the battle for Kigali, the widespread killing abated. Following the RPF mili-
 tary triumph in July, RPF soldiers and Tutsi civilians reportedly killed an unknown
 number of Hutus. There is no evidence that the new Government condoned or sanc-
 tioned these acts. During the civil war, General Paul Kagame-the commander of
 the RPA and current Vice President and Minister of Defense-norced tight dis-
 cipline over his troops. After the fighting, he visited units in the countryside, exhort-
 ing them to respect applicable laws. The RPF executed at least 3 soldiers found
 guilty of atrocities and detained about 100 others.
 b. Disappearance.-There were tens of thousands of disappearances, almost all of
 them undocumented. From April through June, soldiers of the former army and mi-
 litia seized civilians in churches hotels, and stadiums.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Torture is contrary to the Constitution and Arusha Peace Accord, which together
 constitute the fundamental law of the land. Perpetrators of the initial surge of vio-
 lence reportedly tortured many victims before killing them. Hutu extremists dis-
 posed of the corsea of thousands of victims in the Kagera River, many were found
 mutilated, headless, or with their hands bound behind their backs. Some refugees
 who fled to Burundi, Tanzania, and Zaire in the days following Habyarimana's
 death suffered machete or bullet wounds. FAR soldiers and militiamen frequently
 raped women; there are reports of rape by RPF soldiers as well. In postwar oper-
 ations, RPA soldiers tied the elbows of prisoners behind their backs in a manner
 that caused severe pain and in some instances permanent physical injury.
 The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) has regular access to pris-
 oners, and U.N. officials visited camps where the Government seeks to integrate
 
 
 202
 into the new national army former FAR soldiers who surrendered in the war. Living
 conditions in these camps are good.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law provides legal safeguards for ar-
 rested persons, but in practice they are rarely applied. In general, the law requires
 that authorities investigate, then obtain a judicial warrant before arresting a sus-
 pect. Although police may detain persons for up to 48 hours without a warrant, for-
 mal charges must be brought within 5 days of arrest.
 The law permits preventive detention only if authorities believe public safety is
 threatened, if the accused might flee, or if the penalty carries a minimum sentence
 of 6 months. Courts may prolong detention indefinitely, but judicial review is man-
 datory ever 30 days. Detainees may appeal their incarceration, and a competent
 judicial authority must hear this appeal within 24 hours. These procedures apply
 to all persons, and failure to meet any of these requirements constitutes grounds
 for release of the arrested person and dismissal of the case. There is no bail, but
 in the past authorities released suspects on their own recognizance pending trial.
 Incommunicado detention is not practiced.
 Security forces of the self-proclaimed interim government ignored laws covering
 arrest, detention, and trial in the explosion of political and ethnic violence in A
 which decimated the judicial system (only 40 of 800 magistrates remained in place
 following the upheaval). The ensuing chaos brought about the collapse of the justice
 system, making enforcement of existing laws impossible. The parallel collapse of the
 criminal investigation system further hampered the application of law, and the
 breakdown of the court system created a large backlog of cases that courts cannot
 try expeditiously. In all likelihood, many prisoners will await trial for very long peri-
 ods of time. Illegal detentions in criminal cases continue to occur.
 The new Government supported the work of a Special Investigations Unit after
 the creation by the United Nations Security Council of a special international tribu-
 nal to help the Rwandan Government adjudicate the huge backlog of criminal cases
 stemming from human rights atrocities that began in early 1994 and increased fol-
 lowing Habyarimana's death. At year's end, the international tribunal had not yet
 commenced full-scale investigations nor sought the detention of any person involved
 in the massacres.
 During the renewed military conflict, Hutu militants detained several thousand
 Tutsi prisoners in stadiums in Kigali and Cyangugu without adequate food, clean
 water, sanitary facilities or shelter. Between the July RPF declaration of a cease-
 fire and the end of the year, the new Government jailed more than 12,000 prisoners
 suspected of war crimes or genocide, holding 7,400 of them in the Kigali Central
 Prison and the remainder in other facilities. Journalists who visited these prisoners
 reported severe overcrowding and harsh, life-threatening conditions. Some detainees
 were reportedly held in military camps rather than prison facilities.
 Officially, exile is not practiced, but in actuality tens of thousands of Tutsis lived
 in de facto exile for over 30 years in neighboring countries during rule by a succes-
 sion of Hutu-dominated governments. As many as 400,000 to 600,000 returned fol-
 lowing the RPF victory. The Arusha Accord incorporates into law the right of re-
 turn, and a 1991 law granted blanket amnesty to refugees and exiles who wished
 to repatriate. Currently, there are more than 2 million Hutu refugees in neighboring
 countries. The Government has publicly stated that they are free to return and has
 solicited their repatriation. In October the Government signed a tripartite repatri-
 ation accord with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees        CR)
 and the Government of Zaire. However, anti-Tutsi propaganda and extremist Hutu
 intimidation in the refugee camps, and reprisal attacks on Hutus by RPF soldiers
 and Tutsi civilians inside Rwanda have thus far deterred large-scale refugee re-
 turns, although an increasing number of refugees had begun to return at year's end
 under the auspices of UNHCR. The Government has not offered amnesty nor pardon
 for those suspected of genocide or atrocities.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Tria.-At year's end, the Ministry of Justice had drafted
 and was working with foreign donors to fund and implement a plan to rebuild the
 judiciary. However, few trials had yet takenplae. The pre-April judicial system had
 separate systems for criminal/civil cases and military cases. Decisions could be ap-
 pealed to the regional court of appeals. At the request of defendants or their coun-
 sel, the Cour de Cassation reviewed civil and criminal cases for errors in procedure
 or in the application of the law. Errors resulted in retrial by another panel of
 judges. Although the Constitution provides defendants with the right to counsel,
 many were denied counsel due to the shortage of lawyers.
 The pre-April judicial system was susceptible to government manipulation in spite
 of constitutional provisions for an independent judiciary. The low educational level
 of most judicial officials, budgetary constraints, and the absence of abody of case law
 and precedent further eroded the functioning of the judicial system. The outbreak
 
 
 203
 of genocide and renewed civil war following Habyarimana's death led to the total
 collapse of the judicial system.
 The RPF maintained a system of militjustice that operated outside the struc-
 tures of constitutional law; during the April o July military offensive, RPF military
 tribunals ordered the execution of at least three RPA soldiers for human rights
 abuses against civilians.
 There were no reports of political prisoners. The Government has stated that sup-
 porters of the MRND and CDR parties currently in detention were arrested for
 criminal rather than political offenses.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the respect of privacy of individuals, correspondence, and
 communications and declares that the home is inviolable. Police generally respected
 these provisions before the events of April. In the 3-month period that followed, po-
 litical and military officials of the interim government abandoned any pretense of
 respecting privacy laws and committed wholesale abuses.
 There are no reports that the new Government interfered with these rights nor
 does it reportedly engage in surveillance of political parties, associations, or individ-
 uals. However Hutu civilians and displaced persons in the northwest and southwest
 complained of abuses by RPA troops searching for weapons and suspected war
 criminals. After capturing Kigali, both RPA soldiers and civilians committed wide-
 spread looting and vandaism.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Vilations f Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-In the 2 weeks following the crash of the airplane carrying President
 Habyarimana, killing spread rapidly throughout the country. Within a week, the
 Presidential Guard and militia lhad killed an estimated 20,000 pople in Kigali and
 its immediate environs. Extremist Hutu radio broadcasts calleX for Hutus to exter-
 minate all Tutsis, and politically targeted killing gave way to general massacre of
 both Tutsis and those Hutus who supported the powersharing formulas of the
 Arusha Accord.
 Militiamen from outlying provinces joined extremists from Kigali in urging Hutu
 civilians to participate in the massacres. Hutus engaged in the mass iling of
 Tutsis from uhengeri and Gisenyi in the north to Cyangugu in the south. Among
 the most egregious events reported were: instances in which the Interahamwe Mili-
 tia assembled and massacred 15,000.Tutsis in a stadium in Gatwaro, Kibuye; the
 killing of 2,800 persons in a church in Kibungo; of 6,000 Tutsis in a church in
 Cyahlnde where they had taken refuge; of 4,000 in a church in Kibeho; of 2,000 in
 a parish in Mibirizi; of 4,000 in a parish in Shangi; and 500 Tutsis killed by
 Interahamwe militia and gendarmes in a parish in Rukara.
 On April 19, a second wave of killing of Tutsis by Hutus began in the southern
 city of Butare following the self-proclaimed interim (pst-Hayarimana) govern-
 ment's dismissal of the local prefect who had until then maintained order in his dis-
 trict.
 The massacres included house-to-house sweeps in which Hutu militants killed en-
 tire families, summarily executed Tutsis at military or militia roadblocks, murdered
 doctors and priests in hospitals and churches, and slaughtered civilians who had
 sought sanctuary in churches and religious missions. Assailants used guns, gre-
 nades, machetes, hoes, and clubs. Survivors eventually buried most victims in un-
 marked, mass graves, but prpetrators cast thousands of corpses-many of them se-
 verely mutilated-into the Kagera River. The killers often stole the property of their
 victims after killing them. Although militiamen and soldiers did much of the killing,
 there are credible reports that large numbers of civilians also committed atrocities.
 Some implicated in the killings charged that extremists threatened to kill them
 and their families unless they joined in attacks on Tutsi neighbors. An unknown
 number of Hutus were killed for attempting to protect or harbor Tutsis. Some Hutu
 civilians, including women and childre  reportedly attacked Tutsi civilians only
 after local government authorities orderel them to do so.
 Both former government and RPF supporters committed numerous individual acts
 of human rights abuse in addition to the organized cycle of genocide and revenge
 killings that swept the country. Nonsystematic killings committed by RPF soldiers
 constituted a small fraction of the those committed by FAR and Hutu militia.
 Former FAR troops and their civilian auxiliaries were guilty of widespread looting
 and rape in virtually all the major towns. Advancing RPF soldiers vandalized or dy-
 namited numerous buildings, including schools, ministries, and private residences.
 Retreating FAR forces booby-trapped buildings. Both sides indiscriminately de-
 ployed thousands of landmines, ki   many civilians.
 Both the former FAR and the RPA were guilty of the indiscriminate mortar and
 artillery shelling of enemy-held zones, killing and wounding dozens of noncombat-
 ants. Former FAR troops allegedly fired mortar shells and killed a number of refu-
 
 
 gees sheltered in the Kigali Stadium; RPA rounds struck a relief hospital in central
 Kigal, killing more than a dozen patients. Another RPA mortar attack near the
 Gisenyi border crossing into Zaire caused a stampede of Hutu refugees that killed
 dozens more, most of tem children. The use of excessive force diminished following
 the July collapse of the FAR. Humanitarian relief workers and foreign diplomats re-
 ported that human rights abuses in the east and southeast had decreased by year's
 end, when the RPA was cooperating with the United Nations to disband peacefully
 camps for the internally displaced. RPA troops had stopped destroying the houses
 of Hutus alleged to have been involved in the massacres.
 The sick and wounded were not spared from the massacres. There were numerous
 reports of murders of persons in ambulances and hospitals. In many instances, the
 protective symbol of the Red Cross was ignored. Three ed Cross volunteers were
 killedinButare on May 1 along with 21 orphans under their care. On May 14
 armed militiamen shot to death 6 wounded patients being transported by Rwandan
 Red Cross volunteers in Kigali. An ICRC worker was wounded on May 18 when an
 ICRC convoy traveling from Kigali to Kabgayi was attacked.
 Reliable estimates put the number of people killed in the massacres and fighting
 between April 6 and July 15 at approximately half a million, most of them Tutsi
 victims of genocide by Hutu extremists. Most local and international organizations
 operating in Rwanda do not believe that exact figures will ever be available. Numer-
 ous credible reorts from individual organizations such as the U.N. Human Rights
 Commission's Special Rapporteur, the TUNHCR, the U.N. Commission of Experts,
 the ICRC, journalists, and human rights groups--including Africa Watch and Am-
 nesty International--confirm the scope and the scale of the genocide. By Resolution
 955 of November 8, the U.N. Security Council decided to establish an international
 tribunal for the prosecution of persons responsible for genocide and other serious
 violations of international humanitarian law committed in the territory of Rwanda
 and neighboring States, between January 1 and December 31, 1994. The Special
 Rapporteur named by the UNHCR did not find the RPF guilty of systematic killings
 or genocide in the public report on his findings.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of  peech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and the press. Prior to April the Government respected this right to a limited ex-
 tent. It intimidated and menaced journalists but allowed the country's four inde-
 pendent newspapers and its political parties relative freedom to operate. However,
 the written press had only limited circulation, and only radio reached a broad public
 audience.
 The electronic media included the government-owned television station and two
 radio stations, government-owned Radio Kigali and the privately owned Mille
 Collines, the voice of Hutu extremists.
 Before April, Radio Kigali offered balanced but bland programming, controlled by
 an opposition minister. Radio Mille Collines and Radio Muhubura, controlled by the
 RPF, carried on a propaganda war, the former against the RPF and its allies and
 the-latter against President Habyarimana and supporters of his regime. After Presi-
 dent Habyarimana's death, Radio Mille Collines broadcast strident anti-Tutsi and
 anti-RPF propaganda, which ultimately had a lethal effect, calling on the Hutu ma-
 jority to destroy the Tutsi minority. Experts cited Mille Collines as an important
 factor in the spread of genocide in the hours and days following Habyarimana's
 death.
 A November Reporter Without Borders communique claimed that 40 percent of
 Rwandan journalists perished in the fighting and blamed by name a number of sur-
 viving Hutu journalists for inciting the public to slaughter. The journalists who died
 were targeted principally for ethnic and political reasons.
 Following the RPF victory, Radio Kigali became the voice of the Government,
 broadcasting in French and Kinyarwanda. Muhubura Radio, which broadcast in
 English, Swahili, and Kinyarwanda, was the official voice of the RPF. A proposed
 U.N. radio station reportedly had not received government permission to broadcast
 by year's end.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of peaceful assembly, but authorities required official advance notice for
 outdoor rallies, demonstrations, and meetings. Before the renewal of civil strife, po-
 litical parties routinely held rallies throughout the country. Unauthorized assem-
 blies of the Interahamwe Youth Militia associated with the MRND in January and
 February spawned violence in Kigali and Butare. Government militiamen killed sev-
 eral dozen civilians, blocked streets, searched cars, beat perceived opposition sup-
 porters, and damaged property. When the Habyarimana Government did not use se-
 curity forces to halt these attacks, the opposition took this as tacit approval.
 
 
 205
 Although citizens were legally free to join political parties under the 1990 Con-
 stitution, the political party law banned parties based on ethnic origin or religious
 affiliation. The new Government further curtailed this freedom, prohibiting mem-
 bership in the MRND and CDR, the Hutu-dominated parties implicated in the anti-
 Tutsi enocide, effectively banning these parties.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The constitutional provision for freedom of religion was
 generally respected by both the former and new governments. Although there was
 no overt discrimination against foreign clergy, most left when violence erupted.
 Many Catholic and Protestant leaders perished in the violence, which also destroyed
 or damaged many churches and religious schools.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The former government enforced laws restricting freedom of movement
 and residence, and the current regime has continued some of these practices. The
 former government required all residents to hold identity cards which were subject
 to periodic police checks. Hutu militiamen used these cards, which designated eth-
 nicityby pairilineal descent to target their victims. Before the outbreak of genocide,
 the Government systemically levied fines on property owners who did not require
 tenants to show documentation, and evicted tenants who could not supply the re-
 quired documentation. Nightly curfews lifted following the signature of the 1993
 Peace Accord were reimposed with the outbreak of renewed civil war. Military and
 militia checkpoints proliferated throughout the country during the fighting in both
 government and RPF-controlled territory. The new Government lifted the nightly
 curfew by year's end, and only a few RPF checkpoints-most in border regions-re-
 mained in place at year's end.
 Emigration is not restricted, and the Government normally approves passports for
 citizens who seek them.
 The Peace Accord Protocol on Refugees incorporated into law the right of refugees
 to return, and the new Government has announced its commitment to this principle.
 Following the RPF military victory, several hundred thousand refugees returned
 from neighboring countries, especially Burundi and Uganda. Almost all were ethnic
 Tutsis, who had fled prior periods of anti-Tutsi violence in 1959, 1962 and 1973, and
 their descendants.
 The return of Tutsi refugees was more than matched by the flight of approxi-
 mately 2 million Hutus who sought safety in U.N. refugee camps locates along
 Rwanda's borders with Zaire, Burundi, and Tanzania. This includes many former
 army personnel and civilian militiamen who had engaged in the April to July anti-
 Tutsi genocide. However, many Hutu civilians remained in the camps from fear of
 Tutsi reprisals.
 Living conditions in the refugee camps spawned epidemics, violence, and friction
 with local populations. The camps are not viable for the long term. However, anti-
 Tutsi propaganda and physical intimidation by extremist Hutus have thwarted ef-
 forts to convince the refugees to return to Rwanda. Rumors and reports of revenge
 killings of Hutus by RPF soldiers and Tutsi civilians also contributed to the reluc-
 tance of many refugees to return. A further complicating factor was the seizure by
 returning Tutsis of land, homes and property belonging to Hutus, either those dis-
 placed or refugees abroad. The new Government has not yet followed through on
 its pledge to evict squatters and disallow property claims made by returning refu-
 gees if the claims are more than 10 years old. A commission organized within the
 Ministry of the Interior began compiling legal dossiers on all property claims, but
 squatters remained in many houses at year's end, and the settlement of property
 claims appears to be a long-term process.
 The RPA forcibly disbanded the Musenge Displaced Persons Camp in northern
 Gikongoro on November 10, resulting in 7 deaths, several injuries, and the transfer
 of 20 000 internally displaced persons to neighboring camps. This incident affirmed
 the overnment's determination to close the camps and force the internally dis-
 placed to return home. On November 11, RPA forces came under threat from a local
 internally displaced population in Musbeya; in the ensuing disturbance, RPA troops
 killed seven persons and wounded several others. In November the Government ne-
 gotiated an agreement with UNAMIR and various humanitarian organizations to
 permit the latter to organize the nonforced return of displaced persons from camps
 to their home communes. At year's end, this initiative was proceeding smoothly, ac-
 cording to senior U.N. officials involved.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens did not have the ability to change their government through democratic
 means. The 1992 powersharing agreement crafted in the Arusha negotiations and
 ratified by the 1993 Peace Accord was never implemented prior to Habyarimana's
 
 
 206
 death in April. The RPF brought representatives of four other opposition parties
 into the Government formed after the RPF military victory, but none of these offi-
 cials were elected. A multiparty National Assembl was installed on November 15,
 with 64 deputies selected from 8 political parties. In addition, the RPA received six
 seats in the Assembly.
 Although there are no legal restrictions on the participation of women in political
 life, women remain poorly represented in politics and government. Two ministers
 and several subcabinet officials, and the Prefect (Mayor) of Kigali are women. The
 Batwa Pygmoid ethnic group, which represented about 1 percent of the pre-April
 population, was not represented in key positions in either the former or the new
 Government, nor in any of the active political parties.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Nine human rights organizations were active before the nationwide outbreak of
 political and ethnic violence, when Hutu extremists tareted and decimated the
 leadership of these groups. Some had reorganized by years end under the auspices
 of the umbrella group, the Collective Rwandan Leagues and Associations for the De-
 fense of Human Rights (CLADHO). The Government has not established a Human
 Rights Commission with investigative authority prescribed in the Peace Accord
 Protocolbut had created a department within the Ministry of Justice to handle
 human rights issues.
 Before the April violence, the Government generally permitted human rights orga-
 nizations to operate unhindered. However, Hutu extremists harassed some promi-
 nent human rights monitors; one was the victim of a grenade attack. The Govern-
 ment arrested Jean Paul Burandu, the Executive Secretary of CLADHO on Novem-
 ber 5 in Bugarame, ostensibly for improper registration of his car. Burandu charged
 that this was a pretext and that his detention was linked to prison visits in the
 area. At year's end Burandu had been released.
 The new Government has allowed national human rights groups that reorganized
 following the RPF victory to operate freely. The new Government also cooperated
 with international human rights groups, including the Commission of Experts of the
 U.N. Human Rights Commission and various other nongovernmental organizations
 such as Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch Africa. The Government
 has publicly welcomed the presence of U.N. human rights monitors throughout the
 country as a confidence-building measure, although the full complement of human
 rights monitors envisaged had not yet been put in place at year's end. The ICRC
 has unrestricted access to most prisons.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides that all citizens are equal before the law, without dis-
 crimination on the basis of race, color, origin, ethnicity, clan, sex, opinion, religion,
 or social' standing. In practice, however, discrimination has been widespread and
 systematic.
 Women.-Despite constitutional provisions, women continue to face serious de
 facto discrimination. Women traditionally perform most of the subsistence farming
 and play a limited role in the modern sector. They have only limited opportunities
 for education, employment, and promotion. In support of women's rights, President
 Habyarimana encouraged family planning, and a new Family Code went into effect
 in 1992. The Code generally improves the legal position of women in marriage, di-
 vorce, and child custody but still does not meet Rwanda's international and constitu-
 tional commitments to gender equality. Forexample, it formally designates men as
 heads of households. Also, the absence of succession laws limits a woman's right to
 property, thus jeopardizing her status and ability to provide for her family, should
 she survive her husband.
 Violence against women, including wife beating, occurs and is reportedly wide-
 s read. Wife beating and domestic violence are normally handled within the context
 ofthe extended family and rarely come before the courts.
 Both combatant forces, but especially the former FAR and supporting militias, en-
 gaged in rape on a massive scale from April through July. They targeted women,
 especially Tutsi women, for indiscriminate violence.
 Chiedren.-Tens of thousands of children were murdered, and an unknown num-
 ber were orphaned in the genocide and national upheaval. The ICRC estimates that
 50,000 children were separated from their parents and remain in the care of strang-
 ers or international organizations. Relief workers report that large numbers of chil-
 dren were traumatized by the horrors they experienced.
 
 
 207
 The new Government cannot provide funds for children's welfare; it depends on
 international aid groups for the feeding and medical care of displaced and orphaned
 children. Neither can the Government afford to pay for the education of orphans,
 although it is required by law. The law prohibits children's imprisonment with
 adults, but an unknown number accused of participating in the genocide are report-
 edly held with adults in Kigali's Central Prison.
 Indigenous People.-Less than 1 percent of the population comes from the Batwa
 ethnic group. These indigenous people, survivors of the Pygmy tribes of the moun-
 tainous forest areas bordering Zaire, exist on the margins of society and continue
 to be treated as second-class citizens by both Hutus and Tutsis. The Batwa have
 not been able to protect their interests, which center on access to land and housing.
 Few Batwa have gained access to the educational system, resulting in minimal rep-
 resentation in government institutions.
 There is no reliable information on specific human rights abuses perpetuated
 against the Batwa population during the April upheaval. A group of several hun-
 dred Rwandan Batwa refugees were discovered living in a forested area outside of
 Goma, Zaire, deeply traumatized by the events they had witnessed. They did not
 clarify, however, that they or other Batwa had been caught up on either side of the
 massacres.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Before April an estimated 85 percent of
 Rwandans were Hutu, 14 percent Tutsi, and 1 percent Batwa. The subsequent mass
 killings and population movements probably affected the ethnic composition of the
 population, but the extent of the changes is unknown.
 The new Government has called for ethnic reconciliation and committed itself to
 abolishing policies of the former government that had created and deepened ethnic
 cleavages. It promised to eliminate references to ethnic origin from the national
 identity card, a provision of the 1993 Peace Accord. The Government has not statu-
 torily addressed the issue of ethnic quotas in education, training, and government
 employment. It has partially integrated more than 2,000 former government soldiers
 into RPF forces, although not by the formula prescribed by the 1993 Arusha Accord.
 Tutsi clergy and businessmen, who were well represented in these sectors of society,
 were killed in great numbers in the genocide. Following the RPF victory, Tutsis re-
 turning from exile took over many of the business and professional positions for-
 merly held by Rwandan Hutus and Tutsis.
 People With Disabilities.-Although there are no laws restricting people with dis-
 abilities from employment, education, or other state services, in practice few handi-
 capped person have access to education or employment. There are no laws or provi-
 sions that mandate access of the disabled to public facilities. The number of disabled
 persons increased exponentially among both civilians and military personnel, due to
 injuries from bombs, land mines, grenades, accidents involving unexploded ord-
 nance, and maiming by mob and militia action.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Although government officials assured labor leaders
 in October that the Government would respect existing labor legislation, in practice
 Rwanda does not currently have a functioning labor movement. Technicalfy, how-
 ever, the country's labor laws remain in effect, and the following describes the situa-
 tion prior to April.
 The 1991 Constitution provides for the right to create professional associations
 and labor unions. Union membership is voluntary and open to all salaried workers,
 including public sector employees. There are no restrictions on the right of associa-
 tion, but all unions must register with the Ministry of Justice for official recognition.
 There are no known cases in which the Government has denied such recognition.
 Unions are prohibited by law from having political affiliations, but in practice this
 is not always respected.
 Organized labor represents only a small part of the work force. Over 90 percent
 are engaged in small-scale subsistence farming. About 7 percent work in the modern
 (wage) sector, including both public and private industrial production, and about 75
 percent of those active in the modern sector are members of labor unions.
 Before 1991 the Central Union of Rwandan Workers (CESTRAR) was the only au-
 thorized trade union organization in the country. With the political reforms intro-
 duced by the 1991 Constitution, CESTRAR officially became independent of the
 Government and the MRND but still had close informal ties that party.
 The Constitution provides the right to strike, except for public service workers.
 A union's executive committee must approve a strike, and unions must first try to
 resolve their differences with management according to steps prescribed by the Min-
 istry of Labor and Social Affairs. The Government never enforced laws prohibiting
 retribution against strikers.
 
 
 Labor organizations may affiliate with international labor bodies. CESTRAR is af-
 filiated with the Organization of African Trade Union Unity and the International
 Confederation of Free Trade Unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Constitution provides for
 collective bargaining, although only CESTRAR had an established collective bar-
 gaining agreement with the Government. In practice, since most workers are in the
 public sector, the Government is intimately involved in the process (see Section 6.e.).
 The law prohibits antiunion discrimination, and it has not occurred in practice.
 There are no formal mechanisms to resolve complaints involving discrimination
 against unions.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced labor,
 and there are no reports that it occurs in practice.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Except in subsistence agriculture,
 the law prohibits children under 18 from working without their parents' or guard-
 ians' authorization, and they generally may not work at night. The minimum age
 for full employment is 18 years, and for apprenticeships 14, providing the child has
 completed primary school. The Ministry of Labor has not enforced child labor laws
 effectively.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Ministry of Labor sets minimum wages in
 the sml modern sector. The minimum wage is $1.08 (150 Rwandan francs) for an
 8-hour workday. The Government, the main employer, effectively sets most other
 wage rates as well. The minimum wage was inadequate to provide a decent stand-
 ard of living for urban families; often, families supplement their incomes by work
 in small business or subsistence agriculture. In practice, the minimum wage rate
 is self-enforcing since workers will not work for less.
 Officially, government offices have a 40-hour workweek. Negotiations in 1993 be-
 tween the unions, government, and management were held to reduce the workweek
 from 45 to 40 hours in the private sector as well, but by the end of 1994 no such
 reduction had occurred. Hours of work and occupational health and safety standards
 in the modern wage sector are controlled by law, but labor inspectors from the Min-
 istry of Labor enforce them only loosely. Workers do not have the right to remove
 themselves from dangerous work situations.
