 RWANDA
 Rwanda is a one-party state which has been ruled by Major
 General Juvenal Habyarimana since his accession to power in a
 nonviolent coup in 1973. Founder of the single legal party,
 the National Revolutionary Movement for Development (MRND),
 Habyarimana was reelected unopposed for another 5-year term as
 President in December 1988 by nearly 99 percent of the
 electorate. The President sets government policy after
 consultation with the Council of Ministers. The-National
 Development Council (the Legislature) is not independent from
 the MRND, which approves legislative candidates.
 The key event of 1990 was an invasion into Rwanda beginning on
 October 1 from Uganda by the Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF).
 The RPF force was made up primarily of deserters from the
 Ugandan Army who were of ethnic Rwandan Tutsi origin.
 Responding to growing public pressures for political reform,
 President Habyarimana had announced in July several future
 policy changes, including a gradual transition to multiparty
 democracy by 1992. Following the invasion, he announced
 further reforms, e.g., promising to end ethnic markings in
 identity cards and inviting Rwandan refugees to return
 peacefully to Rwanda. In December the Government published
 the draft of a multiparty National Political Charter. A
 national referendum on multiparty democracy is scheduled for
 June 1991.
 The Rwandan Armed Forces (FAR) include two branches, the army
 and gendarmerie. In 1990 the FAR was greatly increased in
 size, to over 15,000 soldiers. The Government sought military
 assistance from Belgium, France, and Zaire to help stop the
 RPF invaders. Belgian and French troops assumed noncombat
 roles in securing the capital and Kigali's airport, and
 Zairian troops engaged in combat. During the fighting, there
 were serious human rights-abuses committed against civilians,
 particularly by the Zairean forces.
 The overwhelming majority of Rwandans are poor subsistence
 farmers. There is little industry, and imports are expensive
 because of the high cost of transport to this landlocked
 country. Food production has barely managed to keep pace with
 the high population growth rate. Rwanda's economy depends
 heavily on exports of coffee and tea and on foreign aid.
 Human rights deteriorated in Rwanda in 1990, particularly in
 the wake of the Government's efforts to counter the RPF
 invasion. The number of civilian deaths caused by the
 fighting between military forces and by isolated acts of
 interethnic violence was estimated at over 200 persons. The
 Government acted promptly to prevent the spread of ethnic
 violence. Shortly after the outbreak of hostilities, the
 Government declared a State of Emergency (SOE) which, among
 other steps, permitted mass detentions of over 5,000 persons
 suspected of sympathizing with the invaders. Some arrests
 were accomplished with excessive force and resulted in harsh
 treatment. Severe restrictions were imposed on the freedom of
 movement of all persons. At the end of 1990, ethnic tensions
 remained high. The FAR had regained control of most of the
 country by year's end but faced elements of a guerrilla war of
 attrition, in which small groups of-RPF troops attacked
 northern Rwandan towns from Uganda on an almost daily basis.
 Prior to the invasion and the SOE, the Government had taken
 new measures limiting freedom of press, assembly, and
 
 
 300
 RWANDA
 religion. In early 1990, the Government acted against
 independent newspapers which had been outspoken in their
 criticism of the Government, its policies and its leadership.
 Although most journalists were acquitted or released after
 several months' detention, one journalist received a 15-year
 sentence for his admitted affiliation with the RPF. Four
 members of the Jehovah's Witnesses received prison sentences
 of 10 years for alleged political acts, including disrespect
 for the national flag. Three of these Witnesses benefited
 from acts of presidential clemency in September, and the
 fourth appealed his conviction to the Rwandan Supreme Court
 and won a retrial.
 Three political prisoners who had been detained for over a
 year were finally tried and acquitted by the Rwandan courts.
 The September 1990 visit to Rwanda by Pope John Paul II was
 heralded by an act of presidential clemency affecting
 approximately 500 Rwandan prisoners and commutation or
 reduction of sentence which affected many others.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 By the end of 1990 more than 200 civilians had been killed in
 the fighting between the Rwandan military and the RPF
 guerrilla forces or by ethnic violence touched off by the
 invasion (see Section 1.g.).
 In May 1988, an army sergeant accused of the murder of a
 prominent colonel reportedly died during interrogation by
 military and security authorities. Subsequently, three
 officers were arrested in connection with the case. These
 officers remained in prison at the end of 1990, awaiting the
 outcome of a judicial inquest.
 In May Government soldiers fired into a crowd of students
 during a demonstration at the National University in Butare,
 killing one and wounding several others. The Government
 quickly replaced the prefect (governor) of Butare and the
 commander of the local gendarmerie detachment, pending
 completion of an official inquiry into the event (see Section
 2.b.).
 b. Disappearance
 There were no unexplained disappearances prior to the outbreak
 of hostilities on October 1. Large numbers of.Rwandans
 considered "missing" since then are assumed to be detained by
 the Government or to be in refugee camps in Uganda. The
 Government allowed free access to detainees by officials of
 the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Dozens among the thousands of persons arrested immediately
 after the October 1 invasion of Rwanda were subjected to
 severe beatings before and during detention. The first
 detainees rounded up in Kigali were held for almost 1 week in
 an outdoor stadium with virtually no access to food and
 
 
</pre>
<pre>
 301
 RWANDA
 water. Subsequently, some 5,000 new detainees suspected of
 sympathizing with the invaders were also held in harsh
 conditions, including lack of sanitary facilities and
 shortages of food. The logistics of detaining, interrogating,
 and releasing persons created major confusion and hardship.
 Responding to international concern for the detainees'
 welfare, the Government allowed officials of the diplomatic
 corps, in addition to the ICRC, to visit all prison
 facilities. There were some deaths due to these-poor
 conditions. International observers judged prison conditions
 poor but adequate for most detainees.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Under the state of emergency which began October 1, normal
 procedures of arrest and detention were suspended. The
 majority of the approximateIy 5,000 Rwandans detained after
 the October 1 invasion were picked up during random police
 roundups of suspicious persons. Most were of Tutsi ethnic
 origin. The majority of the detainees were released by the
 end of the year, but about 2,000 faced trial proceedings which
 began on December 28.
 Except for suspects caught in the act of committing crimes,
 arrests are normally made with a warrant following an
 investigation. Persons may be detained for no more than 48
 hours without a warrant. There were no known exceptions to
 the legally mandated warrant procedures prior to October 1.
 In most cases, charges must be stated formally in the
 defendant's presence within 5 days of arrest. Failure to meet
 this requirement constitutes grounds for dismissal of the
 charges. In practice criminal offenders arrested by judicial
 authorities are not imprisoned without arrest warrants and
 formal arraignment.
 Even without the SOE, persons arrested by Rwandan security
 forces for political crimes may be detained indefinitely
 without being formally charged. Under broad preventive
 detention provisions, persons may be held for 30 days if
 public safety is believed to be threatened, if the accused
 might flee, or if the penalty carries a minimum sentence of
 6 months. At the end of that period, judicial review is
 mandatory. Detention may be prolonged indefinitely for 30-day
 periods. Persons charged with serious crimes often wait
 6 months before trial. Detainees may appeal their
 incarceration, and the appeal must be heard within 24 hours by
 a competent judicial authority. In May Rwandan security
 forces surrounded the home of a prominent Rwandan Tutsi
 businessman, Valens Kajeguhakwa, who remained under virtual
 house arrest until he surreptitiously fled to Zaire in
 August. He later resurfaced as an acknowledged leader of the
 Tutsi exiles who attacked Rwanda October 1.
 The number of political detainees held by the Government at
 the end of 1990 was unknown but was estimated at about 2,000.
 Most of these were arrested after October 1.
 Exile is not practiced as a form of political punishment.
 However, thousands of Rwandans, mainly Tutsis, have been in
 exile for years in neighboring countries. Government policies
 have prevented their return en masse (see Section 2.d.).
 Between 2,000 and 4,000 such exiles comprised the body of the
 RPF invasion force.
 
 
 RWANDA
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Rwanda has three separate court systems for criminal/civil,
 military, and state security cases. All cases except those
 involving state security may be appealed to the Court of
 Appeals. Convicted criminals must file an appeal within 3
 months ofthe date of judgment. The State Security Court has
 jurisdiction over national security charges such as treason.
 If procedural violations are alleged in security cases, these
 may be brought before the Supreme Court or the Court of
 Cassation. If either of these Courts finds that procedural
 violations occurred, the.case is sent back to the State
 Security Court for retrial by a different panel of judges.
 The judiciary is statutorily independent and expected to apply
 the penal code impartially, but in practice the Government
 exercises influence in political and security cases. The
 President appoints judges to the Security Court for terms of 1
 year and all other judges for life tenure. Judges may be
 dismissed upon recommendation of the Minister of Justice and
 the Supreme Council of Magistrates (which is headed by the
 President). Laws passed in 1982 strengthened the independence
 of the judiciary by improving the process of selecting
 judicial personnel and more closely defining their functions.
 The administration of justice has been hampered by poor
 management and a generally low level of education among civil
 servants. The Ministry of Justice conducts training programs
 for officials and judges.
 All defendants are constitutionally entitled to counsel, but
 because of a shortage of lawyers defendants often are not
 represented at trial by professional counsel. There are only
 about 20 private lawyers in Rwanda, most of whom work in
 Kigali, and approximately 100 officially recognized "legal
 agents" who may represent defendants in court. Family and
 other nonprofessional advisers are permitted. Trials are
 public, and those which arouse extensive public interest are
 often broadcast to the street to permit persons who cannot be
 seated in the courtroom to follow the proceedings.
 Bail is not available under Rwandan law. The majority of
 Rwandans awaiting trial or sentencing enjoy provisional
 release, which is routinely granted provided that the
 defendant is not likely to flee justice, has a fixed
 residence, and is not likely to harm or be harmed by the
 public. A Rwandan awaiting trial or sentencing in prison may
 petition the court for provisional release. In the Kigali
 court district, approximately 85 percent of all prisoners
 awaiting trial or sentencing receive provisional release.
 The number of political prisoners, as distinct from political
 security detainees awaiting trial, was also unknown at year's
 end. On December 28, the Government began the public trials
 of some 2,000 political detainees arrested after October 1.
 Two independent journalists, Hassan Ngeze and Vincent
 Rwabukwisi, who had been arrested prior to the invasion for
 writing articles critical of the Government, were tried before
 the Security Court in Kigali between July and November. Both
 defendants received 1-year, suspended sentences for their
 allegedly seditious writings. However, Rwabukwisi admitted
 involvement with the RPF and received a 15-year prison
 sentence for treason. Ngeze resumed publishing his newspaper
 in December.
 
 
 303
 RWANDA
 Three political prisoners, Dr. Aloys Sebiziga, Callixte
 Sinaruhamagaye, and Claude Bahintasi, were tried by the
 Security Court and acquitted in April after nearly 2 years in
 detention.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Under the SOE, the Government engaged in extensive roundups
 and detentions of persons suspected of sympathizing with the
 rebel forces. In normal circumstances, Rwandan law forbids
 arbitrary searches. However, even in the absence of the SOE,
 Rwandans are subject to occasional interference in their
 private lives. Police normally are required to have warrants
 before entering a private residence, but, using the pretext of
 checking required documentation, authorities in practice gain
 entry into homes without warrants. Prior to October 1, there
 was no evidence that the Government monitored private
 correspondence.
 All. Rwandans are required to be members of the MRND and to pay
 party dues. However, in a series of political reforms
 proposed on July 5 (see Section 3), President Habyarimana
 explicitly called for the end of compulsory membership in the
 MRND. A national referendum on the new multiparty National
 Political Charter, which was published in December, is
 scheduled for June 1991.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian
 Law in Internal Conflicts.
 A Rwandan exile army, the RPF forces, estimated at over 4,000
 well-armed and experienced soldiers, invaded northeastern
 Rwanda from Uganda on October 1. Led at the outset by Fred
 Rwigyema (previously a Major General in the Ugandan army), the
 RPF is composed largely of ethnic-Tutsis who had deserted from
 the Ugandan military. Taken by surprise, FAR troops retreated
 steadily during the first days of fighting, and the RPF
 advanced to within 50 miles of the Rwandan capital. The
 Government sought and obtained military assistance from
 Belgium, France, and Zaire to help blunt the main RPF drive."
 By December, all RPF troops had been driven out of Rwandan
 territory, but they continued to wage a guerrilla war of
 attrition from Uganda against Rwandan civilian and military
 targets and supply routes.
 Approximately 16,000 Rwandan refugees,'primarily Tutsis but
 including Hutus, fled the intense fighting in northeastern
 Rwanda and crossed into Uganda. At least 5,000 of these
 refugees-had returned to Rwanda by year's end. Some refugees
 reported indiscriminate killings of civilians by FAR and
 Zairian forces during the intense fighting in early October.
 The Government confirmed that there had been a large number of
 civilian casualties (between 300 and 500), but claimed that
 the alleged civilian casualties were really RPF rebels wearing
 civilian clothes. At least 62 Rwandan civilians were killed
 by RPF troops during guerrilla raids in November and December.
 The Government reacted to the invasion by declaring an SOE and
 arresting thousands of citizens suspected of collaborating
 with the RPF (see Section l.c.). The invasion touched off
 scattered incidents of ethnic violence in the countryside, in
 which some Hutu peasants attacked their Tutsi neighbors,
 burned their huts, and slaughtered their cattle. The
 Government, with the help of the Catholic Church, sent troops
 
 
 304
 RWANDA
 and teams of clerics to trouble spots in Gisenyi, Gikongoro,
 and Gitarama prefectures and insisted that local officials
 prevent further violence or face dismissal and punishment.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The law guarantees freedom of speech and press, but these
 statutory provisions are not observed in practice. Open
 criticism of government policies and personalities increased
 markedly in 1990 among Rwandan intellectuals and the
 independent press. The Government responded to the changing
 environment by accelerating the pace of political reform, but
 it also cracked down on the independent journals Kanguka,
 Kangura, and the Catholic church sponsored newspaper
 Kinyamateka. The Government maintained tight control over the
 official media, including radio broadcasting (the most
 important medium since there is no functioning television
 system in Rwanda).
 During the year, the Government arrested Kanguka journalist
 Francois Hangimana, Kanguka editor Vincent Rwabukwisi, and
 Kangura editor Hassan Ngeze and charged them with promoting
 civil unrest. Hangimana and Ngeze were tried, convicted, and
 released after several months in detention but Rwabukwisi was
 sentenced to 15 year's imprisonment on a separate charge of
 involvement with the RPF (see Section l.e.). In September the
 Government also brought charges against Abbe Sibomana, the
 editor of the prestigious Catholic Church newspaper
 Kinyamateka, and three other Kinyamateka journalists for
 slander of government authorities in a series of critical
 articles. All four were subsequently acquitted of all charges.
 Academic freedom is limited. Due to the October 1 invasion of
 Rwanda, the National University was closed and may remain
 closed for the duration of the 1990/91 academic year.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedoms of assembly and association are limited. No public
 meetings or demonstrations are permitted if there is any
 chance they will result in expressions of overt opposition to
 government policies. The Government permits private
 associations, but requires that they be registered officially
 and accorded legal recognition. The "wartime measures"
 implemented after the October 1 invasion of Rwanda by Tutsi
 exiles effectively prohibit public assemblies of more than a
 few persons. The 7 p.m. to 5 a.m. curfew in force at the end
 of the year precluded the possibility of evening meetings.
 Government troops used excessive force in controlling a
 violent altercation between students and local police
 officials at the National University in Butare in May. The
 students were reacting to alleged police brutality in
 controlling a student crowd at an outdoor rock concert (see
 Section l.a.).
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is provided for in the Constitution, and
 generally accorded to mainstream religious denominations.
 However, the Government continues to discriminate against, and
 local officials harass, some small groups, including the
 Jehovah's Witnesses. The Government denied the Witnesses'
 
 
 305
 RWANDA
 request for legal recognition in October 1988 on the grounds
 that they constitute a threat to law and order and disturb the
 peace. Four Rwandan Witnesses were convicted in the Security
 Court of Kigali on April 30 of "political crimes," including
 showing disrespect to the national flag. The Court found
 "aggravating circumstances" related to the offenses, including
 an attitude of contempt for the judicial process and rejected
 the government prosecutor's request for a light sentence.
 Instead, it meted out an unusually stiff sentence of 10 year's
 imprisonment. Three of these Witnesses benefited from
 presidential clemency in September and were released. The
 fourth Witness successfully appealed his conviction to the
 Supreme Court; but remains in detention pending a retrial.
 Foreign clergy are able to practice their religions and
 organize missionary activities. Worship is freely permitted,
 and Christian churches are numerous. There are several
 mosques in the capital and elsewhere; Muslims are permitted to
 practice their religion throughout the country.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Freedom of movement and residence within Rwanda is restricted
 by laws and regulations which require all residents to hold
 national identity cards and residence and work permits.
 People who wish to spend more than 3 days in a township other
 than their own must obtain permission from the authorities of
 the area they will be visiting. Police conduct periodic
 checks, especially in urban areas, and return all those not
 registered in the locality to their own township. Property
 owners who do not require tenants to show valid documentation
 are.in theory subject to fines and even imprisonment.
 Undocumented tenants are subject to expulsion.
 Passports for foreign travel are obtained by Rwandans with
 little difficulty and cost the equivalent of $20. Exit visas
 are not required. Properly documented Rwandans may emigrate.
 Wartime measures implemented after the October 1 invasion of
 Rwanda, which remain valid indefinitely, severely limit
 freedom of movement within the country for Rwandans and
 expatriates alike.. Special authorizations from the local
 authorities or the Ministry of Defense are required to operate
 a vehicle in'Kigali and other urban centers. Additional
 authorizations are required for travel between prefectures.
 As a result of the conflict, an estimated 16,000 Rwandans fled
 into neighboring countries, principally Uganda. While the
 majority of the new refugees were Tutsis, many Hutu also
 fled. An estimated 3,000 persons were temporarily displaced
 within Rwanda. By the end of 1990. an estimated 5,000 of the
 refugees who had fled .into Uganda had returned to Rwanda, and
 persons displaced within Rwanda had returned to their homes.
 According to United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
 (UNHCR) and other sources, there are an estimated 200,000 to
 500,000 Rwandan refugees in neighboring countries. Most are
 ethnic Tutsis who fled Rwanda during the revolution of 1959,
 which overthrew the Tutsi monarchy, and subsequent ethnic
 violence associated with independence in 1962. In public
 pronouncements after the October 1 invasion of Rwanda,
 President Habyarimana explicitly recognized the refugees'
 right of rdturn and called on the international donor
 community to assist Rwanda in receiving larger numbers of
 
 
 RWANDA
 refugees. It is generally believed that very few refugees
 actually wish to return to Rwanda, although the principle of
 Rwandan citizenship is an important issue to them. The
 Government in the past has cited lack of land and heavy
 population density as reasons precluding a large-scale
 repatriation of refugees, although it did permit repatriation
 on a "case-by-case" basis. The Government has encouraged
 countries hosting the refugees to naturalize them. Many more
 ethnic Rwandans, perhaps numbering in the millions, reside in
 neighboring countries due to boundary demarcations in the
 colonial era that granted formerly Rwandan territory to Uganda
 and Zaire. These persons are not considered refugees.
 Rwanda hosts 19,000 Burundi refugees (mainly Hutu) who fled
 the 1972 massacres. Most of these refugees have been
 integrated into Rwandan society, although they retain Burundi
 citizenship and refugee status. In mid-1988, some 47,000
 Burundi nationals (mainly Hutus) fleeing ethnic violence again
 sought refuge in Rwanda. The Rwandan Government refused to
 accord official refugee status to this group but did grant
 temporary asylum. Working with a quadripartite group composed
 of Rwanda, Burundi, Zaire, and the UNHCR, the Government
 facilitated their voluntary return to Burundi by the end of
 1988. In late 1990, approximately 1,000 Burundi refugees who
 refused to return remained in a UNHCR refugee camp in central
 Rwanda. Rwanda has asked the UNHCR to resettle this group in
 a third country.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Rwandans currently do not have the right to change their
 national government through democratic means. In late
 December the Government published a draft National Political
 Charter which is scheduled to be voted on by national
 referendum in June 1991. The Charter establishes the
 framework for multiparty democracy and limits the President's
 tenure in office to two consecutive 5-year terms. President
 Habyarimana has offered to include Rwandan refugees living
 abroad in the political reform dialog in Rwanda and has
 invited opposition elements to begin coalescing into groups
 that could form the basis for future political parties.
 Despite projected changes in the future, the MRND remained in
 1990 the sole body permitted political activity. It is
 dominated by President Habyarimana who also holds the position
 of President of the MRND. The President and party leaders
 make all policy decisions and nominate all candidates for
 public office. The MRND President chooses the Central
 Committee members and is the only constitutionally recognized
 candidate for President of the country. Every citizen is
 automatically a party member and is required to pay party dues
 representing 2 days' pay per year.
 The political arm of the Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF) is
 reportedly headed by Alexis Kanyarengwe, a former Rwandan army
 officer who helped President Habyarimana seize power in 1973
 and later fled Rwanda in 1980 after an alleged coup attempt.
 The RPF claims to represent all Rwandans, but it is primarily
 an ethnically based organization involving Tutsi exile
 communities throughout East Africa and Western Europe. The
 RPF has called for a democratic multiparty system based on
 "free and fair elections." It alleges that it invaded Rwanda
 and continues to fight to permit "the 2 million Rwandese
 refugees" to return home, to overcome discrimination in
 
 
 307
 RWANDA
 employment and education, and to stop corruption and
 mismanagement of the Rwandan economy.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The establishment on September 30 of the first local
 organization to report on human rights practices in Rwanda,
 the Rwandan Human Rights Association (ARDHO), was eclipsed by
 the October 1 invasion. The ARDHO issued a press release
 after the invasion calling for fair treatment of detainees and
 a peaceful solution of the military conflict. The Government
 has not attempted to interfere in the Association's activities.
 Rwanda cooperates with visiting delegations from such human
 rights groups as Amnesty International (AI) and the ICRC. An
 AI observer arrived in Rwanda in late December to monitor the
 trial of suspected RPF collaborators. Resident diplomats and
 ICRC officials have visited Rwandan prisons on several
 occasions since the October 1 invasion to inspect conditions
 and interview detainees. Observers from resident diplomatic
 missions and international human rights organizations
 witnessed the April trial of a political prisoner, Dr. Aloys
 Sebiziga, who was ultimately acquitted together with two
 associates.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 In 1959 the majority Hutu ethnic group (89 percent of the
 population, according to the 1978 census) overthrew the Tutsi
 monarchy. In 1962 Belgium granted independence to a Hutu-led
 government which overwhelmingly won a U.N.-supervised
 election. These developments-marked the end of the
 traditional, feudal society in which the Hutu had lived in
 subjugation under the Tutsi for centuries. The Constitution
 states that "all citizens are'equal before the law, without
 any discrimination, notably that of race, color, origin,
 ethnicity, clan, sex, opinion, religion, or social position."
 In November the Government officially rescinded the legal
 requirement that ethnic origin be listed on identity
 documents. However, an existing informal ethnic quota system
 is likely to continue to be practiced. This system allocates
 sought-after positions in academia,- the civil service, and
 military to members of Rwanda's two principal ethnic groups
 based roughly on the proportion of Hutus and Tutsis in the
 general population. This tends to limit the access of Tutsis
 to education and important positions in the Government and
 military. Tutsis are well represented in private business and
 the clergy.
 In response to the October 1 invasion, the Government
 initially targeted thousands of Rwandan Tutsis for detention
 and harassment on the assumption that they might sympathize
 with the invaders.
 Despite the language in the Constitution, women continue to
 face serious de facto discrimination. Women have fewer
 opportunities for education, employment, and promotion, and
 they perform most of the subsistence agricultural labor.
 Women's rights to property are limited, and women are not
 treated equally in divorce proceedings. However, the
 President has been an outspoken advocate of women's rights,
 encouraging family planning efforts and promoting women to
 
 
 308
 RWANDA
 positions of responsibility in the Government. The Government
 has completed revision of the Rwandan family code, which at
 the end of 1990 was awaiting the President's signature for it
 to take effect. The new code, drafted in 1988, modernizes
 Rwandan laws concerning marriage, divorce, the status of
 children born out of wedlock, and child custody and other
 elements of family law. The delay in implementing the code
 reflects more a lack of organized interest in, rather than
 opposition to, improving women's rights. There are currently
 few organizations promoting women's interests in Rwanda, but
 their numbers are growing. URAMA, a women's association which
 is an adjunct of the sole. political party, was only formed in
 1989. Two organizations dedicated to assisting women in
 business established a national headquarters in 1990.
 Violence against women is socially accepted in the less
 developed rural areas, but it is neither encouraged nor
 permitted by law. In public places, women are often observed
 to be subject to low-level aggression, such as shoving and
 pushing. Wife beating exists, but there are no studies
 available which show the extent of the problem. When
 reported, wife beating is punished by the courts, but rarely
 do these cases come to litigation. Neither the Government nor
 URAMA has addressed the issue of violence directly. Female
 circumcision is not practiced.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The economy consists predominantly of small-scale subsistence
 farming. There is very little industry and hence few workers
 in the modern wage economy which accounts for perhaps 7
 percent of the work force in both private and public sectors.
 The draft National Political Charter published in December
 explicitly guarantees the right of association and freedom to
 create professional associations and labor unions. However,
 labor organizations have only recently begun to develop, and
 the Government to date has allowed only one labor federation,
 the Central Union of Rwandan Workers (CESTRAR), which is
 integrated into the sole political party, the MRND. The
 CESTRAR is scheduled to be separated from the Government and
 the MRND as part of the package of political reforms now under
 consideration. Union membership (open to all salaried
 workers) is optional. CESTRAR leadership focuses on
 nonwage-related work conditions and on providing training
 opportunities and credit union facilities to its members.
 In theory, CESTRAR members have the right to strike, but only
 with the approval of the executive committee--in effect, the
 Government/MRND. There was one strike in 1989, which occurred
 without the CESTRAR's authorization. The dispute between
 workers and management at the national brewery was quickly and
 successfully mediated by CESTRAR officials. No strikes were
 reported in 1990. The CESTRAR is affiliated with the
 Organization of African Trade Union Unity and the Organization
 of Central African Workers. It maintains friendly ties with
 foreign trade union organizations, including the American
 Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Pending adoption of the recently published National Political
 Charter and modification of trade union legislation, the Labor
 Code grants the right to organize "professional organizations"
 
 
 309
 RWANDA
 and to engage in collective bargaining with employers within
 the framework of the CESTRAR. At the end of 1990, the CESTRAR
 was representing workers at a new textile factory in wage
 negotiations with management. There are no legal bars to
 antiunibn discrimination, but such discrimination does not
 occur in practice. Approximately 75 percent of the industrial
 work force is unionized. There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced and Compulsory Labor
 Forced labor is prohibited by law and is not known to occur in
 practice. Most citizens are expected to participate in
 community service programs as part of the National Development
 Program.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Except in the subsistence agriculture sector, which is the
 area of employment of most Rwandans, children under 18 are not
 permitted to work without. their parents' or guardian's
 authorization, and they may work at night only under
 exceptional circumstances on a temporary basis. The Minister
 of Labor may grant work permission to a child under 14. Child
 labor outside the agricultural sector is uncommon.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Minimum wage rates in the small modern economic sector are set
 by the Ministry of Labor. The current minimum wage is
 approximately $1.50 per day; higher minimum wages apply to
 certain professions. The minimum wage is inadequate to
 provide a decent standard of living for urban families and is"
 often supplemented by work in petty commerce or agriculture.
 Government offices and most private sector companies have a
 43-hour workweek, which includes Saturday morning community
 service. Rwandan wage earners in both the public and private
 sectors are accorded 1 weekday afternoon free for
 participation in sports and leisure activities. Saturday
 morning community service hours are counted as part of the
 regular work service hours, and therefore supplemental wages
 are not required. Hours of work and occupational health and
 safety in the modern wage sector are controlled by law and
 enforced by labor inspectors from the Ministry of Labor.
 04
 
 
 310
