 RWANDA
 At the beginning of 1991, Rwanda was a one-party state ruled by
 Major General Juvenal Habyarimana and the party he founded, the
 National Revolutionary Movement for Development (MRND).
 Habyarimana took power in a nonviolent coup in 1973. On July
 1, 1990, Habyarimana initiated a move to multiparty democracy,
 which developed momentum in 1991. With growing public
 pressures for reform and a continued insurgency from Rwandan
 exiles, the President and the MRND-controlled legislature, the
 National Development Council (CND), amended the 1978
 Constitution in June to replace the one-party State with a
 multiparty political system. The CND passed the Political
 Parties Law in July, and by August the Government had
 registered five political parties, including a revised MRND.
 At year's end, the date for elections and the convening of a
 national conference had become major issues between the
 Government and the political parties. At least three of the
 parties want to convene a national conference to speed
 political change. In late 1991, the Government entered into
 lengthy negotiations with the opposition parties in an attempt
 to create a transitional government composed of a coalition of
 all major parties. When these negotiations stalled, the Prime
 Minister-Designate formed a Government on December 30 without
 the opposition.
 The Rwandan Armed Forces (FAR) include two branches, the army
 and the gendarmerie. In 1991 the FAR grew to nearly 30,000
 soldiers to meet intensive attacks at the Rwanda/Uganda border
 by Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF) guerrillas. These attacks
 were a continuation of the war that broke out in October 1990,
 when Rwandan guerrillas, mainly Tutsis long in exile, invaded
 from Uganda. (The ethnic conflict between Hutus, 85 to 90
 percent of the population, and the Tutsis, 10 to 14 percent,
 has deep historical roots; in November 1959, the Hutu
 population overthrew the Tutsi monarchy and ruling oligarchy,
 and thousands of Tutsis took refuge in Uganda.) In January the
 RPF briefly captured the northern town of Ruhengeri. In
 response, the Government arrested thousands of suspected RPF
 supporters, mainly Tutsis, bringing to more than 8,000 the
 number arrested since the 1990 invasion, all under the state of
 emergency (SOE) powers of October 1990.
 The RPF threat also generated random violence by the populace
 and the military against ethnic Tutsis, primarily in the
 northern provinces of Gisenyi and Ruhengeri. Credible reports
 indicated that over 200 persons lost their lives in this random
 violence with some deaths attributed to government security
 forces. An official inquiry has been ordered. Careful
 government efforts prevented the violence from spreading to
 other regions at a time of extraordinary political and ethnic
 tension in the country. A cease-fire agreement negotiated on
 March 29 was violated almost immediately. In September
 regional Heads of State, meeting under the auspices of the
 Organization of African Unity (OAU), called for both sides to
 respect the cease-fire and to begin a political dialog to end
 the conflict. At the end of the year, there had been little
 progress toward a solution. Approximately 100,000 Rwandans
 have been displaced by the fighting, some of whom were moved
 back from the border by Government security forces.
 The overwhelming majority of Rwandans are subsistence farmers.
 There is little industry, and food production has barely
 managed to keep pace with the high population growth rate.
 Rwanda's economy depends heavily on exports of coffee and tea
 and on foreign aid. Rwanda reached agreement with the World
 
 
 303
 RWANDA
 Bank and the International Monetary Fund on a structural
 adjustment program in February, but at year's end it had not
 stimulated economic growth, which remained dependent on ending
 the war.
 During 1991 human rights remained circumscribed, although there
 was some improvement as the threat from the RPF stabilized and
 public participation in the political process increased.
 Starting in March, the Government released unconditionally
 8,000 suspected RPF supporters detained following the January
 attack, and in April it announced a limited pardon program that
 resulted in the release of or reduced sentences for persons
 already tried and convicted. The political changes brought
 increased freedom of speech and freedom of the press, with
 nearly*60 independent newspapers available in 1991 compared
 with a dozen in 1990. However, the Government also carefully
 tried to control the quality of change and, on three separate
 occasions, cracked down on some journalists for criticism of
 persons in the Government and what the Government termed
 sensationalist reporting. At the-end of the year. all
 journalists arrested in mid-1991 were free, although some have
 cases or appeals pending before the courts. Intimidation of
 the independent press resumed in December. Eighteen persons,
 tried and convicted in the period December- 1990-January 1991
 for being RPF supporters, remained in prison.
 Major human rights problems in 1991 included extrajudicial
 killings by security forces during the conflict with the RPF,
 incidents of torture and pervasive beatings of detainees,
 widespread arbitrary arrests (mostly persons of Tutsi ethnic
 origin), discrimination against women, and the inability of
 citizens to change'their government.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section I Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 Ethnic violence erupted in northern Rwanda in January following
 the RPF attack on Ruhengeri. It was exclusively directed
 against Tutsi residents near the border with Uganda, known as
 the Bagogwe, who were suspected of sympathizing with the
 rebels. An estimated 200 to 300 civilians lost their lives in
 this random violence. Reports indicated that both security
 forces and local civilian groups were involved in these
 killings. Even after the RPF threat receded, there were
 credible reports throughout the year of isolated acts of
 violence against Tutsis. Some government officials were
 accused of condoning the ethnic violence. The Ministry of
 Justice announced an inquiry into these charges but at year's
 end had not issued a report or made arrests.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no known disappearances due to government action.
 However, there were massive arrests, releases, and
 displacements of people due to the war and ethnic conflict.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Security forces, including police, occasionally use torture
 during detention as a part of interrogations, and routine
 
 
 304
 RWANDA
 beatings seem to be pervasive at the time of arrest. The major
 roundup of suspects following the January attack on Ruhengeri
 was accompanied by severe beatings and other forms of brutality
 against hundreds of suspects on their way to prison. Aside
 from massive overcrowding following the January events, prison
 conditions improved with the release of most of the Tutsi
 detainees and prisoners in the pardon program. Delegates of
 the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) regularly
 visit prisoners in Rwanda. Diplomats and human rights groups
 often have access as well.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Except for suspects caught in the act of committing crimes,
 arrests are required by law to be made with a warrant following
 an investigation. Under the law, persons may be detained for
 no more than 48 hours without a warrant. In most cases,
 charges must be stated formally in the defendant's presence
 within 5 days of arrest. Failure to meet these requirements
 constitutes grounds for dismissal of charges and release of
 those arrested. However, in practice under the state of
 emergency, which began in October 1990, normal procedures of
 arrest and detention were frequently ignored. Most of the more
 than 6,000 persons arrested after the January attack on
 Ruhengeri were picked up during random police roundups of
 suspected persons, mainly of Tutsi ethnic origin.
 Persons arrested by Rwandan security forces for political
 crimes may be detained indefinitely without being formally
 charged. Political crimes are acts judged to be against the
 interests of the State and therefore under the jurisdiction of
 the security court. Under broad preventive detention
 provisions, persons may be held for 30 days if public safety is
 believed to be threatened, if the accused might flee, or if the
 penalty carries a minimum sentence of 6 months. At the end of
 that period, judicial review is mandatory. Detention may be
 prolonged indefinitely for 30-day periods. Persons charged
 with serious crimes often must wait up to 6 months before
 trial. Detainees may appeal their incarceration, and the
 appeal must be heard within 24 hours by a competent judicial
 authority.
 In March the Ministry of Justice announced the release of more
 than 8,000 detainees, including some 2,000 persons detained in
 1990 after the October invasion. Among those released were 14
 military officers held without trial for nearly 3 years on
 charges of participating in the murder of a prominent colonel.
 In September the Rwanda Association for the Defense of Human
 Rights (ARDHO) publicly alleged that civilians were being
 detained in military facilities, without the knowledge of the
 normal law enforcement or judicial authorities. In the same
 press release, ARDHO also reported that some persons released
 from detention had been arbitrarily confined to rural areas
 without proper court orders and thus constrained from resuming
 work in urban areas. ARDHO charges of extrajudicial detentions
 and banishment to rural areas are credible, but reports of such
 instances are infrequent.
 Exile is not practiced as a form of political punishment.
 However, thousands of Rwandans, mainly Tutsis, have been in
 exile for years in Uganda and other neighboring countries.
 Between 2,000 and 4,000 such exiles and/or their children
 comprised the body of the RPF invasion force. Past government
 policies prevented the exiles from returning, and the 1991
 amnesty was designed to remove this obstacle. In 1991 the
 
 
 305
 RWANDA
 Government began planning for the return of exiles, including
 identification of reintegration sites and preparation of an
 amnesty law. In October the CND passed two laws which will
 grant blanket amnesty to Rwandan refugees/exiles who choose to
 repatriate and restore civil rights to persons deprived of them
 for political reasons.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Rwanda has three separate court systems for criminal/civil,
 military, and state security cases. All cases except those
 involving state security may be appealed to the Court of
 Appeals. The State Security Court has jurisdiction over
 national security charges such as treason. If procedural
 violations (points of law) are alleged in security cases, these
 may be brought before the Supreme Court, the Cour de
 Cassation. If such violations occur, the Court can send the
 case back to the State Security Court for retrial by a
 different panel of judges.
 The judiciary is statutorily independent and expected to apply
 the Penal Code impartially, but in practice the Goverrient
 exercises influence in political and security cases. All
 judges are appointed by the President and may be dismissed upon
 recommendation of the Minister of Justice and the Supreme
 Council of Magistrates, formerly-headed by the President. The
 Ministry of Justice also controls the operating budget for the
 judicial system. In 1991 constitutional changes eliminated the
 President's role in the Supreme Council of Magistrates.
 Although the President retains the authority to appoint persons
 to the bench, candidates must be proposed by the Council. The
 administration of justice has been hampered by poor management
 and a generally low level of education among civil servants.
 All defendants are constitutionally entitled to counsel, but,
 because of a shortage of lawyers, defendants often are not
 represented at trial by professional counsel. There are only
 about 30 private lawyers in Rwanda, most of whom work in
 Kigali, and approximately 100 officially recognized "legal
 agents" who may represent defendants in court. Family and
 other nonprofessional advisers are permitted. Trials are
 public.
 Bail is not available under Rwandan law. The majority of
 Rwandans awaiting trial or sentencing enjoy provisional
 release, which is routinely granted, provided that the
 defendant is not likely to flee justice, has a fixed residence,
 and is not likely to harm anyone or need protective custody.
 At the end of 1991, no political prisoners were known to remain
 in Rwandan jails. Of the some 8,000 persons arrested following
 the October 1990 invasion, 18 remained in jail. In April the
 Minister of Justice announced a limited presidential pardon for
 persons arrested and sentenced following the October 1990
 invasion as well as for common law offenders. Innocent
 Ndayambaje; a former university student imprisoned in 1986 and
 convicted in 1990 for violating the prohibition against forming
 political parties, was released on April 29. In addition, six
 journalists were arrested in 1991 and variously tried and
 convicted, or released without charges. Three still have their
 cases pending before the State Security Court (see Section
 2.a.).
 
 
 306
 RWANDA
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Rwanda's Constitution provides for the respect of privacy of
 individuals, correspondence, and communications and declares
 that the home is inviolable. Rwandans are subject to
 occasional interference in their private lives. While police
 are required to have warrants before entering a private
 residence, in practice authorities gain entry into homes
 without warrants, often using the pretext of checking required
 documentation.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian
 Law in Internal Conflicts
 In addition to the ethnic violence unleashed by the RPF
 invasion (see Section l.a.), there was an undetermined number-
 of deaths, including civilian deaths, caused by the fighting
 between FAR troops and RPF guerrillas. The intense fighting at
 the beginning of the year, which involved fairly large units,
 gave way at the end of the year to sporadic guerrilla
 incursions along the northern border with Uganda.
 The conflict also resulted in many injuries to civilians.
 Moreover, as a result of the fighting, an estimated 90,000 to
 120,QOO persons fled from their homes, some of them to Uganda.
 In response to a government appeal, the ICRC and the European
 Community provided food and medicines for these people. The
 ICRC began to phase out its assistance at the end of 1991. The
 Government has allowed the ICRC to visit persons taken prisoner
 in the guerrilla conflict at the border. The Government
 acknowledged holding at year's end 15 prisoners of war captured
 in the course of the conflict with the RPF.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Rwanda's Constitution provides for freedom of speech and
 press. In 1991 individual critics, opposition political
 parties, and watchdog associations frequently called to account
 government policies and personalities, using the newly
 organized independent press or mass political rallies in
 various parts of the country as vehicles for their criticism.
 Broadcast media in Rwanda are limited to one radio station
 owned and operated by the Government. With the legalization of
 political parties, the government-owned radio began to report
 opposition party activities and to publicize their messages to
 the population. It also provided each party 12 minutes of free
 air time each week. Rwanda has no television.
 Independent newspapers proliferated in 1991 from about 12 in
 1990 to over 60 by the end of the year. Most engaged in
 frequent criticism of government policies and personalities.
 Even official government newspapers ran some stories critical
 of the Government.
 The Government responded in several ways to what it considered
 irresponsible reporting by the independent press. The
 legislature passed a controversial press law in August that
 defines the legal framework within which the press may work.
 The legislation was signed into law by the President at the end
 of the year. The Government arrested six journalists from
 independent newspapers in the last half of 1991. Two were
 
 
 307
 RWANDA
 tried and convicted of contravening sections of Rwanda's penal
 code that protect government officials from libel. Both were
 temporarily free pending appeal at the end of 1991. Another,
 accused of sympathy with the RPF,-was free pending review of
 his case before the State Security Court. Two others, who
 worked on the same newspaper, had their cases tied to his., The
 sixth was released with no charge brought. 'In December,
 independent journalists came under increased pressure to curb
 criticism of the Government and government officials. The
 internal security service arrested with warrants, interrogated,
 and released several leading journalist critics. In the first
 such case, the journalist was severely beaten and forced to
 sign a statement promising not to write critical articles in
 the future. The journalist has filed a complaint with the
 judicidl system.
 Due to the October 1, 1990, invasion, the national university
 was closed and remained closed for the duration of the
 1990/1991 academic year. The university, however, reopened-
 October 7, 1991. As a result of the introduction of political
 parties and a rapidly expanding private press, academicians and
 students freely exressed their political and personal views in
 and outside of the classroom. Political tensions, reflecting
 national political tensions, developed in November over campus
 elections, but the university remained open, and no violence or
 disorder dccurred.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The amendment of the Constitution in June effectively abolished
 compulsory membership in the formerly sole party. People are
 now free to join the party of their choice. Some prominent
 members of the ruling party, including seven member� of the
 elected legislature,,have declared themselves for newly
 registered parties.. Both the Government and opposition parties
 began holding mass political rallies regularly in all parts of
 the country, except in combat zones.
 Permits are still required for large group meetings. No
 political party reported being denied a permit to meet.
 Despite presidential urging to local officials to be impartial
 in implementing democratic pluralism,.credible reports continue
 to circulate of intimidation and arbitrary discrimination on
 the part of.local officials toward persons favoring or-
 suspected of favoring political parties other than theMRND.
 Opposition party organizers reported harassment by local
 authorities, who, for example, declined to rent loudspeaker
 equipment to them or delayed issuance of permits, sometimes
 until the last minute.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion iS guaranteed by Rwanda's Constitution and
 is generally accorded to religious communities. However, the
 Government. refuses to recognize the Jehovah's Witnesses, which
 it considers a subversive association rather than a religious
 organization.
 Christianity predominates in Rwanda, with the largest segment
 of the population adhering to Catholicism. Muslims constitute
 a small minority but freely practice their religion throughout
 the country. Foreign clergy are able to practice their
 religion and to organize missionary activities. There are no
 restrictions on construction of places of worship, training of
 clergy, religious publishing, or religious education.
 
 
 308
 RWANDA
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Freedom of movement and residence within Rwanda is restricted
 by laws and regulations which require all residents to hold
 national identity cards and residence and work permits (see
 Section 5). People who wish to spend more than 3 days in a
 township other than their own must obtain permission from the
 authorities of the area they will be leaving and visiting.
 Police conduct periodic checks, especially in urban areas, and
 return all those not registered in the locality to their own
 township. Property owners who do not require tenants to show
 valid documentation are subject to fines and even
 imprisonment. Undocumented tenants are subject to expulsion.
 Wartime measures implemented after the October 1990 invasion of
 Rwanda, which remain valid indefinitely, severely limit freedom
 of movement within the country for Rwandans and foreigners
 alike. Under the state of emergency, checkpoints exist at key
 points on main roads and outside most towns, authorizations are
 required for travel between prefectures, and a nighttime curfew
 remains in effect throughout the country. Passports for
 foreign travel are normally obtained by Rwandans who seek them,
 and emigration is not restricted.
 According to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
 (UNHCR) and other sources, there are an estimated 200,000 to
 500,000 Rwandan refugees in neighboring countries. Most are
 ethnic Tutsis who fled Rwanda during the revolution of 1959,
 which overthrew the Tutsi monarchy and subsequent ethnic
 violence associated with independence in 1962. In the past,
 the Government cited lack of land and heavy population density
 as reasons precluding large-scale repatriation of refugees,
 although it did permit return on a case-by-case basis. After
 the October 1990 invasion of Rwanda, President Habyarimana
 publicly recognized the refugees' right of return and called on
 the international donor community to assist Rwanda in receiving
 large numbers of refugees. Throughout 1991, the Government
 worked with the UNHCR and the international community in
 planning for the return and reintegration of refugees opting
 for repatriation. Refugees were unable to repatriate in 1991,
 however, due to the continued conflict between the Government
 and the RPF. In August, under a bilateral agreement with the
 Republic of Tanzania, Rwanda accepted the return of 7,000
 Rwandan citizens who arrived in Tanzania after 1986.
 Rwanda hosts almost 30,000 refugees, mainly Hutu, from
 Burundi. Approximately 19,000 of these arrived in 1972,
 fleeing massacres in Burundi. Most have been integrated into
 Rwandan society, although they retain Burundi citizenship and
 refugee status. Some of these refugees sought voluntary
 repatriation in 1991 from refugee camps in northern Rwanda near
 the zone of conflict. Most of the Burundi refugees who had
 fled to Rwanda following ethnic disturbances in 1988 were
 denied permanent asylum by the Rwandan Government and
 subsequently repatriated. Of the remaining 1,000, some 150
 have been permitted to attend secondary school and remain in
 Rwanda. At the end of 1991, Rwanda received another 10,000
 refugees fro& Burundi who were assisted by the UNHCR and the
 Rwandan Red Cross.
 
 
 309
 RWANDA
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government.
 While citizens did not have this right in 1991, the
 Constitution was amended in June to provide for a multiparty
 democracy. The Constitution provides for President Habyarimana
 and the MRND-dominated legislature, elected in 1988 under the
 single-party system, to continue in office until the next
 elections, which remain to be set by the President in
 consultation with political party leaders. Meanwhile, the
 President has recognized the parties as legitimate
 representatives of the Rwandan people. While negotiations
 continued until the end of the year for formation of a
 transition government under a Prime Minister, the President and
 the MRND retained their dominance of the Government and the
 political process. The new Constitution, drafted by the
 broad-based Commission of National Synthesis, provides for the
 President and Members of the Parliament to be elected to 5-year
 terms by universal adult suffrage'and by secret ballot. The
 President's tenure is limited to two 5-year terms. The new
 Political Parties Law came into force in July, and nine parties
 were registered by the end of 1991. One is essentially the
 continuation of the former single party. Three parties have
 formed a consultation committee to cooperate in the opposition.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding Internationaa and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The first local organization to monitor and report on human
 rights practices in Rwanda, the Rwandan Association for the
 Defense of Human Rights (ARDHO), was established in September
 1990. It issues press releases (see Section l.d.), makes
 representations to public officials calling attention to
 alleged human rights abuses, and seeks redress on behalf of
 victims. The Government has not attempted to interfere in
 ARDHO's activities, and its members include several
 high-ranking government officials.
 Rwanda cooperates with visiting delegations from such human
 rights groups as Amnesty International (AI) and the ICRC. An
 AI observer monitored the trials of suspected RPF collaborators
 that began in December 1990. Africa Watch sent a mission to
 Rwanda in November 1991 to interview refugees and war victims.
 Resident diplomats and ICRC officials visited Rwandan prisons
 on several occasions following the arrests of citizens in the
 wake of the attack on Ruhengeri in January to inspect
 conditions and interview detainees.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution provides that all citizens are equal before
 the law, without any discrimination because of race, color,
 origin, ethnicity, clan, sex, opinion, religion or social
 standing. Rwanda's Political Parties Law bans parties based on
 ethnic origin or religious affiliation. Ethnicity, however, is
 a sensitive issue as a result of Rwanda's ethnic imbalance and
 its historical legacy. About 85 to 90 percent of the
 population is Hutu and 10 to 14 percent Tutsi. In a 1959
 uprising, the Hutu majority overthrew the Tutsi monarchy to end
 a longstanding feudal system.
 In November 1990, the Government officially rescinded the
 controversial legal requirement that ethnic origin be listed on
 
 
 310
 RWANDA
 identity documents. However, the documents had not been
 revised at the end of 1991, and an existing ethnic quota system
 continues to be practiced, with widely differing results. This
 system allocates sought-after positions in academia, the civil
 service, and the military to members of Rwanda's principal
 ethnic groups in proportion to their numbers. In practice,
 this policy limits access of Tutsis to education and important
 positions in the Government and military. Tutsis are, however,
 well represented in private business and the clergy.
 Despite the language in the Constitution, women continue to
 face serious de facto discrimination. Women have fewer
 opportunities for education, employment, and promotion, and
 they perform most of the subsistence agricultural labor.
 Women's rights to property are limited, and women are not
 treated equally in divorce proceedings. The President has been
 an outspoken advocate of women's rights, encouraging family
 planning efforts and promoting women to positions of
 responsibility in the Government. However, he has yet to sign
 into law a new family code, passed by the National Assembly in
 _1989, that would change Rwandan laws concerning marriage,
 divorce, the status of children born out of wedlock, child
 custody, and other elements of family law. The proposed
 changes, affecting some strongly held traditions, have
 generated fierce controversy, not least among women who see
 some of its provisions, such as the limitations on the size of
 the marriage dowry, as threatening to their social status.
 There are currently few organizations promoting women's
 interests in Rwanda, but their numbers are growing. A women's
 association, URAMA, was formed in 1989. Two organizations
 dedicated to assisting women in business established national
 headquarters in 1990. Also, there is an association of women
 lawyers and another of women parliamentarians.
 Violence against women is socially accepted in the less
 developed rural areas, but it is neither encouraged nor
 permitted by law. wife beating exists, but there are no
 studies available to help indicate the extent of the problem.
 When reported, wife beating is punished by the courts, but
 rarely do these cases come to litigation. Neither the
 Government nor URAMA has addressed the issue of violence
 directly.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The economy consists predominantly of small-scale subsistence
 farming. There is very little industry and hence few workers
 in the modern wage economy, which accounts for perhaps 7
 percent of the work force in both private and public sectors.
 The amended Constitution explicitly guarantees citizens the
 right of association and freedom to create professional
 associations and labor unions. However, labor organizations
 have only recently begun to develop. Union membership (open to
 all salaried workers) is optional.
 The Central Union of Rwandan Workers (CESTRAR) separated from
 the Government and the MRND as part of the package of political
 reforms under the new Constitution. CESTRAR leadership focuses
 on nonwage-related work conditions and on providing training
 opportunities and credit union facilities to its members.
 CESTRAR members have the right to strike with the approval of
 the-executive committee. No strikes were reported in 1990 or
 
 
 RWANDA
 1991. CESTRAR is affiliated with the Organization of African
 Trade Union Unity and the Organization of Central African
 Workers. In its 1991 report, the Committee of Experts (COE) of
 the International Labor Organization (ILO) asked that the
 Government-revise legislation governing agricultural workers in
 order to provide them the same right of association the law
 grants to industrial workers.
 In November the Government recognized an independent union
 representing Rwandan health professionals, the Union
 Association of Health Personnel in Rwanda. Two additional.
 unions have presented their statutes to the Government for
 recognition: The Association of Christian Unions, representing
 public.and private sector workers, small businessmen and
 subsistence farmers; and the Interprofessional Union of Workers
 of Rwanda, which was disbanded when CESTRAR became Rwanda's
 sole union in .1984.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The Constitution grants workers the right to defend their
 rights through collective actions. The Labor Code grants the
 right to engage in collective bargaining with employers within
 the framework of the CESTRAR. There are no legal bars to
 antiunion discrimination, but such discrimination does not
 occur in practice. Approximately 75 percent of the small
 industrial work force is unionized,,but few of these workers
 are covered.by genuine collective agreements. There are no
 export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced and CompulsoryoLabor
 Forced labor is prohibited by law and is not known to occur in
 practice.. Most citizens are expected to participate in
 community service programs once a week as part of the national
 development program.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Except in the subsistence agriculture sector, which is the area
 of employment of most Rwandans, children under 18 are not
 permitted to work without their parents' or guardian's
 authorization, and they may work at night only under
 exceptional circumstances on a temporary basis. The Minister
 of Labor may grant work permission to a child under 14. Child
 labor outside the agricultural sector is uncommon.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Minimum wage rates in the small modern economic sector are set
 by the Ministry of Labor. The minimum wage is inadequate to
 provide a decent standard of living for urban families and is
 often supplemented by work in small business or agriculture.
 Government offices and most private sector companies have a
 45-hour workweek, as fixed by ministerial decree. Rwandan wage
 earners in both the public and private sectors are accorded one
 weekday afternoon free for participation in sports and leisure
 activities. Hours of work and occupational health and safety
 in the modern wage sector are controlled by law but only
 loosely enforced by labor inspectors from the Ministry of Labor.
 
 
 312
