 RWANDA
 While Rwanda continued its transition towards multiparty democracy, Major Gen-
 eral Juvenal Habyarimana remained in power during 1992. President Habyarimana,
 who took power in a nonviolent coup in 1973, initiated political change in 1990, and
 in 1991 the country adopted an amended Constitution providing for multiple par-
 ties. In April Habyarimana named an opposition Prime Minister, Dismas
 Nsengiyaremye, who formed a five-party transition Government. In accordance with
 a protocol signed by all five parties, a ya-imana remained as President and the
 legislature, controlled by the former single party, the National Revolutionary Move-
 ment for Development (MRND), remained in place. Nevertheless, the transition
 Government exercised considerable authority over day-to-day Iovement affairs.
 The transition Government began negotiations in June withi the Rwana Patri-
 otic Front (RPF), a group of mostly minority Tutsi exiles who invaded the country
 in October 1990 from Uganda and has waged an intense war near the border ever
 since. The Rwandan conflict has deep historical roots in an ethnic rivalry between
 Hutus and Tutsis, who cornp rise about 85 and 14 percent of the population, respec-
 tively. In July, in Arusha, Tanzania, the two sides agreed to a cease-fire which took
 effect on August 1 and has largely held since. In August a protocol on the rule of
 law was signed. Negotiations began in September on sharing power, but stalled at
 year's end over the distribution of cabinet portfolios and the composition of an in-
 terim legislature.
 The Rwandan Armed Forces (FAR) include two branches, the army and the gen-
 darmerie. In response to intensive RPF attacks, the army grew to over 30,000 sol-
 diers but currently numbers less than 27,000. In late spring, after the Government
 discussed eventual demobilization, units of soldiers rampaged in several towns,
 causing considerable propeity damage and a few civilian casualties. In 1992 the
 Government, seeking tighter control over the multiple security units, strengthened
 the gendarmerie, which is responsible for internal security and investigations of se-
 cuty breaches. It also divided the responsibilities of the Central Intelligence Serv-
 ice (SCR), which had           ein human rights abuses, amongthe Ministries
 of Defense (external intelligence) and Interior (immigration) and the Prime Min-
 ister's office (internal intellgence). Rwanda's total miitary expenditures for 1989i
 the last year for which the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency conducted
 a detailed analysis, were roughly estimated to be between $36 million and $39 mil-
 lion. Reduction of these expenditure  s a high priority with the Government as part
 of its structural adjustment program and postwar demobilization plans.
 
 
 207
 The overwhelming majority of Rwandans are subsistence farmers. There is little
 industry, and food production has barely managed to keep pace with the high popu-
 lation growth rate. Rwanda's economy depends heavily on exports of coffee and tea
 and on foreign aid. Rwanda has an agreement with the World Bank and the Inter-
 national Monetary Fund for a structural adjustment program, but economic growth
 remains dependent on ending the war.
 In 1992 there were significant human rights abuses, many related to the conflict
 with the RPF. All sides to the conflict were responsible for injuries to civilians from
 artillery shelling and land mines; by July intense RPF attacks had increased the
 number of displaced persons to 350,000.
 Outside the area of RPF conflict, ethnic violence, political strife, bomb explosions,
 and armed assaults created a climate of increasing internal insecurity. Credible re-
 ports allege that local officials were involved in widespread ethnic violence in March
 in which 300 died and 15,000 were displaced. Observers have accused party leaders
 of not taking steps to curb interparty violence and government security forces of not
 responding promptly to maintain public order. Following the establishment of the
 transition Government in April, however, reports of extrejudicial killings, torture,
 and beatings of detainees "virtually ceased.
 During 1992 the application of two amnesty laws and the advent of a multiparty
 government led to the release of virtually all persons, approximately 60, convicted
 or detained for war-related or other political offenses as well as that of thousands
 of common criminals. While freedoms of speech, assembly, association, and move-
 ment also were more widely respected, political partisans, including the youth wings
 of the MRND and other parties, attempted to control the political process by attack.
 ing opponents and by intimidating human rights monitors. By year's end, the right
 of citizens to change their government, embodied in the amended Constitution, had
 not been tested in free and air elections.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Kiling.-There were unsubstantiated allega-
 tions in 1992 of the existence of Rwandan death squads, with possible links to Presi-
 dent Habyarimana. Human rights watchers cite as examples of squad activities un-
 timely deaths in mysterious circumstances, cases of suspected poisonings, and
 deaths seemingly camouflaged by crime. In September Rwanda's oldest private
 (Catholic) newspaper reported finding human skeletons in a field in the southwest
 of the country. Local witnesses told journalists that more than 100 people had been
 brought to the field in military trucks between July and September 1991 and then
 tortured and killed. An investigation of these allegations, ordered by the President's
 office, reportedly assigned blame to the RPF, but neither the investigation nor its
 results have been made public.
 In 1992 hundreds of Rwandans lost their lives in ethnic violence, interparty clash-
 es, random terrorist incidents involving land mine and bomb explosions, and inci-
 dents of armed robbery, often involving grenades. These events occurred sporadi-
 cally during the year in widely separated areas of the country, creating a general
 climate of insecurity. The Government increased foot patrols in Kigali neighbor-
 hoods reportedly in an effort to stem armed robberies. However, many observers,
 including members of human rights organizations, alleged that many of the so-
 called robberies were actually efforts at political intimidation.
 The most widespread ethnic violence erupted in Bugesera, south of Kigali, in
 March, causing more than 300 deaths and temporarily displacing about 16,000 per-
 sons, mostly Tutsi, many of whose homes were destroyed. While local officials ac-
 cused opposition political parties and RPF sympathizers of sparking the trouble,
 credible reports from many sources stressed the responsibility of local authorities for
 inciting the violence. At the same time, as violence of a lesser magnitude spread
 to nearby regions, human rights groups credited some local authorities and commu-
 nity watch groups in some areas with containing the violence. The Government ar-
 rested more than 500 persons in connection wi  events in Bugesera, but later re-
 leased nearly all without trial because of irregularities in the arrest procedures.
 Youth groups of several political parties, including that of the President as well
 as those of the opposition, engaged in violent clashes that left several persons dead.
 All sides accused party leaders of condoning the violence. Many human rights
 groups, opposition parties, and independent observers claimed to have seen military
 articipants, including members of the presidential guard, among the youth of the
 President's party. They also claimed that government security forces are much slow-
 er in responding to violence caused by MRND supporters.
 
 
 208
 Government investigations into land mine explosions in areas of the country well
 outside the war zone and taxi bombings in Kigali turned up no viable suspects.
 Sources close to the investigations claimed the explosives were similar to those used
 by the RPF. Opposition observers continued to suspect Rwandan military of involve-
 ment in these incidents.
 Official investigations into other ethnic violence that occurred since the war began
 in October 1990 continued in 1992, although criminal penalties are precluded by the
 December 1991 general amnest for crimes committed before that date. These in-
 clude alleged massacres of the Baggwe and of people in Kibilira, Nasho, Murambi,
 Buqesera, Mbogo, Gishyita, and Rwamatatu. The fndings are to be turned over to
 an independent international human rights commission scheduled to begin its work
 in January 1993 (see Section 4).
 b. Disappearance.-Reports of disappearances are rare; however, government offi-
 ials generally attribute the disappearance of Tutsi youth as departures to join rebel
 forces.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Reports of torture by security forces, including police, either during interrogations
 or at the time of arrest, decreased in early 1992 and virtually ceased after the
 multiparty Government took office. The two services previously accused of using tor-
 ture and-other abusive interrogation methods on detainees-the SCR and the gen-
 darmerie investigation unit-have been divided and reorganized to improve their ac-
 countability. French consultants trained a new gendarmerie investigation unit in
 nonabusive interrogation techniques. The Minister of Justice lodged chares against
 several former members of the unit for allegedly engaging in torture durng interro-
 gation. Delegates of the International Committee o the  d Cross (ICRC) have reg-
 ular access to persons held in Rwanda's prisons and gendarme brigades.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exiie.-Except for suspects_ caught in the act of
 committing crimes arrests are required by law to be made with a warrant following
 an investigation. Under the law, persons may be detained for no mere than 48 hours
 without a warrant. Within 5 days of arrest, either charges must be stated formally
 in the defendant's presence or the Court of Appeals must approve a public prsecu-
 tor's reuest for a 30-day preventive detention order. Preventive detention is per-
 mitted if public safety is believed to be threatened, if the accused might flee, or if
 the penalty carries a minimum sentence of 6 months. Detention may be prolonged
 indefinitely, but judicial review is mandatory every 30 days. Detainees may appeal
 their incarceration and the appeal must be heard within 24 hours by a competent
 judicial authority. hese procedures apply to all persons suspected of crimes. Failure
 to meet any of these requirements constitutes grounds for release of the arrested
 person and dismissal of the case. So far about 400 persons have been released under
 these circumstances.
 Especially after the expanded multiparty Government took over in April, Rwanda
 made progress in curbing arbitrary arrest and detention by applying procedures
 more strictly. The Government handled journalists arrested early in the year, alleg-
 edly for insulting the Head of State, in accordance with normal judicial procedures
 rather than by indefinite detention and beatings in military camps as was the case
 in late 1991. In early April, the authorities released all journalists, one appealing
 a conviction and two held pending investigation, as a result of intervention by
 human rights groups and the outgoing Prime Minister. The Minister of Justice in
 the new multiparty Government announced that journalists would no longer be ar-
 rested or detaineduntil they had been tried'and convicted. In two instances, the
 Government released on technical grounds Tutsi detained on security charges. One,
 a Bagogwe, was granted provisional release in April as a result of intervention by
 the outging Prime Minister. However, the Minister of Justice complained publicly
 that   ice and local officials refused to take action on warrants of arrest issued by
 his Ministry In December he offered his resignation in protest, but it was not ac-
 cepted by the President. The Ministers of Defense and Interior publicly denied the
 al  ations.
 Nevertheless, illegal detentions in criminal cases continue to be common due to
 delays in processing and unfamiliarity of untrained magistrates with judicial proce-
 dures. In September the authorities found that 80 percent of the persons held in
 the Kigali prisn were irregularly detained. The Government began centralizing and
 computerizing arrest data inan effort to correct this situation.
 The Government detained thousands of persons ,      min 1990 and 1991
 following the RPF invasion. It released thousands of these detainees in 1991, and
 in accordance with two amnesty laws (December 1991 and July 1992) released an-
 other 6,000 persons in 1992. Most security cases benefited from one of the two am-
 nesties. At the end of 1992, two political prisoners were being held in Rwandan
 jails, both Tutsi youth caught in possession of a land mine. Security charges at the
 
 
 209
 end of the year were pending against three journalists, all provisionally released
 from detention.
 Exile is not practiced as a form of punishment. However, thousands of Rwandans,
 mainly Tutsi, have been in exile for over 30 years in Uganda and other neighboring
 countries. Between 2,000 and 4,000 such exiles or their children comprised the RPF
 invasion force in October 1990. The December 1991 law granted blanket amnesty
 to refugees and exiles who choose to repatriate.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Tria.-Rwanda has three separate court sms, one for
 criminal/civil cases, one for military cases, and one for state secunty cases. Deci-
 sions in criminal, civil and military cases may be appealed to the appropriate re-
 gional court of appeals. There is no provision for appeal of decisions in security
 cases. At the request of counsel or of defendants, the Cour de Cassation, will review
 civil, criminal, and security cases for errors in procedure or in the application of the
 law. Errors in civil or criminal cases result in dismissal of the case. Errors in state
 ecurity cases result in retrial by a different pnel of jde. The current multiparty
 overnment prepared, but at year's end the ehad not passed, draft legis-
 lation to abolish the State Security Court.
 The Rwandan judicial system is suscptile to government influence and manipu-
 lation. Although the Constitution provides for an independent judiciary, it also
 makes the judicial system dependent on the executive branch. It authorizes the
 _President to appoint and dismiss judges, albeit upon the reommendation of the
 Minister of Justic and the Superior Council of Magistrates. Also, the judicial sys-
 tem depends entirely on the Ministry of Justice for its operating budget and is ham-
 pered by the low educational level of the vast majority of judicial officials, the lack
 of material and equipment for the courts, and the absence of compiled jurispru-
 dence. Pending enabling legislation to revitalize the Superior Council of Mag-
 istrates, the Minister of Justice was not able to hire or fire judges and resorted to
 rotating key magistrates to improve judicial administration. A new Magistrature
 Council Law was passed in December, paving the way for changes in judiciary staff.
 All defendants are constitutionally entitred to counsel but often are not rep-
 resented at trial by professional counsel because of a shortage of lawyers. There are
 only about 30 private lawyers in Rwanda, most are resident in Kigali, and approxi-
 matly 100 officially recgnized  egal agents" who may represent defendants in
 court. Family and other nonprofesnal advisers are permitted. Trials are public.
 Bal is not available under Rwandan law, but suspects are often released on their
 own recognizance pending trial.
 f. Arbdtrary Interference with Pivac, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-
 Rwanda's Constitution provides for the respect of privacy of individuals, correspond-
 ence, and communications and declares that the home is inviolable. These prvi-
 sions are generally respected, but occasionally Rwandans are subject to interference
 in their private lives. Whle police are legally required to have warrants before en-
 tering a private residence, in practice authorities gain entry into homes without
 warrants, often using the pretext of checking required] documentation.
 With the introduction of a multiat system in 1991, Rwandans are no longer
 obliged to belong to a particular plitical party (see Section 2.b.).
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations C Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-Intensive RPF attacks continued along the Rwanda/Uganda border until a
 cease-fire took effect August 1. An undetermined number of deaths and injuries, to
 bth combatants and civilians, resulted from the fighting in norern Rwanda be-
 tween the FAR and RPF guerrillas. The numbers of war-displaced, estimated at
 about 100,000 in January, increased dramatically in June and stabilized at about
 360,000, when RPF attacks forced the entire civilian ppulation out of a strip along
 much of the length of Rwanda's border with Uganda.
 Until the Arnsha cease-fire took effect August 1, the two sides used artillery and
 land mines in the clashes, resulting in hundreds of civilian casualties. Credible re-
 ports indicated that the RPF kidnaped a number of local citizens to serve asguides,
 porters, cooks, and field hands to harvest crops under RPF control. The  vern-
 ment, the ICRC, the local Red Cross, international organizations, and bilateral do-
 nors continue to provide humanitarian assistance for the displaced.
 In accordance with a provision of the July accord, bth the Government and the
 rebels released prisoners of war (POW's). In July the Government released 23
 POW's who were returned to the RPF in northern Rwanda in August through the
 good offies of the ICRC and the Organization of African Unity (OALD neutra l ease-
 eobserver group. Subsequently, the RPF released 11 POW's into the custody of
 the ICRC who returned them to their families in Rwanda. In October the Govern-
 ment returned four more prisoners to the RPF. Both sides ceaim to hold no more
 POW's.
 
 
 210
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Rwanda's Constitution provides for freedom of
 speech and press. Freedom of speech remained restricted but was more widely exer-
 cised in 1992, including by political parties, human rights associations, the private
 press, and, to some extent, even the government media. These groups became vehi-
 cles for criticizing public policies and practices and expressing competing and often
 conflicting viewpoints. Dominating the print media ar three newspapers with the
 widest circulation: a government-owned weekly, an independent Catholic biweekly,
 and a rural-oriented monthly. The number of private newspapers, which reached
 over 60 in 1991, stabilized at about 30 in 1992.
 The Government passed a new press law in December 1991 which provides for
 stiff penalties for insulting the President and requires editors to file copies of each
 edition of their papers with specified authorities, including the public prosecutor,
 prior to distribution. Despite the Minister of Justice's pledges that no journalists
 would be taken into custody- unless tried and convicted, journalist Theoneste
 Muberantwali was jailed temporarily for publishing unsubstantiated allegtions
 about the President's origins and ethnic background. Earlier in February, under the
 press law, one journalist, Jean-Pierre Mugabe, was convicted of insulting the Presi-
 dent sentenced to 4 years in jail, and subsequently released pending his appeal. He
 fled Rwanda in late April after an issue of his biweekly was seized, reportedly over
 allegations linking the President to arms trafficking. At year's end, security charges
 were pending against Tutsi journalist, Andre Kameya, who alleged Rwanda was
 providing training for Burundi dissidents; Hutu journalist, Hassan Ngeze, for his ar-
 ticles insulting Burundi President Buyoya; and Muberantwali, all of whom were
 conditionally released from detention. Another journalist, also charged with insult-
 ing the President for publicly supporting Muberantwali's allegations, remained in
 detention. The government-owned and operated radio station the most important
 media outlet for reaching the public became the focus of a pofitical struggle within
 the Government after an opposition Minister was named to head the Ministry of In-
 formation in April and alter the Cabinet fired the head of the Office of Information
 (ORINFOR). A struggle for political control then became a key issue. At year's end,
 the Government was unable to agree on a replacement for the head of ORINFOR,
 and the President instructed the Prime Minister to develop a law to clarify the re-
 spective roles of the Ministry and ORINFOR.
 In academia, the countrs political, ethnic, and regional tensions have affected
 professorial appointments and are alleged to affect students' examination results.
 There is no apparent ideological pressure on teaching, research, or curriculum is.
 sues.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of peaceful assembly. Permits for outdoor rallies, demonstrations, and meet-
 ings require 6-day advance notice, but political party rallies are routinely held
 throughout the country, except in combat zones, without official interference or ob-
 struction. Protest demonstrations occurred peacefully on several occasions during
 the year; one held in early January drew an estimated 80,000 people. However, un-
 authorized demonstrations and clashes of opposing party youth following political
 rallies resulted in material damage, deaths, and numerous injuries (see Section
 La.).
 Since the introduction of multiple parties in 1991, people have been free to join
 the party of their choice. About 25 percent of the National Assembly deputies, elect-
 ed under the former one- party system, have declared themselves for other parties.
 Nevertheless, members of several parties have used intimidation and violence to en-
 courage party affiliation or dissuade defections. Youths suspected of affiliation with
 the former ruling party, the MRND, attacked a female minister and a female dep-
 uty, members of different opposition parties, in their homes.
 Political parties, now numbering 16, and special interest associations, which have
 proliferated since 1991, must register with the Department of the Interior and the
 Department of Justice, respectively. There were no instances of parties or associa-
 tions being denied registratf6n in 1992. A challenge to one party, accused of being
 ethnically based in contravention of the party law, failed upon review of its statutes.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Freedom of religion is provided for in the Constitution
 and is generally accorded to religious communities. However, the Government still
 does not recognize the Jehovah's Witnesses, which it considers a subversive associa-
 tion rather than a religious organization.
 Christianity predominates in Rwanda, with the largest segment of the population
 adhering to Catholicism. Muslims constitute a small minority but freely practice
 their religon throughout the country. Foreign clergy are able to practice their reli-
 gons an to organize missionary activities. There are no restrictions on construction
 of places of worship, training of clergy, religious publishing, or religious education.
 
 
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Freedom of movement and reidence within Rwanda is restricted by
 laws and regulations which require all residents to hold national identity cards and
 residence and work permits. Police conduct periodic checks, especially in urban
 areas, and return all those not registered in the locality to their own commune.
 Property owners who do not require tenants to show valid documentation are sub-
 ject to fires and even imprisonment. Undocumented tenants are subject to expul-
 sion.
 Measures introduced following the October 1990 invasion, which further restricted
 freedom of movement within the country for Rwandans and foreigners alike, were
 relaxed by the post-April multiparty Government. A laissez-passer is no longer re-
 quired to move between communes. Military checkpoints still exist on main roads
 and outside most towns, however and a nighttime curfew, albeit reduced, remains
 in effect throughout the ountry. a    sor foreign travel are normally obtained
 by Rwandans who seek them, and emigrtion is not restricted.
 An estimated 500,000 Rwandan refugees live in neighboring countries, of which
 200,000 receive assistance from the United Nations High Commissioner for Refu-
 gees (UNHCR). Most are ethnic Tutsi who fled Rwanda during the revolution of
 1959, which overthrew the Tutsi monarchy, and during subsequent ethnic violence
 associated with independence in 1962. Although repatriation has alway been per-
 mitted on a case-by-case basis, the Government cited lack of land and heavy popu-
 lation density as reasons precluding large-scale return. After the October 1990 OF
 invasion, President Habyarimana publicly recognized the refugees' right of return,
 one of the principal demands of the invaders. In December 1991, the legislature
 passed a law granting amnesty to refugees for crimes they may have committed
 prior to the law entering into effect. While none returned in 1992, repatriation and
 reintegration of those refugees desiring to return was expected to be a prominent
 feature of the peace settlement. In December the Government launched a campaign
 to sensitize Rwandans to the potential return of refugees.
 Rwanda hosts approximately 24,000 refugees, mainly Hutu, from Burundi. Ap-
 proximately 22,000 of these arrived in 1972, fleeing massacres in Burundi. Most re-
 tain Burundi citizenship and refugee status but have been integrated into Rwandan
 society. However, some sought voluntary repatriation in 1992 and those who lived
 in refugee settlements in northern Rwanda became displaced persons in 1992 be-
 cause of the war. Most of the refugees who entered Rwanda following 1988 ethnic
 disturbances in Burundi were denied permanent asylum and have repatriated, with
 the exception of about 700 who live in    n    central Rwanda and about 150
 granted permission to attend secondary school and remain in Rwanda. Most of the
 10,000 Burndi who fled to Rwanda in late 1991 and early 1992 have repatriated
 voluntarily, either spontaneously or under UNHCR auspices; those remaining, about
 1,000, live in a camp in northeastern Rwanda.
 Section 3. Respect for Politicol Rights: The Right ofr Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens did not have this right in 1992 as multiparty elections, provided for
 under the 1991 Constitution, did not take place, due in part to the transition proc-
 ess and to the negotiations with the RPF which were continuing at year's end. The
 President and the MRND continued to exercise paramount power in 1992 and con-
 troiled the pace of political reform. In April the country entered a transition phase
 with the appointment of the multiparty Government, headed by Prime Minister
 Dismas Nsengiyaremye, a member of a former opposition party.
 The transition Government draws its authority from a protocol agreement among
 the five parties comprising the Government and from a prowam aproved by the
 President. Under the protocol, the Constitution remains in e  an the President
 and the MRND-contrlled legslature, both elected in 1988 under the one-party sys-
 tem, remain in office untl elections end the transition period. The protocog abor
 elections to be held before April 1993. The 1991 Constitution calls or 5-year terms
 for the President and legislators, universal adult suffrage, and a secret baot.
 Within the framework of negotiating peace, the transition Government and the
 rebel RPF concluded a cease-fire in July and agreed in August on the principles for
 establishing the rule of law in Rwanda. Negotiations began on power-sharing ar-
 rangements in September but stalled at yers end over the distribution of cabinet
 portfolios and the composition of an interim legislature. The outcome of the talks
 may significantly alter the shape of Rwanda's transition period and could delay elec-
 tions beyond next April. The RF and opposition parties are waryof holding elec-
 tions before local civil servants and officials loyal to the MRND and President
 Habvarimsna have been replaced.
 
 
 212
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Rwanda has five human rights organizations, all formed since 1990 that inves-
 tigate allegations of human rights abuses, make representations to public officials,
 ublish press releases and reports of investigations, and generally seek redress on
 half of victims. These organizations have been instrumental in alerting officials
 to abuses of authority and in prompting early interventions to redress or contain
 situations, such as ethnic violence (see Section l.a.). Their effective collaboration
 with authorities increased after the multiparty Government took office in April. In-
 dividual human rights monitors, however, reported incidents throughout the year of
 intimidation and harassment from unidentified sources, including attacks on their
 families and anonymous death threats. Government authorities arrested on vague
 security charges a Bagogwe Tutsi, a human rights activist, and seized his docu-
 mentation from witnesses conoerning the Bagogwe massacre. Subsequently, his pa-
 pers were returned, and the invest'gtion dropped.
 Rwanda cooperates with outise governmental and nongovernmental human
 rights groups, including the ICRC, which has had continuing access to Rwandan
 prisons and gendarmeries during 1992, and Africa Watch, which published in Feb-
 ruary a report of its November 1991 visit to Rwanda. Representatives of human
 rights groups from Belgium, France, Canada, and the Netherlands visited Rwanda
 during 1992. Rwandan human rights monitors are in frequent contact with inter-
 national human rights groups about human rights violations.
 In May the Government decided to invite an independent international commis-
 sion to investigate human rights abuses since the war began in October 1990. In
 August the Arusha protocol on the rule of law mandated creation of such a commis-
 sion. With the active support of the Minister of Justice, the work was scheduled to
 begin in January 1993. Although the Arusha protocol also called for creation of a
 national human rights commission with investigative authority, none has yet been
 established.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution provides that all citizens are equal before the law, without any
 discrimination because of race, color, origin, ethnicity, clan, sex, opinion, religion, or
 social standing. Rwanda's political parties' law bans parties based on ethnic origin
 or religious affiliation. Ethnicity, however, is a sensitive issue as a result of
 Rwanda's ethnic imbalance and its historical legacy. About 85 percent of the popu-
 lation is Hut, 14 percent Tuti, and 1 percent Twa. Citizens carry identity docu-
 ments that clearly identify reference to ethnic origin despite a government decision
 in 1990 to end this practice.
 An ethnic quota system, which allocates positions to ethnic group members in pro-
 portion to their numbers, has in practice limited access of Tutai to education, train-
 ing, and government employment. (No provision is made for the Twa.) Tutis are,
 however, well represented in private business and the clernd. The transition Gov-
 ernment introduced new procedures for primary school examination that reduced
 the impact of the quota sstem on aWcess to secondary school.
 Less than 1 percent of the Rwandan population comes from the Twa, or Batwa
 ethnic group. They are indigenous people, the survivors of the Pygmy tribes of the
 mountainous areas bordering Zaire. They continue to be treated as secnd-class citi-
 zens by both Huts and Tutsis and to exist on the margin of society. There are no
 legal restraints to their participation in the political process. Nevertheless, few are
 able to take advantame of the educational system and are, therefore, unable to re-
 ceive sought-after postions or influence in the Government, resulting in their inabil-
 ity to protect their interests.
 Despite constitutional provisions, women continue to face serious d facto dis-
 crimination, deriving both from Rwandan culture and from Rwandan law and play
 only a minor role in the political and economic life in the modern sector of the coun-
 try. Traditionally, women perform most of the subsistence agriculture and have lim-
 ited opportunities for education, employment, and promotion. According to a 1991
 U.N. study, females receive only 33 percent of the schooling of males. In support
 of women's right, President Habyarimana encouraged famiy planning, appointed
 women to positions of responsibility in the Government, and in March signed into
 law a new family code passed by the legislature in 1988 which generally improves
 the legal position of women in marriaqe, divorce, and child custody. However, the
 law is stll inconsistent with Rwanda a international and constitutional commit-
 ments to gender equality: it makes the man head of the household, places extra
 legal burdens on women who survive their spouses, and limits rights to property
 and inheritance.
 
 
 213
 Violence against women, including wife beating, occurs, but the extent of the prob-
 lem is unknown. Cases involving domestic violence rarely come before the courts.
 Instead, wife beating and domestic violence are normally handled within the context
 of the extended family. However a woman who complains of being beaten is re-
 garded as not having been a dutiil wife. A woman seeking family help is generally
 regarded as asking for advice about how to improve her conduct. Only if family
 counseling fails is the matter likely to be taken to outside resources, and divorce
 is usually the next step.
 With the opening to democracy and a multiple party system, the number of
 groups aimed at promoting women's interests in development, business, the legal
 profession, and the legislature have proliferated. None directly addresses issues
 such as violence ainst women. A National Women's Association, URAMA, failed
 in Februaryi its bid for independence from the former ruling party which founded
 it in 1989. URAMA has documented upward of 3,000 women's group. in rural areas.
 A women's political party, the Movement of Women and Working Class People, has
 attracted lit-te support since it was formed in mid-1992.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The economy consists predominately of small-scale
 subsistence farming. There is very little industry and hence few workers in the
 wage economy, which accounts for perhaps 7 percent of the work force in both pri-
 vate and public sectors. The amen    Constitution explicitly provides citizens the
 right of association and freedom to create professional associations and labor unions.
 However, labor organizations have only recently begun to develop. Union member-
 ship (open to all salaried workers) is optional.
 The Central Union of Rwandan workers (CESTRAR), Rwanda's largest and pre-
 viously sole authorized trade union organization, separated from the Government
 and the MRND in 1991 as part of political reforms under the new Constitution.
 The Government recognized four new independent unions in 1991 and 1992: the
 Union Association of Health Personnel in Rwanda (ASPESAR); the Interprofessional
 Union of Workers of Rwanda (SITR); the Union of Secondary School Teachers; and
 UMURIMO, the Association of Christian Unions (representing public and private
 sector workers, small businessmen and subsistence farmers). These new unions
 compete directly with CESTRAR for members.
 Union members have the right to strike with the approval of their executive com-
 mittee, provided that workers first go through a set of steps prescribed by the Min-
 itry of Labor and Social Affairs to try to resolve their differences with management.
 Six strikes against public and private sector firms were reported between November
 1991 and March 1992; none was directly organized by either CESTRAR or the other
 unions, and the strikin  workers did not adere to required procedures. Private sec-
 tr workers' demands focused on wage and benefits issues, while in the public sec-
 tor workers attempted to obtain the removal of directors and supervisors perceived
 as being unfair or arbitrary. Although the strikes were wildcat in nature, the Gov-
 ernment treated them as legitimate and acted as a facilitator in the workers' nego-
 tiations with their management, in most cases with CESTRAR playing a supporting
 role.
 CESTRAR is affiliated with the Organization of African Trade Union Unity and
 The Organization of Central African orers and was admitted to membership in
 the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions in December.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectiuely.-The Constitution grants
 workers the right to defend their rights through collective action. The Labor Code
 rants workers the right to engag in collective bargaining with employers within
 the framework of the CESTRAR. There are no legal bars to antiunion discrimina-
 tion, but such discrimination has not occurred in practice. Approximately 75 percent
 of the small industrial work force is unionized, but few of these workers are overed
 by genuine collective bargaining agreements. t"he Government is the chief employer
 andis the mainforce in setting wages.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced and Compulsoy Labor.-Foreed labor is prohibited by law
 and is not known to occur in practice.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Except in the subsistence agri-
 culture sector, which involves most Rwandans, children under 18 are not permitted
 to work without their parents' or guardian's authorization and they may work at
 night only under exceptional circumstances on a temporary basis. Labor laws set the
 minimum age for full employment at 18 years and for apprenticeships at 14 years,
 providing the child has completed primary school. The Minister of Labor, who is re-
 sponsible for enforcement, has the right to permit a child under the age of 14 to
 work, but this has prbably never been tested in practice. Enforcement ochild labor
 
 
 laws is lax, but, apart from children working in family-owned businesses whose par-
 ents have never bothered to seek official approval, child labor outside the agncul-
 tural sector is uncommon.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Minimum wage rates in the small modern eco-
 nomic section are set administratively by the Ministry of Labor. The minimum wage
 is inadequate to provide a decent standard of living for urban families and is often
 supplemented by work in small business or subsistence agriculture. Government of-
 fices and most private sector companies have a 45-hour workweek, as fixed by min-
 isterial decree. Hours of work and occupational health and safety in the modern
 wage sector are controlled by law but only loosely enforced by labor inspectors from
 the Ministry of Labor.
