 RWANDA
 Major General Juvenal Habyarimana has headed the Government
 since his accession to power in a nonviolent coup in 1973.
 The President is also the founder of the single party, the
 National Revolutionary Movement for Development (MRND).
 Government policy is set by the President in consultation with
 the party's central committee and the Council of Ministers.
 Laws are adopted by the National Development Council (the
 legislature), which was established in 1982. In December
 1983, President Habyarimana, the sole candidate, was reelected
 along with a new slate of deputies. Although the legislative
 candidates had to be approved by the party, the race was open
 to almost all who chose to run.
 The major organizations responsible for administration of
 justice include the Ministry of Justice, which controls the
 courts, the judicial police, and the prison system; and the
 gendarmerie, a paramilitary force which receives specialized
 police training. In addition, the Central Intelligence
 Service in the Office of the President can make certain
 decisions which may not be appealed, such as denial of
 passports to Rwandan citizens or the extension of visas and
 residence permits to foreigners.
 Most Rwandans are poor rural farmers. There is little
 industry, and imports are expensive because of high
 transportation costs. Nevertheless, food production has
 managed to keep pace with the high population growth rate.
 The Constitution guarantees fundamental human rights, and the
 Government, including the President, emphasizes respect for
 the rule of law. Although the human rights situation in
 Rwanda has generally improved in recent years, one development
 of major concern in 1986 was the trial of 295 members of minor
 religious sects, accused of inciting disobedience to legal
 authority. All, including 11 minors, were sentenced to terms
 of 4 to 12 years.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no reports of politically motivated killings or
 summary executions.
 b. Disappearance
 Unexplained disappearances have not occurred in recent years.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 There were no reports of torture in 1986. In the past,
 Amnesty International has noted allegations of torture made in
 court by political prisoners, involving forced confessions and
 electrical shocks, but has also noted the Minister of
 Justice's efforts to punish security and police officials
 found to have ill-treated prisoners.
 Conditions in the overcrowded prisons are generally poor.
 Guard training is inadequate. Although Amnesty International
 has not released its report on its May 3-10, 1986, visit to
 
 
 237
 RWANDA
 Rwanda, the delegation leader indicated on a local radio
 interview before departure that the team had been impressed
 with the progress toward improving prison conditions. The
 Government attempts to cope with overcrowding in part by
 periodic amnesties of persons who have served half their terms
 or have fewer than 5 years to serve. The most recent amnesty
 was announced in September 1986.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Except for suspects caught in the act of committing crimes,
 arrests are normally made with a warrant following
 investigation. In most cases, charges must be formally stated
 in the defendant's presence within 5 days of arrest. Failure
 to meet that requirement is grounds for dismissal of the
 charges. Under preventive detention provisions, persons may
 be held for 30 days, if public safety is believed to be
 threatened, if the accused might flee, or if the penalty
 carries a minimum sentence of 6 months. At the end of that
 period, a judicial review is mandatory. If warranted, the
 detention can be prolonged indefinitely for 30-day periods.
 These provisions were rarely invoked during 1986. Detainees
 may appeal their incarceration, and the appeal must be heard
 within 24 hours by a competent judicial authority. There were
 no known exceptions to the legally mandated warrant procedures
 and no detentions for political offenses in 1986. The Ministry
 of Justice schedules official visits to prisons to ascertain
 that the proper documentation exists for each detainee.
 Rwandan law prohibits forced labor. Sentencing to exile does
 not exist.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The judiciary is statutorily independent and expected to apply
 the penal code impartially, but the President appoints and
 dismisses magistrates. New laws in January 1982 strengthened
 the independence of the judiciary somewhat by improving the
 process of selecting judicial personnel and more closely
 defining their functions. The administration of justice has
 been hampered by poor management and a generally low level of
 education among civil servants. The Ministry of Justice is
 conducting training programs for officials and judges and
 plans to establish a magistrate training center.
 All defendants are constitutionally entitled to counsel, but a
 shortage of lawyers and the lack of a constituted bar makes it
 difficult for the accused to prepare an adequate defense.
 Family and other nonprofessional counsel is permitted. Trials
 which arouse extensive public interest are often broadcast to
 the street to permit persons who cannot be seated in the
 courtroom to follow the proceedings.
 Rwanda has three separate court systems for criminal/civil,
 military, and state security cases. All but security cases
 may ultimately be appealed to the Court of Appeals. The State
 Security Court has jurisdiction over national security charges
 such as treason. Some cases tried before this court have
 resulted in innocent verdicts.
 The Minister of Justice stated in September 1986 that Rwanda
 was holding 10 prisoners convicted of crimes against domestic
 security. Presumably this figure includes Theoneste Lizinde,
 the former Chief of State Security, who along with four
 codefendants was sentenced to death in 1985. The appeals
 
 
 238
 RWANDA
 process in their cases is still in progress, and it is
 uncertain whether the death sentences will actually be carried
 out. Amnesty International in its 1986 Report noted its
 concern that Lizinde and other former government officials
 were tried in secret, apparently without counsel, and that the
 trials did not meet accepted international standards.
 In October 1986, 295 members of religious sects not recognized
 by the State were convicted of inciting rebellion against
 local authority, disobedience of legitimate laws, and unlawful
 public meeting. The accused were sentenced to prison terms
 ranging from 4 to 12 years. Although the trial was reportedly
 conducted in accordance with local rules of due process., the
 sentences were unnecessarily harsh for crimes basically
 equivalent to civil disobedience. If they are in fact
 required to serve more than token prison sentences, members of
 this group could be considered political prisoners. During
 1986, Amnesty International expressed concern about the
 sentencing of the religious nonconformists.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Rwandans are subject to some interference in their private
 lives. Police are normally required to have warrants before
 entering a private residence but, using the pretext of
 checking required documentation, authorities can gain entry
 into homes without warrants.
 There is no evidence that the Government monitors private
 correspondence, and the receipt of foreign publications is
 permitted. Rwandans have the right to own property.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The law guarantees freedom of speech and press, but public
 criticism of the Government, and especially the military, is
 rare. This is probably due as much to the tradition of
 respecting authority and social pressure to conform as to fear
 of government sanction. Candidates in the 1983 legislative
 elections were restricted to expressing opinions and
 advocating policies sanctioned by party doctrine. However,
 some members of the National Development Council have
 criticized government policies from the floor of the Council.
 The Government produces radio broadcasts, a daily press
 bulletin, and a weekly newspaper. Two Catholic church
 publications sometimes print muted criticism of political and
 economic conditions. Such criticism is tolerated and
 occasionally even encouraged by the Government. There is no
 record of any journalist having been arrested for what he has
 written. The Government has cautioned the press, however, to
 avoid what it regards as "harmful" criticism of leaders and
 maintains that the press should devote its efforts to
 "promoting development." Books and imported publications are
 not censored, and academic freedom of inquiry and research is
 respected at the university.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly is limited. No public meetings or
 demonstrations are permitted if there is any chance they will
 result in expressions of overt opposition to government
 
 
 239
 RWANDA
 policies. The Government permits private associations,
 including a wide variety of religious denominations, but
 requires that they be registered and accorded legal
 recognition.
 The Rwandan labor code grants workers the right to organize
 "professional organizations." If such organizations establish
 a collective bargaining agreement with the employer, they may
 negotiate salaries and terms of employment. No unions
 currently exist, but the Government is in the process of
 forming a labor union, the Central Union of Rwandan Workers
 (CESTRAR), which is expected to begin functioning in early
 1987. Membership is open to all salaried workers. The union
 will be affiliated with the party, which will approve the
 slate of candidates for offices. Members will have the
 theoretical right to strike, but only with the approval of the
 executive bureau. In organizational meetings, the provisional
 directors of CESTRAR indicated that its objectives will
 include ensuring that labor contributes to the development of
 the nation and transcends the parochial interests of
 individual workers and trades. The Government has permitted
 seminars on labor issues organized by unofficial local trade
 organizations which receive some support from foreign labor
 confederations and the International Labor Organization.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is guaranteed by the Constitution and is
 generally respected. The population is 70 percent Christian
 and 1 percent Muslim, with the remainder following traditional
 African or no religious practices. Eighty percent of the
 Christians are Roman Catholic, but there are active Protestant
 denominations. The Roman Catholic Archbishop of Kigali, who
 had been a member of the MRND central committee, resigned from
 the committee in January 1986, apparently to bring his status
 into accord with Vatican doctrine. The Government depends
 upon church-sponsored schools for a considerable portion of
 education in Rwanda (over 85 percent of secondary schools are
 church sponsored).
 The Government does not openly favor one religion over another,
 but in 1986 prosecuted 295 members of minor religious sects--
 the Abarokore, Abatampera, Abantu B'imana Bihana, and Jehovah's
 Witnesses--for inciting disobedience to legal authority. The
 offenses included refusal to participate in political party
 activities and to pay party dues, holding unauthorized
 religious meetings and, in some cases, failure to participate
 in required community service work. The accused were
 prosecuted under specific provisions of the penal code, and
 the Government argues that they are not being persecuted for
 their religious beliefs. The accused reportedly maintain that
 allegiance to political entities is against their religion.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Freedom of movement and residence within Rwanda is restricted
 by laws and regulations which require people to hold national
 identity cards and residence and work permits. People who
 wish to spend more than 3 days in a township other than their
 own must obtain permission from the authorities of the area
 they will be visiting. Police conduct periodic checks,
 especially in urban areas, and return all those not registered
 in the locality to their own township. Property owners who do
 not require tenants to show valid documentation are subject to
 
 
 240
 RWANDA
 fines and even imprisonment. "Clandestine" tenants are
 subject to expulsion.
 Foreign travel is closely controlled through the granting or
 refusal of passports, preceded by a security check of each
 applicant by the Central Intelligence Service. Rwandans often
 are denied permission to travel abroad, usually without formal
 explanation. Properly documented Rwandans may emigrate.
 Official policy permits people who left Rwanda as refugees
 during the revolution or for other reasons to be repatriated
 on a case-by-case basis, but the Government discourages any
 mass return on the grounds that the overpopulated land and
 underdeveloped economy could not sustain the burden. However,
 the Government has recognized the citizenship claims of some
 of the persons forced into the country from Uganda in October
 1982. Throughout 1986 it continued resettling 2,500 of those
 recognized as Rwandans.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Rwandans have no opportunity to change their government
 through a free choice of alternative candidates from opposing
 parties. The party, the sole body permitted political
 activity, makes all policy decisions and nominations of
 candidates for public office. It in turn is dominated by its
 president, who chooses the secretary-general and central
 committee, and is the only constitutionally recognized
 candidate for president. Every citizen is automatically a
 party member and required to pay party dues on a sliding scale
 representing 1 or 2 days' pay per year. Delegates are both
 elected and appointed to the party's governing national
 congress, which meets every 2 years (most recently in December
 1985). The essential function of the congress is to endorse
 the programs presented by the party leadership.
 Only candidates approved by the party may run for the
 legislature, the National Development Council. The President
 can also veto candidates for the Council. Within the
 one-party system, the voters can and do exercise some
 influence on the process, as demonstrated by the fact that
 many incumbents have been defeated in recent elections.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Rwanda has made a concerted effort in recent years to
 participate in human rights activities and to improve its
 human rights record. Representatives of the International
 Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) have made periodic visits to
 prisons. There were no reports of requests for outside
 investigations of alleged human rights violations in 1986. A
 delegation from Amnesty International visited Rwanda May 3-10,
 1986, and received extensive cooperation from the Government.
 The delegation visited a number of prisons, interviewed
 prisoners, including political prisoners, and met with the
 President, the Minister of Justice, and many other officials.
 Rwanda is a signatory to the International Covenants on
 Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and on Civil and
 Political Rights and the Organization of African Unity's
 African Charter of Human and Peoples' Rights. Rwanda is also
 a member of the U.N. Human Rights Commission.
 
 
 241
 RWANDA
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Rwanda's preindependence, traditional, feudal society, which
 was dominated by the Tutsi ethnic group (10 percent of the
 population, according to the 1978 census), was transformed in
 1959 by a revolution of the majority Hutu (89 percent of the
 population) into a society with a greater emphasis on
 individual rights. An ethnic majority government confirmed
 these internal changes at independence in 1962. During the
 next decade, Hutu efforts to redress the social, economic, and
 educational imbalance led to division and corruption among the
 Hutus and to sporadic ethnic strife. This gave rise to the
 coup d'etat which brought President Habyarimana to power.
 The Constitution states, "all citizens are equal before the
 law, without any discrimination, notably that of race, color,
 origin, ethnicity, clan, sex, opinion, religion or social
 position." However, the requirement that ethnic origin be
 listed on identity documents helps to ensure that informal
 quotas corresponding to the Hutu/Tutsi ratio in society are
 not exceeded. The Tutsi minority has in fact been relegated
 to a minor role in government, civil service, and the military
 but is better represented in private business.
 Following the Government's steps to restrict the activities of
 some religious groups, there have been indications of
 discrimination based on religious affiliation. For example,
 one high ranking government official was reportedly threatened
 with arrest because of his membership in the Jehovah's
 Witnesses sect, and three Jehovah's Witnesses were fired from
 the Ministry of Transport and Communication for their
 religious beliefs.
 Women perform most of the agricultural labor and have
 benefited less than men from social development. Despite the
 language in the Constitution, women's rights to property are
 limited, and women are not treated equally in divorce
 proceedings. Moreover, women have fewer chances for
 education, employment, and promotion, often because society
 expects them to remain in uneducated traditional roles at
 home. Family planning services are still inadequate but are
 improving. There are virtually no day-care services for
 children of mothers who wish to work. There are few
 organizations promoting women's interests, and efforts to
 establish a national women's organization within the party
 have been unsuccessful to date. Women play a marginal role in
 political life. Nevertheless, there are now 3 women in the
 party's 21-member central committee, and 9 women among the 70
 legislative deputies. There are also a number of women on
 councils at the local level.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 In the wage sector, children under 18 are not permitted to
 work without their parents' or guardian's authorization, and
 they may not work at night except under exceptional
 circumstances on a temporary basis. The Minister responsible
 for labor affairs may grant work permission to a child under
 14. This Minister also sets the minimum wage and overtime
 rates. Hours of work and occupational health and safety in
 the modern wage sector are controlled by law and enforced by
 labor inspectors.
 
 
 242
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COJNTRY: RWANDA
 1984     1935     1986
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        12.8     24.7      7.0
 LOANS ..............     ..  0.0     0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............       12.8     24.7      7.0
 A.AID  ........ .............  8.3     18.8      6.9
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .......... ....      8.3     18.8      6.9
 (SEC.SUPPASSIST.),,,         0.0     12.0     0.0
 B.FOOD  FOR  PEACE .......      4.4      5.8      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     4.4      5.8      0.0
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ..........       0.0     00       0.0
 REPAY.  IN  S-LOANS .....      0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY.  IN  FOR.  CURR .....     0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  IT-TOTAL .........       4.4      5.8      0.0
 F.RELIEF.EC.DEV  &  WFP.       0.4      1.6      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF  AGENCY .....       4.0      4.2      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST..,         0.1      0.1      0.1
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.1      0.1      0.1
 PEACE CORPS               0.1      0.1     0.1
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ..............      0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.t L.  ASSIST.-TOTAL..,       0.D      0.1      0.1
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     0.0      0.1      0.1
 A.MAP GRANTS                   0.0      0.0     0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING...*        0.0      0.0     0.0
 C.INTL  MIL.ED.TRNG....        0.0      0.1      0.1
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK,..         0.0      0.0      0.0
 -.OTHER  GRANTS ........       00.0             0.0
 III.TOTAL  ECON.  &  MIL..      12.8     24.8      7.1
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................   12.8     24.8      7.1
 OTHER  US  LOANS. .........      0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM  BANK  LOANS .......      0.0      0.0     0.0
 ALL  OTHER ..............       0.0      0.0     0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1984     1985     1986     1946-86
 TOTAL ........    40.8     22.3     59.1    515.0
 IBRO               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IFC                0.3      0.0      0.0      1.1
 ID                9.0     16.3     59.1    293.8
 103                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AOB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFOB              30.3      4.9     .0.0    113.7
 UNOP               1.2      1.1      0.0     35.9
 OTiER-UN           3.0      0.y     0.0     10.3
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0     60.2
 
 
 243
