 RWANDA
 Rwanda's present Government, under Major General Juvenal
 Habyarimana, came to power in a nonviolent coup in 1973. The
 President is also the founder of the single party, the
 National Revolutionary Movement for Development. Government
 policy is set by the President in consultation with the
 party's central committee and the Council of Ministers. Laws
 are adopted by the National Development Council (the
 legislature), which was established in 1982. In December
 1983, President Habyarimana, the sole candidate, was reelected
 along with a new slate of deputies. Although the legislative
 candidates had to be approved by the party, the race was open
 to almost all who chose to run.
 The major organizations responsible for administration of
 justice in Rwanda include the Ministry of Justice--law courts,
 judicial police, and the prison system--and the gendarmerie,
 the police force which is recruited in parallel with the army
 but receives specialized police training. In addition, the
 Office of the President includes the Central Intelligence
 Service which can make certain decisions which may not be
 appealed, such as'denial of passports to Rwandan citizens for
 travel abroad or the extension of visas and residence permits
 to foreigners.
 Most Rwandans are poor rural farmers. There is little
 industry, and imports are expensive because of high
 transportation costs. Nevertheless, Rwandan economic
 development has managed to keep pace with the country's high
 population growth rate.
 The human rights situation in Rwanda continued gradually to
 improve in 1985. The President again stressed the nation's
 commitment to human rights, including in his speech on
 Rwanda's national day in July 1985. The Government also
 concentrated on a series of training seminars for persons
 involved in the administration of justice, continued to
 release prisoners who had served at least half of their
 sentences, and made efforts to improve the treatment of
 prisoners. In 1985, 36 prisoners convicted of political
 crimes were conditionally released.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section I Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no reports of politically motivated killings or
 summary executions in Rwanda in 1985.
 b. Disappearance
 Unexplained disappearances have not occurred in recent years.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 According to Amnesty International's 1985 Report (covering
 1984), there have been allegations of torture made in court by
 political prisoners, involving forced confessions and
 electrical shocks. However, Amnesty International also noted
 
 
 .251
 RWANDA
 the Minister of Justice's efforts to punish security and
 police forces found to have ill-treated prisoners.
 Corporal punishment is not permitted, but neglect,
 overcrowding, and inadequate guard training have rendered
 prison conditions generally poor. The Government attempts to
 cope with overcrowding in part by periodic amnesties of
 persons who have served half their terms or have fewer than 5
 years to serve. The most recent such amnesty was announced in
 July 1985. A new prison with improved facilities opened near
 Kigali, and more facilities are planned for the future.  The
 Minister of Justice has made the improvement of the prison
 system his first priority. A seminar held for directors of
 prisons in March 1985 emphasized the right of prisoners to be
 treated humanely and with dignity. All categories of
 prisoners may now have monthly visits by their families.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Except for suspects caught committing crimes, arrests normally
 occur with a warrant following investigation. Except in rare
 cases where the defendant is not available, charges must be
 formally stated in the defendant's presence within 5 days of
 arrest. Failure to meet that requirement is grounds for
 dismissal of the charges. Under preventive detention
 provisions, however, persons may be held for 30 days. At the
 end of that period, a judicial review is mandatory. If
 warranted, the detention can be prolonged indefinitely for
 30-day periods. These provisions have not been invoked during
 the past year. Detainees may appeal their incarceration, and
 the appeal must be heard within 24 hours by a competent
 judicial authority. There were no known exceptions to the
 legally mandated warrant procedures and no detentions for
 political offenses in 1985. The Justice Ministry has
 initiated a program of official visits to prisons to ascertain
 that the proper documentation exists for each detainee.
 Rwandan law prohibits forced labor.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Although all defendants are constitutionally entitled to
 representation, a shortage of lawyers makes it difficult for
 the accused to prepare an adequate defense. Family and other
 nonprofessional counsel is permitted. Trials which arouse
 extensive public interest are often broadcast to the street,
 so that persons who cannot be seated in the courtroom may
 still follow the proceedings.
 The judiciary is statutorily independent and expected to apply
 the penal code impartially, but the President names and
 dismisses magistrates. New laws in January 1982 strengthened
 the independence of the judiciary somewhat by improving the
 nomination process and more closely defining the functions of
 judicial personnel. Rwanda has three separate court systems
 for criminal/civil, military, and state security cases. All
 but security cases may ultimately be appealed to the court of
 appeals. The state security court has jurisdiction over
 national security charges such as treason. Some cases tried
 before this court have resulted in innocent verdicts.
 In 1985, 36 persons convicted of political crimes were granted
 conditional release from prison. Thirty-three of them had
 been held since 1960 for activities committed during the
 
 
 252
 RWANDA
 revolution. The others had been convicted in 1983 of having
 distributed seditious documents and were adopted by Amnesty
 International as prisoners of conscience.
 Theoneste Lizinde, former Chief of State Security, who is
 already serving a life sentence for a 1981 conviction of
 plotting to overthrow the Government, was tried for a second
 time in May 1985. In the 1985 trial, Lizinde and 11 others
 were tried on charges of murder, torture, and other crimes
 against human rights for activities committed in the aftermath
 of Habyarimana's 1973 coup. The defendants were accused of
 torturing and killing 55 prisoners, including many former
 cabinet ministers. Ten of the defendants, including Lizinde
 and the former Ruhengeri Prison Director, were convicted. The
 other defendant was acquitted. Lizinde and four codefendants
 were sentenced to death, while the others received varying
 prison sentences. The appeals process has yet to run its
 course, so it is uncertain whether the death sentences will
 actually by carried out. Those convicted, along with the
 Rwandan State, are also being held responsible for
 indemnifying the victim's families.
 In August 1985, four persons were tried for political crimes
 committed between 1960 and 1981. One of the defendants was
 acquitted; two others received sentences of 2 and 7 years
 respectively, and the fourth, Aloys Ngurumbe, was sentenced to
 life imprisonment for fomenting an armed rebellion against the
 Government.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Rwandans are subject to some interference in their private
 lives, following practices inherited from the former monarchy
 which ruled the country for several hundred years. Police are
 normally required to have warrants before entering a private
 residence, but, using the pretext of checking required
 documentation, authorities can gain unwarranted entry into
 homes. A person may move out of his home commune only with
 the permission of the mayor of the commune into which he
 wishes to move; the Government can bar a person from specific
 employment, but not all employment; and all citizens must
 carry identification cards. On the other hand, there is no
 evidence that the Government monitors private correspondence,
 and the receipt of foreign publications is permitted.
 Rwandans have the right to own property.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The law guarantees freedom of speech and press, but public
 criticism of the Government is conspicuously lacking. This is
 probably due as much to the tradition of respecting authority
 as to fear of sanctions. Candidates in the 1983 legislative
 elections were restricted to expressing opinions and
 advocating policies sanctioned by party doctrine. However,
 some members of the National Development Council have
 criticized government policies from the floor of the Council.
 The Government produces radio broadcasts, a daily press
 bulletin, and a weekly newspaper. Two Catholic church
 publications sometimes print muted criticism of political and
 economic conditions. Such criticism is tolerated and
 
 
 253
 RWANDA
 occasionally even encouraged-by the'Government. There is no
 record of any journalist having been arrested for what he has
 written. The Government-hascautioned the press, however, to
 avoid what it regards as "harmful" criticism of leaders and
 maintains that the press should devote its efforts to
 "promoting development." Books and.imported publications are
 not censored, and academic freedom of inquiry and.research is
 respected at universities.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful-Assembly and. Association
 Freedom of assembly.is.limited. There have been no public
 .meetings or demonstrations.to express overt opposition to
 government policies. The.Government permits private
 associations but requires that they be registered and accorded
 legal recognition.
 The Rwandan Labor Code.grants workers the right to organize
 "professional organizations.". If such organizations establish
 a collective bargaining agreement with the employer,.they may
 negotiate salaries and terms of employment. No unions
 currently exist in Rwanda, but the Government is in the
 process of forming a labor confederation. This confederation
 is expected to begin functioning in early 1987. It is
 organized under the guidance of the party, which must approve
 its choice of officers, and hence will be limited in its
 independence. All member unions~will have the right to
 strike, but only with-the approval of the confederation
 executive.:bureau. In meetings prefatory to the
 confederation's. creation, the responsibility of labor to
 contribute to-the development of the nation and to transcend
 the parochial interests of individual workers and-trades were
 recurrent themes. The Government has permitted seminars on
 labor issues, organized by unofficial local labor bodies,
 which receive some support from foreign labor confederations
 and the International Labor Organization.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is guaranteed by the Constitution and
 respected in practice. The population is 70 percent Christian
 and 1 percent Muslim, with the remainder following traditional
 African or no religious practices. Eighty percent of the
 Christians are Catholic,-but there are active Protestant
 denominations. The Government does not openly favor one
 religion over another, although the Catholic Archbishop of
 Kigali is a member of the party's central committee, and all
 but one or two members of the National Development. Council are
 Catholic. The Government depends upon church-sponsored
 schools for a considerable portion of education in Rwanda
 (over 85 percent of secondary schools are church sponsored).
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Freedom of residence within Rwanda is restricted by laws and
 regulations which require people to hold national identity
 cards and residence and work permits. People who wish to
 spend more than 3 days in a commune other than their own must
 obtain-permission from the authorities of the communes they
 will be visiting. Property owners who do not require renters
 to show.valid documentation are subject to fines and even
 imprisonment. "Clandestine" renters are subject to expulsion.
 
 
 254
 RWANDA
 Foreign travel is closely controlled through the granting or
 refusal of passports, preceded by a security check of each
 applicant under the auspices of the Central Intelligence
 Service. Rwandans often are denied permission to travel
 abroad, usually without formal explanation. In addition, they
 must pay a refundable deposit of about $400 for each passport
 issued for unofficial travel. This is ostensibly to cover the
 cost of any subsequent repatriation, but it has the effects of
 discouraging travel and conserving foreign exchange.
 Rwandans may emigrate provided they are properly documented.
 Official policy states that people who left Rwanda as refugees
 during the revolution or for other reasons may be repatriated
 on a case-by-case basis. Refugees and displaced persons can
 and do return for short family visits on a laissez-passer from
 the country of refuge. Family members remaining in Rwanda may
 also obtain a laissez-passer for visits to neighboring
 countries, without having to go through all the formalities of
 a passport application. Rwanda's extremely high population
 density and shortage of land greatly restrict prospects for
 repatriation and resettlement of refugees and displaced
 persons. However, the Government has recognized the
 citizenship claims of some of the refugees and displaced
 persons forced into the country from Uganda in October 1982;
 and in late 1985, it began resettling some of those recognized
 as Rwandans.
 The 1985 coup in Uganda caused a major upheaval in the status
 of the 30,000 Ugandan refugees in Rwanda. Following the
 ouster of President Obote, the Ugandans felt it was safe to
 return to the land and houses they had abandoned in their
 homeland. The Ugandan Government had already accepted the
 citizenship claims of about 90 percent of these people, but
 before any orderly resettlement process could be negotiated
 with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
 other agencies, the refugees began moving back to Uganda. The
 Rwandan Government assisted this movement by providing extra
 rations for those willing to leave, buses to take them to the
 border, and similar strong incentives. During a period of
 confusion, many departed Rwanda. At the same time, services
 such as food distribution, woodcutting, and the like became
 disrupted among the refugees remaining behind. Ultimately,
 the Ugandan Government recognized the movement back across the
 borders, and the last Ugandan citizen among the refugees left
 in November 1985.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Rwandans have no opportunity to change their government
 through a free choice of alternative legislative proposals and
 candidates from opposing parties for public office. All
 policy decisions and nominations of candidates for public
 office are made by the party, which is the "sole body
 permitted political activity." The party in turn is dominated
 by its president, who chooses the Secretary-General and
 central committee and is the only constitutionally recognized
 candidate for President of the nation.
 Every citizen is automatically a member of the party and
 theoretically must pay party dues on a sliding scale
 representing 1 or 2 days pay per year. Delegates are elected
 and appointed to the governing National Congress, which meets
 
 
 255
 RWANDA
 every 2 years (most recently in December 1985). The essential
 function of the congress is to endorse the programs presented
 by the party leadership.
 Only candidates approved by the party may run for public
 office. The President can veto candidates for the legislative
 seats of the National Development Council. At the local
 level, representatives are expected to be responsive to the
 voters, as demonstrated by the fact that many incumbents were
 defeated in 1985 elections.
 Rwanda's preindependence traditional feudal society, dominated
 by the Tutsi ethnic group (10 percent of the population,
 according to the 1978 census), was transformed in 1959 by a
 revolution of the majority Hutu (89 percent of the population)
 into a society with a stronger emphasis on individual rights.
 An ethnic majority government confirmed these internal changes
 .at independence in 1962. During the next decade, Hutu efforts
 to redress the social, economic, and educational imbalance led
 to division and corruption among the Hutus and to sporadic
 ethnic strife. This gave rise to the coup d'etat which
 brought President Habyarimana to power.
 Women play a marginal role in political life. Nevertheless,
 there is 1 woman in the party's 21-member central committee, 9
 of 70 legislative deputies are women, and there are a good
 number of women council members at the local level.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Rwanda has made a concentrated effort in recent years to
 participate in human-rights activities and to improve its
 human rights record. Representatives of the International
 Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) have made periodic visits to
 prisons. In its 1985 Report, Amnesty International was
 concerned about the continued imprisonment of a number of
 prisoners of conscience but also noted that some had been
 released and that the Minister of Justice and Kigali's Roman
 Catholic Archbishop had investigated allegations of harsh
 prisons conditions. The results of this latter investigation
 have not been published. There were no reports of requests
 for outside investigations of alleged human rights violations
 in 1985. Freedom House rated Rwanda "not free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Rwanda is one of the world's poorest and most densely
 populated countries (6.3 million people and 3.8 percent annual
 population growth in 1985). Gross national product (GNP) per
 capita has more than doubled since 1970, but still totaled
 only $270 in 1983. Some 95 percent of Rwandans earn their
 living from subsistence farms averaging less than two acres.
 Urban residents are marginally more prosperous than rural
 farmers but suffer unemployment, with wages lagging behind
 moderate inflation. In the mid-1970s, 30 percent of urban
 dwellers and 90 percent of rural inhabitants were estimated to
 be living below the absolute poverty level.
 Rwanda's principal export crop is coffee, which accounts for
 about 70 percent of foreign exchange earnings and provides the
 bulk of government revenues. The country has little industry
 and must pay high transportation costs to move goods along a
 
 
 256
 RWANDA
 1,100-mile road and railroad link to the sea via Uganda and
 Kenya. The 1985 coup and fighting in Uganda effectively
 blocked this route, forcing Rwanda to transport its imports
 and exports via the less well-developed roads of Tanzania,
 thereby incurring even higher transportation costs. Real
 economic growth in recent years has stayed ahead of population
 growth, but prospects that it will continue to do so in the
 long term are dim. Rwanda's trade, investment and banking
 policies encourage private-sector economic activity. About 85
 percent of Rwanda's small businessmen are Rwandans, and the
 proportion is growing. The Rwandan Government has undertaken
 a series of reforms aimed at stimulating labor intensive
 industry as well as encouraging privatization and trade
 liberalization. Foreign investment is currently stagnant, due
 primarily to the inadequate transportation infrastructure.
 Development goals and projects address all regions and
 population groups equally. Life expectancy has increased from
 41 years in 1968 to about 47 years in 1985, while infant
 mortality has remained at a level of about 124 per 1,000 live
 births. In 1977, Rwandans received about 87 percent of their
 caloric nutritional requirements, and 54 percent of the
 population had access to safe water in 1980. Adult literacy
 was estimated at 50 percent in 1980, and primary school
 enrollment as a percentage of primary school age children in
 the population expanded from 49 percent in 1960 to 83 percent
 in 1982 (male 87 percent, female 81 percent).
 Children under 18 are not permitted to work without their
 guardian's authorization, and they may not work at night
 except under exceptional circumstances on a temporary basis.
 The Minister responsible for labor affairs may grant work
 permission to a child under 14. This Minister also sets the
 minimum wage and overtime rates. Hours of work and
 occupational health and safety are controlled by law and
 enforced by labor inspectors.
 Women perform most of the agricultural labor and have
 benefited less than men from social development. Despite the
 language in the Constitution, women's rights to property are
 limited, and women are not treated equally in divorce
 proceedings. Moreover, women have fewer chances for
 education, employment, and promotion, often because men prefer
 them to remain in uneducated traditional roles at home.
 Family planning services are still inadequate but are
 improving. There are virtually no day care services for
 children of mothers who wish to work. There are few
 organizations promoting women's interests, and efforts to
 establish a national union of Rwandan women within the
 political movement have been unsuccessful to date. However,
 in 1985, the Ministry of Public Health and Social Affairs held
 a 3-day seminar to examine the problems of women working in
 urban areas, possibly indicating increased attention to this
 subject by the Government.
 The Constitution states, "all citizens are equal before the
 law, without any discrimination, notably that of race, color,
 origin, ethnicity, clan, sex, opinion, religion or social
 position." However, the requirement that ethnic origin be
 listed on identity documents helps to ensure that informal
 quotas corresponding to the Hutu/Tutsi ratio in society are
 not exceeded. The Tutsi minority has in fact been relegated
 to a minor role in government, civil service, and the military
 but is better represented in private business.
 
 
 257
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: RWANDA
 1983     1984     1985
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         8.6     12.8    24.6
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS ................    8.6     12.8     24.6
 A.AID ....... ............      5.3     8.3     18.8
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS ................    5.3      8.3    18.8
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST )..       0.0      0.0     12.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......        3.2     4.4      5.8
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS ................     3.2      4.4     5.8
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ..........       0.0     0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....        0.0     0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR.....         0.0     0.0      0.0
 TITLE  lI-TOTAL .........       3.2     4.4      5.8
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.         0.4     0.4      1.6
 VOL.RELIEF  AGENCY .....       2.8     4.0      4.2
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...        0.1      0.1     0.0
 LOANS .................    0.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.1       0.1     0.0
 PEACE  CORPS ......       0.1     0.1      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0     0.0      0.0
 OTHER ............0... .  .0      0.0     0.0
 II.MIL.  ASSIST.-TOTAL...        0.1     0.0      0.1
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.1      0.0      0.1
 A.MAP  GRANTS ..........       0.0     0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL  MIL.ED.TRNG ....       0.1      0.0     0.1
 0TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0     0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER  GRANTS ........       0.0     0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON.& MIL...         8.7    12.8     24.7
 LOANS ..............        0.0     0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    8.7     12.8    24.7
 OTHER  US  LOANS ..........      0.0     0.0      0.0
 EX-IM. BANK LOANS .......      0.0      0.0      0.0
 /ALL  OTHER ..............      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ..........................................................
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1983     1984     1985     1946-85
 TOTAL ........    54.2     40.8    21.2    454.8
 IBRO               0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0
 IFC                0.0      0.3     0.0      1.1
 IOA               36.3      9.0     16.3   234.7
 IOS                0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADB                0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFOB              10.4     30.3      4.9    113.7
 UNOP               5.3      1.2      0.0    34.8
 OTHER-UN           2.2      0.0      0.0    10.3
 EEC                0.0      0.0     0.0     60.2
 
 
 258
