 RWANDA
 Rwanda, overpopulated and very poor, is a one-party state
 under the leadership of President Hakyarimana. Rurally
 oriented development policies are slowly having a positive
 impact. The government is relatively well managed and
 non-corrupt. For the past several years, under the aegis
 of the single political party, the National Revolutionary
 Movement for Development (MRND), Rwanda has pursued a
 process of democratization. Progress on the full resump-
 tion of constitutional government continued in 1980 with
 the election of communal counselors in January and the
 holding of the national party congress in December to
 prepare for legislative elections in 1981.
 Government policy is set by-the President in consultation
 with the Council of Government composed of sixteen cabinet
 ministers appointed by the President;
 The constitution contains a list of rights and a basic
 objective is "to assure protection of the person and to
 promote respect of fundamental liberties conforming to the
 universal declaration of human rights." Government efforts
 in this regard are strong in the economic sector where it
 emphasizes development of rural areas to improve the lot of
 the poorest citizens. Deficiencies exist in the con-
 sistent application of justice, the status of women, and
 occasional high-handed treatment of refugees and foreigners.
 In 1959, Rwanda's traditional feudal society dominated by
 the Tutsis (14 percent of the population) and led by a
 monarch, was transformed by revolution of the majority Hutu
 group (85 percent of the population) into an egalitarian
 society with a stronger emphasis on individual rights.. A
 broadly-based majority government confirmed these internal
 changes at the time of political independence in 1962.
 During the decade that followed, Hutu leaders sought to
 redress the social, economic, and educational imbalance
 which had developed under the Tutsi monarchy. This led to
 division, corruption, and sporadic ethnic strife culminating
 in a coup d'etat in 1973 in which President Habyarimana took
 power.
 The current government seeks national unity and full parti-
 cipation of all ethnic groups in national life through a
 proportional quota system aimed at guaranteeing to each an
 equitable share of jobs, education, and advancement oppor-
 tunities. Tutsis are found at all levels of employment.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 While torture is not specifically proscribed by law, the
 constitution states, "the human person is sacred; his
 inviolability is assured." If identified, authorities who
 violate this policy and beat criminal suspects during
 interrogation are prosecuted. There have been no reports
 of torture during 1980.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 Capital punishment is provided for in the penal code, but
 
 
 203
 only rarely invoked. Summary executions do not occur.
 Corporal punishments are not sanctioned as part of or in
 lieu of a prison sentence. If caught using violence, pri-
 son officials are disciplined. General neglect and lack of
 resources for guard training, food and medical supplies, as
 well as outdated and badly overcrowded buildings render
 prison conditions poor. Work continues on the construction
 of a new prison facility that would provide better facilities
 and permit the separation of inmates according to the
 severity of their crimes. The new prison may open in 1981.
 Meanwhile, church and other officials continue to seek to
 focus high level attention on the need to improve existing
 prison conditions, but have achieved few concrete results.
 Other than separation by sex and age, prisoners allegedly
 receive equal treatment.
 c. Disappearances
 People have not been made to disappear in recent years.
 Arrests are openly made. Suspects are detained in the act
 of committing a crime or with a warrant following investiga-
 tion. While little attempt is made to hide arrests, they
 are not usually publicized. A few high officials of the
 previous regime imprisoned in 1973 have not.been accounted
 for.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Several types of warrants issued by regional judicial
 authorities Are used to detain suspects. There have been
 no reports of instances where proper warrants were not
 obtained. If upon examination the charges appear sufficient,.
 a suspect is formally arrested. A suspect may be held for
 up to five days without charges. Detention in excess of
 this period provides grounds for dismissal of charges.
 Additionally, authorities who do not respect this provision
 are subject to administrative discipline.
 Under preventive detention provisions, however, persons
 may be held for thirty days. At the end of that period, a
 judicial review is mandatory. If deemed warranted, the
 detention can be prolonged indefinitely in thirty-day
 periods. Detainees may appeal their incarceration.
 According to law, the appeal must be heard within 24
 hours by the competent judicial authority. Apparently
 in the past this procedure was rarely successful so it is
 not often invoked by defendants.
 e. Denial of Fair public Trial
 Except for rare absentia cases, charges must be formally
 stated in the defendant's presence within five days of his
 or her arrest. All defendants are constitutionally
 entitled to a defense. Although legal counsel is seldom
 available, family or other counsel is permitted. The
 judiciary is statutorily independent and expected to apply
 the penal code impartially. In actuality, except for a
 politically-oriented case, these standards were largely
 met in 1980. Deficiencies result from a dearth of trained
 judges, lawyers, and court clerks. In the continuing case
 involving approximately 20 prisoners who were arrested in
 April 1980, the distinction between charges of corruption,
 opposition to public policy, and plotting has become
 blurred. Charges against the prisoners have not been
 
 
 204
 publicly stated nor has a publicly promised open trial in
 the regular court system been forthcoming.
 The Rwandan court system consists of three parts, all with
 various original and secondary jurisdictions, but all
 decisions can ultimately be appealed to the Court of Cassa-
 tion which is the supreme judicial authority. The regular
 criminal/civil system has three tiers: local, regional and
 appeals Courts. Military tribunals are established as
 needed with first appeal to a standing military court. Only
 military personnel are tried by these courts. A separate
 national security court has original jurisdiction over
 treason and other national security charges. As in the
 case of the twenty-odd prisoners mentioned above, such cases
 may be pursued through the regular court system as well.
 According to judicial regulations, persons tried before the
 national security court enjoy the same protection and due
 process as those tried in other courts, although without
 the right of appeal to a higher court. Even so, upon
 request, a decision could be reexamined by the national
 security court. It is not known how these latter procedures
 would work in reality because the national security court
 has never been convened.
 2. Government Policies Relating to the Fulfillment of Such
 Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care and Education
 Rwanda is one of the poorest countries in the world. With
 more than 5 million people, it is the most densely populated
 state in Africa. 1980 GDP per capita is estimated at $224.
 Literacy is about 25 percent; infant mortality 128/1000 live
 births; life expectancy is 45 years; and nutrition levels
 approximately 70 percent of daily requirements. The population
 growth rate of about 4 percent largely offsets progress in
 the development of social infrastructure, schools, health
 centers etc., as well as increases in food production. The
 vast majority of Rwandans live at the poverty level.
 Ninety-five percent of the people depend on subsistence
 farming for their support. Farms average less than two
 acres in size. Traditional land tenure patterns prevail and
 rural income distribution is relatively even. Urban dwellers
 are not substantially better off. While social services are
 more readily available and the diet more varied in cities,
 there is serious under and unemployment. Wages lag behind
 the 12-15 percent rate of inflation. Moreover, adequate
 affordable housing is rare.
 Rwanda's relatively small monetary economy is based on the
 export of coffee which accounts for approximately 80 percent
 of foreign exchange earnings (an estimated 77 million) and
 provides the principal base for government revenues. Other
 exports include tea, pyrethrum, and tin ore. Most fuels and
 manufactured products are imported. Industry is nascent.
 High transportation costs associated with the long, poorly
 maintained 1,100 mile road link to the sea via Uganda and
 Kenya hinder rapid economic progress. Real economic
 growth over the past five years has averaged about 4.9
 percent, staying barely ahead of population growth. Rwanda's
 liberal approach to trade and investment and conservative
 central bank policies encourages a large private sector role
 in the national economy. Parastatal enterprises and coopera-
 tives complete the economic picture, especially in rural
 areas. Foreign investment is welcome and usually arranged
 with either private or public Rwandan participation.
 About half of Rwanda's small businessmen are Rwandans and
 
 
 205
 
 the proportion continues to grow. Non-Rwandans in small
 business are'mainly Asians and Middle Easterners.
 The government attaches priority to rural development. The
 five-year plan which began in 1977 emphasizes an integrated
 and balanced strategy aimed at reaching the majority of the
 population. To the extent that its resources permit and
 that donor funds become available, Rwanda is focusing on
 increasing food production, providing health services, and
 improving education for its citizens. Government development
 spending rose 34 percent in 1980. External assistance also
 increased dramatically. The creation of a national popula-
 tion policy office in August reflected the growing recogni-
 tion of the need to come to grips with the 4 percent population
 growth rate. Generally, lack of resources rather than
 inappropriate policies retards the provision of basic
 economic rights.
 A contradiction 9dsts in that sexual discrimination is out-
 lawed by the constitution, but women are second-class citi-
 zens before the law. For example, rights to property--to
 acquire and administer it, to dispose of it and to inherit--
 are limited. Women are discriminated against in the job
 market and have fewer chances for education, employment and
 promotion. Health, nutritional, and family planning services
 are inadequate. There are no separate organizations pushing
 women's issues. Official policy is that women's concerns
 and action programs should be articulated only within the
 confines of the male-dominated MRND.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 These freedoms are expressly provided for in the constitution
 with the caveat that they be exercised in compliance with
 -the law. The radio, the daily press bulletin, and a news-
 paper that appears at irregular intervals are all produced
 and controlled by the government. Two self-censoring church
 publications, however, do print mild criticism of government
 policies. Such criticism is tolerated and sometimes even
 encourged by the government. The President recently cautioned
 the press to avoid harmful criticism of leaders and encouraged
 it to devote its efforts to promoting development. Books
 and imported publications are not censored and academic
 freedom is respected.
 Freedom of assembly generally is respected, although cau-
 tiously exercised in the political arena to avoid government
 disapproval. For example, public meetings or demonstrations
 to express political opposition do not take place.
 The constitution guarantees the right to unionize and strike.
 There is no national trade union movement, but the government
 encourages local employee organizations under the aegis of
 th- National Revolutionary Movement for Development (MRND).
 In practice, aside from cooperatives, there are no genuine
 labor organizations.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 Freedom of movement is limited internally by policies to
 restrain rural-urban migration and by lack of available
 new lands for settlement. Outside of the refugee process,
 there is little immigration or emigration. Rwanda's record
 
 
 206
 with respect to refugees is mixed. Over the years it has
 welcomed about eight thousand Burundian refugees, mostly
 Hutus, and integrated them into Rwandan society. Several
 thousand more refugees from Uganda and Zaire have also spent
 time in Rwanda prior to repatriation. However, upon at
 least two occasions during the past year, Rwanda has sum-
 marily expelled about eight resident refugees in violation
 of its responsibilities under the United Nations Convention
 on the status of refugees. These refugees were not forcibly
 repatriated to their countries of origin but were required
 to go elsewhere.
 In 1965, legislation was adopted which denied restitution of
 property to returning refugees thereby effectively discourag-
 ing the repatriation of the some 150,000 Rwandan Tutsi
 refugees who fled to Burundi and Tanzania during 1959-65.
 The government controls issuance of passports for security
 reasons and the scarce foreign exchange by minimizing trayel
 outside Rwanda. The government also controls issuance of
 visas to foreigners on security grounds. Occasionally these
 powers are abused. For example, in 1980 several foreigners
 had their visas revoked and were summarily expelled in
 contravention of Rwandan law, reportedly at the request of
 neighboring governments. They were not forced to return to
 their country of origin.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Rwanda is an authoritarian one-party state with power resid-
 ing primarily with the President. The government places high
 value on achieving national consensus through contact with
 the people. All Rwandans are encouraged to vote after
 reaching age 18. Nearly 98 percent of the eligible voters
 participated in the constitutional referendum and Presiden-
 tial plebiscite in December 1978. In the plebiscite the
 people were asked to elect formally Habyarimana President.
 Under the 1978 constitution, Rwanda is organized under the
 aegis of the National Revolutionary Development Movement
 (MRND). The MRND is officially ensconced by the constitution
 as the "single political entity beyond which no political
 activity can be exercised." MRND organization parallels
 that of the administration but encompasses elected as well
 as appointed officials. At the national level, the Secretary
 General and the Central Committee of the MRND are all
 appointed by the President of the Republic in his capacity
 as founding President of the MRND. Delegates to the govern-
 ing national congress include prefectual committees which
 comprise government administrators and elected delegates.
 Communes are represented by the Bourgmestre (appointed)
 and the Vice-Chairman of the communal council (elected).
 Government civil servants and employees of parastatal
 organizations and of private industries form special MRND
 cells which elect their leadership and delegates to national
 meetings. About half of the congress is elected and half
 appointed.
 Every citizen is automatically a member of the MRND.
 Although no opposition groups are permitted and national
 leaders are not overtly criticized, elections are con-
 tested by several candidates and there is some debate
 about policies and procedures within the existing structure.
 For example, the government's first draft of the 1978
 constitution was thoroughly debated, dissected, and finally
 completely rewritten to conform to wide-spread national
 concerns articulated through the MRND structure.
 
 
 207
 MRND provides candidates for local and national office.
 Local councils were elected in 1980. National legislative
 elections are planned for 1981. Under the constitution
 most power is to remain with the executive branch. The
 legislature will be empowered to initiate and draft legis-
 lation co-jointly with the executive branch. Legislation
 and decrees are automatically reviewed by the constitutional
 court to ascertain conformance to the constitution. In two
 recent cases, concerning a new charter for the university
 and the establishment of a national population office,
 executive decrees were rejected by this court on constitu-
 tional grounds and returned for redrafting. The court
 objected to strictures on academic freedom and student
 associations in the university charter and, regarding the
 population office, sought clarification on the rights of
 families.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and lmn-govental   Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Rwanda is an active participant in African and United Nations
 human rights bodies. Rwanda hosted an international human
 rights colloquium in 1978. In 1979, Rwanda participated in
 an international investigation of human rights in the
 Central African Empire. It has been participating in the
 drafting of an Organization of African Unity human rights
 convention. There are no reports of requests in 1980 for
 outside investigations of alleged human rights violations in
 Rwanda.
 
 
 208
 
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: RWANDA
 1978     1979     1980
 -----------------------------------------------------
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL ..         3.5      6.4      4.1
 LOANS..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............         3.5      6.4      4.1
 A.AID .................         1.7      5.3      1.9
 LOANS..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............         1.7      5.3      1.9
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSST.)...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE.......         1.6      1.0      2.2
 LOANS..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............         1.6      1.0      2.2
 TITLE I-TOTAL .........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS.....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR...,,         0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE II-TOTAL,....  .         1.6      1.0      2.2
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & wFP.         0.1      0.0      0.3
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY...           1.5      1.0      1.9
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST ..         0.2      0.1      0.0
 LOANS...............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............         0.2      0.1      0.0
 CONTR. TO IFI...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPSe..           0.2      0.1      0.0
 OTHER.........            0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSiST.-TOTAL...         0.0      0.0      0.1
 LOANS..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS............      0.0        0.0      0.1
 A.AP GRANTS ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT SALESwFMS..- S        0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG....         0.0      0.0      0.1
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MILe.          3.5      6.4      4.2
 LOANS..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        3.5      6.4      4.2
 -----------------------------------------------------
 OTHER US LOANS .........         0.3      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS ......         0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER..............         0.3      0.0      0.0
 -----      ------------------------------------------------
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1978     1979     1980     1946-80
 ----------------------------------------------------
 TOTAL........     22.8     17.9     38.5    231.2
 IBRD               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IFC                0.0      0.3      0.0      0.8
 IDA               15.0     14.0     28.5    115.5
 IDB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFOB               2.6      0.0      4.1     23.8
 UNDP               2.7      3.6      3.5     22.8
 OTHER-UN           2.5      0.0      2.4      8.1
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0     60.2
 
 
 209
