 RWANDA
 The largely Tutsi Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF), which took power following the
 civil war and genocide of 1994, is the principal political force and controls the Gov-
 ernment of National Unity. President Pasteur Bizimungu and Vice President and
 Minister of Defense General Paul Kagame both belong to the RPF. The mainly Hutu
 Republican Democratic Movement retains the office of Prime Minister. Prime Min-
 ister Pierre Rwigema runs the Government on a daily basis and is responsible for
 relations with the National Assembly. Political party activity was suspended by
 agreement among the parties for the duration of the transition period, which is
 scheduled to end in 1999. The judiciary is subject on occasion to executive influence
 and suffers from inefficiency and some corruption.
 The Minister of Defense is responsible for internal security and military defense;
 the Minister of Interior is responsible for civilian security matters. The security ap-
 paratus consists of the Rwandan Patriotic Army (RPA) and the gendarmerie, which
 is largely made up of RPA soldiers. Civilian police with limited arrest powers work
 throughout the country. Members of the security forces committed numerous serious
 human rights abuses.
 Rwanda is a very poor country with a market economy; over 90 percent of the
 population earns its living through subsistence agriculture. The principal export
 crops are coffee and tea. Per capita Gross National Product is estimated at $210 per
 year. The massive genocide and war in 1994 resulted in the destruction of much of
 the country's economic infrastructure, including utilities, roads, and hospitals. Food
 production, even before the war, barely had kept pace with population growth.
 Small-scale commercial activities are on the increase, but the industrial base re-
 mains neglected.
 The Government's human rights record remained poor, and the Government con-
 tinued to be responsible for numerous serious human rights abuses. Although there
 was some improvement in areas, in a few areas abuses worsened. Security forces
 committed numerous serious abuses. The RPA continued to use brutal tactics and
 killed hundreds of civilians in the course of fighting an insurgency in the northwest
 of the country. Some killings were for political reasons, some were acts of revenge,
 and some were committed during security sweeps. However, the number of killings
 in the northwest declined, and the Government tried and sentenced several soldiers
 who committed abuses. The number of alleged disappearances increased. Security
 forces beat suspects. Prison conditions remained harsh and life threatening for the
 125,000 prisoners housed in jails and prisons designed to hold 17,000. Most are ac-
 cused of participating in the 1994 genocide. More than 3,300 prisoners died during
 the year. Security forces used arbitrary arrest and detention, and prolonged pretrial
 detention was a problem. The judiciary is subject to executive influence on occasion
 and does not ensure due process and expeditious trials. Genocide trials continued
 at a slow pace. The Government released suspects at a more rapid rate than in the
 previous year if they had incomplete files or were ill or elderly; by year's end, it
 
 
 340
 had released 5,120 persons. The Government intimidated journalists and restricted
 freedom of assembly and association; political activity was restricted. The Govern-
 ment made efforts to cultivate the support of the population in the northwest. Hun-
 dreds of thousands of civilians abandoned living and hiding places with the insur-
 gents to return home. Government security forces generally did not harass them.
 The Government was hostile toward some nongovernmental human rights organiza-
 tions (NGO's). The Government's refusal to permit continued monitoring by the
 United Nations Human Rights Field Office in Rwanda (UNHRFOR) led to the clo-
 sure of that mission in July. Discrimination and violence against women and dis-
 crimination against indigenous people are problems. The Government has commit-
 ted itself to ethnic reconciliation, as perceptions of ethnic identity were a key ele-
 ment in the genocide, although generations of intermarriage have blurred the lines
 between Hutus and Tutsis, and they no longer are clearly distinct groups.
 The genocidal militias that had massacred Tutsis and moderate Hutus in 1994
 continued their campaign of ethnic extermination and sought to expand their oper-
 ations beyond the-northwest. The insurgents committed numerous serious human
 rights abuses, including killings of those perceived as Tutsi survivors of the geno-
 cide, and of Hutu officials who opposed their agenda, as well as of religious and hu-
 manitarian aid workers. The militias, composed of members of the defeated army,
 the former Rwandan Armed Forces (ex-FAR) and Interaharnwe genocide gangs, reg-
 ularly attacked government offices and public service institutions, such as prisons,
 clinics, and schools. These actions increased friction between the security forces and
 the Hutu population and created insecurity on the roads.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-The RPA committed hundreds of
 extrajudicial killings, including individuals and families, in the course of fighting
 the insurgency in the northwest. The RPA generally committed these abuses during
 security sweeps, and in revenge for earlier killings by insurgent militias (see Section
 1.g.). Victims of RPA operations- included elderly persons, women, and children, as
 well as insurgents and suspected collaborators. Reliable statistics for the year are
 unavailable. Killings were more frequent during the first half of the year when the
 RPA conducted massive operations in heavily infiltrated areas of Gisenyi,
 Ruhengeri, and Gitarama prefectures. The number of killings decreased during the
 second half of the year, as the RPA gained the upper hand against insurgents and
 undertook efforts to win the support of the local population. The RPA acknowledged
 that soldiers had difficulty distinguishing civilians from the insurgents, many of
 whom do not wear uniforms.
 In late June and early July, infiltrators moved into parts of Kigali Rurale prefec-
 ture. An RPA mission to search out the infiltrators resulted in dozens of deaths in
 Mbogo commune. In Shyorongi commune, residents were ordered to assemble while
 the RPA mounted a search for infiltrators. Those persons who had not complied
 were assumed to be insurgents or insurgent sympathizers and were killed.
 In July RPA soldiers killed approximately a dozen civilians near Rwankeri in
 Gisenyi prefecture. The RPA suspected that the civilians were insurgent sympathiz-
 ers because they failed to stop infiltrators from destroying a bridge. The Govern-
 ment took steps to punish the perpetrators of some of these killings. Three officers
 were sentenced to death for their roles in killings in Uhondo and Cyeru. Sixteen sol-
 diers were sentenced to prison terms ranging from 1 year to life in prison, depend-
 ing on their roles. Another officer, Captain John Turatsinze, was given a 5-year sen-
 tence for failing to control his troops.
 Harsh prison conditions contributed to the deaths of a more than 3,300 inmates
 during the year. Some deaths in custody were due to mistreatment (see Section 1.c.).
 On January 18, Sergeant Gaspard Mutabazi was summarily executed without
 trial before 2,000 observers at the stadium in Ruhengeri. He was accused of killing
 a well-known veterinarian in order to steal his motorbike.
 On January 29, a soldier named Emmanuel Rutayisire was executed publicly at
 the stadium in Gisenyi. He had shot and killed a government correspondent the pre-
 vious day. Legal experts and others severely criticized the executions.
 On May 16, a former cabinet-minister, Seth Sendashonga, was killed in Nairobi,
 Kenya. In June Kenyan authorities charged one Rwandan and two Ugandans with
 his murder.   '
 Eleven members of the RPA, including at least 2 officers, were arrested for their
 alleged participation in the massacre of several hundred civilians in Kanama in Au-
 gust 1997. The UNHRFOR conducted an investigation into allegations that thou-
 sands of innocent persons were killed in caves near Kanama in late 1997. The
 
 
 UNHRFOR concluded that some civilians undoubtedly had died but could not con-
 firm that the number was in the thousands. There are no plans for further inves-
 tigations.
 A major was arrested on January 15 for negligence in a rebel attack on a dis-
 placed persons' camp in December 1997 that left 300 dead. Major Sam Bigabiro was
 sentenced to life in prison on January 30 for the massacre of 30 persons in Runda
 commune, Gitarama prefecture, in July 1994. Corporal Denis Gato was convicted of
 killing on orders from his superior and was sentenced to 45 months' imprisonment.
 In July a court sentenced three persons for the 1994 killing of Queen Rosalia
 Gicanda and six of her relatives. Rosalia was the last Tutsi queen.
 Following the outbreak of fighting in August in the Democratic Republic of Congo
 (DROC), RPA troops participated on the side of Congolese rebels to control territory
 in the DROC held by the rebels. The U.N. expressed concern about reports of
 wounding of civilians, arbitrary detention and expulsion, and other serious abuses
 in areas held by the Congolese rebels.
 The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) continued its work. In
 September Prime Minister Jean Kambanda was sentenced to life imprisonment for
 his role in the genocide (see Section 4). On September 2, the ICTR found former
 Taba mayor Jean Paul Akayesu guilty of: Nine counts of genocide; direct and public
 incitement to commit genocide; crimes against humanity for torture and rape and
 inhuman acts; and extermination. This was the first guilty verdict after trial by an
 international court for the crime of genocide. He was sentenced on October 2 to life
 impnriSoment.
 In December former army second lieutenant Eustache Dusabeyezu was found
 guilty of genocide, crimes against humanity, murder, and failure to assist people in
 dan er for leading the Apr 1994 killings of dozens of Tutsis and moderate Huts
 in Gisenyi. He was the fifth former soldier to be convicted for the 1994 gehocide.
 He was sentenced to life imprisonment.
 Insurgent militias, which included members of the ex-FAR and Interahamwe
 gangs and some former refugees, committed hundreds of killings both for political
 reasons and in pursuit of their genocidal ideology. They also sought to create panic
 and undermine confidence in the Government's ability to protect the population. In-
 surgents stepped up propaganda efforts, distributing hate literature and newspapers
 designed to persuade readers of the justness of their cause, their strength against
 the Government, and the evil intentions of the RPA. The tracts identified anyone
 who opposed the insurgents' cause as an enemy. Genocide survivors, Tutsi refugees
 from the Democratic Republic of Congo, Hutu government officials, local Hutu politi-
 cians, and those who refused to cooperate with the insurgency all were targeted. By
 late summer, the RPA appeared to have gained the upper hand against the insur-
 gents. Intense operations by the RPA combined with disillusionment with the insur-
 gency drove thousands of persons who had abandoned their homes to return to the
 relatively safer areas controlled by the RPA.
 In January insurgents calling themselves the Rwandan Liberation Army distrib-
 uted leaflets stating that all who opposed them would be beheaded. They subse-
 quently killed between 60 and 70 persons in four communes in Gitarama and be-
 headed some of their victims. Local officials of both ethnic groups were targeted.
 In February 35 civilians were killed by insurgents in Jenda, Gisenyi prefecture;
 26 of the victims were Bagogwe Tutsis and 6 were Hutus who were accused of being
 RPA sympathizers. Also in February, Interahamwe bands killed 58 persons and
 wounded 64 others at Byahi, in Rubavu commune of Gisenyi. The victims appar-
 ently were chosen indiscriminately, without regard to ethnic background. The
 attackers reportedly fled toward the Democratic Republic of Congo when RPA sol-
 diers arrived to help.
 In April ex-FAR and Interahamwe gangs killed 26 genocide survivors in
 Msumbira commune of Gitarama prefecture. The following day, a group attacked
 three vehicles, including one carrying the prefect. He was wounded; the driver was
 killed.
 In June over 200 ex-FAR members attacked a settlement of Bigogwe Tutsis in
 Kayove commune of Gisenyi prefecture. In total, 29 persons were killed and many
 more were injured. Insurgents attacked the Nkamira transit camp, which held from
 4,000 to 5,000 Congolese Tutsis, on June 17. A total of 51 persons were killed and
 62 were injured.
 Insurgents wearing stolen RPA uniforms attacked a commuter bus traveling from
 Kigali to Kibuye on June 22. The insurgents killed 18 persons and wounded 40. Re-
 ports indicate that many of the wounded later died. On July 12, insurgents attacked
 the Pensez-y Motel near Tare, about 22 miles from Kigal, where residents had
 gathered to watch a televised World Cup soccer math; they killed 34 persons, in-
 cluding 2 RPA soldiers. In early September, several hundred Interahamwe militia
 
 
 342
 members -attacked the communal jail in Kivumu, Kibuye prefecture and reportedly
 liberated 380 prisoners. Local officials reported that militia members killed 50 civil-
 ians while trying to escape pursuit by the RPA. The RPA reported that it killed 70
 members of the Interahamwe and captured 9 others. In June a court in Cyangugu
 tried six members of the insurgency for murder and found them guilty of the 1997
 killings of four U.N. human rights monitors. The six defendants were sentenced to
 death.
 In August there were reports in the foreign media that Hutu rebels using ma-
 chetes killedat least 110 persons, 34 in Buheta and Raba, near Kigali.
 Killings by vigilante groups tookplace on occasion. One incident occurred in June
 in Gisenyi prefecture f6lowing an Interahamwe attack on the Nkamira transit cen-
 ter. The camp's local defense team, composed of Tutsi civilians, set up a roadblock
 on the day after the attack and killed anyone who was not recognized by a member
 of their group. The victims included genocide survivors as well as Hutus.
 There were reports that ex-FAR and Interahamwe soldiers were incorporated into
 Congolese rebel units in the fighting in the Democratic Republic of Congo (see Sec-
 tion 1.g.).
 b. Disappearance.-Reports of disappearances rose sharply but there was insuffi-
 cient evidence to allow definitive judgments about either the number of disappear-
 ances or whether they involved' government or insurgent forces. During the first
 quarter of the year, the UNHRFOR received fewer than 100 reports of disappear-
 ances. However, -t is possible that there were disappearances that were not brought
 to its attention. In some cases, the missing persons later were found in detention
 centers. In about 50 percent of the cases, the UNHRFOR was neither able to deter-
 mine the reason for the disappearance nor to locate the missing person. Local non-
 governmental organizations indicated that many of those reported missing had been
 seen last at a military identification checkpoint. Some were located or released by
 the Government at a later date, but notification to families was poor or nonexistent.
 An Amnesty International report in March cited a significant increase in the num-
 ber of disappearances countrywide and stated that disappearances in the northwest
 had become so common that citizens no longer bothered to report them. The Govern-
 ment rejected the report's assertions. Speaking at a press conference, a government
 spokesman said that the Government would investigate individual cases brought to
 its attention, but saw no reason to investigate disappearances as a phenomenon.
 Starting in late May, almost 300,000 persons who had been living or hiding in
 forest and mountain areas with the insurgents returned to their home areas in the
 northwest. A significant percentage of those who purportedly had disappeared are
 believed to be among this population. It is uncertain how many of the returnees had
 gone willingly with the insurgents, and how~ many had been compelled.
 Journalist Emmanuel Munyemanzi disappeared in May, and his whereabouts re-
 main unknown (see Section 2.a.).
 Insurgents carried out several kidnapings. On March 23, five Rwandan and two
 Spanish nuns were kidnaped during an attack on La Sante hospital in Ruhengeri
 prefecture. On July 7, one Canadian and two Rwandan nuns were kidnaped during
 an attack on Bungwe sector in Byumba prefecture. On July 21, two Belgian priests
 were kidnaped from their parish in Rwanza in Ruhengeri prefecture. In all three
 cases, the victims later were released. Reports indicated that the insurgents hoped
 that the expatriates would express support for their cause.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Fundamental Law prohibits torture; however, the International Committee of
 the Red Cross (ICRC) reported that beatings at the time of arrest are common. A
 few deaths in prisons were due to mistreatment.
 In September the ICTR found former Taba mayor Jean Paul Akayesu guilty of
 torture and rape during the 1994 genocide (see Section l.a.). This was the first time
 that a verdict by an international court included rape as a genocide crime.
 Insurgents committed numerous abuses. In August a human rights observer re-
 ported the case of a 14-year-old boy in a Gisenyi hospital whose hands had been
 cut off by insurgents when he refused to join them.
 Prison conditions are harsh and life threatening. The prison population declined
 slightly and stands just over 125,000. Overcrowding is a chronic problem, and sani-
 tary conditions are extremely poor. However, many of the worst local prisons were
 closed for security reasons, and the inmates were concentrated in the larger central
 prisons. The Government does not provide adequate food or medical treatment.
 There were sporadic reports of isolated deaths due to malnutrition and mistreat-
 ment. Most deaths were the result of curable diseases or the cumulative debilitating
 effects of severe overcrowding. Over 3,300 persons died in custody during the year.
 The ICRC feeds inmates in the 14 main prisons and also provides additional ex-
 pertise, and logistical and material support to improve conditions for them. Hun-
 
 
 343
 dreds of children are incarcerated with their mothers throughout the prison system
 (see Section 5).
 The ICRC, human rights organizations, diplomats, and journalists have regular
 access to the prisons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Fundamental Law provides legal
 safeguards against arbitrary arrest and detention, but authorities rarely observed
 them in practice. The justice system collapsed during the war and genocide of 1994,
 but with help from the international community it slowly is being rebuilt and is be-
 ginning to function more normally. The Government does not have the capacty to
 ensure that provisions in the Constitution are enforced or that due process protec-
 tions are observed.
 In general the law requires that authorities first investigate, then obtain a judi-
 cial warrant before arrestinga suspect. Police may detainpersons for up to 48hours
 without a warrant; formal charges must be brought within 5 days of arrest. The law
 permits preventive detention if authorities believe that public safety is threatened
 or that the accused might flee. There is no bail but the authorities may release sus-
 pects pending trial if they are satisfied that there is no risk that the person may
 flee.
 Over 90 percent of the 125,000 persons incarcerated are awaiting trial on genocide
 charges. Some have been in jail since 1994. The Government does not have the ca-
 PaCity to process cases within a reasonable time. In March 1997, the Government,
 ith extensive assistance from donors, established mobile groups whose mandate
 was to establish or complete files that indicate the basis for charges for all pris-
 oners. To date these groups have handled over 60,000 cases. Approximately 80,000
 prisoners remain without ifies. In December 1997, the National Assembly amended
 the law to permit the detention through 1999 of genocide suspects on whom fdes
 had not been established. However, the Government continued to release prisoners
 who were elderly, ill, or had no files. It released about 400 prisoners each month;
 over 5,100 were released during the year. The Government took steps to mute criti-
 cism from survivors' groups and residents of the communities to which those re-
 leased were returned. Rearrests because of community opposition were rare. New
 arrests dropped precipitously from 1,054 in January to 31 in August. This change
 was attributed to improved enforcement by the Ministry of Justice of the laws gov-
 erning arrest and to a recognition of the fact that the existing prison caseload is
 already more than the system can handle.
 There were no reports of political detainees.
 Exile is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Fundamental Law provides for an independ-
 ent judiciary; however, the Government did not fully respect this provision. In
 March the President of the Court of Appeals was suspended following a disagree-
 menot      e             of the Supreme Court over the power of the executive
 branch with regard to the judiciary. He resigned his position a few months later.
 There were credible indications that members of the executive branch were dissatis-
 fied with rulings made by the suspended judge. There were occasional reports of cor-
 ruption, mostly of bribery of officials, ranging from clerks to judges.
 The law provides for public trials with the right to a defense, but not at public
 expense. The shortage of lawyers-there are 64 in the country-and the extreme
 poverty of most defendants makes it difficult for many defendants to obtain rep-
 resentation. International NGO's such as Avocats sans Frontiers provide defense
 and counsel to many of those in need. The Government does not have sufficient
 prosecutors, judges, or courtrooms to hold trials within a reasonable time.
 According to the Prosecutor General, over 800 genocide suspects were tried, in-
 cluding 107 who pled guilty. The number of convictions and acquittals is not known.
 The number of death sentences handed down declined from 1997. On April 24, there
 were 22 convicted genocide criminals executed in public, in several different loca-
 tions around the country, despite widespread international opposition. No further
 executions were held.
 In 1996 the Parliament passed a law, the Organic Genocide Law, designed to en-
 courage confessions in exchange for reduced sentences for the vast majoty of those
 involved in the genocide. Few confessions were elicited prior to the public executions
 in April. To date 2,777 persons have confessed, and more than 8,000 have expressed
 interest in confessing. he Government requested and received assistance from sev-
 eral donors to handle the unanticipated increase.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Priacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution prohibits such practices, and authorities generally respected these pro-
 hibitions. Forced conscription has been practiced by the RPA, particularly after the
 iPA entered the conflict in the Democratic Republic of Congo in August. Citizens
 
 
 344
 
 who have served in the military forces can be recalled to compulsory duty at any
 time.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-The RPA used excessive force in suppressing the insurgency in the north-
 west part of the country and killed hundreds of civilians. No complete death toll is
 available (see Section l.a.). The RPA indiscriminately killed suspected insurgent col-
 laborators, some of whom were women and children. Family members of collabo-
 rators also were killed. The RPA also fired indiscriminately on civilians. In January
 RPA soldiers allegedly fired upon approximately 300 civilians during a military op-
 eration in Rubavu commune, Gisenyi prefecture. In February the RPA killed an un-
 known number of civilians during a search for infiltrators in Mukingo, Ruhengeri.
 In late March and early April, the RPA launched significant military operations
 against insurgent areas in Ruhengeri, particularly Kingi. On April 1, RPA soldiers
 attacked an insurgent hideout and shot indiscriminately at everyone in the area. Ci-
 vilians trying to escape the battle were killed by soldiers in armored vehicles. Dur-
 ing the same month, RPA soldiers were responsible for the deaths of 134 persons
 in Ruhondo commune and nearly 200 in Cyeru commune, both in Ruhengeri prefec-
 ture. The killings in these neighboring communes, many of which were indiscrimi-
 nate, occurred after an insurgent unit apparently escaped capture by the RPA. An
 RPA officer and 11 soldiers were ambushed and killed on April 7 between Cyeru
 and Nyamugari. Observers believe that many reprisal killings followed this incident.
 In parts of Gisenyi, the RPA required civilians to destroy banana plantations, the
 key to their livelihood, in order to prevent insurgents from using the thick leaves
 as cover.
 Insurgents committed hundreds of killings, and specifically targeted genocide sur-
 vivors and other innocent civilians (see Section L.a.). Insurgents routinely attacked
 members of the civilian population who refused to support them and targeted facili-
 ties such as schools and clinics (see Section L.a.).
 In May insurgents armed with guns and machetes attacked a secondary school
 at Nyamyumba in southern Gisenyi prefecture, killing 11 students and'3 others.
 The headmaster had refused to close the school as instructed in rebel tracts.
 In September a truck in a World Food Program (WFP) convoy detonated a land
 mine placed by insurgents. The driver was killed. In one of their tracts, the rebels
 had warned WFP to stop delivering food.
 There were allegations that ex-FAR and Interahamwe soldiers were incorporated
 into Congolese rebel units fighting in the Democratic Republic of Congo and killed
 civilians (particularly Tutsis) in that country.
 Insurgents also -were responsible for several kidnapings (see Section l.b.).
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Fundamental Law provides for freedom of
 the press; however, the Government did not fully respect this provision. The Gov-
 ernment intimidated journalists whose reporting was contrary to official views.
 A Rwandan television journalist, Emmanuel Munyemanzi, disappeared on May 5
 under suspicious circumstances. There are allegations that he disagreed with broad-
 casting decisions. On May 12, there was an unconfirmed report that his body had
 been seen near the Mille Collines Hotel but had been quickly removed. The head
 of Rwanda's information department, known as ORINFOR, stated publicly that
 there was concern about poor programming and that Munyemanzi was transferred
 to another department on a temporary basis. He asserted that there was no link
 between Munyemanzs disappearance and any actions taken within the television
 station.
 The Government continued to fail to act on the Rwandan Journalists' Associa-
 tion's request for a license. Without a license, the Association may not act legally
 on behalf of its members or apply for assistance from NGO's or other donors.
 Media sources are limited. There are several privately owned newspapers, which
 publish weekly in English, French, or Kinyarwanda. There is no daily newspaper.
 Most journalists practice self-censorship. The Government owns the only national
 radio station and the only television station, which has 5 hours of programming per
 day. The British Broadcasting Corporation began broadcasts on F.M. radio in
 March.
 Academic freedom is respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Fundamental Law pro-
 vides for freedom of peaceful assembly; however, the government authorities restrict
 this right in practice. They legally may require advance notice for outdoor rallies,
 demonstrations, and meetings. Private organizations are required to register but,
 with few exceptions -(see Section 2.a.), the Government generally grants licenses
 without undue delay.
 
 
 345
 The Constitution provides for freedom of association; however, the Government re-
 stricts this right in practice. The National Revolutionary Movement for Democracy
 and Development (MRND) and the Coalition for Defense of the Republic, both impli-
 cated in planning and'executing the 1994 genocide, have been banned bylaw.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for these rights, and the Government gen-
 erally respects them in practice.
 Many persons have been displaced in the northwest as a result of insurgent ac-
 tivities and government military operations to halt them. Numerous displaced per-
 sons returned to their home areas in the northwest beginning in late May. The Gov-
 ernment encouraged some of these returnees to settle temporarily in makeshift
 camps close to communal office buildings and other centers where their security
 could be better assured. In December the U.N. Office of the Humanitarian Coordina-
 tor estimated that there was a total of 625,713 displaced persons in Ruhengeri and
 Gisenyi prefectures. The Government began relocating these persons in government-
 selected village sites in their home sectors in the latter part of the year. The Gov-
 ernment urged NGO's and international donors to provide seeds, tools, and other
 assistance necessary for this population to resume normal activities.
 The Government cooperates with the office of the U.N. High Commissioner for
 Refugees (UNHCR) and provided first asylum to over 36,000 refugees. The vast ma-
 jority were Congolese refugees who fled their country during unrest in 1996. About
 800 Burndian refugees also have found temporary asylum in the country.
 There were no reports of the forced return of persons to a country where they
 feared persecution.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens do not have the right to change their government through democratic
 means. The Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF) is the dominant political force in the
 country. Following the genocide of 1994, political parties agreed to form a Govern-
 ment of National Unitybased on the provisions of the 1992 powersharing agreement
 crafted in the Arusha negotiations and ratified by the 1993 Arusha Accords. This
 agreement lays the basis for the apportionment of ministries and other offices. Polit-
 ical parties also agreed to suspend political activities for a period of 5 years, which
 will end in 1999. The RPF brought representatives of four other opposition parties
 into the Government after the its military victory in 1994, but none of the officials
 were elected. A National Assembly is functioning, with nine political entities rep-
 resented, including the RPA. Assembly members, known as deputies, were chosen
 by the political bureaus or executive councils of their respective parties. The central
 government appoints local officials. There are no legal restrictions on the participa-
 tion of women in political life, but women remain underrepresented in politics and
 in the Government, including both the Cabinet and the National Assembly. Thirteen
 of the 70 Members of Parliament are women; there are two female Cabinet mem-
 bers. The Batwa ethnic group also is underrepresented.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A variety of local human rights groups operate without government restriction, in-
 vestigating and publishing their findings on human rights violations. However, none
 has the resources to conduct extensive human rights monitoring. Local NGO activi-
 ties often are limited to receiving and compiling reports from citizens about human
 rights abuses and conducting selective investigations. Reports are published occa-
 sionally; statements condemning specific incidents are more common. Only one or
 two local human rights NGO's are viewed as strictly impartial.
 The Government was cooperative and responsive to the reports of some inter-
 national human rights NGO's. It was hostile towards others whose reporting was
 perceived as biased and inaccurate. International human rights workers encoun-
 tered problems with authorities when they did not strictly observe the terms of their
 visas. Some international human rights workers construed these actions as obstruc-
 tion by the Government.
 The Government and the U.N. Human Rights Field Office for Rwanda
 (UNHRFOR) began discussions about changes to and the renewal of UNHRFOR 's
 mandate in 1997. The negotiations intensified from March through May, but the
 sides did not agree on terms for renewal. The Government opposed the continuation
 of monitoring. In the absence of agreement to continue this function, U.N. officials
 decided to close the office. UNHRFOR operations ceased at the end of July. The
 
 
 346
 Government expelled a UNHRFOR staff member in June for making public state-
 ments that the Government termed "insulting."
 The ICRC operates normally and is active in visiting prisons.
 The Arusha Accords provide for, and the Government recommitted itself to, a Na-
 tional Human Rights Commission. A presidential decree establishing the commis-
 sion was signed in November 1997 and became law on December 1. To date the
 members of the-commission have not been named. In response to urgings from do-
 nors and international human rights groups, the Government agreed that the Na-
 tional Assembly should pass a law establishing the commission as a permanent and
 independent entity. In December the Government sent to the Assembly a bill to es-
 tablish the commission.
 Cooperation between the Government and the International Criminal Tribunal for
 Rwanda (ICTR) improved. The Government chided the Tribunal for its slow pace
 but acknowledged its efforts to increase the pace of work and welcomed the comple-
 tion of the first trial. The Government expressed satisfaction with the sentences of
 life imprisonment given to former Prime Minister Jean Kambanda and to Jean Paul
 Akayesu, former mayor of Taba (see Section L.a.). Protection mechanisms for wit-
 nesses in Rwanda continue to be the subject of discussion between the ICTR and
 the Government. One witness who testified in defense of an accused genocidaire was
 subsequently killed. The perpetrator is still being sought.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides that all citizens are equal before the law, without dis-
 crimination on the basis of race, color, origin, ethnicity, clan, sex, religion, or social
 standing. However, the Government provides only limited enforcement of these pro-
 visions.
 Women.-Violence against women is common. Wife beating and domestic violence
 are normally handled within the context of the extended family and rarely come be-
 fore the courts.
 Despite constitutional provisions, women continue to face discrimination. Women
 traditionally perform most of the subsistence farming and play a limited role in the
 modern sector. They have limited opportunities for education, employment, and pro-
 motion. The Family Code of 1992 generally improved the legal position of women
 in matters relating to marriage, divorce, and child custody, but does not meet the
 constitutional commitment to gender equality. For example, it formally designates
 men as heads of households. Also, the absence of inheritance laws limits a woman's
 right to property, thus jeopardizing her status and ability to provide for her family
 should she survive her husband. The omission is particularly onerous in the
 postgenocide period, since widows are numerous and surviving male relatives, who
 normally would inherit and provide for them, are relatively few.
 The Ministry of Gender, Family, and Social Affairs is charged with handling prob-
 lems of particular concern to women. The Minister is an active advocate for women's
 rights. Since the 1994 genocide, a plethora of women's groups has emerged. These
 organizations are extremely active in promoting women's issues, particularly prob-
 lems faced by widows, orphaned girls, and households headed by children. Address-
 ing social and cultural barriers to the equality of women is a major focus.
 Children.-The Government is committed to children's rights and welfare. It is at-
 tempting to provide an education and health care to every child. Over 85 percent
 of the children who were separated from or lost their parents during the 1994 geno-
 cide and the massive repatriation in 1996 have been reunited with family members
 or placed in foster homes. Only 3,000 of the 50,000 lost and separated children re-
 main in centers.
 All families must pay school fees to enroll a child. The Government routinely
 waived fees for orphans. As of May, the U.N. Children's Fund estimated that about
 45,000 children 18 years or younger head households in the country. The Govern-
 ment worked closely with local and international NGO's to secure assistance for
 children in such situations. The Government regularly held sessions with local offi-
 cials to sensitize them to the needs of households headed by children and emphasize
 the additional responsibility officials bear in connection with this group.
 The few public schools that exist cannot accommodate all children of primary
 school age, and private schools also are few. A 1996 sociodemographic survey re-
 leased in July, conducted by the Government and the U.N. Population Fund, found
 that 59.6 percent of the population age 6 and over had primary education. Only 3.9
 percent had completed secondary school and 0.2 percent had university education.
 The highest percentage of those with-no education is in the 30-and-over age group,
 indicating a trend toward increased educational levels in recent years.
 
 
 347
 Although the penal code prohibits the imprisonment of children with adults, the
 ICRC reported that about 590 children, most of whom are aged 2 or younger, are
 with their mothers who are incarcerated. No figure was available for the number
 of children tried for participation in the 1994 genocide.
 People With Disabilities.-Although there are no laws restricting persons with dis-
 abilities from employment, education, or other state services, in practice few dis-
 abled persons have access to education or employment. There are no laws or provi-
 sions that mandate access to public facilities.
 Indigenous People.-Less than 1 percent of the population belongs to the Batwa
 ethnic group. These indigenous people, survivors of the Pygmy (Twa) tribes of the
 mountainous forest areas bordering the Democratic Republic of Congo, exist on the
 margins of society and continue to be treated as inferior citizens by both the Hutu
 and Tutsi groups. The Batwa have been unable to protect their interests, which cen-
 ter on access to land and housing. Few Batwa have gained access to the educational
 system, resulting in their minimal representation in government institutions. There
 is no reliable information on specific human rights abuses perpetrated against the
 Batwa population since the 1994 upheaval.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Before April 1994, an estimated 85 percent
 of citizens were Hutu, 14 percent were Tutsi, and 1 percent were Batwa. However,
 Hutus and Tutsis are not clearly distinct groups, as the two have intermarried for
 generations. The subsequent mass killings and migrations probably affected the eth-
 nic composition of the population, but the extent of the changes is unknown. A joint
 Govermnent-U.N. Population Fund government census completed in 1997 did not
 address the ethnic composition of the population. The Government has called for
 ethnic reconciliation and committed itself to abolishing policies of the former govern-
 ment that had created and deepened ethnic cleavages. It eliminated references to
 ethnic origin from the national identity card, a provision of the 1993 Arusha Ac-
 cords. The Government has not addressed statutorily the problem of ethnic quotas
 in education, training, and government employment, but discrimination against the
 Tutsi minority effectively ceased with the change of government in 1994. Some
 Hutus accuse the Government of favoring Tutsis in government employment, admis-
 sion to professional schooling, recruitment into the army, and other matters.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution provides for the right to create pro-
 fessional associations and labor unions, and the Government usually respects this
 right in practice. In practice the labor movement has been hampered due to the
 massive disruptions caused by the 1994 genocide. Although preconflict labor law
 technically remains in effect, the Government is unable to implement its provisions.
 Unions are only slowly regrouping and asserting themselves.
 Union membership is voluntary and open to all salaried workers, including public
 sector employees. There are no restrictions on the right of association, but all unions
 must register with the Ministry of Justice for official recognition. There are no
 known cases in which the Government has denied recognition. Unions are prohib-
 ited by law from having political affiliations, but in practice this is not always re-
 spected. Union activists complain that employers threaten to fire employees who at-
 tempt to organize or join unions.
 Organized labor represents only a small part of the work force. More than 90 per-
 cent of workers are engaged in small-scale subsistence farming. About 7 percent
 work in the modern (wage) sector, including both public and private industrial pro-
 duction, and about 75 percent of those active in the modern sector are members of
 labor unions.
 Until 1991 the Central Union of Rwandan Workers (CESTRAR) was the only au-
 thorized trade union organization. With the political reforms introduced in the Con-
 stitution, the CESTRAR officially became independent of the Government and the
 later-outlawed MRND political party. Unions outside the CESTRAR have been reg-
 istered.
 The Constitution provides for the right to strike, except for public service workers.
 Procedures to conduct a legal strike as stipulated in the Labor Code are cum-
 bersome and, according to a CESTRAR officer, have never been followed. A union's
 executive committee must approve a strike, and a union must first try to resolve
 its differences with management according to steps prescribed by the Ministry of
 Public Service and Labor.
 In August workers at the National Printery went on strike after most workers re-
 ceived termination notices citing privatization of the Printery as the reason for their
 dismissal. The workers attempted a march but failed to obtain prior permission.
 Government authorities dispersed the group peacefully.
 
 
 348
 Labor organizations may affiliate with international labor bodies. CESTRAR is af-
 filiated with the Organization of African Trade Union Unity and the International
 Confederation of Free Trade Unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Constitution provides for
 collective bargaining, although only CESTRAR had an established collective bar-
 gaining agreement with the Government. In practice, since most union members are
 in the public sector, the Government is intimately involved in the process (see Sec-
 tion 6.e.).
 The law prohibits antiunion discrimination, it has not been reported. There are
 no formal mechanisms to resolve complaints involving discrimination against
 unions.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced labor,
 and there are no reports that it occurs in practice. Although the law does not specifi-
 cally prohibit forced  and bonded labor by children, such practices are not known to
 occur. Work details composed of prisoners are common and generally involved re-
 building houses, clearing land, or other public maintenance duties.
 d. Status of Child Labor-Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-Except in
 subsistence agriculture, the law prohibits children under age 18 from working with-
 out their parents' or guardians' authorization, and they generally may not work at
 night. The minimum age for full employment is 18 years, and 14 years for appren-
 ticeships, providing that the child has completed primary school. The Ministry of
 Labor has not enforced child labor laws effectively.- The law does not specifically pro-
 hibit forced or bonded labor by children, but such practices are not known to occur
 (see Section 6.c.).
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Ministry of Labor sets minimum wages in
 the small modern sector. The Government, the main employer, effectively sets most
 other wage rates as well. There is no single minimum wage; minimum wages vary
 according to the position. The minimum wages paid are insufficient to provide a de-
 cent standard of living for a worker and family. Often families supplement their in-
 comes by work in small business or subsistence agriculture. In practice, however,
 workers accept less than the minimum wage.
 Officially, government offices have a 40-hour workweek. In 1993 negotiations were
 held between the unions, government, and management to reduce the workweek
 from 45 to 40 hours in the private sector as well. Hours of work and occupational
 health and safety standards in the modern wage sector are controlled by law, but
 labor inspectors from the Ministry of Labor enforce them only loosely. Workers do
 not have the right to remove themselves from dangerous work situations without
 jeopardizing their jobs.
