 SAUDI ARABIA
 Saudi Arabia is a monarchy ruled by the descendants of its
 founder, King Abd Al-Aziz, known in the West as "Ibn Saud,".
 who unified the country in the early part of the 20th
 century. The concept of separation of religion and state is
 foreign to Saudi society, and the legitimacy of the regime
 rests to a large degree on its perceived adherence to the
 precepts of a puritanically conservative form of Islam.
 There is no written national constitution. The legal system
 is based on Islamic religious law. Most Saudis share a
 respect for this legal system, which they believe to be
 divinely inspired, as well as for ancient customs which call
 for consensus in government, internal social cohesion, private
 economic enterprise, and respect for private property. Since
 the death of King Abd Al-Aziz, the King and Crown Prince have
 been chosen from among his sons, who themselves have
 preponderant influence in the choice. Senior religious
 scholars and other princes also have a voice, as do other
 members of the society through informal consultations with the
 royal family following the death of a reigning monarch. There
 are no elected assemblies or political parties, and all forms
 of political expression except those favorable to the regime
 are forbidden.
 Saudi Arabia's security rests with three entities: the
 Ministry of Defense and Aviation, which controls the Army, Air
 Force, and Navy; the National Guard, which is responsible for
 guarding vital internal installations and providing additional
 land forces in case of war; and the Ministry of Interior,
 which is responsible for internal security, including police
 and border forces.
 Massive oil- revenues have transformed Saudi Arabia's
 centuries-old pastoral, agricultural, and commercial economy.
 This transformation has been marked by rapid urbanization,
 large-scale development of economic and social.infrastructure,
 the emergence of a welfare state- and technocratic middle
 class, and the importation of millions of foreign workers for
 skilled and menial labor. It has also been marked by
 widespread expenditure of public funds in ways that have
 enriched the royal family and their associates. With some
 important exceptions, the economy remains largely in private
 hands.
 The Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in August and the following
 crisis have provided much of the impetus for positive changes
 in the human rights situation in Saudi Arabia, such as the
 proposal for a consultative council, it also prompted negative
 developments, i,e,, the reaction against an unprecedented
 women's protest demonstration.
 There were no significant developments in human rights in
 1990; significant restrictions remained on the freedoms of
 speech and press, peaceful assembly and association, religion,
 the right of citizens to change their government, women's
 rights, and worker rights. There were credible reports in
 1990 of the mistreatment of prisoners and incommunicado
 detention.
 
 
 1616
 
 SAUDI ARABIA
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no xeports of -political killings or, contrary to
 previous years, of deaths of persons in official custody.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no known disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 While official controls make collection of detailed
 information difficult, there continue to be credible reports
 of torture and mistreatment of detainees, particularly
 politicaldetainees. In its 1990 report, covering 1989,
 Amnesty International (AI) noted that it had received
 information -that the torture and ill-treatment of detainees is
 common. Detainees reported that torture is commonly practiced
 at the General'Directorate of Investigations (GDI) Prison in
 Dammam. Reliable reports indicated that at least one
 non-Saudi detained at Dammam prison in 1990 was subjected to
 physical abuse by his Saudi guards.- There were again reports
 in 1990 that police beat some detainees to elicit
 confessions. As in past years, government officials declined
 to respond to inquiries regarding specific reports of
 torture. Similarly, there were also no reports of authorities
 being tried and convicted for mistreatment of detainees,
 although there are reports, as in past years, of authorities
 being disciplined for excessive harassment.
 In November AI reported allegations of torture among Yemenis
 who had recently left Saudi Arabia, based on interviews AI
 conducted.on the Yemeni side of the border. The Saudi
 Government strongly denied these reports, rejecting any
 allegations of torture in Saudi Arabia.
 Under the Saudi interpretation of Islamic law, punishment for
 some crimes may include amputation (administered under
 anesthetic) or execution by beheading, firing squad, or
 stoning (each with the convicted person in a drugged state).
 In the absence of two witnesses (four witnesses in the case of
 adultery), oral confessions before a judge are almost always
 required for conviction. Saudi interpretation of Islamic law
 requires strict application of scriptural sanctions. For
 serious- crimes, such as murder, rape, or drug smuggling, Saudi
 Arabia imposes capital punishment. All 17 criminals known to
 have been executed in 1990,were convicted of 1 or more of
 those 3 crimes, and all sentences of capital punishment were
 carried out by beheading, sometimes followed by gibbetting.
 Death by firing squad or stoning may be imposed for adultery,
 although high evidentiary standards make such convictions
 quite rare. No one was executed for adultery in 1990.
 Repeated thievery is punishable by amputation of the left
 hand. In 1990 less than 10 amputations took place, including
 at least 5 administered to foreigners.
 For less severe crimes, such as drunkenness or publicly
 flouting Islamic precepts, flogging with a cane is often
 imposed. Flogging is intended to degrade rather than cripple
 
 
 1617
 
 SAUDI ARABIA
 the criminal and to serve as a deterrent to others. At least
 4 Americans received such sentences in 1990, involving between
 30 and 120 strokes for their offenses.
 Members of the Committee for the Propagation of Virtue and
 Prevention of Vice (commonly called Mutawwi'in), enforce laws
 concerning prayer time closings of commercial establishments
 and appropriate dress in public. They have the legal right to
 detain suspects for up to 24 hours before turning them over to
 the regular authorities. Mutawwi'in have flogged detainees
 while seeking to elicit a confession and often use switch-like
 sticks to harass those whom they perceive to be violating
 religious laws. Some incidents of harassment probably were
 perpetrated by self-appointed vigilantes who function outside
 the formal Mutawwi'in organization. Expatriates were often
 the targets of harassment; in 1990 the U.S. Government
 protested to the Saudi Government about several instances
 involving Americans. The Saudi Government still occasionally
 disciplines overzealous Mutawwi'in after specific complaints
 are received.
 While most of 1990 saw little Mutawwi'in harassment, there
 were numerous unconfirmed reports of an increase in harassment
 incidents late in the year. A serious incident occurred in
 mid-November when a group of expatriates attending a social
 function were detained in a Mutawwi'in raid. During the
 course of the raid, several of the attendees, including some
 American citizens, were subjected to physical abuse (pushed,
 shoved, and threatened with weapons), and several of those
 arrested complained of having water thrown on them while being
 detained by the Mutawwi'in. All the arrestees were released
 without charges within 24 hours. There were later unconfirmed
 reports that some of the Mutawwi'in involved had been strongly
 disciplined.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Saudi security forces are divided into several branches,
 including the regular police and the special investigative
 police. Grounds for initial arrest and detention are
 generally determined at the discretion of the arresting
 officer; arbitrary arrest can and does occur. There is no
 automatic, prompt procedure for contacting a detainee's family
 or employer; however, in cases involving foreigners, Saudi
 authorities state their willingness to do so. When asked, the
 police will almost always confirm an arrest or provide
 .information about a case the same day. Embassies usually hear
 about arrests of their nationals a few days afterward through
 informat channels. Official arrest notification almost always
 takes several months, if it is given at all. A 1989 policy
 requiring Foreign Ministry coordination of consular visits
 remains in force and sometimes causes delays in the scheduling
 of visits, although authorized visits are conducted without
 delay or monitoring by the police.
 Problems may arise when persons are arrested by the GDI, the
 security service, commonly called the "Mubahith" or
 investigative police. GDI prisoners are regularly held
 incommunicado during the initial phase of an investigation,
 which may last weeks or months. At least one GDI case in 1990
 resulted in several weeks' detention without official charges
 while an investigation was conducted. Relatives of the
 accused were allowed two closely supervised visits during that
 
 
 1618
 
 SAUDI ARABIA
 time. There was-also a report that a Saudi journalist was
 arrested in November without charges and was held incommunicado
 after he alerted a Western news organization to the
 demonstration by Saudi women, including his wife, against the
 ban on female driving.
 Saudi law makes no provision for bail or habeas corpus;
 prisoners are sometimes released on the recognizance of a
 patron or employer. While investigations proceed, prisoners
 may be held for long periods before they are charged or
 released. Regulations issued by the Interior Ministry in 1985
 to eliminate lengthy pretrial detentions or detentions without
 charges are frequently not enforced. However, under normal
 circumstances most arrestees are held no longer than 3 days.
 before being formally charged. In a March 1990 newsletter, AI
 expressed renewed concern over the detention since April 1988
 of over 40 Shi'a activists in a prison in Riyadh.
 In its 1990 Report, AI noted that it had expressed concern to
 the Saudi Government about the continuing pattern of detaining
 political suspects without trial and urged it to investigate
 reports that political detainees were tortured. Regarding a
 January. 1990 AI report concerning 66 individuals being held by
 Saudi authorities without charge or trial, AI-said that 41
 were released during 1990, the majority in April on the
 occasion of a royal pardon for common criminals. The rest
 remain detained for radical Shiite activities.,
 The Government does not officially use exile as a form of
 punishment. Denial of exit visas for foreigners or exit
 permits for Saudis occurs.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The judicial system is founded upon the set of Islamic legal
 precepts known as the Shari'a. Regular Shari'a courts
 exercise jurisdiction over common criminal cases and civil
 suits regarding marriage, divorce, child custody, and
 inheritance of real or personal property. Trials are
 generally closed and are normally held without counsel, though
 the advice of lawyers is available before trial. In a Saudi
 court the defendant appears before a judge who determines
 guilt or innocence and, if warranted, imposes the appropriate
 punishment. Counsel.is not permitted in the court itself, but
 lawyers may act as interpreters for those unfamiliar with
 Arabic. Generally, consular officers have no access to the
 trials of foreign nationals, although embassy representatives
 may sometimes attend informally at the presiding judge's
 discretion. Sentencing.is not uniform and may be changed at
 any of the stages of review.
 Appeals against judges' decisions are automatically reviewed
 by the Justice Ministry or, in more serious cases, by the
 Court of "Cassation and the Supreme Judicial Council to ensure
 that court procedure was correct and that the judge applied
 appropriate legal principles and punishments. Cases involving
 capital punishment must also be reviewed by the King.
 The Shi'a community is free to adjudicate exclusively
 noncriminal intra-Shi'a disputes within their own legal
 tradition.
 The independence of the judiciary is prescribed by law and
 usually respected in practice, although jurists are
 nevertheless aware of and reportedly have acceded to the power
 
 
 1619
 SAUDI ARABIA
 and influence of the royal family and their associates. The
 Justice Ministry is responsible for the appointment, transfer,
 and promotion of judges. Judges may be disciplined or removed
 only by the Supreme Judicial Council, an independent body of
 senior jurists. The Supreme Judicial Council in the past has
 investigated and removed corrupt judges to allow prosecution
 and imprisonment.
 The military justice system has jurisdiction over uniformed
 personnel and civilian government employees charged with
 violations of military regulations. Court-martial decisions
 are reviewed by the Minister of Defense and Aviation and by
 the King..
 The Board of Grievances arbitrates all nonbanking business
 disputes, including claims against the State. The board has a
 staff of experienced jurists, but it lacks the independent
 power to enforce judgments. The Board also has the power to
 enforce foreign court judgments in commercial matters, so long
 as they do not contravene the basic tenets of Islam and the
 foreign country involved reciprocally enforces Saudi judgments.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Among the most fundamental of Islamic precepts are the
 sanctity of family life and the inviolability of the home.
 Saudi police must generally demonstrate reasonable cause and
 obtain special permission from the provincial governor before
 searching a private home, but judicial warrants are not
 required. The Mutawwi'in may enter homes to search for
 evidence of un-Islamic behavior when they have grounds for
 suspicion, but they rarely do so without reasonable grounds.
 Wiretaps and mail surveillance can be carried out on the
 authority of officials of the Interior Ministry or the
 Directorate of Intelligence. Informants are widely employed
 in internal security matters.
 Most social and Islamic religious norms and strictures
 affecting personal life are matters of law and are enforced by
 the Government. Saudi women may not marry non-Saudis without
 government permission, which is rarely given. Saudi men must
 obtain approval to marry women originally from countries other
 than the six members of the Gulf Cooperation Council. During
 the Muslim holy month of Ramadan, the prohibition against
 public eating, drinking, or smoking during daylight hours is
 enforced on Muslims and non-Muslims alike. Prohibitions
 against alcohol, narcotic substances, and material deemed
 pornographic are strictly enforced and apply as well to
 foreign residents. Decorum in dress and demeanor, as well as
 the closing of shops for a half-hour period during each of the
 five daily prayers, are enforced by the Mutawwi'in.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The freedom of speech and of the press is significantly
 limited. Criticism of Islam or of the ruling family is not
 allowed. The potential presence of informers renders public
 criticism of the regime rare. In 1990 credible reports
 suggested that one foreign resident left the kingdom after
 being detained for making political statements in public while
 intoxicated. In private, opinions and complaints are
 expressed relatively freely. Saudis are able to voice
 
 
 1620
 SAUDI ARABIA
 complaints and seek redress of grievances through the
 open-door audiences held by officials at all levels, including
 by members of the royal family. Many local-level officials
 hold such audiences daily, and even the most important
 national leaders are available regularly to hear grievances.
 Such grievances are generally personal in nature, rather than
 political or social.
 Saudi television and radio are state owned and operated.
 Foreign programs and songs are heavily censored, with
 references to politics, religions other than Islam, pork or
 pigs, and alcohol removed. Although foreign news is generally
 presented in an objective manner, news about subjects
 affecting Saudi Arabia is generally tightly controlled and
 conflicting viewpoints are not offered. However, the Iraqi
 invasion of Kuwait resulted in considerably increased coverage
 of such subjects by the local media, although threats against
 the kingdom were usually not reported. There was also a
 marked increase in foreign media access to the country after
 the invasion, although the activities of foreign journalists
 continued to be monitored.
 The press is privately owned. It is effectively controlled by
 a 1982 media policy statement and the firm understanding that
 nothing embarrassing to the Government, ruling family, or
 religious leadership may be published. The media policy
 statement enjoins the press to uphold Islam, oppose atheism,
 promote Arab interests, and preserve the cultural heritage of
 Saudi Arabia. Newspapers receive guidelines issued by the
 Information Ministry on government positions on controversial
 issues, and the government-owned Saudi Press Agency (SPA)
 expresses the official viewpoint on such issues. As in the
 case of television and radio, most foreign news that does not
 directly concern Saudi Arabia is presented objectively in the
 press. Domestic news concerning sensitive subjects, such as
 crime or terrorism, is usually published only after the
 perpetrators have been arrested, convicted, and imprisoned or
 executed.
 Editors-in-chief are appointed with the tacit approval of the
 Information Minister, and the Government has the power to have
 them removed. Foreign publications circulate but may be
 censored for materials deemed immoral or critical of Saudi
 policies and actions. Entire publications have sometimes been
 withheld from distribution. Crossword puzzles and comic
 strips in Eiglish-language newspapers are sometimes censored.
 Academic freedom is constrained by similar guidelines; for
 example, the study of Freud, Marx, and Western philosophy is
 not formally allowed. Some professors believe that classroom
 comments that could be taken as antiregime will be reported to
 the authorities. There is also an injunction against the
 study of music in educational institutions through the
 university level, although there are some private
 organizations for the study of Western classical music.
 Nevertheless, there has been an increase in artistic
 activities in schools and universities and in society in
 general, as evidenced by classes sponsored by the Saudi
 Arabian Society for Culture and Arts, an association whose
 head holds ministerial rank. There are also private art
 galleries, and some members of the royal family patronize the
 arts. Abstract and representational artists as well as
 photographers are allowed to work. However, cinemas and most
 public musical or theatrical performances are still prohibited.
 
 
 1621
 
 SAUDI ARABIA
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Public demonstrations as a means of political expression or
 presenting grievances are prohibited. Tribal, familial, and
 economic interest groups informally aggregate public opinion
 which their leaders express to high officials. Nonpolitical
 clubs and professional groups may be organized with the
 permission of the authorities. The few existing professional
 bodies are permitted, but not encouraged, to maintain contacts
 with their recognized international counterparts. Public
 meetings are generally segregated by sex. Unless they are
 sponsored by diplomatic missions, members of groups seeking to
 hold unsegregated meetings face arrest, incarceration, and
 deportation.
 In November some 47 women demonstrated against the informal
 ban on women driving in Saudi Arabia by driving cars
 themselves in Riyadh. The women were detained by local police
 for less than 24 hours before authorities ordered them
 released to the custody of their nearest male relative. The
 women were charged with civil traffic violations. While some
 people supported their action, significant portions of the
 populace were critical. In addition, they and their families
 have reportedly been shunned by some..religiously conservative
 persons,-and there were reports that some of the participants
 lost their jobs.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is strictly circumscribed. Islam is the
 official religion, and all Saudi citizens must be Muslims.
 Althbugh Islamic law stipulates the death penalty for
 apostasy, there.were no executions in 1990 for this act. In
 principle, the Saudis allow all Muslims who wish to visit
 Mecca and Medina to do so. However, as a result of a decision
 by the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), Saudi
 Arabia has established and maintains a system of national
 quotas for the yearly pilgrimage, or hajj, to facilitate
 security and efficiency. The Iranian government (an OIC
 member state) has criticized the quota system as'unfairly
 discriminatory against its citizens. Travel to the holy
 cities by non-Muslims is illegal. Political activities by
 pilgrims are banned.
 Islamic practice in Saudi Arabia is generally limited to that
 sanctioned by the "Wahhabi" interpretation of the Hanbali
 jurisprudential school of Islam. Practices contrary to this
 interpretation, such as the visiting of graves of famous
 Muslims by pilgrims to Mecca or Medina, or the use of the
 Shiite call to prayer, are prohibited.
 The Shi'a Muslims of the eastern province, estimated at up to
 500,000 persons, constitute a religious minority subject to
 officially sanctioned forms of social and economic
 discrimination. Any form of public Shi'ite practice that
 deviates from Sunni Islam is generally prohibited.
 Historically, the Government has prohibited Shi'ite public
 processions during the holy month of Muharram and restricted
 public belebrations to specially designated areas within the
 major Shia cities. However, as in 1989, authorities permitted
 marches in 1990, provided they took place without banners or
 public self-flagellation. In addition, Shi'ite banners were
 allowed to be hung from a public building in at least two
 eastern province towns.
 
 
 1622
 SAUDI ARABIA
 The Government sometimes offers to provide financial support
 for the Shi'a religious establishment, which is generally
 refused. The Government seldom permits private construction
 of Shi'ite mosques, and the Shi'a have refused government
 offers to build state-supported mosques, in which Shi'ite
 motifs would'be prohibited.
 Public or private non-Muslim religious activities are not
 permitted, and importation of non-Islamic religious material,
 including Christmas cards or trees, is illegal. However, some
 Christmas decorations, including small artificial trees, and
 cards were available as "seasonal items" in local shops in
 December 1989, with apparently few incidents of mutawwi'in
 harassmbnt. Persons wearing non-Islamic religious symbols in
 public may be arrested or publicly harassed by the
 Mutawwi'in. There are no non-Muslim places of worship.
 Foreign nationals practice their religions in strict privacy
 without interference. Proselytizing, large religious
 gatherings, or elaborate organizational structures are likely
 to attract official attention and lead to the imprisonment or
 expulsion of those responsible.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Male Saudis may travel freely anywhere within the country. A
 new regulation in 1990 required most single Saudi men under
 the age of 18 to obtain permission before traveling abroad,
 although such permission may be obtained easily through family
 or business connections. In the case of government officials,
 the permission of the royal court is required, but apparently
 is normally perfunctory. Saudi-and non-Saudi women must
 obtain written permission from their closest male relative
 before bding allowed to leave the country or to travel on
 public transportation between different parts of the country.
 The passports of suspected subversives have occasionally been
 seized. Shi'a known to have pro-Iranian sympathies may not be
 allowed to travel abroad. Saudis are permitted to emigrate
 and assume foreign nationality, which results in the loss of
 Saudi nationality. Citizenship is not revoked for political
 reasons, but passports may be seized if security questions
 arise about the holder.
 There is no explicit formal policy regarding refugees or
 granting asylum. Refugees and displaced persons are dealt
 with in most cases like other foreign workers. With some
 exceptions, persons seeking residence in the country must meet
 strictly enforced requirements of sponsorship and employment.
 In addition to about 300,000 Kuwaitis and other foreign
 nationals, who fled to Saudi Arabia in August and-September
 after the Iraqi invasion and who have received financial and
 material aid worth several hundred million dollars, there are
 over 250,000 resident foreigners who fled their native
 countries, primarily Palestinians, Lebanese, Eritreans,
 Somalis, Afghans, and South Yemenis. Most of these persons
 generally receive no special treatment, privileges, or
 services. 'Individual Saudis, including many members of the
 ruling family, permanently sponsor such persons to enable them
 to remain in Saudi Arabia, permitting them to find work where
 they may. In a small number of cases, sponsors reportedly
 have charged fees to such persons for providing documentation
 required by the Government. Rules announced in September
 1990, if fully implemented, will eliminate these two
 practices. There are few Saudi exiles outside the country.
 
 
 1623
 
 SAUDI ARABIA
 Saudi Arabia is not a party to the International Convention on
 Refugees, but Saudi authorities are responsive in cases where
 deportation of refugees to their home country would jeopardize
 their safety.
 All foreigners living in Saudi Arabia are required to carry
 identification cards. Some Yemenis were traditionally exempt
 from this policy. However, the Yemeni exemption was canceled
 in September, and plans were announced for all Yemeni
 expatriates to have the required cards by the end of the
 year. Foreigners are not permitted to travel outside the city
 of their employment or change their workplace without their
 sponsor's permission. Foreign employees are prevented from
 traveling abroad without their sponsor's permission, since
 sponsors hold their passports and are responsible for
 obtaining exit visas for them. Foreign diplomats may not
 travel outside of the major cities without notifying the
 Government. Foreigners involved in commercial disputes are
 sometimes not allowed to leave the country until the dispute
 has been resolved. Sponsors have taken advantage of this
 arrangement at times to exert pressure to resolve commercial
 disputes in their favor. Occasionally Saudi sponsors or
 business partners have been able to prevent foreign nationals
 from departing Saudi Arabia for years or to have them arrested
 or deported. In criminal cases, Saudi regulations require
 that the passports of all potential suspects and witnesses be
 seized, which sometimes forces foreign nationals to remain in
 Saudi Arabia for lengthy periods against their will.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Citizens da not have the ability peacefully to change their
 government. There are no formal democratic institutions, and
 most Saudi citizens have no voice in the choice of leaders or
 in changing the political system. The King rules the country
 in matters secular and religious, within limits established by
 religious law, tradition, and the need to maintain consensus
 among the ruling family and religious leaders. The King's
 legitimacy is based upon his descent, his selection by
 consensus of the royal family, his adherence to the tenets of
 Islam, his ability to govern, and his perceived concern for
 the welfare and security of the nation. The King is also the
 Prime Minister, and the Crown Prince serves as First Deputy
 Prime Minister. The King appoints all other Min.sters, who in
 turn appoint subordinate officials with cabinet concurrence.
 There are no popularly elected officials in Saudi Arabia.
 Political parties are not permitted, and there are no public
 organized opposition groups.
 Traditionally, public opinion has been expressed through
 client-patron relationships and interest groups such as
 tribes, families, and professional hierarchies. The open-door
 audience (majlis) remains the primary forum for expression of
 opinion or grievance. Any male citizen or expatriate may
 attend these sessions, which the King, princes, and all
 important officials, national and local, hold regularly and
 openly. Since the assassination of King Faisal before a
 majlis in 1975, however, kings have reduced the frequency of
 these personal contacts with the public. Access to King Fahd,
 to whom decisions on some apparently minor matters are
 referred, is considered by ordinary Saudis to be quite
 difficult. Typical topics raised in a majlis are complaints
 about bureaucratic delay or insensitivity, requests for
 redress or assistance, and criticism of particular acts of
 
 
 1624
 
 SAUDI ARABIA
 government affecting personal or family welfare. Broader
 political concerns--Saudi social, economic, or foreign
 policy-are raised only occasionally. Either the King or the
 Crown Prince meets with Sunni religious leaders at least once
 a week.
 This institutionalized but informal method of ascertaining
 public opinion through consultation has limitations.
 Participation by women in the process is severely restricted
 in most parts of the country, although there are reports that
 women may seek redress through female-members of the royal'
 family. In the Eastern province, women may make written
 appeals to the Provincial Governor, although they are barred
 from appearing in person at his weekly majlis. As
 governmental functions have become increasingly complex, time
 consuming, and centralized in Riyadh, direct public access to
 senior officials has become more difficult. King Fahd
 announced in November his intention to create a Consultative
 Council, although by year's end no details had been announced.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There are no human rights groups in Saudi Arabia, and none
 critical of Saudi policies would be permitted to operate,
 given the existing restriction on freedoms of speech and
 association. AI, in its 1989 Report, stated that the Foreign
 Minister wrote to the organization in January 1988 indicating
 Saudi willingness to discuss with AI officials "the origins of
 human rights in Islam and the principles of the Shari'a and
 its implementation in the kingdom of Saudi Arabia." In its
 1990 report, AI said that it had written to the Government
 proposing that an AI delegation visit Saudi Arabia to discuss
 human rights concerns. Such a visit had not been scheduled as
 of the end of 1990,despite occasional rumors to the contrary.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Although racial discrimination is illegal in Saudi Arabia,
 substantial societal prejudice based on ethnic or national
 origin still exists. Foreign workers from Africa and Asia are
 subject to various forms of discrimination, as are Saudis from
 the Yemeni-influenced areas of southwest Saudi Arabia. In
 1990 there were reports of informal discrimination against
 Jordanians, Palestinians, and Yemenis, primarily because of
 the positions taken on the Persian Gulf crisis by their
 leaderships.
 Women in Saudi Arabia have few substantive political and
 social rights, and they are not equal members of society.
 Women, including foreigners, may not drive motor vehicles or
 bicycles, and there are restrictions on their use of public
 facilities when men are present. After the recent
 demonstration to support women's driving (see section 2.b),
 the Government ruled women's driving illegal, the first
 official codification of what had been accepted social
 custom. By law and custom, women may not undertake domestic
 or foreign travel alone (see Section 2.d.). Women are
 restricted to specially designated sections in the rear of
 urban buses with separate entrances. In public, Muslim women
 are expected to wear the abaya (a lightweight, black garment
 covering the entire body and, often, the face). Saudi
 authorities have repeatedly said that non-Muslim women need
 
 
 1625
 SAUDI ARABIA
 not wear the abaya. However, Saudi custom encourages many to
 do so, or at least to wear loose-fitting clothing extending
 below elbows and knees. Most incidents of Mutawwi'in
 harassment of women about their clothing in 1990 involved
 foreign women who either left their hair uncovered or were not
 wearing--or were improperly wearing--abayas. Female
 circumcision or other mutilation is not practiced in most
 parts of Saudi Arabia, although there are indications that it
 may persist among African settlers in the southwestern Tihama
 region.
 Little is known about the extent of violence against women,
 and the Government does not keep statistics on such abuse.
 "Islamic advice" columns in the Saudi press sometimes
 recommend strict disciplining of women as part of a proper
 marriage. Foreign embassies have received numerous reports of
 sexualabuse of female domestics by Saudi employers. It is
 almost impossible for these women to obtain redress in the
 courts due to their strict evidentiary rules and the women's
 fears of reprisals, although a few employers have reportedly
 been punished for such abuses. There are as yet no private
 support groups or religious associations to which these women
 could turn for assistance.
 In addition to these customary and legal restrictions, Saudi
 women are subject to discrimination inherent in the Islamic
 legal system. Under Islamic law a daughter's share of an
 inheritance is less than that of her brother, although the
 brother has financial obligations to his mother and sisters.
 Women must demonstrate legally specified grounds for divorce,
 but men may divorce without grounds. If divorced or widowed,
 a woman normally may keep her children until they attain the
 age of 9 years, but then they revert to the husband's family,
 to whom they belong under Islamic law. American women married
 to Saudis have frequently been barred from visiting their
 children after divorce. In a Shari'a court, the testimony of
 one man equals that of two women. Although Islamic law
 permits polygamy, it is becoming less common, especially in
 cities and among younger, Saudis. Islamic legal precepts limit
 the number of wives to.four and require a husband who has more
 than one wife to treat each of his wives equally.
 Employment opportunities for Saudi women are extremely
 limited, although there has been some slight improvement in
 recent years. In practice, most employment opportunities are
 in the field of education, with some available in health care
 and a relatively few in business, engineering, and the media.
 In September, as part of the Saudi Government's response to
 the Persian Gulf crisis, King Fahd called upon Saudi women to
 volunteer for nursing and social services. Free but
 segregated education through the university level is available
 to Saudi women, and the number of women enrolled in the
 university system is said to be more than a million, up about
 50 percent in the past 5 years. Saudi men are able to study
 overseas; Saudi women may not unless accompanied by an
 immediate male relative--usually a practical impossibility.
 Elderly members of Saudi society generally enjoy exemplary
 care and support. Their status within the still traditional
 extended families protects them against the neglect or abuse
 often found in other societies.
 The. large expatriate work force-does not, for the most part,
 receive the same economic and social benefits available to
 native Saudis and must conform to restrictive Saudi social
 
 
 1626
 
 SAUDI ARABIA
 standards. Highly.skilled or high-ranking foreign workers are
 allowed to bring their immediate families to-live with them.
 However, visits by other relatives of foreigners working in
 Saudi Arabia, including foreign diplomats, are difficult to
 arrange. Employment opportunities for non-Muslims are
 circumscribed.
 Saudi Shi'a face discrimination in government and industrial
 employment, especially in jobs-with national -ecurity
 implications, which are broadly defined. The government
 petroleum company, Saudi Aramco, which traditionally provided
 large numbers of jobs to Shi'a, reportedly has been instructed
 to cease all further hiring of Shi'a and to phase out
 gradually all Shi'a working in responsible positions. Shi'a
 also face some limitations on their access to social services,
 despite efforts by the Government to improve the social
 service infrastructure in predominantly Shi'a areas of the
 country. Since the Iranian revolution, some Shi'a have been
 subjected periodically to surveillance and limitations on
 their travel abroad.
 Members of the royal family, and of other powerful families,
 are not subject to the same legal constraints as other
 Saudis. Princes and other influential persons may not be
 subject to customs inspection on entering the country.
 Government contracts are allegedly often awarded on the basis
 of influence, and foreign companies doing business in Saudi
 Arabia are often said to need an influential "sponsor,"
 frequently a member of the royal family, to be successful.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Government decrees prohibit the formation of labor unions and
 strike-activity. Saudi Arabia has been a member of the
 International Labor Organization (ILO) since 1976.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Collective bargaining is forbidden. There are no special
 economic zones in the country.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced labor has been prohibited since 1962 by a royal decree
 that abolished slavery in Saudi Arabia, and Saudi ratification
 of ILO Conventions 29 and 105 on forced labor have the force
 of law. Some 3.5 to 4 million of Saudi Arabia's total labor
 pool of 7 to 8 million workers are expatriates, mostly from
 the Third World. Forced or compulsory labor, in the usual
 sense, is not known to exist, but since employers generally
 exercise control- over the movements of foreign employees,
 situations that could be described as forced labor can occur,
 especially in remote areas where workers are unable to leave
 their place of work. There are also reports that female
 workers are sometimes prevented from leaving the homes of
 their employers and forced to work 12 to 16 hours per day, 7
 days a week. In addition, there are reports of workers whose
 employers have refused to pay the accumulated salary of
 several months or even years and other promised benefits. In
 cases involving delay of salary, workers have recourse to the
 labor courts, where workers' wages are considered "first-class
 privileged debts," secured by a lien on all of the employer's
 property and enforceable for collection before all other debts.
 
 
 1627
 SAUDI ARABIA
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 There is no minimum age for workers employed in
 family-operated businesses or in other situations that are
 construed as extensions of the household, e.g., farmers,
 herdsmen, and domestic servants, since they are not covered by
 Saudi Arabia's labor regulations. In other cases, the labor
 regulations provide for a minimum age of 13, which may be
 waived by the Ministry of Labor with the consent of the
 juvenile's guardian. Women and children under age 18 may not
 be employed in hazardous or harmful industries, such as mines
 or industries employing power-operated machinery.
 While there is no formal governmental -entity charged with
 enforcing the minimum age of employment for children, the
 Ministry of Justice has jurisdiction. The Ministry has acted
 as a plaintiff in the very few cases that have arisen against
 alleged violators.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 There is no legal minimum wage. Saudi labor regulations
 establish a maximum 48-hour workweek at regular pay, and allow
 employers to require up to 12 additional hours of overtime at
 time-and-a-half pay.
 There are numerous reports of foreign nationals coming to
 Saudi Arabia on promises of certain pay and benefits, only to
 find that the contract they sign upon arrival specifies lower
 levels of both. Other reports suggest that some workers sign
 contracts in their home countries and are then asked to sign
 less favorable ones upon arrival. To solve these problems,
 some foreign governments have begun utilizing employment
 organizations which negotiate salary and benefits in advance
 for their nationals. These organizations periodically check
 on the results of their efforts through their embassies and
 the Saudi labor courts.
 Saudi labor regulations require employers to protect most
 workers from job-related hazards and disease, but workers
 employed in family-operated businesses, farmers, herdsmen, and
 domestic servants are not covered by these regulations. The
 law specifically prohibits employers from requiring workers to
 work outside when the temperature exceeds 122 degrees
 Fahrenheit. Labor Ministry inspectors and the labor courts
 are seeking, with some success, to enforce the labor code, but
 foreign nationals report frequent failures to enforce health
 and safety standards.
 Saudi Arabia has a generous social security program. Most
 foreign workers were formerly eligible to participate in this
 program on the same basis as Saudis, but were excluded from
 participation in 1987. Saudi Arabia is now refunding all
 previous contributions by foreign laborers to these programs
 with interest.
 Foreign workers reside in Saudi Arabia in an explicitly
 temporary status comparable to workers who enter the United
 States under temporary labor contracts. As a consequence,
 they are officially barred from seeking employment with anyone
 but their sponsor, although in practice many do change jobs
 during the course of their stay in Saudi Arabia. If
 dismissed, foreign workers are officially obliged to leave the
 country by a date set by their employers, although many do
 stay on in alternate employment. In some cases, foreigners,
 
 
 1628
 SAUDI ARABIA
 who have worked in Saudi Arabia for many decades and who may
 have no country to which they can return, find themselves
 required to leave the country immediately if demanded by the
 employers or upon retirement.
 There are numerous reports of domestic servants being victims
 of overwork and sexual and physical abuse. As noted above,
 domestiu positions, such as maid, nanny, and cook, are not
 covered by Saudi labor regulations. This fact, plus ignorance
 of the labor regulations, inability to understand Arabic, and
 fear of retribution from their employers, have generally
 militated against maids pressing charges in court. The
 Government, in general, considers cases involving domestic
 servants to be private family matters and will not get
 involved unless clear-cut charges of severe abuse are brought
 to its attention.
 
 
 1629
