 SAUDI ARABIA
 Saudi Arabia is a monarchy without elected representative institutions or political
 parties. It is ruled by King Fahd bin Abd Al-Aziz Al Saud, a son of King Abd Al-
 Aziz Al Saud, who unified the country in the early 20th century. The King and the
 Crown Prince are chosen from among the male descendants of King Abd A1-Aziz.
 There is no written constitution. There is no concept of the separation of religion
 and state. The Government enforces adherence to the precepts of a rigorously con-
 servative form of Islam-a position that enjoys near-consensus support among Saudi
 citizens.
 In 1992 King Fahd appointed a Consultative Council, the Majlis Ash-Shura, and
 similar provincial assemblies. The Council began holding sessions in 1994. The Gov-
 ernment does not permit the establishment of political parties and suppresses oppo-
 sition views. The legal system is based on Shai'a, or Islamic law. Most Saudis re-
 spect the legal system which they believe is divinely inspired.
 Police and border forces under the Ministry of Interior are responsible for internal
 security. Members of the security forces committed abuses. The Mutawwa'in, or Re-
 ligious Police, compose the Committee to Prevent Vice and Promote Virtue, a semi-
 autonomous agncy that encourages adherence to Islamic values by monitorinff, pub-
 lic behavior. The Mutawwa'in are government employees; however, private citizens
 sometimes represent themselves as Mutawwa'in when in fact they are not. The
 Mutawwa'in continued to confront, and sometimes abuse, citizens and foreigners of
 both sexes.
 The oil industry has transformed Saudi Arabia from a pastoral, agricultural, and
 commercial society to a rapidly urbanizing one characterized by large-scale infra-
 structure projects, the emergence of a welfare state, and millions of foreign workers.
 Oil revenues account for 37 percent of the gross domestic product (GDP) and 72 per-
 cent of government income. Agriculture accounts for only about 8 percent of GDP.
 Government spending, including spending on the national airline, power, water,
 telephone, education and health services, accounts for 36 percent of GDP. About 37
 percent of the economy is in private hands, and the Government is promoting fur-
 ther privatization of the economy.
 The Government commits or tolerates serious abuses. Aspects of the law prohibit
 or restrict freedoms of speech, press, assembly, and association. There is systematic
 discrimination against women, and strict limitations, and even suppression, of the
 rights of workers and ethnic and religious minorities. Ministry of Interior officers
 allegedly abused prisoners and facilitated incommunicado detention in contradiction
 of Saudi law, but with the acquiescence of the Government. Arbitrary arrest and
 prolonged detention are problems, as well as violence against women. There is no
 mechanism for citizens to change their government. Since the death of King Abd
 Al-Aziz, the King and Crown Prince have been chosen from among his sons, who
 themselves have had preponderant influence in the choice. A 1992 royal decree re-
 serves for the King exclusive power to name the Crown Prince. The Government
 bases its legitimacy on governance according to Islamic law. The Government dis-
 agrees with internationally accepted definitions of human rights and views Islamic
 law as the only necessary guide to protect human rights.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudcial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings by government officials. However, in August Abdullah
 Bin Abd Al-Rahman Al-Hidaif, a supporter of the Committee for the Defense of Le-
 gitimate Rights (CDLR), an opposition group based in London, was sentenced to
 death by aSaudi court and executed for the 1994 attempted murder by acid of an
 Interior Ministry official. Al-Hidaif's execution, by beheading, was carried out as a
 form of   a'zeer"-as punishment justifiably disproportionate to the crime so as to
 deter others who might contemplate similar crimes, or even sympathize with acts
 
 
 1250
 of political resistance that bring disunity to the community. Nine others associated
 with AI-Hidaif were sentenced to prison terms for related crimes (see Sections 1.d.
 and i.e.).
 In November unidentified assailants set off two car bombs near the Saudi Na-
 tional Guard headquarters in Riyadh, killing 6 people, including 5 Americans, and
 wounding 60. At least two previously unknown groups claimed responsibility, but
 their statements shed no light on the identity of the perpetrators. Another obscure
 group warned twice earlier in the year that U.S. and British military personnel
 would become "legitimate targets" if they did not depart the Kingdom. A govern-
 ment investigation into the bombing was ongoing at year's end.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degradinl Treatment or Punishment.-
 There were credible reports that the authorities continued to torture and otherwise
 abuse detainees, including foreigners. A common method of torture is beating, espe-
 cially "fallaqa," which is a beating on the soles of the feet. The authorities aso de-
 prive detainees of sleep.
 Ministry of Interior officers are allegedly responsible for most incidents of abuse.
 The Government's failure to announce the punishment of human rights abusers has
 contributed to the public perception that abuses may be committed with impunity.
 An acquaintance of detained religious activist Salman Al-Awdah claimed that the
 cleric was hospitalized in January with a kidney ailment following beatings at the
 hands of Interior Ministry officials. It is not possible to verify such claims.
 The Mutawwa'in and uniformed policemen were also responsible for abuse. On the
 eve of the new year, Mutaww'in raided a private party and arrested dozens of young
 Saudis and foreigners, including minors, for associating with unrelated persons of
 the opposite sex, and for suspicion of possessing alcohol One detainee was chained
 to a chair after arrest and struck by several Mutawwa'in. He was later forced to
 stand with his arms outstretched; whenever hip arms lowered from exhaustion, a
 uniformed policeman would ignite a cigarette lighter under his outstretched arms
 and fingers. Other persons attending the party were also physically abused during
 and after their arrest.
 The Government rigorously observes criminal punishments according to its inter-
 pretation of Islamic law, including amputation for repeated theft, execution by be-
 heading, and stoning. In 1995 the authorities beheaded 191 persons, including 5
 women. Whereas in 1994 all persons executed had been convicted of one of only
 three capital offenses--rape, murder, or drug trafficking-persons were executed in
 1995 for a wider variety of crimes, including alcohol trafficking, armed robbery,
 adultery, practicing witchcraft, and attempted murder. The 1995 total was consider-
 ably higher than the 59 executed in 1994. There were twice as many non-Saudi exe-
 cuted as Saudis.
 In accordance with Shari'a, repeated thievery is punished by amputation of the
 right hand. In 1995 they imposed this punishment on two Saudis and seven foreign-
 ers, including one woman. One Sudanese convicted of murder had a hand and a leg
 amputated. For less serious crimes, such as drunkenness or publicly flouting Islamic
 precepts, flogging with a cane is frequently the punishment.
 Conditions in standard jails and prisons vary throughout the kingdom. Prisons,
 particularly in the Eastern Province, are of generally high quality, with air-condi-
 tioned cells, good nutrition, regular exercise, and careful patrolling by prison guards.
 Some detainees in police station jails, however, have complained of overcrowding
 and unsanitary conditions under which dozens of inmates share a communal cell
 and a single toilet cut into the cell floor. Family members are allowed access.
 Boards of Investigation and Public Prosecution, organized on a regional basis,
 were established by the King in 1993. The members of these boards have the right
 to inspect prisons, review prisoners' files, and hear their complaints. The Govern-
 ment, however, does not permit visits to jails or prisons by human rights monitors.
 Some officials from foreign embassies have been granted regular access to incarcer-
 ated foreign citizens.
 No impartial observer is allowed access to specialized Ministry of Interior prisons,
 such as Al-Hair Prison south of Riyadh, where the Government detains persons ac-
 cused of political subversion.
 Representatives of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
 are present at the Raffia refugee camp housing former Iraqi prisoners of war and
 civilians who fled Iraq following the Gulf War. According to UNHCR officials, there
 is no systematic abuse of refugees by camp guards. When occasional instances of
 abuse are reported, the Saudi authorities are generally responsive and willing to
 reprimand abusive guards. The camp itself is comfortable and well-run.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law prohibits arbitrary arrest. How-
 ever, arresting officers have traditionally exercised broad discretion in determining
 
 
 1251
 the grounds for arrest and have frequently set their own standards for the rights
 of detainees. As a result, there have traditionally been few procedures to safeguard
 against abuse.
 Authorities usually detain suspects for no longer than 3 days before charging
 them, in accordance with a regulation issued by the Ministry of Interior in 1983,
 although serious exceptions have been reported. The regulation also has provisions
 for bail in cases involving other than major crimes. Also, detainees are sometimes
 released on the recognizance of a patron or sponsoring employer without the pay-
 ment of bail. If not released, the accused are detained on average 1 to 2 months
 before going to trial, although there are reports of persons having been detained for
 years awaiting action on their cases.
 The UNHCR reported that seven Iraqi refugees in Rafha camp were arrested De-
 cember 1992 following the murder of a fellow refugee. After 2  years of incarcer-
 ation, six of the detainees were released in June, having never been tried or offi-
 cialy charged.
 There is no established procedure providing detainees with the right to inform
 their family of their arrest. If asked, the authorities usually confirm an arrest of
 foreign residents. In general, however, embassies learn about such arrests through
 informal channels. The authorities may take as long as several months to provide
 official notification of the arrest of foreigners, if at all. In capital cases, foreigners
 have been tried and executed without notification of their arrest delivered to their
 embassies.
 The Mutawwa'in have the authority to detain people for no more than 24 hours
 for violation of behavior standards. However, they sometimes exceed this limit be-
 fore delivering detainees to the regular police (see Section 1.f.). Current procedures
 require a police officer to accompany the Mutawwain before the latter makes an ar-
 rest, although this requirement is often ignored. A number of long-term foreign resi-
 dents have attested that the Mutawwa'in are much more active in harassing indi-
 viduals than a decade ago, and have become increasingly active since the Gulf War.
 Detainees arrested by the General Directorate of Investigation (GDl), the Ministry
 of Interior's Security Service, or "Mubahith," are commonly held incommunicado
 during the initial phase of an investigation, which may last weeks or months. The
 GDI allows the detainees only limited contact with their families or lawyers.
 The authorities often detain without charge people who publicly criticize the Gov-
 ernment or charge them with attempting to destabilize the Government (see Sec-
 tions 2.a. and 3). In August the Government sentenced one Saudi man to 5 years
 in prison in part for possessing leaflets and posters mentioning the CDLR, and an-
 other to 3 years in prison for attending meetings in support of the group and its
 exiled spokesman, Mohammad Al-Mas'ari. Both were associates of Abdullah .Bin
 Abd A1.Rahman A1-Hidaif, who was executed for assaulting a security official with
 acid (see Sections L.a. and 1.e.).
 The vociferously antigovernment CDLR has made repeated claims that more than
 300 clerics are currently detained for political reasons, although this number is im-
 possible to corroborate. The authorities continued to detain Salman Al-Awdah and
 Safar Al-Hawali, Muslim clerics who were arrested in September 1994 for publicly
 criticizing the Government. Their detention sparked protest demonstrations result-
 ing in the arrest of 157 persons for antigovernment activities in October 1994. At
 the end of 1994, 27 remained in detention pending investigations; the Government
 did not announced the release of any of those detainees during the year. The thou-
 sands of prisoners and detainees released in February under the annual Ramadan
 amnesty included no political dissidents.
 e. Denial of Fair Public TriaL.-The independence of the judiciary is prescribed
 by law and is usually respected in practice, although judges occasionally accede to
 the influence of members of the royal family and their associates.
 Judicial, financial, and administrative control of the courts rests with the Min-
 istry of Justice. Jurisprudence is based on Shari'a, or Islamic law. Regular Shari'a
 courts exercise jurisdiction over common criminal cases and civil suits regarding
 marriage, divorce, child custody, and inheritance. These courts base judgments
 largely on the Koran and on the Sunna, the authenticated actions and deeds of the
 Prophet Muhammad. Cases involving relatively small penalties are tried in sum-
 mary courts; more serious crimes are adjudicated in general courts. Appeals from
 both courts are heard by the appeals courts in Mecca and Riyadh.
 Other civil proceedings, including those involving claims against the Government
 and enforcement of foreign judgments, are held before specialized administrative tri-
 bunals, such as the Commission for the Settlement of Labor Disputes and the Board
 of Grievances.
 
 
 1252
 The military justice system has jurisdiction over uniformed personnel and civil
 servants charged with violations of military regulations. Court-martial decisions are
 reviewed by the Minister of Defense and Aviation and by the King.
 The Government permits Shi'a Muslims to use their own legal tradition to adju-
 dicate only noncriminal cases within their community.
 There is a Supreme Judicial Council, which is not a court and may not reverse
 decisions made by an appeals court. However, the Council may refer decisions back
 to the lower courts for reconsideration. Its members are appointed by the King, as
 are most senior jurists, called muiftis. Only the Council may discipline or remove a
 There is also a Council of Senior Religious Scholars, which is an autonomous body
 of 15 senior religious jurists, inciuding the Minister of Justice. It establishes the
 legal principles to guide lower court judges in deciding individual cases.
 efendants usually appear without an attorney before a judge, who determines
 guilt or innocence in accordance with Shari'a standards. Defense lawyers may offer
 their client advice before trial or may attend the trial as interpreters for those unfa-
 miliar with Arabic. The courts do not provide foreign defendants with translators.
 There is no licensing procedure for lawyers. Individuals may choose any person to
 represent them by a apower of attorney" filed with the court and the Ministry of
 Justice. Most trials are closed.
 In the absence of two witnesses, or four witnesses in the case of adultery, confes-
 sions before a judge are almost always required for criminal conviction-a situation
 which repeatedy has led prosecuting authorities to seek forced confessions. Sentenc-
 igs not uniform and may vary according to the nationality of the defendant.
 Under Shari'a law, as interpreted and applied in Saudi Arabia, crimes against
 Muslims receive harsher penalties than those against non-Muslims. In the case of
 wrongfl death, the amount of indemnity or "blood money" awarded to relatives var-
 ies with the nationality, religion, and sex of the victim. A sentence may be changed
 at any stage of review, except for punishments stipulated by the Koran.
 Provincial governors have the authority to exercise leniency and reduce a judge's
 sentence. In some instances, governors have reportedly threatened and even de-
 tained judges over disagreements on their decisions. In general, the public perceives
 members of the royal family, and other powerful families, as not subject to the same
 rule of law as ordinary citizens. For example,  dges do not have the power to issue
 a warrant summoning any member of the royal family.
 The King and his advisors review cases involving capital punishment to ensure
 that the court applied the proper legal and Islamic principles. The King has the au-
 thority to grant pardons and commute death sentences but does not have the au-
 thority to pardon capital crimes committed against individuals. In such cases, he
 may request the victim's next of kin to pardon the murderer-usually in return for
 compensation from the family or the King.
 There is insufficient information to determine the number of political prisoners
 because the Government does not provide information on such persons or respond
 to inquiries about them. Moreover, the Government conducts closed trials for per-
 sons who may be political prisoners and in other cases has detained persons incom-
 municad for long periods while under investigation. At year's end, at least nine
 persons were serving prison terms for their connections to CDLR and alleged in-
 volvement in the 1994 assault on an Interior Ministry official (see Sections 1.c. and
 l.d.).
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 sanctity of family life and the inviolability of the home are among the most fun-
 damental of Islamic precepts. Royal decrees announced in 1992 include provisions
 calling for the Government to defend the home from unlawful incursions.
 The police must generally demonstrate reasonable cause and obtain permission
 from the provincial governor before searching a private home, but warrants are not
 required. However, some Mutawwa'in continued to enter homes forcibly, searching
 for evidence of non-Islamic behavior, and harassing and abusing perceived trans-
 gressors.
 Customs officials routinely open mail for contraband including material deemed
 pornographic as well as non-Muslim religious material. They regularly confiscate
 materials deemed offensive. The authorities use informants, wiretaps, and open
 mail in internal security matters.
 The Government enforces most social and Islamic religious norms, which are mat-
 ters of law (see Section 5). Women may not marry non-Saudis without government
 permission; men must obtain approval from the Ministry of Interior to marry
 women from countries outside the 6 states of the Gulf Cooperation Council. Al-
 though women are prohibited from marrying non-Muslims, men have the right to
 marry Christians and Jews, in accordance with Islamic law.
 
 
 1253
 Both citizens and foreigners were targets of harassment by members of the
 Mutawwa'in and by religious vigilantes acting independently of the Mutawwa'in.
 The Government enjoins the Mutawwa'in to follow established procedures and to
 offer instruction in a polite manner following especially egregious altercations, the
 authorities have temporarily exerted tighter control over the Mutawwa'in. The Gov-
 ernment, however, has not condemned the actions of religious vigilantes or sought
 to disband such groups.
 Mutawwa'in enforcement of strict standards of social behavior included the clo-
 sure of commercial establishments during the daily prayer observances, modest
 dress in public, and avoidance of video tape rental shops. They harassed Saudi and
 foreign women for failure to observe strict dress codes, and for being in the company
 of males who are not their close relatives. They also harassed and arrested non-
 Muslims attempting to conduct religious services (see Section 2.c.).
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The law severely limits freedom of speech and
 press. The authorities do not countenance criticism of Islam, the ruling family, or
 the Government. Persons whose criticisms align them with an organized political
 opposition are subject to arrest and detention until they confess their crime or sign
 a statement promising not to resume such criticisms, which is tantamount to a con-
 fession.
 In 1994 CDRL spokesman Al-Mas'ari secretly fled to the United Kingdom, where
 he sought political asylum and established an overseas branch of the CDLR (see sec-
 tions 1.c., 1.d. and 4). After the CDLR criticized the Government in the inter-
 national press in 1993, security forces detained 38 of its members, including Al-
 Mas'ari, confiscated their passports, and forbade them to travel or speak publicly.
 The authorities dismissed several founding members from their government jobs.
 They subsequently released the detainees after they signed statements promising
 not to discuss the Government's policies or communicate with anyone outside the
 country by telephone or facsimile machine. AI-Mas'ari was released in November
 1993 after spending 6 months in detention.
 In the United Kingdom, AI-Mas'ari continued to disseminate tracts critical of the
 Government, particularly of King Fahd, Interior Minister Prince Naif, and Riyadh
 governor Prince Salman. His publicized views have expressed opposition to peace
 with Israel and to Saudi support for the peace process. After A1-Mas'ari fled, secu-
 rity forces arrested 15 to 20 of his relatives and supporters. In late 1994, the Gov-
 ernment released several of these detainees including Dr. Fouad Dahlawi; Al-
 Mas'ari's brother, Lu'ay A1-Mas'ari; and Al-Mas'ari's brothers-in-law, Rashad and
 Nabil Al-Mudarris. The Government did not publicly acknowledge the detention of
 any CDLR supporter until August when it sentenced nine remaining detainees to
 prison terms and executed another (see Sections l.a. and 1.d.).
 The press is privately owned but publicly subsidized. A 1982 media policy state-
 ment and a 1965 national security law prohibit the dissemination of criticism of the
 Government. The Media Policy Statement urges journalists to uphold Islam, oppose
 atheism, promote Arab interests, and preserve the cultural heritage of Saudi Arabia.
 The Ministry of Information appoints, and may remove, the editors in chief. It also
 provides guidelines to newspapers on controversial issues. The Government owns
 the Saudi Press Agency, which expresses official government views.
 Newspapers typically publish domestic news on sensitive subjects, such as crime
 or terrorism, only after the authorities arrest and sentence the perpetrators. The
 Government suppresses any news regarded as a threat to national security. How-
 ever the Saudi media coverage of the November bombing of the National Guard
 headquarters was complete and timely. The press reports most foreign news objec-
 tively unless it has adverse implications for Saudi Arabia.
 The authorities censor stories about the Kingdom in the foreign press. Censors
 may remove or blacken the offending articles, glue pages together, or prevent cer-
 _tain issues of foreign publications from entering the market. he Government tight-
 ly restricts the entry of foreign journalists into the Kingdom.
 The Government owns and operates the television and radio companies. Govern-
 ment censors review foreign programs and songs often removing any reference to
 politics, religions other than Islam, pork or pigs, alcohol, or sexual innuendo.
 There are as many as 300,000 satellite receiving dishes which provide citizens
 with foreign broadcasts. The legal status of these devices is ambiguous. The Govern-
 ment ordered a halt to their import in 1992-at the request of religious leaders who
 objected to foreign programming available on satellite channels. In March 1994, the
 Government banned the sale, installation, and maintenance of dishes and support-
 ing devices, but the number of dishes continues to increase and residents may le-
 galy subscribe to satellite decoding services that require a dish.
 
 
 1254
 The Government censors all forms of public artistic expression. The authorities
 prohibit cinemas and public musical or theatrical performances, except those that
 are strictly folkloric.
 Academic freedom is restricted. The authorities prohibit the study of evolution,
 Freud, Marx, Western music, and Western philosophy. Some professors believe that
 government and conservative religious informers monitor their classroom comments.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Government strictly limits
 these freedoms. It prohibits public demonstrations as a means of political expression
 and the establishment of political parties or any type of opposition group (see Sec-
 tion 3). By its power to license associations, the Government ensures that groups
 conform to public policy. Rare exceptions occur.
 Public meetings are segregated by sex. Unless meetings are sponsored by diplo-
 matic missions or approved by the appropriate governor, foreign residents seeking
 to hold unsegregate meetings risk arrest and deportation. The authorities monitor
 any large gathering of people, especially of women.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-:-Freedom of religion does not exist. Islam is the official
 religion, and all citizens must be Muslims. The Government prohibits the practice
 of other religions. In December seven Indian nationals were reportedly arrested in
 the city of Jubayl for conducting Christmas services. They were soon released after
 their embassy's intervention. An undetermined number of Filipinos were arrested
 in Damman on the same charge.
 Conversion by a Muslim to another religion is considered apostasy. Public apos-
 tasy is a crime under Shari'a law and punishable by death. There were no execu-
 tions in 1995 for apostasy, although one Saudi man-by law a Muslim-was exe-
 cuted for practicing witchcraft.
 Islamic practice is generally limited to that of the Wahhabi sect's interpretation
 of the Hanbali school of Sunni Islamic jurisprudence. Practices contrary to this in-
 terpretation, such as visits to the graves of renowned Muslims, are discouraged.
 The Shi'a Muslim minority (500,000 of over 12 million citizens) lives mostly in the
 Eastern Province. They are the objects of officially sanctioned social and economic
 discrimination (see Section 5). Prior to 1990, the Government prohibited Shi'ite pub-
 lic processions during the Islamic month of Muharram and restricted other proces-
 sions and congregations to designated areas in the major Shi'ite cities. Since 1990
 the authorities have permitted marches on the Shi'a holiday of Ashura, provided
 that the marchers do not display banners or engage in self-flagellation. In June the
 Ashura commemorations in the Eastern Province passed without incident.
 The Government seldom permits private construction of Shilte mosques. The
 Shi'a have declined government offers to build state-supported mosques because
 Shi'ite motifs would be prohibited in them. One of the 90 members of the Majlis
 Ash-Shura is a Shi'.
 The Government does not permit public or private non-Muslim religious activities.
 Persons wearing religious symbols of any kind in public risk confrontation with the
 Mutawwa'in. The general prohibition against religious symbols applies also to Mus-
 lims. A Muslim wearing a Koranic necklace in public would be admonished. Non-
 Muslim worshippers risk arrest, lashing, and deportation for engaging in any reli-
 gious activity  at attracts official attention.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Government restricts the travel of Saudi women, who must obtain
 written permission from their closest male relative before the authorities will allow
 them to board public transportation between different parts of the country or travel
 abroad (see Section 5). Saudi males may travel anywhere within the country.
 The Government requires foreign residents to carry identification cards. It does
 not permit foreigners to travel outside the city of their employment or change their
 workplace without their sponsor's permission. Foreign residents who travel in the
 Kingdom are often asked by the authorities to show they that possess letters of per-
 mission from their employers.
 Sponsors generally retain possession of the workers' passports. Foreign workers
 must obtain permission from their sponsors to travel abroad. If sponsors are in-
 volved in a commercial or labor dispute with foreign employees, they may ask the
 authorities to prohibit the employees from departing the country until the dispute
 is resolved. Some sponsors use this pressure tactic to resolve disputes in their
 favor-or to have foreign employees deported.
 The Government seizes the passports of all potential suspects and witnesses in
 criminal cases and suspends the issuance of exit visas to them, until the case is
 tried. As a result, some foreign nationals are forced to remain in the Kingdom for
 lengthy periods against their will. The authorities sometimes confiscate the pass-
 ports of suspected subversives. The Government prevents Shi'a Muslims believed to
 have pro-Iranian sympathies from traveling abroad.
 
 
 1255
 Citizens may emigrate, but the law prohibits dual citizenship. There are no provi-
 sions for long-term foreign residents to acquire citizenship. However, foreigners are
 granted citizenship in rare cases, generally through the advocacy of an influential
 patron.
 The 1992 Basic Law provides that "the State will grant political asylum if the
 public interest mitigates- in favor of it. The language does not specify clear rules
 for adjudicating asylum cases. In general, the authorities regard refugees and dis-
 placed persons like other foreign workers: they must have sponsors for employment
 or risk expulsion. Of the 35,000 Iraqi civilians and former prisoners of war allowed
 refuge in Saudi Arabia at the end of the Gulf War, none has been granted perma-
 nent asylum by the Saudis.
 At year's end, 21,000 of the original 35,000 had been resettled in third countries
 or voluntarily repatriated to Iraq. Most of the remaining 14,000 refugees are re-
 stricted to the Raffa refugee camp. In 1993 Human Rights Watch reported that ref-
 ugees were forcibly repatriated to Iraq after staging a riot at the Ratha camp. How-
 ever, the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees has monitored over 2,700 persons
 voluntarily returning to Iraq from Rafha since December 1991 and found no evi-
 dence of forcible repatriation of bona fide camp refugees. However, Iraqis who have
 attempted to infiltrate the camp subsequent to December 1991, who are not recog-
 nized as refugees by Saudi authorities, have been turned back.
 The Government has temporarily allowed some foreigners to remain in Saudi Ara-
 bia in cases where their safety would be jeopardized if they were deported to their
 home countries.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens do not have the right to change their government. There are no formal
 democratic institutions, and only a few citizens have a voice in the choice of leaders
 or in changing the political system. The King rules in matters civil and religious
 within certain limitations established by religious law, tradition, and the need to
 maintain consensus among the ruling family and religious leaders.
 The King is also the Prime Minister, and the Crown Prince serves as first deput
 Prime Minister. The King appoints all other ministers, who in turn appoint subordi-
 nate officials with cabinet concurrence.
 In 1993 the King appointed 60 members to a Consultative Council, or Majlis Ash-
 Shura. This strictly advisory body began to hold sessions in 1994; but the Council
 has maintained a very low profile andhas not publicized its work in detail
 The Council of Senior Islamic Scholars is another advisory body to the King and
 the Cabinet. It issues decisions based on Shari'a law supporting the Government's
 public policies. The Government uses the Council as an important source of religious
 Communication between citizens and the Government is usually expressed
 through client-patron relationships and by affinity groups such as tribes, families,
 and professional hierarchies. In theory, any male citizen or foreign national may ex-
 press an opinion or air a grievance at a Majlis-an open-door meeting held by the
 King, a prince, or an important national and local official. However, as govern-
 mental functions have become more complex, time-consuming, and centralized, pub-
 lic access to senior officials has become more restricted. After the assassination of
 King Faisal in 1975, Saudi kings have reduced the frequency of their personal con-
 tacts with the public. Access to King Fahd and Crown Prince Abdullah by ordinary
 citizens is difficult, in part due to strict security measures. Ministers and district
 governors more readily grant audience at a Majlis. Participation by women is re-
 stricted, although some women seek redress through female members of the royal
 family.
 Typical topics raised in a Majlis are complaints about bureaucratic delay or insen-
 sitivity, requests for redress or assistance, and criticism of particular acts of govern-
 ment affecting personal or family welfare. Broader "political" cencerns-Saudi so-
 cial, economic, or foreign policy-are raised only occasionally.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no publicly active human rights groups, and none critical of government
 policies would be permitted.
 The Committee for the Defense of Legitimate Rights was established in 1993 by
 six citizens. CDLR does not advocate internationally recognized human rights but
 takes a rigidly Islamic fundamentalist approach. Statements by CDLR supporters
 have advocated policies and actions that are antiwomen and anti-Shi'a. Other state-
 ments, attributed to its London-based spokesman, Muhammed Al Masari, have ex-
 
 
 1256
 preseed the group's "understanding of the National Guard headquarters bombing
 e Section 1.). Atr its establishment, the Government acted quickly to repress
 CDLR (see Section 2.a.).
 The Government does not permit visits by international human rights groups or
 independent monitors, nor has it signed major international human rights treaties
 and conventions. The Government disagrees with internationally accepted defini-
 tions of human rights and views Islamic law as the only necessary guide to protect
 human rights. Citations of Saudi human rights abuses by international monitors or
 foreigu governments are routinely ignored or cndemned by the Government as as-
 saults on Islam. Sharp criticism leveled by the Government of Turkey over the exe-
 cution in August of four Turkish citizens or smuggling amphetamines prompted the
 Government to issue a strong defense of the Shari'a legal code.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religon, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Systematic discrimination based on sex and religion are built into Saudi law.
 Saudi law forbids discrimination based on race, but not nationality. The Govern-
 ment and private organizations cooperate in providing services for the disabled.
 There are no indigenous linguistic minorities in Saudi Arabia.
 Women.-Hospital workers report that many women are admitted for treatment
 of injuries that apparently result from spousal violence. Some foreign women mar-
 ried to Saudis have suffered physical abuse from the spouse or father-in-law. Em-
 bassy officials must seek the assistance of government officials to intervene in such
 cases. The Government does not keep statistics on spousal or other forms of violence
 against women.
 Embassies receive many reports that employers abuse foreign women working as
 domestic servants. Embassies of countries with large domestic servant populations
 maintain safehouses to which citizens may flee from abusive employers. In August
 one such safehouse held 68 residents escaping work situations that included forced
 confinement, withholding of food, beating and other physical abuse, and rape. Often
 the abuse is at the hands of female Saudis. In general, the Government considers
 such cases as family matters and does not intervene unless charges of abuse are
 brought to its attention. It is almost impossible for foreign women to obtain redress
 in the courts due to the courts' strict evidentiary rules and the women's own fears
 of reprisals. Few employers have been punished for such abuses. There are no pri-
 vate support groups or religious associations which can assist these women.
 By religious law and social custom, women have the right to own property and
 are entitled to financial support from their husbands or male relatives. However,
 women have few political and social rights and are not treated as equal members
 of society. There are no active women's rights groups, nor would one be tolerated
 by the Government. Women, including foreigners, may not legally drive motor vehi-
 cles or ride bicycles and are restricted in their use of public facilities when men are
 present. Women must enter city buses by separate rear entrances and sit in spe-
 cially designated sections. Women risk arrest by the Mutawwa'in for riding in a ve-
 hicle driven by a male who is not an employee or a close male relative. Women are
 not admitted to a hospital for medical treatment without the consent of their male
 relative. By law and custom, women may not undertake domestic and foreign travel
 alone (see Section 2.d.).
 In public women are expected to wear the abaya, a black garment covering the
 entire body. A woman's head and face should also be covered. The Mutawwa'in gen-
 erally expect women from Arab countries, Asia, and Africa to comply more fully with
 Saudi customs of dress than they do Western women; nonetheless, in recent years
 they have increased pressure on Western women to wear the abaya and cover their
 hair.
 Women are also subject to discrimination in Islamic law which stipulates that
 daughters receive half the inheritance awarded to their brothers-reflecting the fact
 that men have financial obligations to their mothers and sisters. In a Shari'a court,
 the testimony of one man equals that of two women.
 Although Islamic law permits polygamy for men, it is becoming less common. Is-
 lamic law allows a husband four wives, provided that he treats each wife equally.
 In practice, such equality is left to the discretion of the husband. The Government
 places greater restrictions on women than on men regarding marriage to non-Saudis
 and non-Muslims (see Section 1.f.).
 Women must demonstrate legally specified grounds for divorce, but men may di-
 vorce without giving cause. If divorced or widowed, a woman normally may keep her
 children until they attain a specified age: 7 years for boys, 9 years for girls. Children
 over these ages are awarded to the divorced husband or the deceased husband's
 
 
 1257
 family. Divorced women who are foreigners are often prevented by their former hus-
 bands from visiting their children after divorce.
 Women have access to free, but segregated, education through the university
 level. They constitute 55 percent of all university graduates-but are excluded from
 studying such subjects as engineering, journalism, and architecture. Men are able
 to study overseas; women may do so only if accompanied by a spouse or an imme-
 diate male relative.
 Women comprise only 5 percent of the work force. Whereas salary and other bene-
 fits are the main concerns for men seeking employment, for women theprimary goal
 is merely establishing some toehold in the private or public sector. Most employ-
 ment opportunities for women are in education and health care, with lesser oppor-
 tunity in business, philanthropy, banking, retail sales, and the media. Women wish-
 ing to enter nontraditional fields are subject to discrimination. Women may not ac-
 cept jobs in rural areas if they are required to live apart from their families. All
 workplaces where women are present are segregated by sex. Contact with male su-
 pervisors or clients is allowed-by telephone or facsimile machine. In July the Min-
 istry of Commerce announced that women would no longer be issued business li-
 censes for work in fields that might require them to supervise foreign workers,
 interact with male clients, or deal on a regular basis with government officials.
 Children.-The Government provides all Saudi children with free education and
 medical care. Children are highly valued in society, and large families are common.
 Children are not subject to the strict social segregation faced by women, though
 they are segregated by sex in schools starting at age 7. In more general social situa-
 tions, boys are segregated at age 12, and girls at the onset of puberty. It is difficult
 to gauge the prevalence of child abuse, since the Government kee s no statistics on
 such cases and is disinclined to infringe on family privacy. Societalabuse of children
 does not appear to be a major problem.
 People With Disabilities.-Traditionaly, disabled individuals were secluded within
 the family, but the provision of government social services has increasingly brought
 them into the public domain. Public awareness and acceptance of the disabled are
 growing. The press features articles lauding the public accomplishments of disabled
 persons and sharply criticizing parents who neglect disabled children. The Govern-
 ment and private charitable organizations cooperate in education, employment, and
 other services for the disabled. The law provides hiring quotas for the disabled.
 While there is no legislation for public accessibility, newer commercial buildings
 often include such access.
 Religious Minorities.-The Government is intolerant of the practice of any non-
 Islamic religion. It also imposes restrictions on the Shi'a Muslim minority (see Sec-
 tion 2.c.). Shia citizens are discriminated against in government and employmentl
 especially in national security jobs. Several years ago the Government subjected
 Shi'a to employment restrictions in the oil industry and has not relaxed them. Some
 Sunni clerics, including Al-Awdah and one CDLR founder, have made strong anti-
 Shi'a statements (see Section 2.a.).
 Shi'a also face restrictions on access to several services, despite efforts bythe Gov-
 ernment to improve the social service infrastructure in predominantly  h'a areas
 of the country. Since the Iranian Revolution, some Shi'a have been subjected peri-
 odically to surveillance and limitations on travel abroad. Some Sunni clerics advo-
 cate stronger government discriminatory measures against Shi'a citizens, accusing
 them of plytheism and apostasy--capital offenses punishable by beheading.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Although racial discrimination is illegal,
 there is substantial societal prejudice based on ethnic or national origin. Foreign
 workers from Africa and Asia are subject to various forms of formal and informal
 discrimination and have the most difficulty in obtaining justice for their grievances.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.--Government decrees prohibit the establishment of
 labor unions and any strike activity.
 Since July Saudi Arabia has been suspended from the USq. Overseas Private In-
 vestment Corporation (OPIC) insurance programs because of the Government's lack
 of compliance with internationally recognized worker rights standards.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.--Collective bargaining is for-
 bidden. Foreign workers comprise about half of the work force. Wages are set by
 emtloyers and vary according to the nationality of the worker.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced labor has been prohibited
 since 1962 by the royal decree that abolished slavery. Ratification of the Inter-
 national Labor Organization's (ILO) conventions 29 and 105, which prohibit forced
 labor, has the force of law. However, employers have significant control over the
 
 
 1258
 movements of foreign employees, giving rise to situations that might involve forced
 labor-especially in remote areas where workers are unable to leave their place of
 work.
 Sometimes sponsors prevent foreign workers from obtaining exit visas to pressure
 them to sign a new work contract or to drop claims against their employers for un-
 paid salary. In another pressure tactic, sponsors may refuse to provide foreign work-
 ers with a "letter of no objection" which would allow them to be employed by an-
 other sponsor.
 The labor laws do not protect domestic servants. There were credible reports that
 female domestic servants were sometimes forced to work 12 to 16 hours a day, 7
 days a week. There were numerous confirmed reports of runaway maids (see Section
 5). The authorities often returned runaway maids to their employers against the
 maids' wishes.
 There have been many reports of workers whose employers have refused to pay
 several months, or even years, of accumulated salary or other promised benefits.
 Nondomestic workers with such grievances have the right to complain before the
 labor courts, but few do so because of fear of deportation. The Government abets
 the exploitation of foreign workers because the system for enforcing work contracts
 is weak and generally favors Saudi employers. Labor cases can take many months
 to reach a final ruling, during which time the employer may prevent the foreign la-
 borer from leaving the country, alternatively, an employer may delay a case until
 a worker's funds are exhausted and the worker is forced to leave the country.
 d. Minimum Ae for Employment of Children.-The minimum age for employment
 is 13 years, which may be waived by the Ministry of Labor with the consent of the
 juvenile's uardian. There is no minimum age for workers employed in family-ori-
 ented businesses or in other situations that are construed as extensions of the
 household, e.g., farmers, herdsmen, and domestic servants. Workers in such fields
 are not protected by labor regulations.
 Children under age 18 and women may not be employed in hazardous or harmful
 industries, such as mines or industries employing  wr-oprated machinery. While
 there is no formal government entity charged with enforcing the minimum age for
 employment of children, the Ministry of Justice has jurisdiction and has acted as
 plaintiff in the few cases that have arisen against alleged violators.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no legal minimum wage. Labor requ-
 lations estabish a 48-hour workweek at regular pay and allow employers to require
 up to 12 additional hours of overtime at time-and-a-half pay. Labor law provides for
 a 24-hour rest period, normally Fridays, although the employer may grant it on an-
 other day.
 Many foren nationals who have been recruited abroad have complained that
 ater arrivaln Saudi Arabia they were presented with work contracts specifying
 lower wages and fewer benefits than originally promised. Other foreign workers
 have reportedly signed contracts in their home countries and were later pressured
 to sign less favorable contracts after arrival. Reliable reports indicate that the
 length of service called for in the original contract is sometimes increased after ar-
 rival by as much as 3 years. Some employees report that at the end of their contract
 service, their employers refuse to grant permission to allow them to return home.
 The ILO has stated that the Government has not formulated legislation imple-
 menting the ILO Convention on Equal Pay and that regulations which segregate
 work places by sex, and limit vocational programs for women, violate ILO Conven-
 tion 111.
 Labor regulations require employers to protect most workers from job-related haz-
 ards and disease. Foreign nationals report frequent failures to enforce health and
 safety standards. Workers in family operated businesses, farmers, herdsmen, and
 domestic servants are not covered by these regulations.
