Saudi Arabia
Human rights conditions remain poor in Saudi Arabia. King Abdullah has not fulfilled
several specific reform promises; reforms to date have involved largely symbolic
steps to improve the visibility of women and marginally expand freedom of
expression.
Authorities continue to systematically suppress or fail to protect the rights of nine
million Saudi women and girls, eight million foreign workers, and some two million
Shia citizens. Each year thousands of people receive unfair trials or are subject
to arbitrary detention. Curbs on freedom of association, expression, and
movement, as well as a pervasive lack of official accountability, remain serious
concerns.
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
Saudi Arabia continues to treat women as legal minors, allowing male guardians
to determine whether a woman may work, study, marry, travel, or undergo certain
medical procedures. The government has not fulfilled its 2009 pledge to the
United Nations Human Rights Council to dismantle the male guardianship system.
The Ministry of Interior since October 2009 has refused to issue a 43-year-old
divorced woman cardiologist a new passport without male guardian approval. In
2010 the uncles and male guardians of a US-based adult woman with dual Saudi
and US nationality did not allow her to obtain a Saudi passport. In May Nazia
Quazi–the Indian father of 23-year-old dual Canadian and Indian national–finally
permitted his daughter to leave Saudi Arabia after luring her to the kingdom in
2007 and keeping her there, as her guardian, against her will because he disapproved
of her fiance.
A medical doctor in her forties lost a court appeal to remove her father as her
guardian after he refused to give her hand in marriage and confiscated her
income. She lives in a women’s shelter. The brothers of two unrelated women—
one in Buraida, the other in Riyadh—acting as their guardians, forced their sisters
to marry five men each, for money and against their wills. In January 2010 a court in Qasim province sentenced Sawsan Salim to 300 lashes and one-and-a-half
years in prison for “appearing [in court] without a male guardian.”
The Saudi Human Rights Commission did not respond to written requests from
Human Rights Watch that it assist Nazia Quazi, Sawsan Salim, ‘A’isha Ali, or the
women in Buraida and Riyadh. The woman in Riyadh said she had contacted the
commission but that it had failed to assist her.
Women and children who are victims of domestic violence face societal and governmental
obstacles in obtaining redress. In September the appointed Shura
Council that fulfills some functions of a parliament discussed a law aimed at better
protecting children from violence. In March officials in the Family Protection
Program said they had received 200 reports of child abuse in the previous six
months.
Saudi Arabia strictly enforces gender segregation throughout the kingdom,
including in work places, impeding women’s full participation in public life.
Women make up 14.4 percent of the workforce, triple the rate in 1992, a March
2010 study by Booz & Company found. Women’s unemployment rate is four times
that of men. Panda Supermarket in August reassigned 11 designated women
cashiers after prominent cleric Yusuf al-Ahmad called for a boycott.
Women cannot work as judges or prosecutors. Promises by the Justice Ministry in
February to draft a law allowing women lawyers to practice in court remained
unmet.
The government has not yet set a minimum legal age for marriage, but in June
issued new marriage contracts noting the bride’s age. In January, a divorced
father married off his 12-year-old daughter for 80,000 riyals (ca. US$21,300)
because his ex-wife had gained custody, Al-Riyadh newspaper reported.
Migrant Worker Rights
8.3 million migrant workers legally reside in Saudi Arabia; an unknown number of
other migrant workers are undocumented. They fill manual, clerical, and service
jobs, constituting more than half the national workforce. Many suffer multiple
abuses and labor exploitation, sometimes rising to slavery-like conditions. Saudi Arabia did not bring any prosecutions under a 2009 anti-trafficking law against
Saudis employing Nepali domestic workers trafficked from Kuwait.
Saudi Arabia made no progress reforming the restrictive kafala (sponsorship) system
that ties migrant workers’ residency permits to their employers; workers cannot
change employers or exit the country without written consent from their initial
employer or sponsor. The system fuels abuses such as employers confiscating
passports, withholding wages, and forcing migrants to work against their will.
On Saudi National Day, September 23, the king announced a six-month amnesty
for undocumented workers to return home without incurring immigration penalties.
In 2010, illegal strike actions by migrant workers increased, typically because of
unpaid salaries. In May, 30 Nepalese cleaners were repatriated after striking in
February over pay and lack of accommodation. They spent two months homeless
and three weeks in deportation detention. Also in May workers at the Dhahran
compound of Jadawel International–owned by Saudi Arabia’s third richest man,
Shaikh Muhammad bin Issa Al Jaber–went on strike over unpaid salaries and
expired residency permits. Jadawel made a partial payment in August, but by
September salary payments were again three months in arrears. In September
workers at the Mecca metro went on strike, as did over 200 Filipino workers at
Ansar hospital in Jeddah in June.
1.5 million migrant domestic workers remain excluded from the 2005 labor law.
Although the Shura Council in July 2009 approved an annex to the law extending
them limited labor protections, at this writing the government has not enacted it.
Asian embassies report thousands of complaints each year from domestic workers
forced to work 15-20 hours a day, seven days a week, and denied their
salaries. Domestic workers frequently endure forced confinement; food deprivation;
and severe psychological, physical, and sexual abuse. After returning home
in August, a Sri Lankan domestic worker had dozens of metal nails extracted from
her body that she claimed her Saudi employers had hammered into her as punishment
for complaining about long working hours. In September a Filipina
domestic worker was found dead with acid burns and stab wounds in her employers’
home in Khobar.
Criminal Justice, Arbitrary Detention, Torture, and Ill-Treatment
Detainees, including children, are commonly the victims of systematic violations
of due process and fair trial rights, including arbitrary arrest and torture and illtreatment
in detention. Saudi judges routinely sentence defendants to thousands
of lashes.
Judges can order arrest and detention, including of children, at their discretion.
Children can be tried and sentenced as adults if physical signs of puberty exist. It
was unclear whether the law setting the age of majority at 18, passed by the
Shura Council in 2008 but not yet enacted, would apply to criminal justice matters.
Authorities rarely inform suspects of the crime with which they are charged, or of
the supporting evidence. Saudi Arabia has no penal code and prosecutors and
judges largely define criminal offenses at their discretion. In April the Council of
Senior Religious Scholars in principle approved codification of Sharia. During
interrogation detainees are not assisted by lawyers; they face excessive pretrial
delays and difficulty examining witnesses or presenting evidence at trial. The
Shura Council in January approved, but the government at this writing has not
enacted, a law to provide defendants with legal assistance free of charge.
In August a judge in Tabuk considered sentencing a man to be surgically paralyzed
after convicting him of paralyzing another man in a fight two years earlier. In
March a Medina court reaffirmed Lebanese television presenter Ali Sibat’s death
sentence for “witchcraft” based on his fortune-telling show broadcast from
Lebanon. In September a Qatif court sentenced two high school pupils to six
months in prison and 120 lashes for stealing exam questions.
Secret police detained without trial or access to lawyers, in many cases for years,
around 2,000 persons suspected of sympathies or involvement with armed
groups or for their peaceful political views. Muhammad al-’Utaibi and Khalid al-
’Umair, two human rights activists arrested in January 2009 for trying to organize
a peaceful Gaza solidarity demonstration, continued to be held in al-Ha’ir prison
without trial beyond the six-month limit allowed under Saudi law and despite a
prosecution order for their release. In Saudi Arabia, prosecutors under the
Ministry of Interior issue arrest and detention warrants and orders for release.
On January 20, Saudi authorities informed the family of Jordanian professor
Muhammad al-Nimarat that he had died in Abha secret police prison on
November 27, 2009. Al-Nimarat remained in detention after he finished his twoyear
sentence in early 2009 for “issuing private religious rulings.”
Prisoners and detainees in several facilities described inhumane conditions.
Women twice rioted in Makka women’s prison in 2010. Five Ethiopian detainees
in Jizan deportation center died from alleged asphyxiation due to overcrowding in
August, and Saudi websites in September published what they said were recent
photos showing overcrowded communal cells in Riyadh’s Malaz prison. In
September a number of detainees in the Jeddah deportation center rioted and
then escaped. Inmates in several prisons complained about ill-treatment and
forced confessions extracted at police stations.
Freedom of Expression and Belief
Saudi authorities continue to brook little public criticism of officials or government
policies in 2010. The Ministry of Culture and Information approves newspaper
and television editors and heavily censors print and broadcast media.
Internet critics crossing vague “red lines” face arrest.
Police in June arrested Sunni human rights activist Shaikh Mikhlif bin Dahham al-
Shammari for “annoying others” with articles he wrote criticizing prominent Sunni
clerics for their anti-Shia views. In August 2009, prosecutors charged Nasir al-
Subai’i under unspecified articles of the Law against Cybercrimes with making
allegedly libelous comments against the Saudi consul in Beijing. Al-Subai’i had
written on his website about his ordeal trying to secure funding for his brother’s
medical care abroad.
In May Jamal Khashoggi, chief editor of the liberal Al-Watan newspaper, was
sacked over articles questioning Saudi Arabia’s religious ideology. A judge in
October sentenced journalist Fahd al-Jukhaibid to prison and public lashes for a
news article describing a public protest against electricity cuts in the northern
town of Qubba. The books of Abdo Khal, a Saudi novelist and columnist, remain
banned even after he won the International Prize for Arabic Fiction in March 2010.
A Ministry of Culture and Information spokesperson made conflicting statements
regarding the requirement that blogs and news websites obtain a license under a
proposed law regulating online expression.
Saudi Arabia does not tolerate public worship by adherents of religions other
than Islam and systematically discriminates against its religious minorities, in
particular Shia in the Eastern Province and around Media, and Ismailis (a distinct
branch of Shiism) in Najran. Official discrimination against Shia encompasses
religious practices, education, and the justice system. Government officials
exclude Shia from certain public jobs and policy questions and publicly disparage
their faith.
Authorities have kept Munir Al Jassas, a Saudi Shia human rights activist, in
detention without trial since November 2009 and Muhammad Al Libad, a young
Shia from ‘Awwamiyya town, in detention since January 2010 for his alleged role
in March 2009 sectarian disturbances there. Authorities in Ahsa’ province continue
to detain six Shia students arrested in January and February for publicly displaying
religious banners during Ashura, a Shia religious holiday, in December
2009.
Key International Actors
Saudi Arabia is a key ally of the United States and the United Kingdom and both
countries continued in 2010 to laud Saudi counterterrorism cooperation. US pressure
for human rights improvements was imperceptible. In September the
Pentagon proposed for Congressional approval a US$60 billion arms sale to
Saudi Arabia, the biggest-ever US arms sale. It is unknown whether the UK made
efforts through the Two Kingdoms Dialogue to promote human rights, but if so
they had no tangible effect.
UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Navenathem Pillay, in a visit to the
region in April, called on Saudi Arabia to improve women’s rights; abolish the
sponsorship system; address statelessness; and protect the rights to freedom of
expression, assembly, and association. The Gulf Cooperation Council announced
the establishment of a human rights committee in July 2010, but its mandate and
working methods remain unclear at this writing. Other Gulf countries made no human rights demands of Saudi Arabia, and the kingdom joined others in supporting
a crackdown in Bahrain on peaceful political dissidents and human rights
activists ahead of elections there in October.