 SAUDI ARABIA
 The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is a traditional family
 monarchy. It grew to its present geographic extent in the
 1930s under King Abd AI-Aziz ibn Saud. He fostered unity
 among the distant provinces and dispersed tribes through
 personal alliances and informal consultations, maintaining
 close ties with tribal leaders and eminent religious
 figures. This informal and delicate framework for cohesion
 and expression of opinion remains a determining factor in the
 politics of the kingdom. There are no political parties and
 no elected assemblies.
 Saudi Arabia is governed in accordance with Islamic sharia
 law. The sharia regulates the individual's conduct toward
 others and in society. It is a codification based on the
 Koran and the words and deeds of the prophet Muhammad.
 Considered divinely inspired, and thus complete, perfect and
 immutable, the sharia necessarily excludes any intrusion by
 man-made regulations, except in such fields as commercial and
 labor disputes and traffic regulations. The sharia contains
 legal and moral precepts to guide judges, and appropriate
 punishments for transgressors, but is not precise about
 pretrial protections and procedures.
 The inflow of large oil revenues in recent years, rapid
 urbanization, and the emergence of a technocratic class have
 transformed the traditional pastoral, commercial and
 agricultural economy. While great wealth, preoccupation with
 major political and economic issues and unsettling security
 trends evident world-wide have effectively reduced the easy
 accessibility characteristic of the older society, even
 high-ranking provincial authorities still make themselves
 regularly available to the humblest Saudi petitioner.
 Creating new forms for old consultative institutions is under
 study. Official encouragement of orthodox religious values
 and state emphasis on the importance of preserving
 traditional social customs have been increasingly apparent
 since the late 1970s. The presence of many foreign workers,
 including numerous non-Arabs and non-Muslims, and the
 eruption or imposition of antagonistic regimes in several
 nearby countries have caused concern to the civil and
 religious authorities. Circumscribing the influence of
 unwelcome foreign practices and beliefs and reducing the
 inevitable tension between modernization and tradition are
 Saudi objectives which heavily influence human rights
 practices in the Kingdom.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom From:
 a. Torture
 The kingdom as a matter of policy does not permit torture or
 other abuse of the person by its officials. However, Islamic
 law requires confession to convict, in the absence of
 eyewitnesses. There are occasional unconfirmed reports of
 physical mistreatment of suspects in drug trafficking cases
 (in 1981 one American -- an accused narcotic trafficker --
 claimed, without presenting evidence, that he had been
 mistreated). The board of grievances has jurisdiction over
 allegations of abuse by officials. The board adjudicates
 disputes arising between private contractors and Saudi
 ministries or agencies and grievances of citizens against
 ministries or officials arising from the performance of their
 legal responsibilities. Clearance from the council of
 
 (1086)
 
 
 1087
 ministers is required before a complaint may be brought
 before the board; informed local sources recall no instance
 in which such clearance was refused. Any allegation or
 evidence of criminal conduct which may emerge during the
 adjudication process is referred to the interior ministry for
 investigation and, if warranted, trial. Information on
 penalties imposed on officials found guilty of bribery or
 malfeasance is not readily available; unanticipated early
 retirement, transfer, or demotion of officials is often
 attributed by informed observers to recommendation of the
 board, or findings of the courts. A civil service control
 board disciplines low-ranking officials found guilty of
 misconduct or minor offenses; it imposes fines on, or effects
 the dismissal of, erring employees, sometimes with press
 publicity to deter others.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment
 There have been no reports of summary executions in Saudi
 Arabia. The sharia imposes capital punishment for
 premeditated murder and adultery. It may also be imposed for
 other crimes considered heinous, such as rape.  (Those
 convicted of murder or manslaughter must also compensate the
 family of the victim financially, according to officially set
 rates.) Capital punishment may take the form of shooting or
 beheading; three instances of the latter were reported in
 September-October 1981. The three had been found guilty of
 murder. -Adultery may be punished by shooting, stoning or
 beheading; no cases were reported during the year. In the
 absence of extenuating circumstances, a convicted recidivist
 thief suffers severance of a hand. For less severe crimes,
 such as drunkenness, the sentence is often flogging. This is
 imposed less to inflict physical pain than to occasion public
 humiliation. The flogger uses only the lower arm to wield
 the cane; the criminal remains clothed; the skin should not
 be broken.
 Prison conditions are not unusually harsh nor intentionally
 degrading. Of those Americans jailed in 1981, mostly on
 charges of trafficking in or possession of alcohol or
 narcotics, none has complained of harsh or degrading
 conditions. Overcrowding has been the cause of some
 complaints.
 c. Disappearances
 No reports of disappearances were received in 1981.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Arbitrary arrest and imprisonment are rare in Saudi Arabia.
 In national security cases, or when the existence of a
 criminal ring is suspected, the authorities have arrested and
 held suspects for weeks, or even months, while ipvestigations
 proceed. When an individual is detained, there is no
 automatic procedure for contacting his family or employer.
 Inquiries to the police almost always evoke official
 confirmation of the arrest; the facility of consular access
 to expatriate suspects varies with the gravity of the
 charge. Formal charges are not brought until the
 investigation is completed, which can be a long time. The
 sharia does not provide for habeas corpus. Time spent in
 pretrial detention is normally applied against the length of
 any term of imprisonment imposed.
 
 
 1088
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Trials are generally open to anyone legitimately interested
 in the case. In drug cases, public access is restricted.
 National security charges are heard in closed court. In
 addition to civil commercial suits, the board of grievances
 adjudicates such white collar crimes as embezzlement and
 forgery, holding its proceedings behind closed doors. The
 defendant appears before a judge, who weighs all the evidence
 gathered by the police and presented by the defendant in
 accordance with the precepts of the sharia. The prosecution
 bears the burden of proof. In criminal cases, the standards
 for admission of evidence are more stringent than in civil
 disputes. The more serious the charge, the weightier the
 evidence and more numerous the witnesses must be.
 Confessions are accorded great importance. Defendants are
 not normally represented by counsel during the actual court
 proceedings, although Saudi lawyers may participate as
 interpreters for expatriates.
 After all the evidence has been presented and weighed, the
 judge decides guilt or innocence. If the defendant is found
 guilty, the judge recommends sentencing in accordance with
 the provisions of the sharia. If a term of imprisonment is
 recommended, the interior ministry determines its length.
 The interior ministry hears all requests for clemency, as
 well as appeals filed against decisions apparently
 contradicting the evidence, or sentences allegedly
 contravening the sharia. Decisions of the board of
 grievances are routinely reviewed by the council of
 ministers. The military justice system has jurisdiction over
 civilian employees of the ministry of defense when charged
 with violations of military regulations as well as over
 uniformed defendants. Decisions of courts martial are
 automatically submitted for appellate review to the minister
 of defense and the king.
 f. Invasion of the Home
 The sanctity of the home is traditionally respected in Saudi
 Arabia. The police are obliged to obtain prior authorization
 from the provincial governor to search a private home.
 However, in connection with specific cases, extensive
 searches for contraband (liquor, drugs and pornography) have
 not always been carried out under cover of search warrants.
 There is no evidence that foreigners suffer discriminatory
 treatment in this regard.
 2. Respect for Civil and Political Rights, Includings
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 Saudis are free to speak their thoughts, complain to any
 official and, at least traditionally, to seek redress of
 their grievances personally from the king. Many high Saudi
 officials, such as provincial governors, devote up to four
 hours daily to audiences with individual petitioners. The
 king meets weekly with religious and tribal notables.
 There is no official prior censorship of the Saudi press;
 however, a certain self-censorship does occur. The
 information ministry vets appointments of editors-in-chief of
 Saudi newspapers, of which ten appear daily. Publication of
 articles or pictures deemed offensive to Saudi morality can
 provoke suspension of the offending journal. As a rule,
 
 
 1089
 pictures of women do not appear in thb press. General
 criticism of specific domestic policies usually passes
 muster, and criticism of bureaucratic abuses and official
 .inattention to economic and social problems has been
 published. Criticism of the principles or legitimacy of the
 state, of the Saudi leadership and Royal Family, of the Armed
 Forces, of the religious notables, or of Islam is not
 permitted. Foreign publications are rigorously censored to
 eliminate both pornography, defined broadly, and reporting or
 commentary held potentially harmful to political stability or
 national security.
 Islam is the established religion in Saudi Arabia. All
 Saudis must be Muslim. In some cities "volunteers* from the
 official Society for the Promotion of Virtue and prevention
 of Vice regularly patrol bazaars to encourage shopowners and
 pedestrians to attend daily prayers. A Shia community,
 unofficially estimated at 300,000 persons, resides in the
 eastern province. Disturbances there in late 1979 were
 emanations of discontent over social and economic
 disparities. Calm has since prevailed in that region,
 apparently due to the authorities' greater efforts to redress
 local grievances. The authorities allow devotees of all
 Islamic sects to perform the Hajj and worship at the holy
 places. Heterodox rites or practices and political
 activities by pilgrims are banned. Holders of Hajj visas
 must leave the kingdom when the pilgrimage concludes.
 Prosyletizing is banned. Non-Muslim foreigners may assemble
 to practice their religion discreetly in private. Wearing
 religious symbols or ornaments is discouraged.
 Assembly as a means of political expression or to press labor
 grievances is prohibited. Within the context of his family,
 tribal, religious, or commercial group, a Saudi can express
 opinions which, if endorsed by his confreres, may be conveyed
 through various levels of notables to the highest councils of
 state. The increasingly evident deficiencies of this
 informal, traditional consultation process have been
 officially recognized. Proposals for a consultative body,
 composed of representatives of major social, religious, and
 economic interest groups, are under study.
 b. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel Emigration and Repatriation
 Saudis may travel anywhere within the kingdom. Customarily,
 women do not travel alone nor are they permitted to drive.
 Visas are granted to those foreigners coming to the kingdom
 to work, in some cases to their dependents, and to Muslim
 pilgrims. One tourist village was inaugurated in 1981, but
 issuance of tourist visas is not yet authorized.
 To travel abroad, both Saudis and foreigners must obtain exit
 permits. A Saudi woman must obtain written permission from
 her closest male relative to travel abroad. A Saudi male may
 marry a woman from a foreign country, other than one of the
 Gulf emirates, only with permission from the minister of
 interior. A Saudi woman requires official permission to
 marry a foreigner, which in practice is rarely granted.
 Saudis cannot hold dual nationality or emigrate permanently;
 .the question of repatriation does not arise. There are no
 known Saudi refugees abroad.
 Saudi Arabia has no public policy on refugees and publishes
 no statistics on them. The kingdom provides asylum for many
 Muslims who would be persecuted were they to return to their
 
 
 1090
 native lands. Numerous refugees from Eritrea and the Peoples
 Democratic Republic of Yemen have long resided in the
 .kingdom; several prominent Afghans have more recently found
 refuge in Saudi Arabia.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 In Saudi Arabia, the nexus of legitimate authority is the
 king. He is usually the eldest surviving son of the late
 King Abd al-Aziz, judged by consensus as qualified to hold a
 senior leadership position. He is selected from among the
 adult male members of the house of Saud by an informal
 process involving consultations among (in order of
 importance) senior members of the royal family, religious
 leaders, tribal leaders, and representatives of the
 technocratic/bureaucratic class and of commercial interests.
 Nearly all Saudis are linked with at least one of these
 interest groups. The opinions of the leaders of these groups
 usually represent a consensus of the thoughts of the many
 individuals which comprise them.
 The king appoints a crown prince and a council of ministers
 through a process of consensus similar to the one by which he
 himself was chosen. The king rules as head of state in
 matters secular and religious, no distinction between the two
 realms being made in traditional Islam. The king's
 legitimacy depends not only upon his descent and his
 selection by consensus, but also upon his adherence to the
 tenets of Islam; moral and administrative laxity can result
 in forced abdication, as occurred in 1964.
 Political parties are not allowed, and there are no known
 organized opposition groups in Saudi Arabia. Political
 opinions are expressed through the patron/client and interest
 group channels described above. The press serves as a
 vehicle for ventilating the opinions of readers as well as
 editors. The Saudi leadership is acutely sensitive to public
 opinion, however informally or obliquely expressed. Domestic
 policy is developed within the context of the country's
 religious and social traditions, while Saudi foreign policy
 reflects a healthy respect for nationalist, Arab, Islamic,
 and non-aligned viewpoints most warmly espoused by members of
 the younger Saudi generation.
 3. Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations of
 Human Rights
 No organization is known to have approached the Saudi
 Government regarding human rights since the 1978 Amnesty
 International request that the kingdom abolish the death
 penalty. There are no self-proclaimed human rights groups in
 the kingdom; any Saudi believing that his rights have been
 violated is free formally to approach the board of grievances
 or informally to seek the intercession of a patron.
 Unilaterally and through such organizations as the United
 Nations, the Organization of the Islamic Conference and the
 League of Arab States, the kingdom has championed the rights
 of Afghan, Palestinian, and Eritrean refugees and of Muslim
 religious minorities in the Philippines, Ethiopia, and
 Cyprus. The officially-encouraged World Muslim League, at a
 September 1981 meeting at its Makkah headquarters, also
 discussed the situation of Muslim minorities in the USSR and
 China.
 
 
 1091
 4. Economic and Social Circumstances
 Saudi Arabia is a country blessed with vast petroleum
 resources and revenues, enabling its people to achieve a per
 capita annual income estimated in 1979 at $7,280. Taking
 advantage of such revenues and resources, the government has
 since 1975 made a higher standard of living for all Saudis
 its overall development goal. While much of the money has
 been spent on major projects in large urban areas, the rural
 areas have not been neglected. The authorities have devoted
 massive financial resources to developing the road network,
 telecommunications, and electric power, providing housing
 construction loans, developing potable water through
 desalinization plants, furnishing free health care to all
 Saudis, and improving educational levels through development
 of undergraduate university education at home and making
 available government scholarships for graduate study abroad
 for male Saudi students.
 While no figures were available for the infant mortality
 rate, life expectancy at birth had risen to 54 years by
 1976. The U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID)
 estimated births per thousand per year at 49 in January 1980,
 with the death rate at 18 per thousand, yielding a population
 growth of 3.1 percent annually. It was estimated that 97
 percent of the urban residents and 64 percent of the entire
 population enjoyed access to safe water supplies in 1975,
 while caloric intake was estimated at 88 percent of
 nutritional requirements for the period 1976-79.
 (These and other statistical estimates obtained from
 international agencies such as the IBRD/IMF and from USAID
 must be treated with caution, since published Saudi
 statistics are at best fragmentary and the agencies
 themselves are inactive as lenders to the Kingdom.)
 The Saudi authorities' fundamental educational objective is
 the elimination of illiteracy by 1991. International
 agencies estimated literacy at only 15 percent in 1970.
 According to ministry of education figures published in
 September 1981, by 1978 male literacy had risen to 48.10
 percent and female literacy to 36.32 percent; the overall
 adult literacy rate was given as 42.08 percent.
 Public education through university is free to all Saudis.
 In 1980, over 1.2 million Saudis, including 400,000 females
 in separate schools, were enrolled. International agencies
 estimated primary school attendance at 59 percent (boys 74
 percent, girls 44 percent) in 1976-79. Official emphasis on
 undergraduate education in the kingdom, evident since the
 late 1970s in the accelerated effort to expand Saudi
 universities to accommodate all applicants, was sustained in
 1981.
 Despite massive state participation in development of the
 country, public policy dictates that economic activities and
 resources be in private hands as much as possible. Many
 programs have been instituted to further this goal. Although
 oil revenues have permitted the incomes among the elite to
 rise astronomically, practically all Saudis have come to
 enjoy a much higher standard of living. Since oil revenues
 have tended to concentrate wealth, investment and job
 opportunities in specific and usually urban areas, the
 government has consciously attempted to include less-favored
 rural areas in its social and economic infrastructural
 efforts. Generous subsidies have been offered to encourage
 agricultural   development.
 
 
 1092
 The status of Saudi women reflects the orthodox religious
 beliefs and traditional social practices of the peninsula.
 Women may own, purchase, and sell property. On marriage, the
 bride receives a pre-negotiated sum of money and/or goods
 from the groom's family. In the event of divorce, which in
 certain well-defined circumstances she may seek and qbtain,
 she retains her bride price. Under the sharia, divorced
 women retain custody of the children only until they reach
 school age, after which the father's claim prevails. The
 Saudi authorities enforce this precept in custody disputes
 involving foreign divorcees who seek to raise their children
 abroad in a non-Muslim environment. The societal requirement
 that all Saudi women be protected by their fathers, husbands,
 or other male relatives, and the effective constraints on
 their freedom of movement render the formal exercise of
 women's rights under the sharia somewhat problematical,
 whatever influence individual women may enjoy in the home.
 Employment opportunities open to women are centered on the
 pedagogical, medical, and commercial fields. Businesswomen
 generally must manage their affairs through a male Saudi
 partner or agent. Visible change is slowl the number of
 commercial and financial institutions staffed by and catering
 exclusively to women continues to rise gradually. The Saudi
 tradition of segregating women from all but their closest
 male relatives restricts their employment options
 considerably. Regulations reinforce this cultural pattern by
 prohibiting women from working in the same establishments as
 men except in such specified areas as hospitals or aircraft.
 Nevertheless, given the demand for education and the aversion
 to foreign influence, Saudi women willing and able to work
 should find many teaching positions open to them. Similarly,
 the construction of hospitals and clinics throughout the
 kingdom has created a demand for Saudi doctors, over half of
 whom are now women, as well as for female nurses and female
 medical technicians. Opening other fields of employment to
 women is the subject of active public debate.
 Apart from the rapidly declining minority of Saudis who cling
 to the nomadic way of life, financial poverty is evident only
 among some immigrant or refugee laborers, some immigrant
 shopkeepers, and among unskilled workers, especially those
 immigrants illicitly resident in the kingdom. Most of the
 latter migrated from nearby less fortunate countries or came
 as pilgrims and surreptitiously stayed on. They are subject
 to exploitation and blackmail by unscrupulous employers, and
 are deported if discovered.
 The Saudi labor code specifies the rights and duties of
 employers and employees, including wages, hours, conditions
 at the place of work, and conditions of discharge. Female
 employees are guaranteed maternity leave. Inspectors from
 the ministry of labor and social affairs periodically check
 private businesses and construction sites to ensure that
 employers are abiding by the tenets of the labor code. Since
 many laborers are brought into the kingdom under contract,
 embassies of major countries of origin usually include labor
 attaches on their rosters. Despite their efforts to see that
 the terms of employment contracts are observed, some laxity
 and abuse are inevitable. Generally, wages are competitive
 and adequate; most disagreements arise over working
 conditions and workers' remittances. Labor disputes may be
 brought before a ministry of labor arbitration board, which
 will adjudicate them if it is persuaded that the parties are
 themselves unable to resolve the issue.
 Labor unions are illegal in Saudi Arabia, as is assembly or
 job action by workers to press common grievances. Foreign
 workers who attempt to organize unions or who violate the
 terms of their work permits are subject to immediate
 deportation..
 
 
 1093
 U.S.OVERKsA. -LOANS AND GRANTS- U1L]GATIUNS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.4.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF1 DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: SAUDI ARABIA
 1479     1980     1981
 I.E(ON. ASSIST.-TOTAL.o,        .0.0      0.0      0.0
 -LOANS .............        0.0       0.0      0.0
 GHANTS .......o....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.AID .................          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS                        0... ...  Oo   0.0  .0
 GRANTS ........*.           u.0      .0      0.0
 ISEL.SUPP.ASS IT.)...         0.0       0.0      0.0
 8.'OOU FOR PEACE.L...           0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .................     0.0      0.0     .0.0
 GRANTS ............... .   0.0      (.0     (.0
 TITLE I--UTAL.........           0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....         0.0      0.U      V.0
 PAY. IN FOR. LURRo...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE 11-TUTAL 0........          .0      O.0      O.0
 ERELIErtC.DEV L WP.         0.0      0.0      0.0
 VUL.RLLIlF AGENLY.....          O.u      0.0      0.(
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...          U.U      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .........-.... .0.0             0.0      0.0
 GkANTS............. ..0.0            0.0      0.0
 PEALE CORPS .....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 NARCOf ICS                0o.       0.0      6.0
 OThtR.. .............      0.0      0o.      0.0
 It.MIL. ASSIS.-TTAL..           0.0      0.0      0.0
 L.OANS...............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.MAP 6.ANTS ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 a.CkEOIT SALES-I MS...          0.0      G.0     c6.0
 C.INTL MIL.EO.TRNG....          0.0      0.0      U.0
 O.TRAN--EACES5 510CK.. *        O.U      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHEK GRANTS ....0..          0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TJTAL ECON. L NIL...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS.............. ..;.o           0.0      c. 0
 GRANTS............ . .   .0.0        0.0      0.0
 OTHER US LUANS ......,,           0.0      9.7      0.0
 E X-IM BANK LOANS.......         0.0       9.7      0.0
 ALL OTheR... ..............    0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSIbTANCL FROM INTtRNATIUNAL AUENCitS
 1979     1'iMO 1,81       1946-81
 
 TOTAL........  .0.2       1      1.2
 I RD              0.0     0.0      0.0
 IFC                 J     (. . C  0.0
 IUOA              0.)     0.0      0.0
 lO8               V.0     0.0      0.0
 AOb               0.0     iI.O     0.0
 AFOI3             0.0     0.0      0.0
 UNOP              0.2     2.1      1.2
 OTHER-UN          0.0     0.0      C.0
 EEC               0.0     0.0      0.0
 
 27.1
 0.0
 0.0
 0.U
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 2-..6
 2.5
 0.0
 
 
