 SAUDI ARABIA
 Saudi Arabia is an Islamic state governed in accordance
 with the Sharia (Islamic law). The Sharia regulates the
 conduct of the individual in relation to God as well as
 to other persons, and in society as a whole. It is a
 codification of the Koran and the views, words, and deeds
 of the Prophet Muhammad. Considered by Muslims to be
 divinely inspired, the Sharia excludes man-made regula-
 tion except in some technological areas such as air
 flight control regulations, traffic, and labor regula-
 tions.
 The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia came into its present
 boundaries in the 1930's under its modern founder,
 King Abd Al-Aziz Al Saud. Although the Al Saud
 dynasty dates back to the 18th century, rivalries
 within the Al Saud family, as well as between the
 tribes, had led to a patchwork of sedentary and
 nomadic tribal satrapies. Supported by force of arms
 as necessary, King Abd Al-Aziz brought about unity
 through a long process of building up personal
 alliances with tribal groups and maintaining close ties
 with religious leaders. This delicate framework of
 cohesion still remains a determining factor in the
 politics of the kingdom. There are no political
 parties and no elected assemblies, but the royal family
 maintains the tribal tradition of ready access between
 citizen and ruler.
 In Saudi Arabia the fountainhead of authority is the
 King, who is selected from the royal family of the
 house of Saud. He is selected through a consensus
 worked out among representative groups in the society:
 senior members of the royal family, religious leaders,
 and tribal leaders. Most Saudis see themselves as part
 of, or close to one of these groups. The opinions-of
 group leaders usually are based on a consensus of many
 individuals bound to that group.
 The King appoints his cabinet through a process similar
 to that under which he was chosen. The King rules, as
 head of state, for matters both secular and religious.
 If his policies fall short in the eyes of the constituency,
 he is subject to loss of his mandate and removal, as
 happened to King Saud in 1964.
 Large oil revenues in the 1960's and 1970's, along with
 the emergence of a technocratic class, are reshaping
 former patterns of cohesion through a process of rapid
 modernization.
 Inevitably, this produces periodic tension between
 traditional values on the one hand, and agents of socio-
 economic change on the other. The Saudis express
 concern about the large numbers of foreign workers in
 the kingdom and view their presence as harmful to the
 preservation of traditional social and cultural values.
 Saudi courts which, in the past, have been lenient
 toward western offenders no longer favor them. This
 has resulted in severe prison sentences for both
 citizen and non-citizen offenders. The seizure of the
 
 
 1084
 Grand Mosque in Mecca by religious zealots, although
 eliciting no favorable response from the Saudi populace,
 reinforced conservative attitudes.
 Discontent and disturbances among Saudi Arabia's small
 Shia community (approximately 150,000) took place in
 December of 1979 and early 1980. The demonstrations
 during the Shia holy month of Muharram apparently were
 incited by radio broadcasts from Iran. Members of the
 Shia community arrested during these disturbances were
 released on the occasion of King Khalid's recent visit
 to the eastern province. The King pledged to increase
 spending on human and physical infrastructure develop-
 ment in the Shia townships there.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 There is no evidence that physical torture is carried out
 in the kingdom, but there is a heavy stress on obtaining
 confessions. In narcotics cases, authorities may make
 strong efforts, including psychological pressure, to
 secure confessions, especially where the accused is found
 in possession of the drugs. The Board of Grievances,
 under the direct authority of the Council of Ministers,
 has jurisdiction over improper acts committed by
 government officials and judges.
 b. Cruel, ngmn'or Degrading Treatmnt or Punishnent
 There are no summary executions in Saudi Arabia. The
 Sharia imposes capital punishment as the method to deal
 with premeditated murder and adultery. Capital punish-
 ment is discretionary for other crimes considered
 heinous. Premeditated murder is punished by beheading,
 and there were ten beheadings for premeditated murder
 in 1980. Adultery is punished usually by stoning.
 There have been no reports of stonings in 1980. In
 January, 1980, 63 of the attackers on the Grand
 Mosque in Mecca were beheaded for sedition.
 For the recidivist thief, where there are no mitigating
 or extenuating circumstances, the law imposes the sever-
 ing of a hand. For lesser offenses, e.g., drunkenness,
 the sentence is often public flogging, the aim of which
 is more to humiliate publicly the offender than to
 produce physical harm. The flogger, using only the lower
 arm, strikes the criminal's clothed back with a cane and
 the skin cannot be broken. Prison conditions in Saudi
 Arabia are not unusually harsh nor purposely degrading.
 c. Disappearances
 The Saudi government is not known to abduct or arrest
 secretly.   Saudi police authorities do not inform a
 person's family or employer regarding his arrest; they
 must inquire of the police, who will then reveal
 information about the arrest.
 
 
 1085
 
 d. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 The practice of arbitrary arrest and imprisonment occurs
 infrequently in Saudi Arabia. When a person is detained,
 there may be a long delay before he is charged and tried
 due to lengthy police investigations and cumbersome
 judicial procedures. The Sharia does not provide for
 anything resembling habeas corpus. For minor offenses,
 an arrestee is often released awaiting trial. Time
 spent in pretrial detention is, as a rule,  applied
 against any term of imprisonment. Preventive deten-
 tion is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 A defendant in court is not represented by counsel.
 In practice, trials are open to anyone legitimately
 interested in the case. For drug cases, however,
 public access to trials is restricted. Cases
 involving state security, such as the trials of the
 perpetrators of the Mecca Mosque incident of 1979,
 are closed. The Board of Grievances adjudicates
 certain crimes, such as embezzlement and forgery.
 Its proceedings are closed.
 At trial, the defendant appears before a judge,
 who must weigh all evidence presented by accuser
 and' defendant in accordance with rules of the Sharia.
 The burden of proof is upon the accuser. In criminal
 proceedings, standards for admission of evidence against
 the defendant are more stringent. The more onerous the
 charge, the weightier the evidence must be against
 a defendant.
 After all evidence is presented and weighed, the judge
 decides guilt or innocence. This must be done within
 the guidelines of the Sharia. If the defendant is
 judged guilty, the judge makes sentencing recom-
 mendations, again within the confines of the Sharia.
 Sometimes a judge recommends imprisonment, but the
 Ministry of Interior ultimately decides the fact or
 duration of imprisonment. The Ministry of Interior
 receives all requests for clemency. Appeals are
 entered when a court decision clearly is at odds
 with the dictates of the Koran. Grievance Board
 cases, as a matter of course, are reviewed by the
 Ministry of Interior and the Council of Ministers.
 The military court system has jurisdiction over all
 employees of the Armed Forces (military and civilian)
 for "crimes of a military nature." There is automatic
 appellate review for military court martials by the
 Minister of Defense and the King.
 f. Invasion of the Home
 Respect for sanctity of the home is traditional in
 Saudi culture, and is observed closely by its
 officials. Prior authorization for search of an
 individual's home is required usually from the
 provincial governorand generally is granted.
 Extensive searches for contraband (alcohol, drugs,
 and pornography) often are carried out in areas
 where foreigners live.
 
 
 1086
 2. Government Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Vital Needs such as Food, Shelter, Health Care,
 and Education
 No Saudi citizen is prohibited from owning land and the
 government encourages land ownership. It has identified
 "limited income" families in urban centers and is
 distributing plots of land 400 meters square for
 residences. It makes available, to any Saudi, interest-
 free long-term credit for home-building. At the same
 time, it offers favorable credit terms to encourage
 large numbers of nomadic tribesmen to settle onto
 farming lands. Women citizens may own, purchase, or
 sell property in Saudi Arabia.
 Under the Sharia, the rules of inheritance guarantee
 each member of a decedent's family a specified portion
 of the estate. Women receive a smaller portion than
 men. Upon marriage, a woman receives a pre-negotiated
 sum of money from the groom's family. The bride has
 complete independent control over these funds, which
 in most cases are substantial.
 The Saudi labor code spells out rights and duties in
 the employer/employee relationship. These include
 maximum work hours, working conditions, and rigid
 procedures for discharging employees. Disputes
 between employee and employer may be brought before
 a Ministry of Labor arbitration board. The board,
 however, will arbitrate only after it is convinced
 that the two parties themselves cannot resolve the
 disagreement. The labor regulations guarantee female
 employees pre-and post-natal maternity leave.
 Labor unions are illegal in Saudi Arabia. There is a
 labor shortage in Saudi Arabia and wages are competitive
 as witnessed by the presence of large numbers of
 foreign workers. Poreign laborers without appropriate
 work permits are subject to immediate deportation, as
 are those who attempt to organize unions. Although
 there is no law limiting women's employment opportuni-
 ties, the traditions of Saudi culture, which require
 the segregation of women from all men except relatives,
 severely restrict those opportunities. Various
 government regulations reinforce tradition by prohibi-
 ting women from working in the same establishment as
 men (except in certain situations: hospitals,
 airline flight crews). Despite traditional pressures,
 more women are finding employment as teachers in the
 country's growing number of women's educational
 institutions, as nurses and doctors (over one-half of
 Saudi doctors are women), and in commercial and
 financial establishments which cater solely to women.
 Since 1975, Saudi Arabia's first development priority
 has been to raise the standard of living for all Saudis,
 with emphasis on those in rural isolated areas. Its
 first efforts were to build infrastructure in most
 outlying areas: utilities and roads, construction and
 staffing of hospitals, clinics, and schools. The
 kingdom's oil revenues have financed the continuing
 rapid pace in this area.
 
 
 1087
 
 In 1980, there were over 15,000 hospital beds in the
 country, double the number five years ago. Free health
 care is available to all Saudis. Saudi Arabia has a
 social security system which provides pensions and
 temporary relief assistance to its citizens. Basic
 foodstuffs, such as bread and vegetables, are subsidized.
 Extensive low-income rental housing is available or
 under construction.
 Despite massive government participation in the economy,
 the country maintains a free enterprise base. Because
 of historical differences among the various regions,
 trade centers, nomadic pastoral life, and sedentary
 farming, there have been income disparities. Oil
 revenues and'associated economic development have
 raised the upper income brackets astronomically.
 These revenues, coupled with the government's social
 policies, also have elevated the lower income brackets.
 Per capita income in Saudi Arabia today exceeds $17,000.
 In 1980 there were over 1,200,000 full-time students in
 Saudi educational institutions. The ratio of male to
 female is 2 to 1. There were 78,655 persons enrolled
 in 2,208 adult education schools in 1980. Education
 through university level is free for all Saudis.
 After kindergarten, educational facilities are
 segregated by sex. As with employment, advanced
 educational opportunities open to women are centered
 in medicine, education and commerce. Such educational
 programs are entirely segregated by sex. A primary
 aim of the forthcoming Five-Year Plan is to eliminate
 illiteracy; the current literacy rate is estimated at
 15 percent.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 The Saudi has the freedom to speak his thoughts,
 complain to any government officials, and seek redress
 of grievance personally from the King. Many Saudi
 leaders, such as provincial Amirs, spend two to four
 hours daily in audience with citizens.
 The press is not censored prior to publication. The
 appointment of all Saudi newspaper editors-in-chief
 requires the approval of the Miiistry of Information.
 The publication of a newspaper may be suspended
 briefly if it prints articles or pictures considered
 offensive to conservative Saudi views of morality.
 Pictures of women do not appear in the press.
 Concerning political subjects, there are certain
 perimeters which the press does not cross, but
 criticism of bureaucratic failures in dealing with
 economic and social problems is published. Direct
 criticism of the principles of government, the Saudi
 leadership, and its legal authority is not allowed.
 Foreign newspapers, books, and magazines are subject
 to censorship of material that would offend the
 sensibilities of the Saudi public. Descriptions of
 sexual acts or depictions of nude figures are not
 
 
 1088
 permissible, nor are articles considered injurious to
 the political stability and national security of the
 country.
 Assembly as a means of political expression is prohibited
 in Saudi Arabia. Political parties are not allowed.
 However, citizens are able to express their views through
 an informal process of consultation. Virtually all
 Saudis have influential ties, primarily through tribal
 groups. The government is attentive to the concerns
 of various groups in society and encourages the
 consultative process. Most senior government officials
 and many businessmen participate almost daily in a
 "majlis", an informal meeting open to Saudi citizens.
 These meetings provide citizens with avenues to express
 directly their views on important issues and to register
 their personal complaints and grievances. Any Saudi
 citizen can attend the "majlis" of the King and there
 are practically no restrictions on attendance at
 similar meetings held by most senior government
 officials and royal family members. The Saudi Arabian
 regime seeks to institutionalize this process in a
 special body of representatives, which will have some
 part in the decree-making process.
 Islam is the established religion of Saudi Arabia.
 Saudi Arabia allows all Islamic sects to worship in
 the holy places of Islam. Non-Muslim foreigners are
 permitted to practice their religion in private.
 Since the Saudis strictly interpret commandments
 against graven images, the wearing of crosses, the
 word "Allah" inscribed on jewelry, and other
 religious ornaments are forbidden.
 b. Freedom of Movement within the Country,
 Foreign Travel, Emigration and Expatriation
 There are no legal controls on Saudis traveling within
 the country. However, by custom women do not travel
 alone, nor are they permitted by law to drive
 automobiles.
 Saudis must obtain an exit permit from the Ministry of
 Interior in order to travel abroad. Saudi women must
 also travel in the company of male relatives or must
 obtain permission from their male guardians to travel
 overseas. Saudis cannot hold dual nationality and are
 not allowed to emigrate. A Saudi cannot legally marry
 a foreigner without the government's permission.
 Saudi Arabia has no formal policy on refugees. It is,
 however, a place of asylum for many Muslims who would
 be persecuted in their home countries for their
 political beliefs.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Saudi governmental decisions are reached by a consensus
 process largely within the royal family. Important
 decisions are made by the Crown Prince in consultation
 with senior royal family members with the King as final
 arbiter. Although decision-making powers rest with these
 senior princes, ministers who were educated abroad play
 
 
 1089
 important advisory roles in economic decisions. In early
 1980, King Khalid announced the formation of a committee
 to draw up a basic law for Saudi Arabia and to oversee
 the formation of a consultative council. The council
 would initially consist of 50 to 70 appointed members.
 Its powers have not been determined, and work continues
 both on the basic law and on the assembly.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged
 Violation of Human Rights
 No reported approach has been made by a human rights
 organization to the Government of Saudi Arabia since
 the 1978 letter of Amnesty International seeking
 abolition of the death penalty in the kingdom.
 
 
 1090
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: SAUDI ARABIA
 1978     1979     1980
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL..          0.0       0.0      0.0
 LOANS..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS,.  .........          0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.AID ................          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS..............        0.0        0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 (SECSUPPASSST.) ..         0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACEE.....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS..............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS..........             0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL..........          0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS...            0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR.,.,           0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL,........          0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.          0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY..           0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON, ASSISTe..          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS................       0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 CONTR. TO IFI...,         0.0       0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS .....         0.0       0.0      0.0
 OTHER..............       0.0       0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL*..         0.0       0.0      0.0
 LOANS.............           0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.AP GRANTS   NT........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT SALES-FS...           0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.E.TRNG....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK,..         0.0       0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS.......           0.0      0.0      0.0
 1II.TOTAL ECON. & MILe.          0.0       0.0      0.0
 LOANS..............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 ----------------------::::  ---------- ; ------ ;------- -----
 OTHER US LOANS,,.,..0.0                    0.0      9.7
 EX-IN BANK LOANS.......          0.0      0.0      9.7
 ALL OTHER..............        0.0        0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1978     1979     1980     1946-80
 ----      -------------------------------------------------
 TOTAL........      2.5       0.2      2.1     25.8
 IBRD               0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0
 IFC                0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0
 IDA                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 IDB                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 ADB                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFDB               0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 UNDP               2.5       0.2      2.1     23.3
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0       0.0      2.5
 EEC                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 
 
 1091
