 SAUDI ARABIA
 Saudi Arabia is a traditional, Arab, and Islamic monarchy
 ruled by the sons of its founder, the late King Abd Al-Aziz
 (known in the West as "Ibn Saud"). There is no written
 national constitution.
 By convention, the King and Crown Prince have been chosen from
 among the sons of Abd Al-Aziz, who themselves have
 preponderant influence in the choice. Senior religious
 scholars and other princes also have a voice. The King serves
 as Prime Minister. Officials from the highest levels down
 maintain contact with citizens by holding open-door audiences
 ("majlis") regularly. Saudis from all social strata attend
 these meetings to seek redress of grievances which is
 frequently granted. There are no elected assemblies or
 political parties. Nonreligious public assembly and
 demonstrations are not permitted. Non-Muslim public worship
 is banned. The legitimacy of the regime rests to a large
 degree on its perceived adherence to the defense of Islam,
 particularly the austere Hanbali School of Islamic
 Jurisprudence. Rulers and ruled share a respect for laws
 believed to be divinely inspired as well as ancient customs
 which call for consensus in government, internal social
 cohesion, and economic private enterprise. Social and
 religious custom mandate strict separation of the sexes
 outside the home, greatly limiting job or career possibilities
 for women.
 During the past 30 years, massive oil revenues have
 transformed Saudi Arabia's centuries-old pastoral,
 agricultural, and commercial economy. This transformation has
 been marked by rapid urbanization, large-scale infrastructure
 development, government subsidies to entrepreneurs and
 consumers, the emergence of a technocratic middle class, and
 the presence of almost 3.4 million foreign workers in a
 population of about 11 million. With the exception of the oil
 sector, economic activity and resources have largely remained
 in private hands.
 No major new developments affected human rights in 1986. The
 Iran-Iraq war, the basic ideological enmity of the Iranian
 revolution toward Saudi Arabia, the lingering memory of
 antiregime disturbances in 1979 and 1980, terrorist incidents
 as well as discoveries of foreign-supported subversive
 activities in the Gulf States have forced the Saudi
 authorities to remain highly vigilant regarding internal
 security. There were several reports of mistreatment of
 prisoners in 1986.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no known political killings.
 b. Disappearance
 Disappearances at the hands of official agents are unknown.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 
 
 1285
 SAUDI ARABIA
 Government policy prohibits torture. Some punishments meted
 out under Islamic Shari'a law include amputation with
 anesthetic, beheading, execution by a firing squad, and
 stoning (with the convicted individual in a drugged state).
 There were some reports in 1986 of the police beating
 detainees to elicit confessions, which in the absence of
 witnesses are usually required for conviction in Shari'a
 courts. There were reports from a provincial prison of
 beatings administered indiscriminately to members of one
 particular nationality, as a reprisal for the escape of
 several prisoners of the same nationality. Two Saudi
 prisoners reportedly died in a General Directorate of
 Investigation prison in 1986, and reportedly the officials
 responsible have been removed. There have also been credible
 allegations of solitary confinement. Members of the Committee
 for the Propagation of Virtue and Prevention of Vice
 (Mutawwi'in) have the legal right to detain suspects for
 supposed infractions of Muslim strictures up to 48 hours
 before turning them over to the regular authorities. On
 occasion, the Embassy has formally protested Mutawwi'in
 actions to the Saudi Government, including one case in 1986.
 Prison conditions are not intentionally degrading. Conditions
 in some provincial correctional institutions are, however,
 severe. Prisoners sometimes suffer heat stroke and have
 complained of difficulty in obtaining adequate medical
 treatment. Prisoner abuse does not appear to be an expression
 of policy but a result of negligence on the part of relatively
 low-level officials.
 In accordance with Shari'a law, Saudi Arabia imposes capital
 punishment for the crimes of premeditated murder, adultery,
 apostasy from Islam, and, depending upon the circumstances,
 rape and armed robbery. The Interior Minister and Cassation
 Courts review all cases in which capital punishment has been
 imposed. The King must approve all such sentences. The
 number of death sentences declined in 1986 (to 18 in the first
 9 months of 1986 from 34 in the same period of 1985).
 Beheading is the usual method of execution. Death by firing
 squad or stoning may be imposed for adultery. Despite severe
 social disapproval of adultery and the requirement of a
 confession or testimony by four eyewitnesses for conviction,
 at least one Saudi man was stoned for adultery in 1986. A
 recidivist thief may suffer severance of a hand. In the first
 9 months of 1986, 1 Saudi and 6 foreign nationals lost hands,
 all for burglary-related offenses. For less severe crimes,
 such as drunkenness or publicly flaunting Islamic precepts,
 flogging with a cane is often imposed. Public flogging is
 intended to humiliate the criminal and serve as a deterrent to
 others. The skin is not broken, and the flogging, though it
 is painful and leaves welts, is administered with a bent elbow.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 There were several dozen arbitrary arrests and imprisonments
 of Shi'a in the Eastern Province during 1986. There is no
 automatic, prompt procedure for contacting a detainee's family
 or employer, though, in cases involving foreigners, Saudi
 authorities acknowledge that they have the ohligation to do
 so. When asked, the police will almost always confirm an
 arrest. Shari'a law makes no provision for bail or habeas
 corpus. Prisoners may be held for months while an
 investigation proceeds before being either charged or
 released. Regulations issued by the Interior Ministry in 1983
 to eliminate lengthy pretrial detentions or derentions without
 
 
 1286
 SAUDI ARABIA
 charge are frequently unenforced. On the other hand, the
 Board of Grievances, an independent judicial body empowered to
 investigate citizens' complaints against official abuse, has
 used authority granted to it in 1983 to become an effective if
 slow avenue of redress for citizens and private corporations
 against state institutions, public sector companies, and
 government officials accused of malfeasance, nonfeasance,
 bias, or corruption.
 Embassies usually hear about arrests of their nationals
 informally within a few days or weeks but are rarely notified
 officially in less than several months; police authorities
 frequently do not allow consular access early in the
 investigative phase. Once an arrest or detention has come to
 the attention of a foreign embassy through unofficial sources,
 however, Saudi police will eventually accord consular access
 to prisoners. There is a distinction between detainees held
 by the regular police and the General Directorate of
 Investigations (GDI), i.e., the security service of the
 Ministry of Interior. GDI prisoners are regularly held
 incommunicado. The Embassy strongly protested one such
 detention involving an American to the authorities in 1986.
 The total number of individuals affected is unknown. The
 Government does not use forced labor or exile as a form of
 punishment.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The judicial system is founded upon the Shari'a. Shari'a
 courts exercise jurisdiction over common criminal cases and
 civil suits regarding marriage, divorce, child custody, and
 inheritance of real or personal property. Trials are
 generally closed and are normally held without counsel, though
 the advice of Islamic lawyers is available before trial. In
 the Shari'a court the defendant appears before a judge who
 determines guilt or innocence and, if warranted, imposes the
 appropriate punishment. Appeals against judges' decisions are
 automatically reviewed by the Justice Ministry or, in more
 serious cases, by the Supreme Judicial Council to ensure that
 court procedure was correct and that the judge applied
 appropriate Shari'a principles and punishments. Counsel is
 not permitted in the court itself, but lawyers may act as
 interpreters for those unfamiliar with Arabic. With rare
 exceptions, there is no consular access to foreign nationals'
 trials.
 The independence of the judiciary is ensured by law and
 respected in practice. The Justice Ministry is responsible
 for the appointment, transfer, and promotion of judges.
 Judges may be disciplined or removed only by the Supreme
 Judicial Council, an independent body of senior jurists. The
 Supreme Judicial Council has investigated and removed corrupt
 judges to allow prosecution and imprisonment.
 Specialized labor and commercial courts decide cases on the
 basis of decrees issued by the Council of Ministers and
 regulations issued pursuant to those decrees. The Commercial
 Courts' effectiveness is vitiated by frequent serious delays
 in reaching decisions and practical difficulties in enforcing
 judgments reached. The military justice system has
 jurisdiction over uniformed personnel and civilian government
 employees charged with violations of military regulations.
 Decisions of courts martial are reviewed by the King and the
 Minister of Defense and Aviation. The Board of Grievances
 arbitrates claims against the State. The President and Vice
 
 
 1287
 SAUDI ARABIA
 President of the Board are experienced jurists. They are
 aided by board members expert in administrative, contract,
 corruption, civil service, and forgery legislation. The
 President is responsible directly to the King, and the members
 of the board are guaranteed considerable independence. The
 board has on occasion used powers granted by a 1983 decree to
 call erring officials to account.
 There were no reports of prisoners formally sentenced for
 political offenses.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Among the most fundamental of Islamic precepts are the
 sanctity of family life and the inviolability of the home.
 The police must generally demonstrate reasonable cause and
 obtain permission from the provincial governor before
 searching a private home, but warrants are not required. The
 Mutawwi'in may enter homes to search for evidence of
 un-Islamic behavior when they have grounds for suspicion, but
 instances of this appear to be exceedingly rare. Wiretapping
 and mail surveillance can be carried out on the authority of
 officials of the Interior Ministry or the Directorate of
 Intelligence. Informants are reliably reported to be employed
 in internal security matters.
 Some social and religious norms and strictures affecting
 personal life are matters of law and enforced by the
 Government. Saudi women may not marry non-Saudis without
 government permission. Saudi men must obtain approval to
 marry women from countries other than the six members of the
 Gulf Cooperation Council. During Ramadan, the prohibition
 against public eating, drinking, or smoking during daylight
 hours is enforced on Muslims and non-Muslims alike.
 Prohibitions against alcohol and pornography are strictly
 enforced. The Mutawwi'in patrol the streets and markets to
 assure Islamic decorum in dress and demeanor as well as the
 closing of shops during the five daily prayer periods.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Criticism of Islam and the ruling family is not allowed. The
 potential presence of informers renders public criticism of
 the regime rare. In private, complaints are expressed
 relatively freely. Saudis are, however, able to voice
 complaints and to seek redress of grievances through the
 open-door audiences which are held regularly by even the
 highest officials.
 The press is privately owned. It is effectively controlled by
 a 1982 media policy statement and the firm understanding that
 nothing embarrassing to the Government, ruling family, or
 religious leadership may be published. The media policy
 statement enjoins the pzess to uphold Islam, oppose atheism,
 promote Arab interests, preserve the cultural heritage of
 Saudi Arabia, and combat human rights violations. Newspapers
 receive guidelines issued by the Information Ministry on
 government positions on controversial political issues.
 Editors-in-chief are appointed with the tacit approval of the
 Information Minister, and the Government has the power to have
 them removed. Saudi television and radio are atate-owned and
 
 
 1288
 SAUDI ARABIA
 operated. Besides entertainment, their basic aim is to
 project and gain public support for official policies and
 views, with the corollary that conflicting viewpoints are not
 presented. A new educational channel is planned for the near
 future. Foreign news is increasingly presented objectively,
 as, for example, in press and electronic media coverage of the
 Mubarak-Peres summit in Alexandria, the hijacking of an
 American plane in Karachi, and the bombing of a synagogue in
 Istanbul. Foreign publications circulate but are rigorously
 censored for materials deemed immoral or critical of Saudi
 policies and actions. A photograph in the International
 Herald Tribune of Prince Andrew kissing his new bride was
 censored, as was a crucifix in a photograph of the Pope at
 Easter.
 Academic freedom is constrained by similar guidelines; the
 study of Freud and Marx, art, and philosophy, for example, is
 forbidden. Professors commonly believe that classroom
 comments which would be taken as antiregime will be reported
 to the authorities. The Ministry of Higher Education recently
 issued an injunction against the study of music and art in
 educational institutions, including universities. There has
 nevertheless been an increase in art, dance, and sculpture
 outside'these institutions, as evidenced by classes sponsored
 by the Saudi Arabian Society for Culture and Arts, an
 association whose chief holds ministerial rank.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Public demonstrations as a means of political-expression or to
 present grievances are prohibited. Tribal, familial, and
 economic interest groups informally aggregate public opinion,
 which their leaders express to high officials. Nonpolitical
 clubs and professional groups may be organized with the
 permission of the authorities. One particularly active
 philanthropic women's club was disbanded in 1986 for
 unspecified reasons. The few existing professional bodies are
 permitted but not encouraged to maintain contacts with their
 recognized international counterparts. Government decrees
 prohibit labor unions and strikes. Collective bargaining is
 unknown.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Islam is the official religion. All Saudis must be Muslim.
 Apostasy is a crime, and proselytizing by non-Muslims is
 illegal. The Saudis scrupulously uphold the Islamic
 injunction that all Muslims have a responsiblity to make a
 pilgrimage, or Hajj, to Mecca, and all Muslims are welcome to
 visit the holy places. Travel to these places by non-Muslims
 is illegal. Political activities by pilgrims are banned.
 The Shi'a Muslims of the Eastern Province, usually estimated
 at 250,900-400,000 persons, constitute a religious minority
 subject to social and economic discrimination. In the wake of
 the Iranian revolution, they have been periodically subjected
 to surveillance and limitations on travel abroad. Some have
 been arrested without charge and detained, occasionally for
 months. For security reasons, the Government does not permit
 Shi'a public processions to mark Ashura, the holiest of the
 exclusively Shi'a holidays. The shi'a are free to adjudicate
 exclusively intra-Shi'a disputes within their own legal
 tradition, but Shi'a judges receive no stipend or salary from
 the Government. Likewise the Government provides no financial
 support for the Shi'a religious establishment and does not
 
 
 1289
 SAUDI ARABIA
 permit the construction of Shi'a mosques. In recent years the
 authorities have made efforts to redress the Shi'a complaints
 about the economic underdevelopment of their areas. Still,
 most Shi'a continue to live under conditions notably poorer
 than those of their Sunni compatriots.
 Non-Muslim religious services are not permitted, and
 non-Islamic religious materials are illegal. Foreign
 nationals may practice their religions only in private. Large
 gatherings or elaborate organizational structures are likely
 to attract official attention and lead to the deportation of
 their leaders. There have been instances in which private
 services, discovered and brought to the attention of the
 authorities, have been broken up and those conducting them
 arrested, interrogated, and deported.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Saudis may travel freely anywhere within the country.
 Passports are issued by the Interior Ministry. Male Saudis
 may travel abroad freely. In the case of government
 officials, the permission of the Royal Diwan is required but
 apparently is normally perfunctory. Women must obtain prior
 permission from their closest male relative before being
 allowed to leave the country. The passports of suspected
 subversives have occasionally been seized. Shi'a are
 generally prohibited from traveling to Iran. Detection of
 such travel by Saudi authorities is followed by
 interrogation. Shi'a known to have pro-Khomeini sympathies
 may not be allowed to travel abroad. Saudis are permitted to
 emigrate and assume foreign nationality. This results in the
 loss of Saudi nationality. Citizenship is not revoked for
 political reasons.
 There is no formal policy regarding refugees or granting
 asylum. Refugees and displaced persons are in most cases
 dealt with like all other foreign workers. Anyone seeking
 residence in the Kingdom, except Yemenis, must meet strictly
 enforced requirements of sponsorship and employment. There
 are over 250,000 foreigners who fled their native countries,
 primarily Palestinians, Lebanese, Eritreans, Afghans, and
 South Yemenis. These individuals generally receive no special
 treatment, privileges, or services. Reportedly, individual
 Saudis (frequently members of the ruling family) permanently
 sponsor such individuals to enable them to remain in Saudi
 Arabia, permitting them to find work where they may. In a
 small number of cases, sponsors reportedly have charged fees
 to such persons for providing documentation required by the
 Government. There are hardly any Saudi refugees outside the
 country. A few Shi'a are thought to have fled the country to
 avoid arrest.
 Foreigners living in Saudi Arabia, except for Yemenis, are
 required to carry identification cards. They are not
 permitted to travel outside the city of their employment or to
 change their workplace without their sponsor's permission.
 Foreign national employees are not permitted to travel abroad
 without their sponsor's permission since sponsors hold their
 passports and are responsible for obtaining exit visas for
 them. Foreigners involved in commercial disputes are often
 not allowed to leave the country until the problem has been
 resolved. Sponsors have taken advantage of this arrangement
 at times to exert unfair pressure to resolve commercial
 disputes in their favor and occasionally have baen able to
 
 
 1290
 SAUDI ARABIA.
 prevent foreign nationals from departing Saudi Arabia for long-
 periods. The Ministry of Commerce issued new procedural
 guidelines in 1986, but it is still unclear whether they will
 help ameliorate this problem. In criminal cases, Saudi
 regulations require that the passports of all potential
 suspects and witnesses be seized. This has sometimes forced
 foreign nationals to remain in Saudi Arabia for lengthy
 periods. One U.S. citizen was detained for over a year as a
 material witness in an investigation in which he was only
 tangentially involved.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The King rules the country in matters secular and religious,
 within limits established by religious law, tradition, and by
 the need to maintain consensus among the ruling family and
 religious leaders. The King's legitimacy is based upon his
 descent, his selection by consensus, his propagation of the
 tenets-of Islam, and his perceived concern for the welfare of
 the nation. The King, who is also the Prime.Minister,
 appoints the Crown Prince in consultation with the other
 senior members of the ruling family. The Crown Prince serves
 as First Deputy Prime Minister. The King appoints all other
 Ministers, who in turn appoint subordinate officials with
 cabinet concurrence. There are no elected officials in Saudi
 Arabia. (The only elections appear to be businessmen's
 elections of two-thirds or more of the board members of the
 quasi-official Saudi Chambers of Commerce and Industry.)
 Likewise, political parties are not permitted, and there are
 no known organized opposition groups.
 Traditionally, public opinion has been expressed through
 client-patron relationships and interest groups such as
 tribes, families, and professional hierarchies. The open-door
 audience (majlis) remains the primary forum for the expression
 of opinion or grievance. Anyone may attend these sessions
 which all important officials hold regularly and openly.
 (Since the-assassination of King Faisal during a majlis in
 1975, however, kings have reduced the frequency of their
 personal contacts with the public.) Typical topics raised in
 a majlis are complaints about bureaucratic dilatoriness or
 insensitivity, requests for redress or assistance, and
 criticism of particular acts of government affecting personal
 or family welfare. Broader "political" concerns--Saudi
 social, economic, or foreign policy--are not considered
 appropriate and are seldom raised. Either the. King or the
 Crown Prince meets with religious leaders at least once a week.
 This relaxed, but institutionalized, consultative means of
 ascertaining public opinion has limitations. Participation by
 women in the process is severely restricted. Rural-urban
 migration has weakened tribal and familial links. Citizens
 are not directly able to change policies or officials through
 the majlis system, which is largely a forum in which
 grievances are aired and favors sought. As governmental
 functions have become increasingly complex, time-consuming,
 and centralized in Riyadh, direct access to senior officials
 has decreased. The creation of a Consultative Council to
 serve as a means of consultation between rulers and ruled has
 been under consideration for many years. No steps toward its
 implementation are known to have been taken in 1986.
 
 
 1291
 SAUDI ARABIA
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There were no reports that international or nongovernmental
 organizations sought to investigate alleged violations of
 human rights during 1986. There are no human rights groups in
 Saudi Arabia. In international forums, Saudi representatives
 regularly protest violations of human rights of Palestinians,
 Afghans, Eritreans, and Muslim minorities in several
 countries, including Bulgaria.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Women do not enjoy equality with men. By Koranic precept, a
 daughter's share of an inheritance is less than that of her
 brother. Women must demonstrate legally specified grounds for
 divorce, but men may divorce without grounds. In Shari'a
 court the testimony of one man equals that of two women.
 Women may not drive motor vehicles, and there are restrictions
 on their use of public facilities when men are present. By
 custom, women do not travel alone. They are restricted to
 specially designated sections on urban buses. Women may
 travel abroad only with the written permission of their
 nearest male relative. Employment opportunities for Saudi
 women either in the civil service or with public corporations
 are extremely limited. In practice their employment is
 largely restricted to the teaching and health care
 professions. In public, women are required to dress with
 extreme modesty. Free but segregated education through the
 university level is now available to Saudi women. The number
 of civil service jobs open to women (in segregated offices)
 has increased recently. Polygamy is becoming less common,
 particularly among younger Saudis.
 The large expatriate work force does not, for the most part,
 receive the same economic and social benefits available to
 native Saudis and must conform to the restrictive Saudi social
 standards. The poorest of these foreign nationals, almost 3
 million Yemenis, Africans, and Asians, live under conditions
 significantly more harsh than those of the Saudi urban classes.
 Saudi Shi'a face discrimination in government employment,
 especially in jobs with national security implications, and
 some limitations on their access to social services, despite
 government efforts to improve the social service
 infrastructure in predominantly Shi'a areas of the country.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 The 1969 Saudi labor law requires employers to protect workers
 from job-related hazards and disease. Labor Ministry
 inspeccors and the labor courts are seeking with some success
 to enforce the labor code, but foreign nationals report
 frequent failures to enforce health and safety standards.
 Saudi authorities have reportedly enjoyed greater success in
 enforcing contract terms and working hours. Saudi labor law
 establishes a maximum 48 hour workweek at regular pay and
 allows employers to require up to 12 additional hours of
 overtime at time and a half. Employees may volunteer for
 additional overtime. There is no legal minimum wage. The
 labor law provides, however, that minimum wages may be set by
 the Council of Ministers on the recommendation of the Minister
 of Labor. The effective minimum is the amount required to
 
 
 1292
 SAUDI ARABIA
 induce foreign laborers to come to work in Saudi Arabia.
 There is no minimum age for those employed in agriculture,
 family enterprises, private homes, or repair of agricultural
 machinery. Adolescents (ages 15 to 18), juveniles (under 15),
 and women may not be employed in hazardous or harmful
 industries, such as mines or industries employing
 power-operated machinery. In other cases, the labor law
 provides for a minimum age of 13, which may be waived by the
 Ministry of Labor in certain areas with the consent of the
 juvenile's guardian. Child labor does not appear to be a
 significant problem in Saudi Arabia.
 Saudi Arabia has a generous social security program for which
 most foreign workers are eligible on the same basis as
 Saudis. Some foreign workers, particularly those in unskilled
 positions such as lower-level construction workers and
 housemaids, are exploited due to their ignorance of the labor
 code, inability to understand Arabic, lack of written
 contracts,,or fear of retribution from their employers. Such
 labor problems, however, can be settled in labor courts, which
 have the reputation of being reasonably fast and fair. In
 1986 the Government increased its authority over recalcitrant
 employers through a written code that permits it to attach
 assets.
 
 
 1293
