 SAUDI ARABIA
 Saudi Arabia is a traditional, Arab, and Islamic monarchy ruled
 by the sons of its founder, the late King Abd Al-Aziz (known
 in the West as "Ibn Saud"). There is no written national
 constitution.
 By convention, the King and Crown Prince have been chosen from
 among the sons of Abd Al-Aziz, who themselves have preponderant
 influence in the choice. Senior religious scholars and other
 princes also have a voice. The King serves as Prime Minister.
 Officials from the highest levels down maintain contact with
 citizens by holding open door audiences ("majlis") regularly.
 Saudis from all social strata attend these meetings to seek
 redress of grievances, which is frequently granted. There are
 no elected assemblies or political parties. The legitimacy of
 the regime rests to a large degree on its perceived adherence
 to the defense of Islam, particularly the austere Hanbali
 School of Islamic Jurisprudence. Rulers and ruled share a
 respect for laws believed to be divinely inspired as well as
 ancient customs which call for consensus in government,
 internal social cohesion, and economic private enterprise.
 During the past 30 years, massive oil revenues have transformed
 Saudi Arabia's centuries-old pastoral, agricultural, and
 commercial economy. This transformation has been marked by
 rapid urbanization, large-scale infrastructure development,
 government subsidies to entrepreneurs and consumers, the
 emergence of a technocratic middle class, and the presence of
 almost 3.4 million foreign workers in a population of about 11
 million. With the exception of the oil sector, economic
 activity and resources have largely remained in private hands.
 No major new developments affected human rights in 1987. As
 in previous years, there were continuing reports of
 mistreatment and torture of prisoners. Civil liberties remain
 significantly restricted. The July 31 riots in Mecca,
 instigated by Iranian participants in the annual Muslim
 pilgrimage, resulted in the deaths of more than 400 persons.
 This event powerfully reinforced the perennial concern of the
 Saudi authorities and public about security, and has increased
 Saudi vigilance in this respect. In general, the heightened
 sense of external threat to the country occasioned by the
 intensifying Iran-Iraq war has sharpened the sense of
 nationhood and solidarity of most Saudis.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no known political killings.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no known disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Some punishments meted out under Islamic Shari'a Law involve
 amputation with anesthetic, or execution by beheading, firing
 squad, or stoning (with the convicted person in a drugged
 state). There were some reports in 1987 that the police beat
 
 
 1291
 SAUDI ARABIA
 detainees to elicit confessions. One such documented case
 involved an Asian man accused of homosexuality who was beaten
 while suspended upside down. In the absence of eyewitnesses,
 confessions are usually required for conviction in Shari'a
 courts. Members of the Committee for the Propagation of
 Virtue and Prevention of Vice (the "religious police,"
 commonly called Mutawwilin, which means "enforcers") have the
 legal right to detain suspects for supposed infractions of
 Muslim strictures up to 48 hours before turning them over to
 the regular authorities. On occasion they have claimed the
 right to flog detainees while seeking a confession. In the
 past, the U.S. has protested Mutawwilin actions against U.S.
 citizens to the Saudi Government.
 Saudi security officials at various levels have separately
 indicated that a royal order prohibiting the striking of
 prisoners exists. There were no reports of abuse of European
 or American prisoners in 1987, but a number of reported
 instances of abuse of African and Asian prisoners. Credible
 reports also claim that two Saudi Shi'ite prisoners died under
 unclear circumstances, possibly involving abuse and neglect.
 The implicated officers of the security forces were
 transferred.
 In its 1987 Report, covering 1986, Amnesty International said
 that it had received several reports in 1986 about the torture
 and ill-treatment of detainees, and that, as in previous years,
 such torture or ill-treatment apparently occurred during the
 period immediately after arrest'when detainees were held
 incommunicado. AI said it was was unable to investigate these
 reports fully but from their consistency and from the variety
 of sources concluded that they "appeared to indicate a pattern
 of torture and ill-treatment."
 Prison conditions are not intentionally degrading. Conditions
 in some correctional institutions are, however, severe.
 Prisoners often sleep on the floor, suffer heat stroke, and
 sometimes complain of difficulty in obtaining adequate medical
 treatment. Despite government efforts to expand and improvd
 prisons, deterioration of some facilities has occurred.
 In accordance with Shari'a law, Saudi Arabia imposes capital
 punishment f6r the crimes of intentional murder, adultery,
 apostasy from Islam, and, depending upon the circumstances,
 rape and armed robbery. The Interior Minister and Cassation
 Courts review all cases in which capital punishment has been
 imposed. The King must approve all such sentences. The
 number of executions rose in 1987 (to 45 in the first 9 months
 of. 1987 from 18 in the same period of 1986). Five of those
 executed were convicted of narcotics smuggling and sentenced
 to death pursuant to a March 1987 law making narcotics
 smuggling a capital offense. (These smugglers also fired at
 police, killing one officer, so that one of them at least was
 also guilty of murder; Shari'a--unlike U.S. law--would not
 necessarily find the other four offenders guilty of that
 crime.)
 Beheading is the usual method of execution. Death by firing
 squad or stoning may be imposed for adultery. A recidivist
 thief may suffer severance of a hand. In the first 9 months
 of 1987 no one suffered this punishment. For less severe
 crimes, such as drunkenness, or publicly flaunting Islamic
 precepts, flogging with a cane is often imposed. Public
 flogging is intended to humiliate, the criminal and serve as a
 
 
 1292
 SAUDI ARABIA
 deterrent to others. The skin is not broken, and the flogging,
 though it is painful and leaves welts, is administered with a
 bent elbow.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, Exile, or Forced Labor
 There were no reports of arbitrary arrests and imprisonment in
 1987. The several dozen Shi'a arrested in the Eastern
 Province during 1986 were released at the beginning of the
 year in what appears to have been a general amnesty.
 There is no automatic, prompt procedure for contacting a
 detainee's family or employer; however, in cases involving
 foreigners, Saudi authorities acknowledge that they have the
 obligation to do so. When asked, the police will almost
 always confirm an arrest.
 Embassies usually hear about arrests of their nationals
 informally within a few days, and in most cases are granted
 prompt consular access to prisoners. Official notification
 almost always takes several months, if it occurs at all.
 Problems arise when persons are arrested by the General
 Directorate of Investigations (GDI), the security service
 commonly called the "Mubahith" or investigation police. GDI
 prisoners are regularly held incommunicado during the initial
 phase of an investigation, which may last several weeks. The
 total number of persons affected is unknown.
 Shari'a law makes no provision for bail or habeas corpus.
 Prisoners may beheld for months whtle an investigation
 proceeds before being either charged or released., Regulations
 issued by the Interior Ministry in 1983 to eliminate lengthy-
 pretrial detentions or detentions without charges are
 frequently unenforced. On the other hand, the Board of
 Grievances, an independent judicial body empowered to
 investigate citizens! complaints against official abuse, has
 used the authority granted to it in 1983 to become an
 effective--if slow--avenue of redress for citizens and private
 corporations against state institutions, public sector
 companies, and government officials accused of malfeasance,
 nonfeasance, bias, or corruption.
 The Government does not use forced labor or exile as a form of
 punishment.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The judicial system is founded upon the Sharila. Sharila
 courts exercise jurisdiction over common criminal cases and
 civil suits regarding marriage, divorce, child custody, and
 inheritance of real or personal property. Trials are generally
 closed an&'aSe normally held without counsel, though the
 advice of Islamic lawyers is available before trial. In the
 Shari'a court the defendant appears before a judge who
 determines guilt or innocence and, if warranted, imposes the
 appropri'ate punishment. Appeals against judges' decisions are
 automatically reviewed by the Justice Ministry or, in more
 serious cases, by the Supreme Judicial Council to ensure that
 court procedure was correct and that the judge applied
 appropriate Sharila principles and punishments. Counsel is
 not permitted in the court itself, but lawyers may act as
 interpreters for those unfamiliar with Arabic. With rare
 exceptions, there is no consular access to the trials of
 foreign nationals.
 
 
 1293
 SAUDI ARABIA
 The independence of the judiciary is prescribed by law and
 respected in practice. The Justice Ministry is responsible
 for the appointment, transfer, and promotion of judges.
 Judges may be disciplined or removed only by the Supreme
 Judicial Council, an independent body of senior jurists. The
 Supreme Judicial Council has investigated and removed corrupt
 judges to allow prosecution and imprisonment.
 Specialized labor and commercial courts decide cases on the
 basis of decrees issued by the Council of Ministers and
 regulations issued pursuant to those decrees. The commercial
 courts' effectiveness is frequently vitiated by long delays in
 reaching decisions and practical difficulties in enforcing
 judgments reached. The military justice system has
 jurisdiction over uniformed personnel and civilian government
 employees charged with violations of military regulations.
 Court-martial decisions are reviewed by the Minister of
 Defense and Aviation, and the King.
 The Board of Grievances arbitrates claims against the State.
 The President and Vice President of the Board are experienced
 jurists. They are aided by board members expert in
 administrative, contract, corruption, civil service, and
 forgery legislation. The President is responsible directly to
 the King, and the members of the Board are guaranteed
 considerable indepenidence. The Board has on occasion used
 powers granted by a 1983 decree to call erring-officials to
 account.
 There were no reports of prisoners formally sentenced for
 political offenses.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 -Correspondence
 Among-the most fundamental of Islamic precepts are the
 sanctity of family life and the inviolability of'the home.
 The police must generally demonstrate reasonable cause and
 obtain permission from the provincial governor before searching
 a private home, but warrants are not required. The Mutawwi'in
 may enter homes to search for evidence of un-Islamic behavior
 when they have grounds for suspicion, but instances of this
 appear to be exceedingly rare. Wiretaps and mail surveillance
 can be carried out bn the authority of officials of the
 Interior Ministry or the Directorate of Intelligence.
 Informants are reliably reported to be widely employed in
 internal security matters.
 Some social and religious norms and strictures affecting
 personal life arematters of law and are enforced by the
 Government. Saudi women may not marry non-Saudis without
 government permission. Saudi men must obtain approval to
 marry women from countries other than the six members of the
 Gulf Cooperation Council. During the Muslim holy month of
 Ramadan, the prohibition against public eating, drinking, or
 smoking during daylight hours is enforced on Muslims and
 non-Muslims alike. Prohibitions against alcohol and
 pornography are strictly enforced. The Mutawwilin patrol the
 streets and markets to assure Islamic decorum in dress and
 demeanor as well as the closing of shops during the five daily
 prayer periods.
 
 
 1294
 SAUDI ARABIA
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Criticism of .Islam and the ruling f-amily is not allowed. The
 potential presence of informers renders public criticism of
 the regime ra-re, In private, complaints are expressed
 relatively freely. Saudis are able to voice complaints and to
 seek redress of grievances through the open-door audiences
 which are held regularly by even the highest officials, but
 such grievances are generally expected to be personal rather
 than political or.social.
 The press is privately owned. It is effectively controlled by
 a 1962 media pqlicy statement and the firm understanding that
 nothing embarrassing to the Government, ruling family, or
 religious leadership may be published. The media policy'
 statement enjoins the press to uphold Islam, oppose atheism,
 promote Arab interests, and preserve the cultural heritage of
 Saudi Arabia. Newspapers receive guidelines issued by the .
 Information Ministry on government positions on controversial
 political issues.
 Editors-in-chief are appointed with the tacit approval of the
 Information Minister, and the  overnment has the power to have
 them removed. Saudi television and radio are state owned and
 operated. Besides entertainment, their basic aim is to
 project and gain public support for offici-l policies and
 views, with the-corollary that conflicting viewpoints are not
 presented. A new educational channel is in the planning
 stage. Foreign news is increasingly presented objectively as,
 for example, in press and electronic media coverage of the
 U.S. Supreme Court confirmation hearings, preparations for the
 U.S. presidential elections, and the "glasnost" campaign in
 the Soviet Union. Foreign publications circulate but are
 censored with iqcreasing yigor for mategials deemed immoral or
 explicitly or implicitly qritical of spudi policies and
 actions, especially since the Mecca riots. For example,
 entire pages of the International Herald Tribune containing
 articles on Saudi Arabia, .advertisements for alcoholic
 beverages, or beach scenes have been torn-out, and the entire
 newspaper has sometimes been withheld from distribution.
 Academic freedom is constrained by similar guidelines; the
 study of Freud and Marx, representational art, and philosophy,
 for example, is forbidden. Professors commonly believe that
 classroom comments, which would be taken as antiregime, will
 be reported to the authorities. There is also an injunction
 against the study of music and art in educational institutions,
 including universities. Nevertheless there has been an
 increase in artistic activities outside these institutions, as
 evidenced by classes sponsored by the Saudi Arabian Society
 for Culture and Arts, an association whose head holds
 ministerial rank..
 b. 'Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Public demonstrations as a means of political expression or to
 present grievances are prohibited. Tribal, familial, and
 economic interest groups informally aggregate public opinion,
 which their leaders express to high officials. Nonpolitical
 clubs and professional groups may be organized with the
 permission of the authorities. The few existing professional
 bodies are permitted but not encouraged to maintain contacts
 
 
 1295
 SAUDI ARABIA
 with their recognized international counterparts. Government
 decrees prohibit labor unions and strikes. Collective
 bargaining is unknown.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Islam is the official religion. All Saudis must be Muslim.
 Conversion to another religion is a crime punishable by death.
 Proselytizing by non-Muslims is illegal. Non-Muslim places of
 worship may not exist. The Saudis scrupulously uphold the
 Islamic injunction that all Muslims have a responsibility to
 make a pilgrimage, or hajj, to Mecca, and all Muslims are
 welcome to visit the holy places. Travel to these places by
 non-Muslims is illegal. Political activities by pilgrims are
 banned.
 The Shi'a Muslims of the Eastern Province, usually estimated
 at 250,000-400,000 persons, constitute a religious minority
 subject to social'and economic discrimination. In the wake of
 the Iranian Revolution,,they have been periodically subjected
 to surveillance and limitations on travel abroad. Some have
 been arrested without charge and detained, occasionally for
 months; For security reasons, the Government does not permit
 Shi'ite public processions to mark Ashura, the holiest of the
 exclusively Shi'ite holidays. Ashura passed without incident
 in 1987. The Shi'a are free-to adjudicate exclusively
 intra-Shi'a disputes within their own legal tradition, but
 Shi'ite judges receive no stipend or salary from the
 Government. Likewise the Government provides no financial
 support for the Shi'ite religious establishment and seldom
 permits the construction of Shi'ite mosques. However, a
 Shi'ite mosque previously closed in Dammam was allowed to
 reopen in August 1987 under some restrictions. In recent
 years the aithorities have made efforts to redress Shi'ite
 complaints about the economic underdevelopment of their
 areas. Still, most Shi'a continue to live under conditions
 notably poorer than those of their Sunni compatriots.
 Non-Muslim religious services are not permitted, and
 non-Islamic religious materials are illegal. Foreign nationals
 may practice their religibns only in private. Large gatherings
 or elaborate organizational structures are likely to attract
 official attention and lead to the deportation of their
 leaders. There was at least one'instance in 1987 in which a
 private service, discovered and brought to the attention of
 the authorities, was broken up and those conducting it
 arrested, interrogated, and deported.
 d. Freedom of Movement Withfn the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Saudis may travel freely anywhere within the'country.
 Passports are issued by the Interior Ministry. Male Saudis
 may travel abroad freely. In the case of government
 officials, the permission of the Royal Court is required but
 apparently is normally perfunctory. Women must obtain prior
 permission from their closest male relative before being
 aliowed to leave the country. The passports of suspected
 subversives have occasionally been seized. Shi'a are
 generally prohibited from traveling to Iran. Detection of
 such travel by Saudi authorities is followed by interrogation.
 Shi'a known to have pro-Khomeini sympathies may not be allowed
 to travel abroad. Saudis are permitted to emigrate and assume
 foreign nationality. This results.in the loss of Saudi
 nationality. Citizenship is not revoked for political reasons.
 
 
 1296
 SAUDI ARABIA
 There is no explicit formal policy regarding refugees or
 granting asylum. Refugees and displaced persons are in most
 cases dealt with like other foreign workers. With some
 exceptions (including all North.Yemenis), persons seeking
 residence in the Kingdom must meet strictly enforced
 requirements of sponsorship and employment. There are over
 250,000 foreigners who fled their native countries, primarily
 Palestinians, Lebanese, Eritreans, Afghans, and South
 Yemenis. These persons generally receive no special
 treatment, privileges, or services. Individual Saudis
 (frequgntly members of the ruling family) permanently sponsor
 such individuals to enable them to remain in Saudi Arabia,
 permitting them to find work where they may. In a small
 number of cases, sponsors reportedly have charged fees to such'
 persons for providing documentation required by the Government.
 There are few Saudi refugees outside the country. A few Shi'a
 reportedly have fled to avoid arrest.
 Foreigners living in Saudi Arabia, except for Yemenis, are
 required to carry identification caras. They are not
 permitted to travel outside the city of their employment or to
 change their workplace without their sponsor's permission.
 Foreign national employees are not permitted to travel abroad
 without their sponsor's permission, since sponsors hold their
 passports and are responsible for obtaining exit visas for
 them. Foreigners involved in-commercial-disputes are often,
 not allowed to leave the country until the problem has been
 resolved. Sponsors have taken advantage of this arrangement
 at times to exert unfair pressure to resolve commercial
 disputes ridtheir favor. 'Occasionally Saudi sponsors or
 busind s partners have been able to prevent foreign nationals
 from departing. Saudi Arabia for long periods or have them
 arrested or deported. In criminal cases, Saudi regulations
 require that the passports of all potential suspects and
 witnesses be'seized. This-has sometimes forced foreign
 nationals to remain in Saudi Arabia for lengthy periods.
 Section 3 Respect for Political-Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Th Kingdom-of Saudi Arabia has no formal democratic
 ihsitutibhs. Consequently,, most of Its citizens do not have
 a say in the choice of leaders or in changing the political
 system. The King rules the country in Aatters secular and
 religious, within limits established by religious law,
 tradition, and the need to maintain consensus among the ruling
 family and religious leaders. The-King's legitimacy is based
 upon his descent, his selection by consensus, hiS propagation
 of the tenets of Islam,. and his perceived concern for the
 welfare add security of the nation. The King is also the
 Prime Minister, and the Ciown Prince serves -as First Deputy
 Prime Minister. The King appoints all other ministers, who in
 turn appoint subordinate officials with cabinet concurrence.
 There are no popularly elected officials in Saudi Arabia.
 (The only-elections appear to be businessmen's elections of
 two-thirds or more of the board members of the quasi-official
 Saudi Chambers of Commerce and Industry.) Political parties
 are not permitted, and there are no known organized opposition
 groups.
 The participationof women in the political and business life
 of the country  s severely restricted in practice.
 Traditionally, public opinion has been expressed through
 client-patron relationships and interest groups such as
 
 
 1297
 SAUDI ARABIA
 tribes, families, and professional hierarchies. The open-door
 audience (majlis) remains the primary forum for expression of
 opinion or grievance. Any male citizen may attend these
 sessions, which all important officials hold regularly and
 openly. Since the assassination of King Faisal during a
 majlis in 1975, however, kings have reduced the frequency of
 their personal contacts with the public. Typical topics
 raised in a majlis are complaints about bureaucratic
 dilatoriness or insensitivity, requests for redress or
 assistance, and criticism of particular acts of government
 affecting personal or family welfare. Broader "political"
 concerns--Saudi social, economic, or foreign policy--are
 raised only occasionally. Either the King or the Crown Prince
 meets with religious leaders at least once a week.
 This relaxed but institutionalized means of ascertaining
 public opinion through consultation has limitations.
 Participation by women in the process is severely restricted.
 Rural-urban migration has weakened tribal and familial links.
 Citizens are not directly able to change policies or officials
 through the majlis system, which is largely a forum in which
 grievances are aired and favors sought. As governmental
 functions have become increasingly complex, time-consuming,
 and centralized in Riyadh, direct access to senior officials
 has decreased. The creation of a Consultative Council to
 serve as a means of consultation between rulers and ruled has
 been under consideration for many years. Though the King
 again endorsed the establishment of such a council in the
 spring, no steps in this regard beyond completion of the
 building identified as its quarters were known to have been
 taken in 1987.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There were no reports that international or nongovernmental
 organizatiois sbught to investigate alleged violations of
 human rights during 1987." There are no human rights groups in
 Saudi Arabia. In international-forums, Saudi representatives
 regularly protest violations of the human rights of
 Palestinians, Afghans, Eritreans, aid Muslim minorities in
 several countries, including Bulgaria.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Women do not enjoy equality with men. By Koranic precept, a
 daughter's share of an inheritance is less than that of her
 brother. Women must demonstrate legally specified grounds for
 divorce, but men may divorce without grounds. If divorced or
 widowed, a woman normally may keep her children until they
 attain the age of 7 years, but then they revert to the
 husband's family, to whom they belong under Islamic law. In
 Shari'a court, the testimony of one man equals that of two
 women. Women may not drive motor vehicles, and there are
 restrictions on their use of public facilities when men are
 present. By custom, women do not travel alone. They are
 restricted to specially designated sections in the rear of
 urban buses. Women may travel abroad only with the written
 permission of their nearest male relative. Employment
 opportunities for Saudi women either in the civil service or
 with public corporations are extremely limited. In practice
 their employment is largely restricted to the teaching and
 health care professions. In public, women are required to
 
 
 1298
 SAUDI ARABIA
 dress with extreme modesty, including (in the case of Muslim
 women) a black outer garment covering the entire body. Free
 but segregated education through the university level is now
 available to Saudi women. Polygamy is relatively common in
 outlying areas but is becoming less so in cities, particularly
 among~youngbr Saudis. Islamic Law limits the number of wives
 to four, and'requires a husband who has more than one wife to
 treat each of his wives equally.
 The large expatriate work force does not, for-the most part,
 receive the same economic and social benefits available to
 native Saudis; and must conform to the restrictive Saudi
 social standards. Opportunities for non-Muslims.are
 circumscribed. The poorest of the foreign nationals, almost 3
 million Yemenis, Africans, and Asians, live under conditions
 significantly morq harsh than those of the Saudi urban
 classes. Foreign emnbassies have received numerous reports of
 sexual abuse of non-Muslim female domestics by their Saudi
 employers. -It appears that such victims have limited options
 for re ress in the courts,,although a few employers have
 reportedly been punished for such abuses.
 Saudi Shi a face'disrirminatidn in government employment,
 especia ly in jobs with national security implications, and
 some limitations on their access to social services, despite
 efforts by the Government to improve the social service
 infrastructure in predoriinantly Shi'a areas of the country.
 CONDITIONS.,OFLABOR
 The 1969 Saudi Labor Law requires employers to protect most
 workers from job-related hazards and disease. Domestics and
 worker.,emploied. in enterprises with fewer than five employees
 are nboEcoveredin the labor code. Labor Ministry inspectors
 and the laboi courts are seeking with some success to enforce
 the labor code, but foreign nationals report frequent failures
 to enforce health and safety standards. Saudi authorities
 reportedly have enjoyed greater succesa in enforcing contract
 terms anc  working hours. The Sgudi ) abor Law establishes a
 maximum 48-hour wQrkweek at regular pay,.and allows empl6yers
 to require up to 12 additional hours of overtime at time and a
 half. Employees may volunteer for additional overtime. There
 is no legal minimum wage. The Labor Law provides, however,
 that minimum wages may be set by the Council of Ministers on
 the recommendation of the Minister of Labor. The effective
 minimum is the amount required to induce foreign laborers to
 come to work in Saudi Arabia.
 There is no minimum age for those employed in agriculture,
 family'qnterprises, private homes, or repair of agricultural
 machinery.'. Adolescents (ages 15 to 18), juveniles (under 15),
 and women may not be employed in hazardous or harmful
 industries, such as mines or industries employing
 power-operated machinery. In other cases, the Labor Law
 provides for a minimum age of 13, which may be waived by the
 Ministry df Labor in certain.areas with the consent of the
 juvenile's guardian. Child labor does not appear to be a
 significant problem in Saudi Arabia.
 Saudi Arabia has a generous social security program. Most
 foreign workers were formerly eligible to participate in this
 program on the same basis as Saudis, but were excluded from
 participation in March 1987. Some foreign workers,
 particularly those in unskilled positions such as lower-level
 construction workers and housemaids, are exploited due to
 
 
 1299
 SAUDI ARABIA
 their ignorance of the labor code, inability to understand
 Arabic, lack of written contracts, or fear of retribution from
 their employers. Such labor problems can be settled in labor
 courts, which have the reputation of being reasonably fast and
 fair, but the poorest employees may face insuperable practical
 and financial obstacles to taking advantage of these courts.
 In 1986 the Government increased its authority over
 recalcitrant employers through a written code that permits it
 to attach assets.
 
 
 1800
