Saudi Arabia
Human rights violations are pervasive in Saudi Arabia, an absolute monarchy.
Despite international and domestic pressure to implement reforms, improvements
have been halting and inadequate. King Abdullah’s succession to the
throne after King Fahd’s death in August inspired some hope among Saudi
citizens for future reform. King Abdullah quickly pardoned three prominent
reformers who had earlier been sentenced to long prison terms for voicing
criticism of the government, and announced a new labor law promising
increased rights for women and migrant workers, but overall human rights
conditions in the kingdom remain poor.
Saudi law does not protect many basic rights. The government does not
allow political parties, and places strict limits on freedom of expression.
Arbitrary detention, mistreatment and torture of detainees, restrictions on
freedom of movement, and lack of official accountability remain serious concerns.
The kingdom carried out some seventy-three executions as of late
September 2005, more than double the thirty-two executions in the whole of
2004. Saudi women continue to face serious obstacles to their participation in
the economy, politics, media, and society. Many foreign workers face
exploitative working conditions; migrant women working as domestics often
are subjected to round-the-clock confinement by their employers, making
them vulnerable to sexual abuse and other mistreatment. The government
continued to harass independent Saudi Arabian human rights defenders and
stifle their efforts to establish independent rights monitoring groups.
Political Violence and Internal Security
A December 6, 2004 attack on the United States consulate in Jeddah killed
nine people; al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula clamed responsibility. A
series of car bomb attacks on Saudi security installations in Riyadh occurred
on December 29, 2004. In late June 2005 the government issued a list of
thirty-six Saudi and foreign terror suspects wanted domestically. Throughout
2005 Saudi security forces carried out raids, killing or capturing wanted men
including five suspects on the June 2005 list and all but one on a previous December 2004 list of twenty-six suspects; the government gave no information
on those captured. Interior Minister Prince Nayif in February said that
fighting between militants and security forces over the past two years had
killed 221 people, including ninety-two suspected militants. In April, the
Saudi government executed three convicted militants in al-Juf, the first executions
for political crimes, according to officials.
At least several hundred Saudis have reportedly traveled to Iraq to take part
in insurgent activities. The Associated Press reported that on May 30, 2005,
Syrian authorities deported more than thirty Saudis who allegedly had sought
to join the Iraqi insurgency. Since early 2005 Saudi border patrols reportedly
apprehended sixty-three Saudis seeking to illegally enter Iraq.
In August 2005, the Saudi government released from detention five Saudis
formerly detained by the U.S. at Guantanamo Bay; they had been transferred
to Saudi Arabia in May 2003. In July, the U.S. transferred three more Saudis
from Guantanamo Bay to Saudi Arabia, where at least one, Salih al-Awshan,
remains in detention. As of October the U.S. was negotiating with Saudi officials
over the transfer into Saudi Arabian custody of some or all of the 121
Saudis still at Guantanamo Bay.
Political Reform
Saudi Arabia’s political reform movement focused in 2005 on the release of
three prominent advocates of constitutional reform who had been in detention
since March 2004 after they refused to sign a pledge to cease all public
activism. A Saudi court on May 15, 2004, had sentenced the three—Matruk
al-Falih, Abdullah al-Hamid, and Ali al-Dumaini—to between six and nine
years in prison for calling for a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary
elections. Their lawyer, Abd al-Rahman al-Lahim, was arrested on
November 6, 2004, after publicly criticizing the trial of the three as unfair. In
August 2005 King Abdullah pardoned the four, as well as Dr. Sa’id Mubarak
al-Zu’air, jailed since April 2004 for remarks he made on the al-Jazeera TV
channel, and the king later met with some of them.
Municipal Elections
The first elections since the 1960s, for half of the country’s municipal council
seats, went ahead in three stages between February and April 2005 after having
been postponed from 2004. The government has reportedly nominated
the remaining councilors, but the councils have yet to begin work. Election
regulations forbade candidates from uniting in electoral lists, and limited the
two-week campaigns to printed materials and meetings in private homes.
The election sparked intense debate between conservatives and liberals, especially
after both Sunni and Shi’a religious sheikhs endorsed groups of candidates,
so-called “golden lists,” which were widely circulated by mobile telephone
text messaging, in contravention of regulations.
Women’s Rights
Women in the kingdom continued to suffer from severe discrimination in the
workplace, home, and the courts, and from restrictions in their freedom of
movement and their choice of partners. The religious police enforce strict
gender segregation and women’s public dress code of head-to-toe covering.
Women were not allowed to vote or stand as candidates in the municipal
elections. Women are also excluded from the weekly majlis (council), where
senior members of the royal family listen to the complaints and proposals of
Saudi citizens.
Women cannot work, study, or travel without explicit permission from a male
relative. Their freedom of movement is further restricted by a law prohibiting
them from driving. While a new labor law passed in late September 2005
reportedly expands the professional fields where women are eligible for work,
they continue to be barred from jobs that are deemed “not suitable to their
nature.”
Migrant Workers
The estimated 8.8 million largely South and Southeast Asian and Arab foreign
workers in Saudi Arabia comprise a third of the country’s population,
according to Minister of Labor Ghazi al-Gosaibi. Many face exploitative working conditions, including sixteen-hour workdays, no breaks or food and
drink, and often remain confined to locked dormitories during their time off.
Security forces deported tens of thousands of illegal immigrants in 2005.
Arrested foreign workers face torture and prolonged incommunicado detention.
Nongovernmental organizations in several Asian countries and those countries’
diplomatic missions in Saudi Arabia documented hundreds of abuses of
migrant workers in Saudi Arabia, such as unpaid wages, long working hours,
and physical and sexual abuse. The isolation of women domestic workers in
private homes, and the lack of legal protection, puts them at risk of serious
abuse. For example, in April 2005 Indonesian maid Suniati Binti Nibaran
Sujari barely survived burn injuries she alleged her employer inflicted on her.
The Saudi court system offers little or no redress. Nur Miyati, another
Indonesian maid, in March accused her employers of torture. While they
remained free, she was detained successively in a hospital, a prison, and a
women’s rehabilitation center before being released into the custody of the
labor attaché of the Indonesian embassy.
Indonesia suspended sending unskilled labor to Saudi Arabia from March
until August 2005, when the two countries concluded a bilateral agreement
on standard employment contracts, regulated weekly and annual time-off,
and minimum wages. The Saudi government issued a new labor law in
September 2005 that continues to exclude domestic workers, although a special
annex promises to regulate their relations with employers. The law entitles
non-domestic migrant workers to one day of rest per week and twentyone
vacation days annually. On July 24 the Ministry of Labor announced the
creation within the ministry of a new Department for the Protection of
Domestic Workers, to receive complaints and impose penalties. Deputy
Minister Ahmed al-Zamil warned that employers would be barred from hiring
expatriates and transferring employment sponsorships if they violate the
law, and that they may be prosecuted. There was no information available on
how the government applied these sanctions.
Human Rights Defenders
The Prosecution and Investigation Department (mabahith) detained and
interrogated human rights defenders during the year. As a condition for their
release, the authorities forced activists to pledge to refrain from speaking to
the media or human rights organizations and to cease their human rights
advocacy. The government also maintained travel bans on several human
rights activists.
International—especially U.S.—media attention to Saudi reform and rights
initiatives has not led to changes in restrictive practices or measurably
enhanced public access to information about rights violations. A nongovernmental
national society for human rights began work in 2004, but it lacks
independence, expertise, and determination to investigate and publicize sensitive
human rights abuses. The society visited prisons and deportation centers,
but failed to monitor the trial of the three reformers mentioned above.
The society remains dependent on the good will of members of the royal
family to provide redress. In September 2005, the government announced
the formation of a governmental human rights commission, reporting directly
to the prime minister (a position held by the king), with a remit to bring
Saudi Arabia’s government practices into line with human rights standards.
Key International Actors
The U.S. is a key ally of Saudi Arabia and a major trading partner. The strain
in bilateral relations in the aftermath of the September 11, 2001 attacks eased
considerably in 2005. The U.S. agenda in its relations with Saudi Arabia
appeared to prioritize measures to reduce crude oil prices, boost counterterrorism
cooperation, and open Saudi markets to foreign investment and goods
through Saudi Arabia’s accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO),
which took place in November..
U.S. officials praised the Saudi municipal elections. In April, then-Crown
Prince Abdullah visited President Bush’s ranch in Texas. They discussed educational
reform in addition to oil prices and counterterrorism cooperation.
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice visited Riyadh in June, where she highlighted the detention of the constitutional reformers. Undersecretary of State
for Public Diplomacy Karen Hughes visited Riyadh in September, where she
raised the prohibition on Saudi women driving.
In November 2005, the U.S. State Department’s annual International
Religious Freedom Report designated Saudi Arabia as “a country of particular
concern” for the second year in a row. In June, the State Department’s
annual report on human trafficking downgraded Saudi Arabia from tier II to
III – i.e., countries that “do not comply with the minimum standards for the
elimination of trafficking and are not making significant efforts to do so.”
Responding to each of the reports, the White House announced that
President Bush had chosen not to impose sanctions on Saudi Arabia.