S8L;@ AI89@8
Saudi Arabia responded with unflinching repression to demands by citizens for
greater democracy in the wake of the pro-democracy Arab Spring movements.
King Abdullah bin Abd al-‘Aziz Al Saud announced economic benefits worth
over US$130 billion, but authorities continued to jail Saudis for peaceful dissent.
New laws introduced or proposed in 2011 criminalize the exercise of basic
human rights such as freedom of expression, assembly, and association.
Authorities continue to suppress or fail to protect the rights of 9 million Saudi
women and girls, 8 million foreign workers, and some 2 million Shia citizens.
Each year thousands of people receive unfair trials or are subject to arbitrary
detention.
In March Saudi troops helped quell Bahrain’s pro-democracy protests. Saudi
Arabia reacted with dismay to the toppling of Egypt’s President Hosni Mubarak,
but supported a transition of power, at least in public, in Yemen and Libya and
urged Syria to stop internal repression. At Saudi urging, the Gulf Cooperation
Council invited Arab monarchies Jordan and Morocco to join the council, and
provided Jordan, Bahrain, Oman, Egypt, and Yemen with substantial financial
aid.
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
The Saudi guardianship system continues to treat women as minors. Under this
discriminatory system, girls and women of all ages are forbidden from traveling,
studying, or working without permission from their male guardians. In 2009 the
Ministry of Commerce, though not other ministries, stopped requiring women to
conduct ministerial business through a male representative.
On September 25 King Abdullah announced that women will be able to vote in
municipal elections in 2015. The government continued to exclude women as
voters or candidates in the September 2011 municipal elections, despite a twoyear
delay to allow for logistical preparations to include women. In March 2011
women activists launched the Baladi (My Country) campaign in protest, trying—
unsuccessfully—to register to vote. In the first municipal elections in 2005, authorities said that election workers could not verify a woman’s identity since
many did not have identity cards. However, the Interior Ministry began issuing
identity cards to women over 22 years old in 2000. The king also promised to
appoint women as full members of the Shura Council.
On May 22, Saudi authorities arrested Manal al-Sharif after she defied the kingdom’s
de facto ban on women driving. Al-Sharif appeared in a video showing
herself behind the wheel. Prosecutors charged her with “tarnishing the kingdom’s
reputation abroad” and “stirring up public opinion,” according to Saudi
press reports. On May 30, Khobar police released al-Sharif from prison after she
appealed to King Abdullah.
On June 17 around 40 women with international drivers’ licenses participated in
a “women2drive” campaign. No law bars women from driving, but senior government
clerics have ruled against the practice. Saudi Arabia is the only country
in the world to prohibit women from driving.
Migrant Worker Rights
Over 8 million migrant workers fill manual, clerical, and service jobs, constituting
more than half the national workforce. Many suffer multiple abuses and
labor exploitation, sometimes amounting to slavery-like conditions.
The kafala (sponsorship) system ties migrant workers’ residency permits to
their “sponsoring” employers, whose written consent is required for workers to
change employers or exit the country. Employers abuse this power to confiscate
passports, withhold wages, and force migrants to work against their will.
In August Jadawel International, owned by Saudi Arabia’s third richest man,
Shaikh Muhammad bin Issa Al Jaber, was six months in arrears with salary payments,
as in previous years, and managers threatened workers not to pursue
complaints in labor court.
Some 1.5 million migrant domestic workers remain excluded from the 2005
Labor Law. As in years past, Asian embassies reported thousands of complaints
from domestic workers forced to work 15 to 20 hours a day, seven days a week,
and denied their salaries. Domestic workers, most of whom are women, frequently endure forced confinement, food deprivation, and severe psychological,
physical, and sexual abuse.
In December 2010, authorities made no attempts to rescue an Indonesian
migrant domestic worker who had worked for 10 years without pay and whose
sponsors were “renting” her out to other houses, according to one Saudi
woman who informed authorities. In November 2010, authorities in Abha,
southern Saudi Arabia, recovered the body of Kikim Komalasari, a 36-year-old
Indonesian domestic worker, bearing signs of extensive physical abuse. In
September an appeals court overturned a three-year prison sentence for the
employer found guilty of severely assaulting Sumiati Mustapa, her Indonesian
domestic worker. In June the government beheaded Ruyati binti Sapubi, an
Indonesian domestic worker convicted of murdering her employer who allegedly
refused to allow binti Sapubi to return home. Courts sentenced another
Indonesian domestic worker to death for killing her employer after he allegedly
tried to rape her.
Saudi Arabia continued to deport hundreds of Somalis to Mogadishu,
Somalia’s capital, according to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, despite the acute violence there.
Criminal Justice and Torture
Detainees, including children, commonly face systematic violations of due
process and fair trial rights, including arbitrary arrest and torture and ill-treatment
in detention. Saudi judges routinely sentence defendants to thousands of
lashes.
Judges can order arrest and detention, including of children, at their discretion.
Children can be tried and sentenced as adults if physical signs of puberty exist.
The Interior Ministry said it had executed Bandar al-Luhaibi, a child, in October
for killing his grandmother.
Authorities rarely inform suspects of the crime with which they are charged, or
of supporting evidence. Saudi Arabia has no penal code, so prosecutors and
judges largely define criminal offenses at their discretion. Lawyers do not assist suspects during interrogation and face difficulty examining witnesses or presenting
evidence at trial.
From January to October 2011 Saudi Arabia had executed at least 61 persons,
including two women and one child, mostly for murder or drugs offenses, but
also a Sudanese man, Abd al-Hamid al-Fakki, for “sorcery.”
In March a court, after only two sessions, sentenced four Iraqis and two Syrians
to the amputation of one foot and one hand each for stealing money from a
supermarket. One of the Iraqis told Human Rights Watch that interrogators
physically tortured him for eight days into a signing, unread, a prepared confession.
Secret police detained without trial or access to lawyers, in many cases for
years, thousands of persons suspected of sympathies for or involvement with
armed groups, or for their peaceful political views.
In July the government proposed a counterterrorism law that would criminalize
“infringing upon the interests of the kingdom” or “describing the king—or the
crown prince—as an unbeliever, doubting his integrity, defaming his honesty,
breaking the [oath of] loyalty [to him], or inciting such [acts].”
Prisoners and detainees in several facilities described inhumane conditions. On
January 3 Mikhlif al-Shammari, a rights advocate detained in Dammam prison
since June 2010, alleged that guards beat inmates. According to his family,
guards assaulted al-Shammari in July for his criticisms by putting a chemical
agent in his mouth.
Freedom of Expression, Belief, and Assembly
Authorities further tightened the space for public criticism of officials or government
policies in the wake of the pro-democracy Arab Spring movements. The
Ministry of Culture and Information heavily censored print and broadcast
media. Internet critics crossing vague “red lines” faced arrest.
In October 2010 the General Court in Qubba, in northern Saudi Arabia, sentenced
to lashes Fahd al-Jukhaidib, a local journalist and teacher who reported on a rare protest against the local electricity company. In December authorities
detained incommunicado for three months Muhammad al-’Abd al-Karim, a professor
of Islamic jurisprudence, for an online article speculating whether Saudi
Arabia would survive as a political entity without the ruling Saudi royal family.
In July the authorities arrested prominent cleric Dr. Yusuf al-Ahmad, one day
after he criticized the Interior Ministry’s policy of long-term detention without
charge or trial.
In January Minister of Culture and Information Abd al-‘Aziz Khuja issued the
Executive Regulation for Electronic Publishing Activity, which subjects virtually
all news and commentary distributed electronically to the country’s press law,
including the requirement for a press license.
In April King Abdullah amended the 2000 Press and Publications Law to further
prohibit speech that “contradicts rulings of the Islamic Sharia [law] or regulations
in force,” or “call[s] for disturbing the country’s security, or its public
order, or … caus[es] sectarianism or … damage[s] public affairs in the country.”
New restrictions also include a prohibition on damaging the reputation of the
chief mufti, members of the Council of Senior Religious Scholars, or any other
government official or government institution.
Saudi Arabia does not tolerate public worship by adherents of religions other
than Islam and systematically discriminates against its religious minorities, in
particular Shia and Ismailis (a distinct branch of Shiism). Official discrimination
against Shia encompasses religious practices, education, and the justice system.
Government officials exclude Shia from certain public jobs and policy
questions and publicly disparage their faith.
This discrimination sometimes amounts to persecution. Professing Shia beliefs
in private or in public, in particular at holy sites in Mecca and Medina, may lead
to arrest and detention. In October the Interior Ministry said that it would pursue
what it called “radicalized or hired instigators” among the Shia with an
“iron fist.”
Prince Badr bin Jilawi, governor of Ahsa’ province, repeatedly had Shia citizens
detained, in violation of Saudi criminal procedure law, for private prayer or public display of Shia banners or slogans. The domestic intelligence agency in
February summoned and then arrested Shia cleric Tawfiq al-‘Amir after he had
called for a constitutional monarchy and equal rights for Shia in his Friday sermon.
On March 5 the Interior Ministry categorically prohibited public protests
“because they contradict the principles of the Islamic Shari’a and the values
and customs of Saudi society.” The royally appointed Council of Senior
Religious Scholars, whose interpretation of religious law is binding, seconded
the ban, and intelligence forces in March arrested Muhammad al-Wad’ani, and
Khalid al-Juhani for advocating protests for political change.
Small, peaceful protests by Shia took place since late February in the Eastern
Province, demanding the release of nine “forgotten” Shia detained for over 13
years without charge or trial on suspicion of involvement in a 1996 attack on a
United States military installation in Khobar, which killed 19. Saudi authorities
detained 160 protesters until May, and at least 40 remained in detention at this
writing.
In March a small group of Sunni Saudis demonstrated in Riyadh, the capital,
calling for the release of thousands of people detained for years without charge
or trial on suspicion of involvement in militant activity. Police arrested several,
including three women as well as lawyer Mubarak bin Zu’air and rights activist
Muhammad Bajadi, both of who remain in detention. In August Judge Abd al-
Latif al-‘Abd al-Latif prohibited defense lawyers for Bajadi from attending a trial
session in a secret location of the Specialized Criminal Court, a state security
tribunal for terrorism cases, where Bajadi faced charges of “insurrection
against the ruler,” “instigating demonstrations,” and “speaking with foreign
[media] channels.”
Police in October arrested human rights activist Fadhil al-Manasif after he complained
about the police seizing two elderly citizens in order to pressure their
sons to give themselves up. The sons were wanted in connection with peaceful
demonstrations in the Eastern Province. Al-Manasif, who was detained from
May until August for peaceful protest, remains in incommunicado detention. A
judge in September charged rights activist Walid Abu al-Khair with “offending the judiciary,” “asking for a constitutional monarchy,” and “participating in
media [programs] to distort the reputation of the country.”
Saudi Arabia does not allow political or human rights associations. In February
intelligence forces arrested six persons who planned to found the kingdom’s
first political party.
Key International Actors
Saudi Arabia is a key ally of the US and European countries. The US failed to
publicly criticize Saudi human rights violations or its role in putting down prodemocracy
protests in neighboring Bahrain. US President Barack Obama failed
to mention Saudi Arabia in a major speech on the Arab uprisings and continued
to pursue a $60 billion arms sale to Saudi Arabia, the biggest-ever US arms
sale.
In June Germany proposed to sell the kingdom over 200 tanks, worth $5 billion.
UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Navenathem Pillay criticized a spate
of executions in October. Indonesia’s President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono in
July publicly criticized treatment of Indonesian workers in Saudi Arabia, as did a
fact-finding delegation of Philippines lawmakers in a report issued in January.