 SAUDI ARABIA
 
 Saudi Arabia is an Islamic monarchy in which religious
 precepts and traditions play a major role in the
 society. By origin tribal, it is basically egalitarian
 and individualistic. Saudis have a finely drawn sense
 of justice.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 To the best of our knowledge, torture is not officially
 sanctioned or practiced in Saudi Arabia. There are
 occasional isolated reports of torture, but none has
 been confirmed or documented.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Islamic law, which is the "constitution" of Saudi
 Arabia, sanctions the practice of severing the hand
 of convicted thieves. This punishment is not meted
 out to first or second offenders but only to clear
 recidivists. Capital punishment by public beheading
 is provided for by law for murder and other heinous
 crimes, but in practice it is rarely used. Prisoners
 live under difficult conditions, particularly during
 the hot season, but are not wantonly mistreated.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 Arbitrary arrest and detention are not condoned or
 practiced by the Government. There is no evidence
 that individuals are presently incarcerated in Saudi
 Arabia for their political beliefs. Foreigners
 accused of breaking the law are frequently deported
 and prohibited re-entry into the Kingdom.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Saudi Arabia's judicial system is based directly on
 Islamic law. The accused is tried before qualified
 and impartial judges. Trials are open to the public,
 including US consular officials, except when the
 security of the state is deemed to be at stake. Such
 
 (402)
 
 
 403
 closed -rials have occurred rarely in recent years.
 Extensive police investigations and administrative
 deficiencies frequently lead to delay of trials, during
 which time, in criminal cases, the accused normally
 remains in jail.' Should parties in a criminal trial
 be dissatisfied with the verdict, they have the right
 to appeal.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 Saudi law and custom require respect for privacy.
 However, Saudi law enforcement authorities do not
 hesitate to search premises without a warrant in cases
 where they have reason to believe illegal activities
 are taking place. Such cases are not common.
 2. Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 The Saudi Government is using its oil revenues for the
 benefit of the poor. Free education and health care
 facilities are being developed as rapidly as possible.
 If adequate medical care is not available within the
 Kingdom, the patient and one family escort will be.
 flown abroad at Government expense. A real estate
 development fund, which-provides interest-free 25-year
 loans, has been created to finance-the acquisition of
 homes by Saudi citizens. The Government subsidizes
 basic foodstuffs. In addition to its concern for the
 welfare of its own people, the Saudi Government is a
 major source of foreign aid to poorer countries.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties,
 Including:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion
 and Assembly
 Saudis are generally free to say whatever they wish;
 indeed, citizens are invited to take their grievances
 to higher authority. The press is not censored prior
 to publication but it does keep within bounds it presumes
 
 
 are acceptable to the Government. Thus, criticism
 of policies and senior officials in the press is rare.
 There is frequent criticism of the negative effect
 of domestic policies, particularly in the economic
 sphere, and the press often writes of the failure of
 middle-level officials properly to discharge their
 duties. The foreign press is censored prior to dis-
 tribution in order to excise pictures and statements
 that are thought offensive in this traditional religious
 society.
 Unions or other forms of labor organizations are pro-
 hibited. Official institutions have been established
 to protect the rights of labor and hear grievances.
 Although there is no express prohibition on assembly,
 any meeting of a political nature would fall under
 the more general prohibition against political activity
 and organizations.
 Islam is the established religion of Saudi Arabia and
 Saudis are not permitted to practice other religions,
 although non-Muslim foreigners have been able to hold
 private and discreet religious services.
 Women in Saudi Arabia occupy a social position quite
 different from that of women in the West. By tradition
 and, to some extent, by Islamic law (as the Saudis
 interpret it), women are segregated from all men
 except close relatives. Their primary focus is on
 home and family, although within that context they can
 become very influential. When they leave their homes,
 they are expected to be veiled and with a male escort.
 They can be easily divorced (but cannot easily divorce
 their husbands). Men can have up to four wives.
 Women's opportunities for employment are limited to
 certain occupations where contact with men is minimal.
 In recent years major changes have taken place in the
 actual situation, if not theoretical status, of women.
 An increasing number are being educated, and some have
 studied for advanced degrees abroad. Divorce is less
 common in Saudi Arabia than in Western countries, and
 polygamy has become rare. More and more Saudi women
 are appearing in public without veils and at social
 events in the company of their husbands.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 
 
 405
 Travel and Emigration
 Saudi males are generally free to move about the
 country and travel abroad. Nor are there obstacles
 to emigration by them. By social custom, however,
 the movement of women is very restricted. They can-
 not drive cars and they must obtain their husband's
 or father's permission to travel abroad or to emigrate.
 Visas for travel into Saudi Arabia have at times been
 refused by Saudi authorities on the basis of religion,
 but such cases are now rare and limited to atheists
 and persons the Saudis consider to be a political or
 religious threat to the Saudi state.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political
 . Process
 Saudi Arabia is an Islamic monarchy whose King is
 chosen by consensus of the senior members of the royal
 family. The Kingdom does not have an elected assembly,
 and political parties are prohibited. The accessibility
 of officials and the fact that any citizen has a fair
 chance for redress through presentation of petition
 or grievance to the King at his weekly public audience
 function as restraints against arbitrary use of
 authority.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-Government Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 To the best of our knowledge the Saudi Government has
 not been asked to accept outside independent investi-
 gations of alleged human rights violations.
 
 
