 SAUDI ARABIA
 Saudi Arabia is a monarchy ruled by the descendants of its
 founder, King Abd Al-Aziz Al Sau4, known in the West as Ibn
 Saud, who unified the country in-the early part of the 20th
 century. The concept of separation of religion and state is
 foreign to Saudi society. The legitimacy of the royal regime
 depends to a large degree on its perceived adherence to the
 precepts of a puritanically conservative form of Islam.
 There is no written national constitution. The legal system is
 based on Islamic religious law. Most Saudis share a respect
 for this legal system, which they believe to be divinely
 inspired, as well as for ancient customs which call for
 consensus in government, internal social cohesion, respect for
 private property, and private economic enterprise. Since the
 death of King Abd Al-Aziz, the King and Crown Prince have been
 chosen from among his sons, who themselves have preponderant
 influence in the choice. Senior religious scholars and other
 princes also have limited influence in the choice of the King
 following the death of a reigning monarch, as do other members
 of the society, through informal consultations with the royal
 family. However, there are no elected assemblies or political
 parties. All forms of political expression except those
 favorable to the regime are forbidden.
 Police and border forces under the Ministry of Interior are
 responsible for internal security. Both police and military
 personnel were responsible for human rights abuses during the
 year.
 During the past 40 years, massive oil revenues have transformed
 Saudi Arabia's centuries-old pastoral, agricultural, and
 commercial economy. This transformation has been marked by
 rapid urbanization, large-scale development of economic and
 social infrastructure, the emergence of a welfare state and
 technocratic middle class, and the importation.of millions of
 foreign workers for skilled and menial labor. It has also been
 marked by widespread expenditure of public funds in ways that
 have enriched the royal family and their associates. With some
 important exceptions, the economy remains largely in private
 hands.
 Human rights continue to be subject to pervasive abuse.
 Principal human rights problems include prohibitions or severe
 restrictions on the freedoms of speech and press, peaceful
 assembly and association, religion, the right of citizens to
 change their government, women's rights, and worker rights. As
 in previous years, there were credible reports of the
 mistreatment of prisoners and incommunicado detention. Abuse -
 (usually verbal but sometimes physical) of Saudis and
 foreigners of both sexes by Saudi Arabia's official proctors of
 proper moral behavior (the Mutawwai'in) or other religious
 zealots acting as vigilantes without government control has
 become commonplace and rose sharply in the latter part of 1991.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section I Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no reports of political killings. There was a
 credible report of deaths of persons in official custody (see
 Section l.c.).
 
 
 1577
 SAUDI ARABIA
 b. Disappearance
 There were no known disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 There were unconfirmed reports in 1991 that police beat some
 detainees to elicit confessions. There were credible reports
 of injuries and the deaths of at least two, and possibly more,
 persons caused by beatings or the use of excessive force while
 being held in official custody. In addition, there was a
 credible report of the torture of several foreigners in Saudi
 military custody. But it is general government policy not to
 respond to such reports, and it cannot, therefore, be
 determined what, if any, action the Government took to punish
 those responsible. Lack of regular access to Saudi detention
 facilities by impartial independent observers makes
 verification of reports of prisoner abuse extremely difficult.
 On at least one occasion, however, Saudi authorities invited
 International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) representatives
 to meet with abused prisoners. The Saudi Government tried and
 convicted those responsible in Shari'a courts.
 Saudi interpretation of Islamic law requires strict application
 of Koranic sanctions, and punishment for some crimes includes
 amputation and execution by beheading, firing squad, or
 stoning. In the absence of two witnesses (four witnesses in
 the case of adultery), confessions before a judge are almost
 always required for conviction. Capital punishment is imposed
 only for serious felonies such as murder, rape, and drug
 smuggling. All criminals known to have been executed in 1991
 were convicted of one or more of these three crimes, and all 26
 capital sentences in 1991 were carried out by beheading,
 sometimes followed by gibbetting. Death by firing squad or
 stoning may be imposed for adultery, although high evidentiary
 standards make such sentences quite rare. Repeated thievery is
 punishable by amputation of the right hand. For less severe*
 crimes, such as drunkenness or publicly flouting Islamic
 precepts, flogging with a cane is often imposed.
 Both Saudis and foreigners were often the targets of harassment
 by members of the Committee for the Propagation of Virtue and
 Prevention of Vice (the Mutawwai'in), or by unsanctioned
 religious zealots acting as vigilantes. The Mutawwai'in sought
 to enforce increasingly strict standards of social behavior,
 from observance of prayer time closings of commercial
 establishments to appropriate dress in public and patronage of
 video tape rental shops. There were also reports that the
 Mutawwai'in sometimes exceeded their legal right to detain
 suspects for up to 24 hours before turning them. over to the
 civil authorities and that Mutawwai'in verbally and sometimes
 physically abused detainees while seeking to elicit
 confessions. They often used switch-like sticks to harass
 those whom they perceived as. violating religiously inspired
 standards of behavior. Some such incidents escalated into
 violent confrontations. In several instances involving
 Americans, the U.S. Government protested to the Saudi
 Government, which often placed the blame on self-appointed
 vigilantes acting outside official channels. However,
 government authorities appeared slow to act to prevent
 recurrences. After a lull during the Gulf War when large
 numbers of non-Muslim military were present in the Kingdom, the
 latter-half of 1991 saw a marked increase in confrontations.
 
 
 1578
 SAUDI ARABIA
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Saudi internal security forces are divided into several
 branches, including the regular police and the special
 investigative police. Since criminal procedure and the grounds
 for arrest are generally determined at the discretion of the
 arresting officer, arbitrary arrest can and does occur. There
 is no automatic, prompt procedure for contacting a detainee's
 family or employer; however, in cases involving foreigners,
 Saudi authorities acknowledge their obligation to do so. When
 asked, the police will almost always confirm an arrest or
 provide a satisfactory answer the same day. Embassies usually
 hear about arrests of their nationals within a few days through
 informal channels; official arrest notification almost always
 takes several months, if it is given at all.
 Saudi law makes no provision for bail or habeas corpus;
 prisoners are, however, sometimes released on the recognizance
 of a patron or employer. While investigations proceed,
 prisoners may be held for long periods before they are charged
 or released. Regulations issued by the Interior Ministry in
 1985 to eliminate lengthy pretrial detentions or detentions
 without charges are frequently not enforced, particularly if
 the authorities have any suspicions that other parties to the
 charge are involved. However, under normal circumstances most
 arrestees are held no longer than 3 days before being formally
 charged.  However, over 40 Shi'a activists have remained in a
 prison near Riyadh since April 1988.
 Problems particularly may arise when persons are arrested by
 the GID, the security service, commonly called the "mubahith"
 or investigative police. GID prisoners are regularly held
 incommunicado during the initial phase of an investigation,
 which may last weeks or months. At least four suspects
 reportedly have been detained in Jeddah since February while
 being investigated in connection with a terrorist incident
 there. Relatives of the accused allegedly have not been
 allowed to visit the prisoners. It is not known whether they
 have been permitted legal counsel. Human rights groups outside
 of Saudi Arabia continued in 1991 to report cases of long-term
 incommunicado detention of what they termed political prisoners.
 One credible report states that there is evidence of a clear
 pattern of suspected political opponents (Shi'a) being arrested
 without warrants and held for long periods without trial. It
 is alleged that the detainees, 25 of whom remain in detention,
 were routinely tortured or otherwise abused in the first days
 or weeks of detention and denied access to counsel and family.
 Shiite scholar Sayyid Tahir al Shimimy was among them.
 The Government does not use exile as a form of punishment.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The judicial system is based on Islamic jurisprudence (the
 Shari'a). Regular Shari'a courts exercise jurisdiction over
 common criminal cases and civil suits regarding marriage,
 divorce, child custody, and inheritance of real or personal
 property. In Saudi courts, the defendant appears before a
 judge who determines guilt or innocence and, if warranted,
 imposes the sentence. Trials are generally closed and are
 normally held without legal counsel, although the advice of
 lawyers is available before trial and lawyers may act in court
 as interpreters for those unfamiliar with Arabic. Sentencing
 
 
 1579
 SAUDI ARABIA
 is not uniform and a sentence may be changed at any of the
 stages of review.
 Appeals against judges' decisions are automatically reviewed by
 the Justice Ministry or, in more serious cases, by the Court of
 Cassation and the Supreme Judicial Council to ensure that court
 procedure was correct and that the judge applied appropriate
 legal principles and punishments. Cases involving capital
 punishment must also be reviewed by the King. The Shi'a
 community is free to adjudicate exclusively noncriminal
 intra-Shi'a disputes within their own legal tradition.
 The independence of the judiciary is prescribed by law and is
 usually respected in practice, although jurists are
 nevertheless aware of and reportedly have on occasion acceded
 to the power and influence of the royal family and their
 associates. The Justice Ministry is responsible for the
 appointment, transfer, and promotion of judges. Judges may be
 disciplined or removed only by the Supreme Judicial Council, an
 independent body of senior jurists.
 The military justice system has jurisdiction over uniformed
 personnel and civilian government employees charged with
 violations of military regulations. Court-martial decisions
 are reviewed by the Minister of Defense and Aviation and by the
 King.
 The number of political prisoners being held at year's end was
 unknown because of the Government's policies of not providing
 data or responding to inquiries about such persons, conducting
 closed trials, and detaining persons incommunicado for long
 periods while under investigation.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The sanctity of family life and the inviolability of the home
 are among the most fundamental of Islamic precepts. Saudi
 police must generally demonstrate reasonable cause and obtain
 special permission from the provincial governor before
 searching a private home, but warrants are not required. The
 Saudi religious police (Mutawwai'in) may enter homes to search
 for evidence of un-Islamic behavior when they have grounds for
 suspicion but rarely do so without probable cause. However,
 such behavior appears to have increased markedly late in 1991.
 Wiretaps and mail surveillance may be carried out on the
 authority of officials of the Interior Ministry or the
 Directorate of Intelligence. Informants are reliably reported
 to.be widely employed in internal security matters.
 Most social and Islamic religious norms and strictures
 affecting personal life are matters of law and are enforced by
 the Government. Saudi women may not marry non-Saudis without
 government permission, which is rarely given. They are
 prohibited from marrying any non-Muslim, although Saudi men may
 marry Christians and Jews. Saudi men must obtain approval to
 marry women originally from countries other than the six
 members of the Gulf Cooperation Council. During Ramadan, the
 Islamic month of fasting and abstinence, the prohibition
 against public eating, drinking, or smoking during daylight
 hours is enforced on Muslims and non-Muslims alike.
 Prohibitions against alcohol and material deemed pornographic
 are strictly enforced and apply as-well to foreign residents.
 A rigid dress code for women, as well as the closing of shops
 
 
 1580
 SAUDI ARABIA
 for a half-hour period during the five daily prayers, are
 enforced by the Mutawwai'in.
 In general, human rights abuses by the Mutawwai'in increased
 sharply in the latter part of 1991. In addition to the
 harassment of non-Muslims attempting to conduct religious
 services (see Section 2.c.), both the number and seriousness of
 incidents in which Saudi and foreign women were harassed for
 alleged failure to observe Mutawwa-enforced dress codes rose.
 In response to increased Mutawwa intrusions, Saudis and
 expatriates alike increased security at their housing
 compounds. There is also a credible report that a Saudi
 professional man was whipped and later jailed on an adultery
 charge for having given a non-Saudi female colleague a ride
 home from work. The woman was deported.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and press is severely limited. Criticism of
 Islam, the ruling family, or the Government is not allowed.
 The potential presence of informers renders public criticism of
 the regime rare. In private, complaints are expressed
 relatively freely. Saudis are able to voice complaints and
 seek redress of personal grievances through the open-door
 audiences held by members of the royal family at all levels.
 In 1991 numerous clandestine audio tapes as well as two
 petitions signed by dozens of prominent Saudis calling for
 government reform were circulated widely in the kingdom through
 informal channels but were not published in the local press.
 Their wide circulation was formally criticized by the country's
 senior body of religious scholars and publicly, if obliquely,
 in the local press. There were also reports that some of the
 petitions' signatories were interviewed by Ministry of Interior
 officials.
 Saudi television and radio are state owned and operated.
 Foreign programs and songs are heavily censored, with
 references to politics, religions other than Islam, pork or
 pigs, alcohol, or sexual innuendo removed. Although foreign
 news is generally presented in an objective manner, news about
 subjects affecting Saudi Arabia is tightly controlled and
 conflicting viewpoints are usually not offered. In addition,
 there are an estimated 16,000 to 20,000 private satellite
 dishes operating in the kingdom which receive foreign
 broadcasts. The status of these devices is ambiguous, and they
 are chiefly in the possession of the country's political and
 economic elite. There was a dramatic improvement in foreign
 press access to Saudi Arabia following Iraq's invasion of
 Kuwait in 1990, but this improvement proved to be temporary,
 and access is again tightly restricted.
 The press, is privately owned. It is effectively controlled by
 a 1982 media policy statement and the firm understanding that
 nothing embarrassing to the Government, ruling family, or
 religious leadership may be published. The media policy
 statement enjoins the press to uphold Islam, oppose atheism,
 promote Arab interests, and preserve the cultural heritage of
 Saudi Arabia. Newspapers receive guidelines issued by the
 Information Ministry on government positions on controversial
 issues, and the government-owned Saudi Press Agency (SPA)
 expresses the official viewpoint on such issues. Most foreign
 news that does not directly concern Saudi Arabia is presented
 
 
 1581
 SAUDI ARABIA
 objectively. Domestic news concerning sensitive subjects, such
 as crime or terrorism, is usually published only after the
 perpetrators have- been arrested, convicted, and imprisoned or
 executed. Editors in chief are appointed with the explicit
 approval of the Ministry of Information, and the.Government has
 the power to have them removed.
 Foreign publications circulate but may be censored for
 materials deemed immoral or critical of Saudi policies and
 actions. Entire publications are sometimes withheld from
 distribution. Although such censorship appeared to have
 declined in 1991, the Saudi Ministry of Information was quoted
 in September as favoring the continuation of censorship.
 Academic freedom is constrained by similar guidelines; for
 example, the study of Freud, Marx, and Western philosophy, is
 not formally allowed. Some professors believe that classroom
 comments which would be taken as antiregime will be reported to
 the authorities. There continues to be an injunction against
 the study of music in educational institutions through the
 university level, although there are some private organizations
 for the study of Western classical music.
 Nevertheless, over the past few years there has been a gradual
 increase in some artistic activities in schools and
 universities and in society in general, as evidenced by classes
 sponsored by the Saudi Arabian Society for Culture and Arts, an
 association whose head holds ministerial rank. There are also
 private art galleries, and some members of the royal family
 patronize the arts. Abstract and representational artists as
 well as photographers are allowed to work. Cinemas and most
 public musical or theatrical performances are, however, still
 prohibited.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Public demonstrations as a means of political expression or
 presenting grievances are prohibited. Tribal, familial, and
 economic interest groups informally aggregate public opinion
 which their leaders express to high officials. Political
 parties are prohibited (see Section 3). Nonpolitical clubs and
 professional groups may be organized with the permission of the
 authorities. The few existing professional bodies are
 permitted but not encouraged to maintain contacts with their
 recognized international counterparts. Public meetings are
 generally segregated by sex. Unless they are sponsored by
 diplomatic missions, members of groups seeking to hold
 unsegregated meetings face arrest, incarceration, and
 deportation.
 In October 1990, some 47 women were arrested in Riyadh for
 driving cars to protest the ban on women driving. They were
 released within 24 hours into the custody of male relatives but
 were subjected to a variety of sanctions, including loss of
 their government jobs (a number were university teachers) and
 seizure of their passports. The passports were returned in
 October 1991 but none of the women has regained government
 employment.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion does not exist. Islam is the official
 religion, and all Saudi citizens must be Muslims. Public
 apostasy is a crime- punishable by death. Islamic practice in
 Saudi Arabia is generally limited to that sanctioned by the
 
 
 1582
 SAUDI ARABIA
 Wahhabi sect's interpretation of-the Hanbali jurisprudential
 school of Islam. Practices contrary to this interpretation,
 such as the visiting of graves of famous Muslims by pilgrims to
 Mecca or Medina or the use of thb Shi'ite call to prayer, are
 prohibited. The Shi'a Muslims of the Eastern Province, usually
 estimated at up to 500,000 persons, constitute a religious
 minority subject to officially sanctioned forms of social and
 economic discrimination. Any form of public Shi'ite practice
 that deviates from Sunni Islam is generally prohibited.
 Historically, the Government has prohibited Shi'ite public
 processions during the Islamic month of Muharram and restricted
 public celebrations to specially designated areas within the
 major Shi'a cities. However, as in 1989 and 1990, reliable
 reports indicate that authorities permitted marches on the
 Shi'a holiday of Ashura in 1991, provided they took place
 without banners or public self-flagellation.
 The Government occasionally offers to provide financial support
 for the Shi'a religious establishment, which is generally
 refused. The Government seldom permits private construction of
 Shi'ite mosques, and the Shi'a have refused government offers
 to build state-supported mosques, in which Shiite motifs would
 be prohibited.
 In principle, the Saudis allow Muslims of all nationalities who
 wish to visit Mecca and Medina to do so. However, as a result
 of a decision by the Organization of the Islamic Conference
 (OIC), Saudi Arabia has established and maintains a system of
 national quotas for the yearly pilgrimage, or hajj, to
 facilitate security and efficiency. The Iranian Government (an
 OIC member-state) continues to criticize the quota system as
 unfairly discriminatory against its citizens. However, in 1991
 large numbers of Iranians participated in the hajj for the
 first time in 3 years. Travel to the holy cities by
 non-Muslims is illegal. Political activities by pilgrims are
 banned.
 Public or private non-Muslim religious activities are not
 permitted, and in 1991 this began to be enforced. In October a
 large number of Mutawwai'in accompanied by police broke up a
 clandestine Christian religious service, arresting many of the
 worshipers, including some children. With the exception of one
 person, who was deported, those arrested were later released;
 orders for their deportation were suspended. Persons wearing
 non-Islamic religious symbols in public may also be arrested or
 publicly harassed by the Mutawwai'in. There are no public
 non-Muslim places of worship; and foreign nationals must
 practice their religions in secret. Proselytizing, large
 gatherings, or elaborate organizational structures are likely
 to attract official attention and lead to the imprisonment or
 expulsion of those responsible.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Travel for women, Saudi and non-Saudi, is restricted; they must
 obtain written permission from their closest male relative
 before being allowed to leave the country or to travel on
 public transportation between different parts of the country.
 Male Saudis may travel freely anywhere within the country. A
 regulation promulgated in 1990 requires most single Saudi men
 under the age of 18 to obtain permission before traveling
 abroad; such permission can be easily obtained through family
 or business connections. In the case of government officials,
 
 
 1583
 SAUDI ARABIA
 the permission of the royal court is required, but appears to
 be routinely granted.
 Denial of exit visas is a fairly common form of punishment.
 The women who took part in the driving demonstration in Riyadh
 in 1990 to challenge the bar against women driving automobiles,
 as well as their husbands and other relatives, had their
 passports confiscated to prevent them from leaving the country
 (see Section 2.b.).
 The passports of suspected subversives have occasionally been
 seized. Shi'a believed to have pro-Iranian sympathies may not
 be allowed to travel abroad. Saudis are permitted to emigrate
 and assume foreign nationality, which results in the loss of
 Saudi nationality. Citizenship is not revoked for political
 reasons. Passports, however, may be seized if security
 questions arise. Dual citizenship is illegal, and Saudis born
 in the United States and thus required to travel to the United
 States on a U.S. passport have had their passports confiscated
 by Saudi immigration authorities. There was one incident in
 1991 in which a naturalized Arab-American from Egypt was
 detained and abused by Saudi immigration officials for
 traveling on a U.S. passport.
 There is no explicit formal policy regarding refugees or the
 granting of asylum.
 Refugees and displaced persons in most cases are dealt with
 like other foreign.workers. With some exceptions, persons
 seeking residence in the country must meet strictly enforced
 requirements of sponsorship and employment. In the aftermath
 of the Persian Gulf War, 22,000 Iraqi citizens, primarily
 Shi'a, fled Iraq and were granted refuge in camps in Saudi
 Arabia near the city of Rafha. Similarly,-13,000 Iraqi
 prisoners of war declined repatriation to Iraq and remain in
 the kingdom under Saudi care near the city of Artawiyah. This
 population of approximately 35,000 Iraqis is reqdired to abide
 by Saudi residence requirements, with the result that most are
 restricted to refugee camps within the kingdom. Saudi
 officials have worked effectively with international
 humanitarian organizations to provide care for these Iraqis but
 have stressed that Islamic principles rather than international
 humanitarian law are the basis for this policy. However, there
 were credible reports that, contrary to this policy, perhaps as
 many as 283 Iraqi refugees from the Rafha and the Artawiyah
 camps were forcibly repatriated to Iraq in late December. It
 was reliably reported that Saudi officials considered this a
 serious breach of government policy and began an
 investigation. In March the Government deported 959 Somalis by
 ship back to Somalia after refusing to consider them legitimate
 refugees.
 There are over 250,000 other resident-foreigners who fled their
 native countries, primarily Palestinians, Lebanese, Eritreans,
 Somalis, and Afghans. Most of these persons generally receive
 no special treatment, privileges, or services as refugees.
 Individual Saudis, including many members of the ruling family,
 permanently sponsor such persons to enable them to remain in
 Saudi Arabia, permitting them to find work where they may.
 Some sponsors reportedly have charged fees to such persons for
 providing documentation required by the Government. There are
 few Saudi exiles outside the country. Saudi authorities are
 responsive in cases where deportation of refugees to their home
 country would jeopardize their safety.
 
 
 1584
 SAUDI ARABIA
 All foreigners living in Saudi Arabia are required to carry
 identification cards. Foreigners are officially not permitted
 to travel outside the city of their employment or change their
 workplace without their sponsor's permission. Foreign
 employees are prevented from traveling abroad without their
 sponsor's permission, since sponsors generally hold their
 passports and are responsible for obtaining exit visas for
 them. Foreign diplomats are ordered by the Government not to
 travel outside of the major cities without notifying the
 Government. Foreigners involved in commercial disputes are
 sometimes not allowed to leave the country until the dispute
 has been resolved or to return to present their case locally.
 Some sponsors have taken advantage of this arrangement to exert
 pressure to resolve commercial disputes in their favor.
 Occasionally, Saudi sponsors or business partners have been
 able to prevent foreign nationals from departing Saudi Arabia
 for years or to have them arrested or deported. In criminal
 cases, Saudi regulations require that the passports of all
 potential suspects and witnesses be seized, which sometimes
 forces foreign nationals to remain in Saudi Arabia for lengthy
 periods against their will.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Citizens do not have the ability to change their government
 peacefully. There are no formal democratic institutions, and
 most Saudi citizens have no voice in the choice of leaders or
 in changing the political system. The King rules the country
 in matters secular and religious, within limits established by
 religious law, tradition, and the need to maintain consensus
 among the ruling family and religious leaders. The King's
 legitimacy is based upon his descent, his selection by
 consensus of the royal family, his adherence to the tenets of
 Islam, his ability to govern, and his perceived concern for the
 welfare and security of the nation. The King is also the Prime
 Minister, and the Crown Prince serves as First Deputy Prime
 Minister. The King appoints all other ministers, who in turn
 appoint subordinate officials with cabinet concurrence.
 There are no popularly elected officials'in Saudi Arabia.
 Political parties are not permitted, and there are no public
 organized opposition groups.
 Traditionally, public opinion has been expressed through
 client-patron relationships and interest groups such as tribes,
 families, and professional hierarchies. The open-door audience
 (majlis) remains the primary forum for expression of opinion or
 grievance. Any male citizen or expatriate may attend these
 sessions, which the King, princes, and all important officials,
 national and local, hold regularly and openly. Since-the
 assassination of King Faisal in 1975, however, Saudi kings have
 reduced the frequency of their personal contacts with the
 public. Access to King Fahd, to whom decisions even on some
 apparently minor matters are referred, is considered by
 ordinary Saudis to be quite difficult. Typical topics raised
 in a majlis are complaints about bureaucratic delay or
 insensitivity, requests for redress or assistance, and
 criticism of particular acts of government affecting personal
 or family welfare. Broader "political" concerns--Saudi social,
 economic, or foreign policy--are raised only occasionally.
 Either the King or the Crown Prince meets with Sunni religious
 leaders at least once a week.
 
 
 1585
 
 SAUDI ARABIA
 This institutionalized but relaxed means of ascertaining public
 opinion through consultation falls far short of internationally
 recognized norms. Participation by women in the process is
 severely restricted, although there are reports that women may
 seek redress through female members of the royal family. In
 the Eastern Province, women may make written appeals to the
 provincial governor, though they are barred from appearing in
 person at his weekly majlis. As governmental functions have
 become increasingly complex, time consuming, and centralized in
 Riyadh, direct public access to senior officials has become
 more difficult.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There are no human rights groups publicly active in Saudi
 Arabia, and none critical of Saudi policies would be
 permitted. Amnesty International (AI), in its 1989 report,
 stated that the Foreign Minister wrote to the organization in
 January 1988 indicating Saudi willingness to discuss with AI
 officials "the origins of human rights in Islam and the
 principles of the Shari'a and its implementation in the Kingdom
 of Saudi Arabia." However, a visit has yet to be scheduled.
 Some U.N. agencies concerned with humanitarian issues,
 including the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees, maintain
 offices in Saudi Arabia and have regular contact with Saudi
 authorities. The Saudis have facilitated the work of the ICRC
 with. Iraqi ex-prisoners of war, refugees, and displaced persons
 from the Gulf War.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Although racial discrimination is illegal in Saudi Arabia,
 substarntial societal prejudice based on ethnic or national
 origin still exists. Foreign workers from Africa and Asia are
 subject to various forms of discrimination. In 1991 there
 continued to.be credible reports of informal discrimination
 against Jordanians, Palestinians, and Yemenis, primarily
 because of positions taken on the Gulf crisis.
 Women in Saudi Arabia have few substantive political and social
 rights, and they are not equal members of society. Women,
 includinq foreigners, may not legally drive motor vehicles or
 ride bicycles (see Section 2.b.), and there are restrictions on
 their use of public facilities when men are present. By law
 and custom, women may not undertake domestic or foreign travel
 alone. They must have the written permission (and sometimes
 physical escort) of their nearest male relative, especially for
 travel abroad. Some women, however, reportedly travel by air
 between major Saudi cities without such permission. Women are
 restricted to specially designated sections in the rear of
 urban buses with separate entrances. In public, Muslim women
 are required to wear the abaya (a lightweight, black garment
 covering the entire body and often the face). Saudi
 authorities have repeatedly said that non-Muslim women need not
 wear the abaya. However, Saudi custom encourages many to do
 so, or at least to wear loose-fitting clothing extending below
 elbows and knees. Mutawwai'in have traditionally appeared to
 expect women from Arab countries, Asia and Africa to comply
 more fully with Saudi customs of dress than women from Western
 countries.
 
 
 1586
 SAUDI ARABIA
 Female circumcision or other mutilation are not practiced in
 most parts of Saudi Arabia, although they may persist among
 African settlers in the southwestern Tihama region. Little is
 known about the extent of violeice against women in Saudi
 society, and the Government does not keep statistics on such
 abuse. "Islamic advice" columns in the Saudi press sometimes
 recommend "strict disciplining" of women, which is understood
 to encompass some degree of physical force as part of a proper
 marriage.
 In addition to these customary and legal restrictions, Saudi
 women are-subject to discrimination inherent in the Islamic
 legal system. Under Islamic law a daughter's share of an
 inheritance is half that of her brother, although the brother
 has financial obligations to his mother and sisters. Women
 murt demonstrate legally specified grounds for divorce, but men
 may divorce without grounds. If divorced or widowed, a woman
 normally may keep her children until they attain the age of 9,
 but then they revert to the husband's family, to which they
 belong under Islamic law. Western women married to Saudis have
 frequently been barred from visiting their children after
 divorce. In a Shari'a court, the testimony of one man equals
 that of two women. Although Islamic law permits polygamy, it
 is becoming less common, especially in cities and among younger
 Saudis. Islamic legal precepts limit the number of wives to
 four and require a husband who has more than one wife to treat
 each of his wives equally. In practice, this norm is not
 always achieved.
 Employment opportunities for Saudi women are extremely
 limited. In practice, most employment opportunities are in the
 field of education, with some available in health care and a
 relatively few in business, engineering, and the media. In
 1990 King Fahd, as part of the Government's response to the
 Gulf crisis, called upon Saudi women to volunteer for nursing
 and social services. However, plans to train women for these
 wartime roles ended with the conclusion of the war. Free but
 segregated education through the university level is available
 to Saudi women, and the number of women enrolled in the
 university system is said to be more than a million, which is
 45 percent of overall university enrollment, and to be rising
 rapidly. Saudi men are able to study overseas; Saudi women
 cannot unless accompanied by a spouse or an immediate male
 relative--usually a practical impossibility.
 The large expatriate work force does not, for the most part,
 receive the same economic and social benefits available to
 naf ive Saudis and must conform to restrictive Saudi social
 standards. Highly skilled or high-ranking foreign workers are
 allowed to bring their immediate families to live with them.
 However, visits by other relatives of foreigners working in
 Saudi Arabia, including foreign diplomats, are difficult to
 arrange. Employment opportunities for non-Muslims are
 circumscribed.
 Foreign embassies receive repeated reports of sexual abuse of
 female domestics by Saudi employers. The Government, in
 general, considers cases involving domestic servants to be
 private family matters and will not get involved unless
 clear-cut charges of severe abuse are brought to its
 attention. It is almost impossible for these women to obtain
 redress in the courts due to the court's strict evidentiary
 rules and. the women's own fears of reprisals. A few employers
 have reportedly been punished for such abuses. There are as
 
 
 1587
 SAUDI ARABIA
 yet no private support groups or religious associations to
 which these women could turn for assistance.
 Saudi Shi'a face discrimination in government and industrial
 employment, especially in jobs with national security
 implications, which is broadly defined. The government
 petroleum company, Saudi Aramco, which traditionally provided
 large numbers of jobs to Shi'a, reportedly was instructed
 several years ago to cease all further hiring of Shi'a and to
 phase out gradually all Shi'a working in responsible
 positions. In 1991 there was some limited signs this policy
 was easing. Shi'a also face some limitations on their access
 to social services, despite efforts by the Government to
 improve the social service infrastructure in predominantly
 Shi'a areas of the country. Since the Iranian revolution, some
 Shi'a have been subjected periodically to surveillance and
 limitations on travel abroad.
 Members of the royal family and of other powerful families are
 not subject to the same legal constraints as other Saudis.
 Princes and other influential persons may not be subject to
 customs inspection on entering the country. Government
 contracts are often awarded on the basis of influence, and
 foreign companies doing business in Saudi Arabia are often said
 to need an influential "sponsor," frequently a member of the
 royal family, to be successful.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Government decrees prohibit the formation of labor unions and
 strike activity.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Collective bargaining is forbidden, and there are no special
 economic zones in the country. Wages are set by what the
 market will bear.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced labor has been prohibited since 1962 by a royal decree
 that abolished slavery, and Saudi ratification of International
 Labor Organization Conventions 29 and 105 has the force of
 law.   Nonetheless, vestiges of the master-slave relationship
 remain; a great number of former slaves chose to remain in the
 princely households where many now enjoy a quasi-familial
 status as household supernumeraries. Additionally, since
 employers generally exercise control over the movements of
 foreign employees, situations that could be described as forced
 labor can occur, especially in remote areas where workers are
 unable to leave their place of work. There are also reports
 that female domestic workers are sometimes prevented from
 leaving the homes of their employers and forced to work 12 to
 16 hours per day, 7 days a week. In addition, there are
 reports of workers whose employers have refused to pay several
 months or even years of accumulated salary, or other promised
 benefits. In such cases workers have recourse to the labor
 courts, where workmen's wages are considered "first-class
 privileged debts," secured by a lien on all of the employer's
 property and enforceable for collection before all other debts.
 
 
 1588
 SAUDI ARABIA
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 There is no minimum age for workers employed in family-operated
 businesses or in other situations that are construed as
 extensions of the household, e.g., farmers, herdsmen, and
 domestic servants, since they are not covered by Saudi Arabia's
 labor regulations. In other cases, the labor regulations
 provide for a minimum age of 13, which may be waived by the
 Ministry of Labor with the consent of the juvenile's guardian.
 Children under age 18 and women may not be employed in
 hazardous or harmful industries, such as mines or industries
 employing power-operated machinery.
 While there is no formal government entity charged with
 enforcing the minimum age for employment of children, the
 Ministry of Justice has jurisdiction and has acted as plaintiff
 in the few cases that have arisen against alleged violators.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 There is currently no legal minimum wage. A provision
 providing for the Council of Ministers to set a minimum wage
 has not been implemented. Saudi labor regulations establish a
 maximum 48-hour workweek at regular pay and allow employers to
 require up to 12 additional hours of overtime at
 time-and-a-half pay.
 There are numerous reports of foreign nationals coming to Saudi
 Arabia on promises of a certain level of pay and benefits, only
 to find that the contract they sign upon arrival specifies
 lower levels of both. Other reports suggest that some workers
 sign contracts in their home countries and are then asked to
 sign ones less favorable to them upon arrival. There are
 reports as well of workers who are indentured to Saudi sponsors
 for a set amount each month and who must then find their own
 employment upon arrival in the kingdom. To solve those
 problems, some foreign governments have begun utilizing
 employment organizations which negotiate salary and benefits in
 advance for their nationals. These organizations periodically
 check on the results of their efforts through their embassies
 and the Saudi labor courts.
 Saudi labor regulations require employers to protect most
 workers from job-related hazards and disease, but workers
 employed in family-operated businesses, farmers, herdsmen, and
 domestic servants are not covered by these regulations. The
 law specifically prohibits employers from requiring workers to
 work outside when the temperature exceeds 122 degrees
 Fahrenheit. Labor Ministry inspectors and the labor courts are
 seeking, with some success, to enforce the labor code, but
 foreign nationals report frequent failures to enforce health
 and safety standards.
 
 
 1589
