 SAUDI ARABIA
 Saudi Arabia is a monarchy without elected representative institutions or political
 parties. It is ruled by King Fahd Bin Abd A1-Aziz Al Saud, a son of King Abd Al-
 Aziz Al Saud, who unified the country in the early 20th century. The King and the
 Crown Prince are chosen from among the male descendants of King Abd AI-Aziz.
 There is no written constitution. The concept of the separation of religion and state
 is not accepted by either society or the Government. The Government maintains ad-
 herence to the precepts of a rigorously conservative form of Islam.
 The Government does not permit the establishment of political parties and sup-
 presses opposition views. In 1[992 King Fahd a ppointed a Consultative Council, the
 Majlis Ash-Shura, and similar provincial assemblies. The Council began holding ses-
 sions in 1994. The judiciary is generally independent but is subject to influence by
 the executive branch and members of the royal family.
 Police and border forces under the Ministry of Interior are responsible for internal
 security. The Mutawwa'in, or religious police, compose the Committee to Prevent
 Vice and Promote Virtue, a semiautnomous agency that encourages adherence to
 Islamic values by monitoring public behavior. Members of the security forces com-
 mitted human rights abuses.
 The oil industry has fueled the transformation of Saudi Arabia from a pastoral,
 agricultural, and commercial society to a rapidly urbanizing one characterized by
 large-scale infrastructure projects, an extensive social welfare system, and a labor
 market comprised largely of foreign workers. Oil revenues account for 37 percent
 of the gross domestic product (GDP) and 72 percent of government income. Agri-
 culture accounts for only about 8 percent of GDP. Government spending, including
 spending on the national airline, power, water, telephone, education, and health
 services, accounts for 36 percent of GDP. About 37 percent of the economy is in pri-
 vate hands, and the Government is promoting further privatization of the economy.
 The Government has also undertaken an aggressive campaign to increase the num-
 ber of Saudi nationals represented in the private and public work forces. This has
 included restrictions on some categories of foreign workers, for example, limiting
 certain occupations to Saudis only, increasing fees for some work visas, and setting
 minimum wages for some job categories designed to increase the cost to employers
 of non-Saudi fabor.
 The Government commits and tolerates serious human rights abuses. There is no
 mechanism for citizens to change their government, and citizens do not have this
 right. Since the death of King Abd AI-Aziz, the King and Crown Prince have been
 chosen from among his sons, who themselves have had preponderant influence in
 the choice. A 1992 royal decree reserves for the King exclusive power to name the
 Crown Prince. The Government bases its legitimacy on governance according to Is-
 lamic law. Security forces continued to abuse detainees and to arbitrarily arrest and
 detain persons. Ministry of Interior officers abused prisoners and facilitated incom-
 municado detention in contradiction of the law, but with the acquiescence of the
 Government. Prolonged detention is a problem. The legal system is subect to execu-
 tive and royal family influene. The Govenment prohibits or restricts freedom of
 speech, the press, assembly, association, and religion. Reports of harassment by the
 Mutawwa'in decreased in 1995 and 1996, though Mutawwa'in intimidation, abuse,
 and detention of citizens and foreigners of both sexes continued. Other problems in-
 dlude discrimination and violence against women, suppression of ethnic and reli-
 gious minorities, and strict limitations on the rights of workers. The Government
 disagrees with internationally accepted definitions of human rights and views its in-
 terpretation of Islamic law as its sole source of guidance for human rights.
 
 
 1367
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There was one allegation of political
 or other extrajudicial killings by government officials. In early December, Haytham
 AI-Bahir, a Shi'a student, reportedly died of complications arising from detention
 and torture, which aggravated a preexisting medical condition.
 On June 25, unknown persons exploded a truck bomb outside a US. military
 housing complex at Al-Khobar. The bomb killed 19 U.S. personnel and wounded
 hundreds of persons. Authorities arrested dozens of people, and the investigation
 was continuing at year's end.
 On April 22, the authorities announced the arrest of four persons for the Novem-
 ber 1995 car bombing of a U.S.-run military training center for Saudi military that
 killed 7 persons and wounded 60. All four were tried and found guilty in accordance
 with Saudi judicial procedures, which include several levels of appellate review, and
 mandatory review by the King prior to their execution on May 31.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 There were credible reports that the authorities continued to abuse detainees, in-
 cluding citizens and foreigners. Ministry of Interior officers are responsible for most
 incidents of abuse, which can include beatings and the deprivation of sleep during
 weeks of interrogation resulting in severe weight loss for the detainee. There were
 unverified reports of worse abuses. Efforts to confirm or discount reports of worse
 abuses, including torture, are hindered by the Government's refusal to grant mem-
 bers of diplomatic missions access to the Ministry of Interior detention facilities or
 allow members of international human rights groups into the country. The Govern-
 ment's past failure to denounce human rights abusers has contributed to the public
 perception that abuses can be committed with impunity.
 Although reports of harassment by the Mutawwa'in decreased, Mutawwa'in in-
 timidation, abuse, and detention of citizens and foreigners of both sexes continued
 (see Sections 1.d. and i.e.).
 The Government rigorously observes criminal punishments according to its inter-
 pretation of Islamic law, including amputation, flogging, and execution by beheading
 or stoning. No executions were performed during the 5-month period from October
 17, 1995, to March 14. Executions resumed March 15, and by year's end the authori-
 ties had beheaded 40 men and 1 woman for murder, 14 men for rape, 6 men and
 2 women for drug offenses, 5 men for armed robbery, and 1 man for withcraft. In
 a reversal of previous years, those executed in 1996 were predominantly Saudi (39
 men and 1 woman). There were no executions by stoning in 1996.
 In accordance with Shari', the authorities punish repeated thievery by amputa-
 tion of the right hand. However, amputation has not been imposed since June 1995.
 For less serious crimes, such as drunkenness or publicly flouting Islamic precepts,
 flogging with a cane is frequently the punishment.
 Condiions in standard jails and prisons vary throughout the Kingdom. Prisons,
 particularly in the eastern province, are of generally high quality, with air-condi-
 tioned cells, good nutrition, regular exercise, and careful patrolling by prison guards.
 Some detainees in police station jails, however, have complained of overcrowding
 and unsanitary conditions. Family members are allowed access.
 Boards of Investigation and Public Prosecution, organized on a regional basis,
 were established by King Fahd in 1993. The members of these boards have the right
 to inspect prisons, review prisoners' fies, and hear their complaints. The Govern-
 ment, however, does not permit visits to jails or prisons by human rights monitors.
 Some diplomats have been granted regular access to incarcerated foreign citizens.
 No impartial observers are allowed access to specialized Ministry of Interior pris-
 ons, such as A-Hair Prison south of Riyadh, where the Government detains persons
 accused of political subversion.
 Representatives of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHR)
 are present at the Ranha refugee camp housing former Iraqi prisoners of war
 (Po     an  civilians who fled Iraq following the Gulf War. According to UNHCR
 officials, there is no systematic abuse of refugees by camp guards. When occasional
 instances of abuse surface, the authorities are generally responsive and willing to
 reprimand offending guards. The camp itself is comparatively comfortable and well
 rn.
 d. Arbitray Arrest, Detention, or Exile.
 The law prohibits arbitrary arrest. Despite the law, however, officers make arrests
 and detain persons without following explicit legal guidelines. There are few proce-
 dures to safeguard against abuse. However, there was a case in 1995 in which a
 
 
 1368
 Saudi citizen successfully sued the Government for wrongful imprisonment and was
 awarded compensation.
 Authorities usually detain suspects for no longer than 3 days before charging
 them, in accordance with a regulation issued by the Ministry of Interior in 1983,.
 although serious exceptions have been reported. The regulation also has provisions
 for bail for less serious crimes. Also, detainees are sometimes released on the recog-
 nizance of a patron or sponsoring employer without the payment of bail. If not re-
 leased, the accused are detained an average of 1 to 2 months before going to trial.
 There is no established procedure providing detainees the right to inform their
 family of their arrest. If asked, the authorities usually confirm the arrest of foreign-
 ers to their country's diplomats. In general, however, foreign diplomats learn about
 such arrests through informal channels. The authorities may take as long as several
 months to provide official notification of the arrest of foreigners, if at all. In capital
 cases, foreigners have in the past been tried and executed without notification of
 their arrest ever having been given to their government's representatives.
 The Mutawwa'in enforce a strict public code of proper dress and behavior. How-
 ever, reports of harassment, intimidation, and detention of those deemed to be vio-
 lating the code declined in 1995 and 1996. The Mutawwa'in have the authority to
 detain people for no more than 24 hours for violation of behavior standards. How-
 ever, they sometimes exceeded this limit before delivering detainees to the regular
 police (see Section 1.f.). Current procedures require a police officer to accompany the
 Mutawwa'in before the latter make an arrest, although this requirement is some-
 times ignored.
 Detainees arrested by the General Directorate of Investigation (GDI), which is the
 Ministry of Interior's security service, are commonly held incommunicado in special
 prisons during the initial phase of an investigation, which may last weeks or
 months. The GDI allows the detainees only linuted contact with their families or
 lawyers.
 The authorities detain without charge people who publicly criticize the Govern-
 ment, or they charge them with attempting to destabilize the Government (see Sec-
 tions 2.a. and 3). The authorities continued to detain Salman A-Awdah and Safar
 Al-Hawai, Muslim clerics who were arrested in September 1994 for publicly criticiz-
 ing the Government. Their detention that year sparked protest demonstrations re-
 suiting in the arrest of 157 persons for antigovernment activities. At the end of
 1994, 27 of these persons remained in detention pending investigation; the Govern-
 ment has not announced the release of any of those detainees in the succeeding 2
 years. The thousands of prisoners and detainees released under the annual Rama-
 dan amnesty included no political dissidents. The total number of political detainees
 is impossible to determine.
 The Government does not use forced exile. However, Mohammed al-Masari and
 Osama Bin Ladin, two critics of the Government who live outside of the country,
 have had their citizenship revoked.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The independence of the judiciary is prescribed
 by law and is usually respected in practice. However, judges occasionally accede to
 the influence of the executive branch, particularly members of the royal family and
 their associates. Moreover, judicial, financial, and administrative control of the
 courts rests with the Ministry of Justice.
 The legal system is based on Shari'a, or Islamic law. Regular Shari'a courts exer-
 cise jurisdiction over common criminal cases and civil suits regarding marriage, di-
 vorce, child custody, and inheritance. These courts base judgments argely on the
 Koran and on the Sunna, another Islamic text. Cases involving relatively small pen-
 alties are tried in summary courts; more serious crimes are adjudicated in general
 courts. Appeals from both courts are heard by the appeals courts in Mecca and Ri-
 yadh.
 Other civil proceedings, including those involving claims against the Government
 and enforcement of foreign judgments, are held before specialized administrative tri-
 bunals, such as the Commission for the Settlement of Labor Disputes and the Board
 of Grievances.
 The military justice system has jurisdiction over uniformed personnel and civil
 servants charged with violations of military regulations. Court-martial decisions are
 reviewed by the Minister of Defense and Aviation and by the King.
 The Government permits Shi'a Muslims to use their own legal tradition to adju-
 dicate noncriminal cases within their community.
 There is a Supreme Judicial Council, which is not a court and may not reverse
 decisions made by an appeals court. However, the Council may refer decisions back
 to the lower courts for reconsideration. Its members are appointed by the King, as
 are most senior jurists, called muftis. Only the Council may discipline or remove a
 judge.
 
 
 1369
 There is also the Council of Senior Religious Scholars, which is an autonomous
 body of 15 senior religious jurists, including the Minister of Justice. It establishes
 the legal principles to guide lower court judges in deciding individual cases.
 Defendants usually appear without an attorney before a judge, who determines
 guilt or innocence in accordance with Shari'a standards. Defense lawyers may offer
 their clients advice before trial or may attend the trial as interpreters for those un-
 familiar with Arabic. The courts do not provide foreign defendants with translators.
 Public defenders are not provided. There is no licensing procedure for lawyers. Indi-
 viduals may choose any person to represent them by a power of attorney filed with
 the court and Ministry of Justice. Most trials are closed. A woman's testimony does
 not carry the same weight as that of a man. In a Shari'a court, the testimony of
 one man equals that of two women.
 In the absene of two witnesses, or four witnesses in the case of adultery, confes-
 sions before a judge are almost always required for criminal conviction-a situation
 that repeatedly has led prosecuting authorities to coerce confessions from suspects
 by threats and abuse.
 Sentencing is not uniform. Foreign residents often receive harsher penalties than
 citizens. Under Shari'a, as interpreted and applied in Saudi Arabia, crimes against
 Muslims receive harsher penalties than those against non-Muslims. In the case of
 wrongful death, the amount of indemnity or "blood money" awarded to relatives var-
 ies with the nationality, religion, and sex of the victim. A sentence may be changed
 at any stage of review, except for punishments stipulated by the Koran.
 Provincial governors have the authority to exercise leniency and reduce a judge's
 sentence. In some instances, governors have reportedly threatened and even de-
 tained judges over disagreements on their decisions. In general, members of the
 royal family and other powerful families, are not subject to the same rule of law
 as ordinary citizens. For example, judges do not have the power to issue a warrant
 summoning any member of the royal family.
 The King and his advisrs review cases involving capital punishment to ensure
 that the court applied the proper legal and Islamic principles. The King has the au-
 thority to commute death sentences and grant pardons except for capital crimes
 committed against individuals. In such cases, he may request the victim's next of
 kin to pardon the murderer-usually in return for compensation from the family or
 the King.
 There is insufficient information to determine the number of political prisoners
 because the Government does not provide information on such persons or respond
 to inquiries about them. Moreover, the Government conducts closed trials for per-
 sons who may be political prisoners and in other cases has detained persons incom-
 municado for long periods while under investigation. At year's end, at least nine
 persons were serving prison terms for their connections to the rigidly fundamental-
 ist Committee for the Defense of Legitimate Rights (CDLR), an opposition group
 based in London (see Section 3), and their alleged involvement in a 1994 assault
 on an Interior Ministry official
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondnce.-rThe
 sanctity of family life and the inviolability of the home are among the most fun-
 damental of Islamic precepts. Royal decrees announced in 1992 include provisions
 calling for the Government to defend the home from unlawful incursions.
 The police must generally demonstrate reasonable cause and obtain permission
 from the provincial governor before searching a private home, but warrants are not
 required.
 Customs officials routinely opea mail for contraband including material deemed
 pornographic as well as non-usm religious material. They regularly confiscate
 materials deemed offensive. The authorities also open mail and use informants and
 wiretaps in internal security matters.
 The Government enforces most social and Islamic religious norms, which are mat-
 trs of law (see Section 5). Women may not marry nonau s without Government
 permission; men must obtaln approval from the Ministry of Interior to marry
 women from countries outside the six states of the Gulf Cooperation Council. Al-
 thoughwomen are prohibited from marrying non-Musims, men have the right to
 marry Christians and Jews, in accordance with Islamic law.
 Both citizens and foreigners were targets of harassment by members of the
 Mutawwa'in and by religious vigilantes acting independently of the Mutawwa'in,
 though on a lesser scale than in 1995. The Government enjoins the Mutawwa'in to
 follow established procedures and to offer instruction in a polite manner; following
 especially egregious altercations, the authorities have exerted tighter control over
 the Mutawwa'in (see Section 1.d.). The Government, however, has not condemned
 the actions of religious vigilantes but has sought to curtail their activities.
 
 
 1370
 Mutawwa'in enforcement of strict standards of social behavior included the clo-
 sure of commercial establishments during the daily prayer observances, insistence
 upon modest dress in public, and harassment of patrons of videotape rental shops.
 They remonstrate with Saudi and foreign women for failure to observe strict dress
 codes and for being in the company of males who are not their close relatives. They
 also harassed and arrested non-Muslims attempting to conduct religious services
 (see Section 2.c.).
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Government severely limits freedom of
 speech and the press. The authorities do not countenance criticism of Islam, the rul-
 ing family, or the Government. Persons whose criticisms align them with an orga-
 nized political opposition are subject to arrest and detention until they confess their
 crime or sign a statement promising not to resume such criticisms, which is tanta-
 mount to a confession.
 The print media are privately owned but publicly subsidized. A 1982 media policy
 statement and a 1965 national security law prohibit the dissemination of criticism
 of the Government. The media policy statement urges journalists to uphold Islam,
 oppose atheism, promote Arab interests, and preserve the cultural heritage of Saudi
 Arabia. The Ministry of Information appoints, and may remove, the editors in chief.
 It also provides guidelines to newspapers on controversial issues. The Government
 owns the Saudi Press Agency (SPA), which expresses official Government views.
 Newspapers typically publish news on sensitive subjects, such as crime or terror-
 ism, only after it has been released by the SPA or when it has been authorized by
 a senior government official. Two Saudi-owned, London-based dailies, Ash-Sharq Al-
 Awsat and AI-Hayat, are widely distributed and read in Saudi Arabia. The authori-
 ties continue to censor stories about Saudi Arabia in the foreign press. Censors may
 remove or blacken the offending articles, glue pages together, or prevent certain is-
 sues of foreign publications from entering the market. However, the Ministry of In-
 formation continued to relax its blackout policy regarding politically sensitive news
 concerning Saudi Arabia reported in international media, although press restrictions
 on reporting of domestic news remain very stringent. The terrorist bombing of a
 US. military facility in Al Khobar on June 25 was promptly reported by the govern-
 ment media.
 The Government's policy in this regard appears to be motivated in part by prag-
 matic considerations: Saudi access to outside sources of information, especially
 Cable News Network and other satellite television channels, is widespread.
 The Government tightly restricts the entry of foreign journalists into the Kingdom
 but admitted a markedly increased number into the country in 1996.
 The Government owns and operates the television and radio companies. Govern-
 ment censors remove any reference to politics, religions other than Islam, pork or
 pigs, alcohol, or any sexual innuendo from foreign programs and songs. Reflecting
 competition from outside satellite television networks, Saudi television has intro-
 duced some program changes, including "Face to Face," a weekly live talk show in
 which ministers and other senior officials interact with a moderator and answer
 phone and facsimile questions from citizens.
 There are as many as 300,000 satellite receiving dishes in the Kingdom that pro-
 vide citizens with foreign broadcasts. The legal status of these devices is ambiguous.
 The Government ordered a halt to their import in 1992, at the request of religious
 leaders who objected to foreign programming available on satellite channels. In
 March 1994, the Government banned the sale, installation, and maintenance of
 dishes and supporting devices, but the number of dishes continues to increase and
 residents may legally subscribe to satellite decoding services that require a dish.
 The Government censors all forms of public artistic expression. The authorities
 prohibit cinemas and public musical or theatrical performances, except those that
 are strictly folkloric.
 Academic freedom is restricted. The authorities prohibit the study of evolution,
 Freud, Marx, Western music, and Western philosophy. Some professors believe that
 government and conservative religious informers monitor their classroom comments.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Government strictly limits
 these freedoms. It prohibits public demonstrations as a means of political expression
 and the establishment of political parties or any type of opposition group (see Sec-
 tion 3). By its power to license associations, the Government ensures that groups
 conform to public policy.
 Public meetings are segregated by sex. Unless meetings are sponsored by diplo-
 matic missions or approved by the appropriate governor, foreign residents seeking
 to hold unsegrgate meetings risk arrest and deportation. The authorities monitor
 any large gathering of people, especially of women.
 
 
 1371
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Freedom of religion does not exist. Islam is the official
 religion, and all citizens must be Muslims. The Government prohibits the practice
 of other religions. There are isolated reports of harassment and arrest of foreign
 workers conducting clandestine worship services, particularly around non-Muslim
 religious holidays. One Christian worship service was broken up by police and
 Mutawwa'in, and the man who hosted the service was punished by lashing.
 Conversion by a Muslim to another religion is considered apostasy. Public apos-
 tasy is a crime under Shari'a law andpunisable by death.
 Islamic practice is generally limite to that of the Wahhabi sect's interpretation
 of the Hanbali School of the Sunni branch of Islam. Practices contrary to this inter-
 pretation, such as visits to the graves of renowned Muslims, are discouraged.
 The Ministry of Islamic Affairs directly supervises and is a major source of funds
 for the construction and maintenance of almost all mosques in the country. The
 Ministry pays the salaries of all imams and others who work in the mosques. A gov-
 ernmentl committee is responsible for defining the qualifications of imams. The re-
 ligious police, or the Mutawwa'in, receive their funding from the Government and
 the general president of the Mutawwa'in holds the rank of minister.
 The Shi'a Muslim minority (roughly 500,000 of over 13 million citizens) lives
 mostly in the eastern province. They are the objects of officially sanctioned social
 and economic discrimination (see Section 5). Prior to 1990, the Government prohib-
 ited Shi'ite public processions during the Islamic month of Muharram and restricted
 other processions and congregations to designated areas in the major Shi'ite cities.
 Since 1990, the authorities have permitted marches on the Shi'a holiday of Ashura,
 provided the marchers do not display banners or engage in self-flagellation. In May
 Ashura commemorations in the eastern province passed without incident.
 The Government seldom permits private construction of Shi'ite mosques. The
 Shi'a have declined government offers to build state-supported mosques because
 Shi'ite motifs would be prohibited in them.
 The Government does not permit public or private non-Muslim religious activities.
 Persons wearing religious symbols of any kind in public risk confrontation with the
 Mutawwa'in. The general prohibition against religious symbols applies also to Mus-
 lims. A Muslim wearing a Koranic necklace in public would be admonished. Non-
 Muslim worshippers risk arrest, lashing, and deportation for engaging in any reli-
 gious activity that attracts official attention.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Government restricts the travel of Saudi women, who must obtain
 written permission from their closest male relative before the authorities will allow
 them to board public transportation between different parts of the country or travel
 abroad (see Section 5). Males may travel anywhere within the country or abroad.
 Foreigners are typically allowed to reside or work in Saudi Arabia only under the
 sponsorship of a Sadi national or business. The Government requires foreign resi-
 dents to carry identification cards. It does not permit foreigners to travel outside
 the city of their employment or change their workplace without their sponsor's per-
 mission. Foreign residents who travel within the country are often asked by the au-
 thorities to show that they possess letters of permission from their employer or
 sponsor.
 Sponsors generally retain possession of the workers' passports. Foreign workers
 must obtain permission from their sponsors to travel abroad. If sponsors are in-
 volved in a commercial or labor dispute with foreign employees, they may ask the
 authorities to prohibit the employees from departing the country until the dispute
 is resolved. Some sponsors use this as a pressure tactic to resolve disputes in their
 favor, or to have foreign employees deported.
 The Government seizes the passports of all potential suspects and witnesses in
 criminal cases and suspends the issuance of exit visas to  em   until the case is
 tried. As a result, some                     forced to remain in the country for
 lengthy periods against their will. The authorities sometimes confiscate the pass-
 ports of suspected oppositionists and their families. Some husbands of women who
 participated in a 1991 motorcade through the streets of Riyadh in protest of govern-
 ment restrictions on female driving reported that, 5 years later, they atim have not
 had their passports returned. The Government prevents Shi'a Muslims believed to
 have pro-Iranian sympathies from traveling abroad.
 Citizens may emigrate, but the law proibits dual citizenship. Apart from mar-
 riage to a Saudi national, there are no provisions for long-term foreign residents to
 a   r   citizenship. However, foreigners are granted citizenship in rare cases, gen-
 erally through the advocacy of an influential patron.
 The 1992 Basic Law    hvides that "the State will grant political asylum if the
 public interest mitigates in favor of it. The language does not specify clear rules
 or addicating asylum cases. In general, the authorities regard refugees and dis-
 
 
 1372
 placed persons like other foreign workers: They must have sponsors for employment
 or risk expulsion. Of the 35,000 Iraqi civilians and former prisoners of war allowed
 refuge in Saudi Arabia at the end of the Gulf War, none has been granted perma-
 nent asylum by the Saudis; however, the Government has underwritten the entire
 cost of providing safe haven to the Iraqi refugees, and continues to provide excellent
 logistical and adistrative support to the Unitd Nations High Commissioner for
 Refugees (UNHCR) and other resettlement agencies.
 At year's end, approximately 25,000 of the original 35,000 Iraqi refugees had been
 resettled in third countries or voluntarily repatriated to Iraq. Most of the remaining
 10,000 refugees are restricted to the Rafia refugee camp. The UNHCR has mon-
 itored over 2,800 persons voluntarily returning to Iraq from Rafiha since December
 1991 and found no evidnce of forcible repatriation.
 The Government has temporarily allowed some foreigners to remain in Saudi Ara-
 bia in cases where their safety would be jeopardized if they were deported to their
 home countries.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens do not have the right to change their government. There are no formal
 democratic institutions, and only a few citizens have a voice in the choice of leaders
 or in changing the political system. The King rules on civil and religious matters
 within certain limitations established by religious law, tradition, and the need to
 maintain consensus among the ruling family and religious leaders.
 The King is also the Prime Minister, and the Crown Prince serves as Deputy
 Prime Minister. The King appoints all other ministers, who in turn appoint subordi-
 nate officials with cabinet concurrence.
 In 1993 the King appointed 60 members to a Consultative Council, or Majlis Ash-
 Shura. This strictly advisor body began to hold sessions in 1994, but the Council
 has maintained a low profile and is not regarded as a significant political force by
 the citizenry or those in power.
 The Council of Senior.islamic Scholars is another advisory body to the King and
 the Cabinet. It issues decisions based on Shari'a in its review of the Government's
 public policies. The Government views the Council as an important source of reli-
 T ous legitimacy, and takes the Council's opinions into account when promulgating
 egislation.                           _..
 Communication between citizens and the Government is usually expressed
 through client-patron relationships and by affinity groups such as tribes, families,
 and professional hierarchies. In theory, any male citizen or foreign national may ex-
 press an opinion or air a grievance at a majlis--an open-door meeting held by the
 ng, a prince, or an important national or local official. However, as governmental
 functions have become more complex, time-consuming, and centralized, public access
 to senior officials has become more restricted. Since the assassination of King Faisal
 in 1975, Saudi kings have reduced the frequency of their personal contacts with the
 public. Ministers and district governors more readily grant audiences at a majlis.
 Typical topics raised in a majlis are complaints about bureaucratic delay or insen-
 sitivity, requests for personal redress or assistance, and criticism of particular acts
 of government affecting family welfare. Broader "political" concerns--social, eco-
 nomic, or foreign poicy-Iare rarely raised. Complaints about royal abuses of power
 would not be entertained. In general journalists, academics, and businessmen feel
 that avenues of domestic criticism and feedback to the regime are closed.
 An opposition group, the Comttee for the Defense of Legitimate Rights, which
 advocates a rigidly fundamentalist Islamic viewpoint, was established in 1993 by six
 citizens. The Government acted quickly to repress the CDLR following its formation.
 In 1994 CDLR spokesman Mohammed AI-Masari secretly fled to the United King-
 dom, where he sought political asylum and established an overseas branch of the
 CDLR. Al-Masari continued to criticize the Government, using computers and fac-
 simile transmissions to send newsletters back to Saudi Arabia. In March internal
 divisions within the CDLR spawned the rival Islamic Reform Movement (IRM),
 headed by Sa'ad Al-Faqih. AI-Masari has expressed the group's "understanding" of
 two fatal terrorist bombings of American military facilities and sympathy for the
 perpetrators. The IRM also implicitly condoned the two terrorist attacks in Saudi
 Arabia, arguing that they were a natural outgrowth of a political system that does
 not tolerate peaceful dissent.
 In April the Saudi Ambassador in the United Kingdom stated publicly that his
 Government would withdraw from large contracts for British weapons unless the
 United Kingdom expelled Al-Masari. The British Government denied AI-Masari's
 initial request for asylum, due to the circumstances of his illegal entry, but eventu-
 ally Al-Masari was granted permission to remain in the United Kingdom for 4
 
 
 1373
 ars, with the option of applying for permanent residency at the end of that period.
 ere is no evidence of Saudi Government retribution against the British Govern-
 ment for this decision.
 Women play no formal role in government and politics, and are actively discour-
 aged from doing so. Participation by women in a Majlis is restricted, although some
 women seek redress through female members of the royal family. Only 1 of the 60
 members of the Majlis Ash-Shura is a Shi'a.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no publicly active human rights groups, and the Government has made
 it clear that none critical of government policies would be permitted.
 The Government does not permit visits by international human rights groups or
 independent monitors, nor has it signed major international human rights treaties
 and conventions. The Government disagrees with internationally accepted defini-
 tions of human rights and views its interpretation of Islamic law as the only nec-
 essary guide to protect human rights. Citations of Saudi human rights abuses by
 international monitors or foreign governments are routinely ignored or condemned
 by the Government as assaults on Islam.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Systematic discrimination based on sex and religion are built into the law. The
 law forbids discrimination based on race, but not nationality. The Government and
 private organizations cooperate in providing services for the disabled. The Shi'a reli-
 gious minority suffers social, legal, and religious discrimination.
 Women.-The Government does not keep statistics on spousal or other forms of
 violence against women. Hospital workers report that many women are admitted for
 treatment of injuries that apparently result from spousal violence. Some foreign
 women have suffered physical abuse from their Saudi husbands, who can prevent
 their wives from obtaining exit visas.
 Foreign embassies receive many reports that employers abuse foreign women
 working as domestic servants. Embassies of countries with large domestic servant
 populations maintain safehouses to which citizens may flee to escape work situa-
 tions that include forced confinement, withholding of food, beating and other phys-
 ical abuse, and rape. Often the abuse is at the hands of female Saudis. In general,
 the Government considers such cases family matters and does not intervene unless
 charges of abuse are brought to its attention. It is almost impossible for foreign
 women to obtain redress in the courts due to the courts' strict evidentiary rules and
 the women's own fears of reprisals. Few employers have been punished for such
 abuses. There are no private support groups or religious associations to assist such
 women.
 By religious law and social custom, women have the right to own proprty and
 are entitled to financial support from their husbands or male relatives. However,
 women have few political and social rights and are not treated as equal members
 of society. There are no active women's rights groups. Women, including foreigners,
 may not legally drive motor vehicles and are restricted in their use of public facili-
 ties when men are present. Women must enter city buses by separate rear en-
 trances and sit in specially designated sections. Women risk arrest by the
 Mutawwa'in for riding in a vehicle driven by a male who is not an employee or a
 close male relative. Women are not admitted to a hospital for medical treatment
 without the consent of their male relative. By law and custom, women may not un-
 dertake domestic and foreign travel alone (see Section 2.d.).
 In public women are expected to wear the abaya, a black garment covering the
 entire body. A woman's head and face should also be covered. The Mutawwa'in gen-
 erally expect women from Arab countries, Asia, and Africa to comply more fully with
 Saudi customs of dress than they do Western women; nonetheless, in recent years
 they have instructed Western women to wear the abaya and cover their hair.
 Some government officials and ministries still bar accredited female diplomats in
 Saudi Arabia from official meetings and diplomatic functions.
 Women are also subject to discrimination in Islamic law, which stipulates that
 daughters receive half the inheritance awarded to their brothers. In a Shari'a court,
 the testimony of one man equals that of two women (see Section i.e.). Although Is-
 lamic law permits polygyvny, it is becoming less common. Islamic law enjoins a man
 to treat each wife equ aly. In practice such equality is left to the discretion of the
 husband. Some women participated in al-Mesyar (or "short daytime visit") mar-
 riages, where the women relinquish their legal rights to financial support and night-
 time cohabitation. Additionally, the husband is not required to inform his other
 
 
 1374
 
 wives of the marriage, and the children have no inheritance rights. The Government
 places greater restrictions on women than on men regarding marriage to non-Saudis
 and non-Muslims (see Section 2.d.).
 Women must demonstrate legally specified grounds for divorce, but men may di-
 vorce without giving cause. If divorced or widowed, a woman normally may keep her
 children until they attain a specified age: 7 years for boys, 9 years for girls. Children
 over these ages are awarded to the divorced husband or the deceased husband's
 family. Divorced women who are foreigners are often prevented by their former hus-
 bands from visiting their children after divorce.
 Women have access to free, but segregated, education through the university
 level. They constitute 55 percent of all university graduates but are excluded from
 studying such subjects as engineering, journalism, and architecture. Men are able
 to study overseas; women may do so ony if accompanied by a spouse or an imme-
 diate male relative.
 Women make up only 5 percent of the work force. Whereas salary and other bene-
 fits are the main concerns or men seeking employment, for women the primary goal
 is merely establishing some toehold in the private or public sector. Most employ-
 ment opportunities for women are in education and health care, with lesser oppor-
 tunity in business, philanthropy, banking, retail sales, and the media. Women wish-
 ing to enter nontraditional fields are subject to discrimination. Women may not ac-
 cept jobs in rural areas if they are required to live apart from their families. All
 workplaces where women are present are segregated by sex. Contact with male su-
 pervisors or clients is allowed by telephone or facsimile machine. In 1995 the Min-
 istry of Commerce announced that women would no longer be issued business li-
 censes for work in fields that might require them to supervise foreign workers,
 interact with male clients, or deal on a regular basis with government officials.
 Children.-The Government provides all children with free education and medical
 care. Children are not subject to the strict social segregation faced by women,
 though they are segregated by sex in schools starting at age 7. In more general so-
 cial situations, boys are segregated at age 12, and girls at the onset of puberty. It
 is difficult to gauge the prevalence of child abuse, since the Government keeps no
 statistics on such cases and is disinclined to infringe on family privacy. Societal
 abuse of children does not appear to be a major problem.
 People With Disabilities.-The provision of government social services has increas-
 ingly brought the disabled into the public domain. The media carry features lauding
 the public accomplishments of disabled persons and sharply criticizing parents who
 neglect disabled children. The Government and private charitable organizations co-
 operate in education, employment, and other services for the disabled. The law pro-
 vides hiring quotas for the disabled. While there is no legislation for public acces-
 sibility, newer commercial buildings often include such access.
 Religious Minorities.-Shi'a citizens are discriminated against in government and
 employment, especially in national security jobs. Several years ago the Government
 subjted Shi'a to employment restrictions in the oil industry and has not relaxed
 them. The Sunni majority discriminates socially against the Si'a minority.
 Si'a face restrictions on access to several services, despite efforts by the Govern-
 ment to improve the social service infrastructure in predominantly Shi a areas of the
 country. Since the Iranian revolution, some Shi'a suspected of subversion have been
 subjected periodically to surveillance and limitations on travel abroad.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Although racial discrimination is illegal,
 there is substantial societal prejudice based on ethnic or national origin. Foreign
 workers from Africa and Asia are subject to various forms of formal and informal
 discrimination and have the most difficulty in obtaining justice for their grievances.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Governrent decrees prohibit the establishment of
 labor unions and any strike activity.
 In 1995 Saudi Arabia was suspended from the U.S. Overseas Private Investment
 Corporation insurance programs because of the Government's lack of compliance
 with internationally recognized worker rights standards.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Collective bargaining is for-
 bidden. Foreign workers comprise about half of the work force. There is no mini-
 mum wage; wages are set by employers and vary according to the type of work per-
 formed and the nationality of the worker.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced labor is prohibited by a
 1952 royal decree that abolished slavery. Ratification of the International Labor Or-
 ganization (ILO) Conventions 29 and 105, which prohibit forced labor, gives them
 the force of law. However, employers have significant control over the movements
 
 
 1375
 
 of foreign employees, giving rise to situations that might involve forced labor, espe-
 dally in remote areas where workers are unable to leave their place of work.
 Sometimes sponsors prevent foreign workers from obtaining exit visas to pressure
 them to sign a new work contract or to drop claims against their employers for un-
 paid salary (see Section 2.d.). In another pressure tactic, sponsors may refuse to pro-
 vide foreign workers with a "letter of no objection" that would allow them to be em-
 ployed by another sponsor.
 The labor laws do not protect domestic servants. There were credible reports that
 female domestic servants were sometimes forced to work 12 to 16 hours a day, 7
 days a week. There were numerous confirmed reports of runaway maids (see Section
 5). The authorities often returned runaway maids to their employers against the
 maids' wishes.
 There have been many reports of workers whose employers have refused to pay
 several months, or even years, of accumulated salary or other promised benefits.
 Nondomestic workers with such grievances have the right to complain before the
 labor courts, but few do so because of fear of deportation. The labor system abets
 the exploitation of foreign workers because enforcement of work contracts is difficult
 and generally favors Saudi employers. Labor cases can take many months to reach
 a final appellate ruling, during which time the employer can prevent the foreign la-
 borer from leaving the country; alternatively, an employer can delay a case until a
 worker's funds are exhausted and the worker is forced to return to his home coun-
 try.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum age for employment
 is 13 years of age, which may be waived by the Ministry of Labor with the consent
 of the juvenile's guardian. There is no minimum age for workers employed in family
 oriented businesses or in other situations that are construed as extensions of the
 household, e.g., farmers, herdsmen, and domestic servants.
 Children under the age of 18 and women may not be employed in hazardous or
 harmful industries, such as mining or industries employing power-operated machin-
 ery. While there is no formal government entity charged with enforcing the mini-
 mum age for employment of children, the Ministry of Justice has 'urisdiction and
 has acted as plaintiff i the few cases that have arisen against alleged violators.
 In general, however, children play a minimal role in the work force.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no legal minimum wage. Labor regu-
 lations establish a 48-hour workweek at regular pay and allow employers to require
 up to 12 additional hours of overtime at time-and-a-hal pay. Labor law provides for
 a 24-hour rest period, normally Fridays, although the employer may grant it on an-
 other day.
 Many foreign nationals who have been recruited abroad have complained that
 after arrival in Saudi Arabia they were presented with work contracts specifying
 lower wages and fewer benefits than originally promised. Other foreign workers
 have reportedly signed contracts in their home countries and were later pressured
 to sign less favorable contracts upon arrival. Some employees report that at the end
 of their contract service, their employers refuse to grant permission to allow them
 to return home.
 The ILO has stated that the Government has not formulated legislation imple-
 menting the ILO Convention on Equal Pay and that regulations that segregate work
 places by sex, and limit vocational programs for women, violate ILO Convention
 Ill.
 Labor regulations require employers to protect most workers from job-related haz-
 ards and disease. Foreign nationals report frequent failures to enforce health and
 safety standards. Workers in family operated businesses, farmers, herdsmen, and
 domestic servants are not covered by these regulations. Workers would risk their
 employment if they were to remove themselves from hazardous work conditions.
