 SAUDI ARABIA
 Saudi Arabia is a monarchy without elected representative institutions or political
 parties. It is ruled by King Fahd bin Abdul Aziz Al Saud, a descendent of King
 Abdul Aziz Al Saud, who unified the country in the early 20th century. The King
 and the Crown Prince are chosen from among the male descendants of King Abdul
 Aziz. There is no written Constitution. The concept of the separation of religion and
 state is not accepted by either society or the Government. The legitimacy of the Gov-
 ernment depnds to a large degree on its perceived adherence to the precepts of a
 puritanically conservative form of Islam. Most Saudis respect the legal system,
 which they believe is divinely inspired. They also revere such ancient customs as
 government by consensus, internal social cohesion, respect for private property, and
 private economic enterprise. The Government disagrees with internationally accept-
 ed definitions of human rights and views Islamic law as the only necessary guide
 to protect human rights.
 In 1992 King Fahd appointed a Consultative Council, the Majlis Ash-Shura, and
 similar provincial assemblies. The Council began holding sessions in 1994. The Gov-
 ernment does not permit the establishment of political parties and suppresses oppo-
 sition views. The legal system is based on the regime's interpretation of Shari'a, or
 Islamic law. Since the death of King Abdul Aziz, the King and the Crown Prince
 have been chosen from among his sons, who themselves have had preponderant in-
 fluence in the choice. A 1992 Royal decree reserves for the King the exclusive power
 to name the Crown Prince.
 Police and border forces under the Ministry of Interior are responsible for internal
 security. The Mutawwa'in, or volunteer religious police, are part of the Organization
 to Prevent Vice and To Promote Virtue, a semi-autonomous agency which encour-
 ages adherence to Islamic values by monitoring public behavior. The Mutawwa'in
 continued to confront and abuse citizens and foreigners of beth sexes. They commit-
 ted many abuses during the year. The Mutawwa'in are government employees; how-
 ever, other citizens sometimes represent themselves as Mutawwa'in when in fact
 they are not.
 The oil industry has transformed Saudi Arabia from a pastoral, agricultural, and
 commercial economy to a rapidly urbanizing one characterized by large-scale infra-
 structure projects, the emergence of a welfare state and a middle class, and millions
 of foreign workers. Oil revenues account for one-third of the gross domestic product
 (GDP) and three-fourths of the government budget. Oil has also enriched members
 of the royal family and their associates. Agriculture accounts for only about 5 per-
 cent of GDP. Government spending, including spending on the national airline, and
 power, water, telephone, education and health services, accounts for 29 percent of
 GDP. About 36 percent of the economy is in private hands, and the Government is
 promoting further privatization of the economy.
 Human rights abuses in 1994 continued. Principal abuses included. the torture of
 prisoners; incommunicado detention; prohibitions or restrictions on the freedoms of
 speech, press, and religion; systematic discrimination against women; and strict lim-
 itations, and even suppression, of the rights of workers and ethnic and religious mi-
 norities. There is no mechanism for citizens to change their government. The Gov-
 ernment's legitimacy is based on its adherence to the Shari'a and upon the consent
 of the governed, who are obliged to obey the ruler as long as he continues to govern
 according to Islamic law.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Exfrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political
 killin.
 b. D;i'ppearance.-There were no reports of disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degradiny Treatment or Punishment.-
 There were credible reports that the authorities continued to torture and otherwise
 abuse detainees, including citizens and foreigners. A common method of torture is
 
 
 1166
 beating, especially "fallaqa," which is a beating on the soles of the feet to cause in-
 tense pain. The authorities also deprive detainees of sleep.
 Agents of the Ministry of Interior are allegedly responsible for most incidents of
 abuse. The Governments failure to announce the punishment of human rights abus-
 ers has contributed to a public perception that abuses can be committed with impu-
 ihe Mutawwa'in were also responsible for abuse. In May they arrested 19 expatri-
 ate workers from the United States, Egypt, Canada, Ireland, and Venezuela after
 they departed a party at a private home. The Mutawwain reportedly beat an Egyp-
 tian and a Venezuelan man, ripped off the outer clothing of an Egyptian woman,
 and severely beat an American woman, ramming her head on a car door, resulting
 in serious injury to her face and one eye. Following diplomatic protests, the Govern-
 ment indicated privately that it had conducted a n-level investigation and that
 "very strong measures had been taken* against the Mutawwa'in involved. However,
 government officials did not specify what actions were taken and did not make a
 public report on the incident.
 In April, after CDLR spokesman Mohamed AI-Mas'ari fled the Kingdom, security
 forces arrested several members and sympathizers of the Committee for the Defense
 of Legitimate Rights (CDLR) (see Sections 1.d. and 2.a.). Security officials reportedly
 tortured these detainees after their arrest. In accordance with standard practice, the
 Government did not comment on the allegations. Al-Mas'ari reported that he was
 tortured during 6 months of detention in 1993.
 While regular access to detention facilities by impartial observers is rare rep-
 resentatives of the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) visited deten-
 tion camps holding Gulf War refugees. In 1993 during her visit to the Raiha refugee
 camp at the invitation of the Government, U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees
 Ogata praised the Government's contributions to the refugees' welfare.
 In May Amnesty International (AI) published a report containing allegations that
 guards tortured and beat refugees at the Rafha camp. However, reliable sources in-
 dicate that the allegations were inaccurate and exaggerated. Many of the incidents
 cited in the Al report allegedly occurred between 1991 and 1993. Sources from
 UNHCR and the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) confirmed some
 of those incidents and reported that authorities promptly removed the guards re-
 sponsible for abuses. The sources also maintain that documented cases of abuse of
 refugees by guards dropped significantly during that period.
 The Government rigorously observes the criminal punishments according to its in-
 terpretation of Islamic Law, including amputation for repeated theft and execution
 by beheading and stoning. In 1994 the authorities beheaded 59 of the 60 persons
 convicted for drug trafficking, rape, and murder. They impose execution by firing
 squad for women convicted of capital offenses; there was one such execution in 1994.
 The number of executions, which had risen in recent years because of drug traffick-
 ing, was down from 85 in 1993.
 The authorities punish repeated thievery by amputation of the right hand. In
 1994 they imposed this punishment on 5 Sudanese and a Pakistani. For less serious
 crimes, such as drunkenness or publicly flouting Islamic precepts, the authorities
 often impose flogging with a cane.
 d. Arbitrry Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law prohibits arbitrary arrest, but
 there are few police procedures to safeguard against abuse. Arresting officers have
 broad discretion to determine the grounds for arrest and frequently set their own
 standards for the rights of detainees. A person may be detained without charge dur-
 ing the investigation of a crime a period that may last weeks or months. In many
 cases, the authorities do not inform detainees of the charges against them. The au-
 thorities detain most suspects for no longer than 3 days before charging them but
 have detained others for long periods before charging or releasing them.
 The Mutawwa'in have the authority to detain people for no more than 24 hours
 for violations of behavior standards. However, they sometimes exceed this limit be-
 fore delivering detainees to the regular police (see Section 1.f.). Current procedures
 require a police officer to accompany the Mutawwain before the latter makes an ar-
 rest. Recently, the Mutawwa'n have been less active in harassing individuals.
 In 1993 the King established an office of investigation and public prosecution. Ac-
 cordingly, only the public prosecutor is authorized to conduct criminal investiga-
 tions, a power previously shared by several government agencies. At year's end,
 however, the public prosecutor's office was not fully operational.
 There is no established procedure providing detainees the right to inform their
 family of their arrest. The law has no provision for bail or habeas corpus. Detainees
 are sometimes released on the recognizance of a patron or sponsoring employer. If
 asked, the authorities usually confirm an arrest of foreign residents. In general,
 however, embassies learn about such arrests through informal channels. The an-
 
 
 1167
 thorities may take as long as several months to provide official notification of the
 arrest of foreigners, if atall
 Detainees arrested by the General Directorate of Investigation (GDI), the Ministry
 of Interior's security service, or 'Mubabith," are commonly-ield incommunicado dur-
 ing the initial phase of an investigation, which nmay last weeks or months. The GDI
 allows the detainees only limited contact with their families or lawyers.
 The authorities often detain without charges people who publicly criticize the Gov-
 ernment or they charge them with attempting to destabilze the Government (see
 Sections 2.a. and 3). In April and May, the Government detained 15 to 20 members
 or supporters of the CDLR, including relatives of CDLR spokesman Mohamed Al-
 Mas'ari (see Section l.a.).
 The authorities arrested an American citizen on May 28, reportedly for sym-
 pathizing with the CDLR. They held him in isolation for 3 weeks, reportedly beat
 him during interrogation, and deported him after release. The authorities did not
 respond to repeated diplomatic requests for access by a consular officer or for infor-
 ma ion about the charges.
 The authorities also arrested Salman Al-Awdah and Safar Al-Hawali, Muslim
 clerics who had publicly criticized the Government. Their detention sparked protest
 demonstrations by hundreds of individuals demanding their release. In September
 and October, the authorities arrested 157 people for engaging in demonstrations or
 other antigovernment activities. The Government released 130 of the detainees on
 October 16, after they pledged not to repeat their actions. At year's end, the remain-
 ing 27 persons remained in detention pending investigations.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judicial system is based on Islamic law, or
 Shari'a. Regular Shari'a courts exercise jurisdiction over common criminal cases and
 civil suits re~ardin  marriage, divorce, child custody, and inheritance. Other civil
 p rocdns, includng those involving claims against the Government and enforce-
 ment of foreign judgments, are held before specialized administrative tribunals,
 such as the Commission for the Settlement ofLabor Disputes and the Board of
 Grievances. Aside from the Koran and Sunna, which are the authenticated sayings
 of the Prophet Mohamed, there are no written laws or precedents by which the
 Shari'a courts make judgments. The Government permits Shi'a Muslims to use their
 own legal tradition to adjudicate only noncriminal cases within their community.
 The Ministry of Justice is responsible for the appointment, transfer, and pr-
 motion of Shari'a court judges. Only the Supreme Judicial Council, a body of senior
 jurists may discipline or remove judges. 'Re independence of the judiciary is pre-
 scrbed by law and is usually respected in practice, although judges occasionally ac-
 cede to the influence of members of the royal family and their associates. At the
 provincial level, governors have reportedly threatened, and even detained, judges
 over disagreements on their decisions. In general, the public perceives members of
 the royal family, and other powerful families, as not subject to the same rule of law
 as ordinary citizens. For example, judges do not have the power to issue a warrant
 summoning any member of the royal family. The luggage of princes and other influ-
 ential persons is not subject to customs inspection on entering the country.
 Defendants usually appear without an attorney before a judge, who determines
 guilt or innocence in aocordance with Shari'a standards. Defense lawyers may offer
 their client advice before trial or may attend the trial as interpreters for those unfa-
 miliar with Arabic. The courts do not provide foreign defendants with translators.
 There is no licensing procedure for lawyers. Individuas may choose any person to
 represent them by a power of attorney" filed with the court and Ministry of Justice.
 Most trials are closed.
 In the absence of two witnesses, or four witnesses in the case of adultery, confes-
 sions before a judge are almost always required for criminal conviction-a situation
 which opens the possibility that prosecuting authorities may seek to obtain forced
 confessions. Sentencing is not uniform and may vary according to the nationality
 of the defendant. Under Shari'a law, as interpreted and applied in Saudi Arabia,
 crimes against Muslims receive harsher penalties than those against non-Muslims.
 In the case of wrongful death, the amount of indemnity or "blood money awarded
 to relatives varies with the nationality, religion, and sex of the victim. A sentence
 may be changed at any stage of review, except for punishments stipulated by the
 Koran. Provincial governors have the authority to exercise leniency and reduce a
 judge's sentence.
 Appeals are automatically reviewed by a three-judge panel at the Ministry of Jus-
 tice or, in more serious cases, by the Court of Cassation and the Supreme Judicial
 Council. The reviews are conducted to ensure that the trial judge applied appro-
 priate legal principles and punishments.
 The Ing and his advisors review cases involving capital punishment to ensure
 that the court applied the proper legal and Islamic principles. The King has the au-
 
 
 1168
 thority to grant pardons and commute death sentences, but he does not have the
 authority to pardon capital crimes committed against individuals. In such cases, he
 may request the victim's next of kin to pardon the murderer--usually in return for
 compensation from the family or the King.
 The military justice system has jurisdiction over uniformed personnel and civil
 servants charged with violations of military regulations. Court-martial decisions are
 reviewed by the Minister of Defense and Aviation and by the King.
 There is insufficient information to determine the number ofpolitical prisoners
 because the Government does not provide information on such persons or respond
 to inquiries about them. Moreover, the Government conducts closed trials for per-
 sons who may be political prisoners and in other cases has detained persons incom-
 municado for long periods while under investigation. At year's end, the Government
 detained an estimated 15 to 20 people for their alleged connections with the CDRL,
 and 27 others for their alleged participation in demonstrations protesting the deten-
 tion of two fundamentalist Shay  .
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 sanctity of family life and the inviolability of the home are among the most fun-
 damental of Islamic precepts. Royal decrees announced in 1992 include provisions
 calling for the Government to defend the home from unlawful incursions.
 The police must generally demonstrate reasonable cause and obtain permission
 from the provincial governor before searching a private home, but warrants are not
 required. However, some Mutawwain continued to enter homes forcibly, searching
 for evidence of un-Islamic behavior, and to harass and abuse perceived trans-
 gressors.
 Customs officials routinely open mail for contraband, including material deemed
 pornographic as well as non-Muslim religious material. They regularly confiscate
 materials deemed offensive. The authorities use informants, wiretaps, and open
 mail in internal security matters. Government officials reportedly wiretapped the
 telephone conversations of CDLR spokesman Al-Mas'ari with foreign journalists and
 human rights organizations.
 The Government enforces most social and Islamic religious norms, which are mat-
 ters of law (see Section 5). Women may not marry non-Saudis without government
 permission. Although women are prohibited from marrying non-Muslims, men have
 the right to marry Christians and Jews. Men must obtain approval from the Min-
 istry of Interior to marry women from countries outside the six states of the Gulf
 Cooperation Council.
 Both citizens and foreigners were targets of harassment by members of the
 Mutawwa'in-and even by religious vigilantes acting independently of the
 Mutawwa'in. The Government has not condemned the actions of religious vigilantes
 or sought to disband such groups.
 The Mutawwa'in continued to press for enforcement of their strict standards of
 social behavior, including the closure of commercial establishments during the daily
 prayer observances, appropriate dress in public, and avoidance of video tape rental
 shops. They harassed Saudi and foreign women for failure to observe strict dress
 codes and for being in the company of males who are not their close relatives. They
 also harassed non- Muslims attempting to conduct religious services (see Section
 2.c.).
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The law severely limits the freedom of speech
 and press. The authorities do not countenance criticism of Islam, the ruling family,
 or the Government.
 In 1994 CDLR spokesman A-Mas'ari secretly fled to the United Kingdom (UK),
 where he sought political asylum and established an overseas branch of the CDLR
 (see Sections 1.c. and 1.d.). Established in 1993 by six citizens, the CDLR criticizes
 the Government's human rights record from the perspective of Islamic principles
 and advocates stricter adherence to Islamic principles by the Royal family and the
 Government. After the CDLR criticized the Government in the international press
 in 1993, security forces detained 38 of its members, including Al-Mas'ari, confiscated
 their passports, and forbade them to travel or speak publicly. The authorities dis-
 missed several founding members from their government jobs. They subsequently
 released the detainees after they signed statements promising not to discuss the
 Government's policies or communicate with anyone outside the country by telephone
 or facsimile machine. A-Mas'ari was released in November 1993 after spending 6
 months in detention.
 In the UK, Al-Mas'ari continued to disseminate tracts critical of the Government,
 particularly of King Fahd, Interior Minister Prince Naif, and Riyadh Governor
 Prince Salman. His publicized views have expressed opposition to peace with Israel
 
 
 1169
 and to Saudi support for the peace process. After Al-Mas'ari fled, security forces ar-
 rested 15 to 20 of his relatives and supporters. In late 1994, the Government re-
 leased several of these detainees, including Dr. Fouad Deblawi; Mas'ari's brother,
 Lu'ay al-Mas'ari; and Mas'ari's brothers-in faw, Rashad and Nabil al-Mudarris. Oth-
 ers remain in custody. The Government has not publicly acknowledged any of these
 detentions.
 In mid-September, Interior Ministry authorities arrested two Muslim clerics and
 critics of the Government, Salman AI-Awdash and Safar Al-Hawai, for violating a
 government order prohibiting them from delivering lectures or sermons critical of
 the Government. In 1993 Al-Awdah and Al-Hawali reportedly had refused to sign
 a statement acknowledging the order. Ministry of Interior officials claimed that they
 detained AI-Awdah and A1-Hawali to safeguard the security and stability of the na-
 tion. At year's end, the clerics were still in detention (see Section 1.d.).
 In August the United States granted asylum to Mohamed Al-Khilewi, a Saudi dip-
 lomat assigned to the United Nations in New York City. AJ-Khilewi claimed that
 he feared for his life if he returned to Saudi Arabia because he had written a letter
 to the royal family and to a Saudi religious leader alleging human rights abuses,
 official corruption, and official support for terrorist groups. The Government has
 said that AI-Khilewi would not face retribution if he returned.
 The press is privately owned, but a 1982 media policy statement and a 1965 na-
 tional security law prohibit the dissemination of criticism of the Government. The
 media policy statement urges journalists to uphold Islam, oppose atheism, promote
 Arab interests, and preserve the cultural heritage of Saudi Arabia. The Ministry of
 Information appoints, and may remove, the editors in chief. It also provides guide-
 lines to newspapers on controversial issues. The Government owns the Saudi Press
 Agncy, which expresses official government views.
 Newspapers publish domestic news on sensitive subjects, such as crime or terror-
 ism, only after the authorities arrest and sentence the perpetrators. The Govern-
 ment suppresses an news regarded as a threat to national security. The press re-
 ports foreign news objectively, but the authorities censor stories about the Kingdom
 in the foreign press. Censors may remove or blacken the offending articles, or pre-
 vent certain issues of foreign publications from entering the market. The Govern-
 ment tightly restricts the entry of foreign journalists into the Kingdom.
 The Government owns and operates the television and radio companies. Govern-
 ment censors review foreign programs and songs, often removing any reference to
 politics, religions other than Islam, pork or pigs, alcohol, or sexual innuendo.
 There are 100 000 to 200,000 satellite receiving dishes in the Kingdom which pro-
 vide citizens with foreign broadcasts. The legal status of these devices is ambiguous.
 The Government ordered a halt to the import of satellite dishes in 1992-at the re-
 quest of religious leaders who objected to foreign programming available on satellite
 channels. In March the Government banned the installation of dishes and support-
 ing devices. However, consumers continued to buy and install the dishes.
 Academic freedom is restricted. The authorities prohibit the study of evolution,
 Freud, Marx, music, and Western philosophy. Some professors believe that Govern-
 ment and conservative religious informers monitor their classroom comments.
 The Government censors all forms of public artistic expression. The authorities
 prohibit cinemas and public musical or theater performances, except those that are
 strictly folkloric.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Government strictly limits
 these freedoms. It prohibits public demonstrations as a means of political expression
 and the establishment of political parties or any type of opposition group (see Sec-
 tion 3). By its power to license associations, the Government ensures that groups
 conform to public policy.
 Public meetings are segregated by sex. Unless meetings are sponsored by diplo-
 matic missions, foreign residents seeking to hold unsegregated meetings risk arrest
 and deportation.
 The authorities monitor any large gathering of people, especially of women. In
 January the Government closed allhealth clubs, but several months later the clubs
 reopened for male patrons only. Health clubs for women remain closed. The Govern-
 ment has not explained why the clubs have been closed to women.
 In February the Mutawwa'in closed a proposed cultural program for Saudi and
 expatriate women. The Mutawwa'in indicated that a public gathering featuring a
 fashion show and dancing was not an appropriate activity for women.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Freedom of religion does not exist. Islam is the official
 religion, and all citizens must be Muslims. The Government prohibits the practice
 of other religions according to an injunction attributed to the Prophet Mohammed.
 Conversion    a Muslim to another religion is considered apostasy. Public apostasy
 
 
 1170
 is a crime under Shari'a law and punishable by death. There were no executions
 in 1994 for apostasy.
 Islamic practice is generally limited to that of the Wahabi sect's interpretation of
 the Hanbali school of Sunni Islamic jurisprudence. Practices contrary to this inter-
 pretation, such as visits to the graves of renowned Muslims or public prayers ac-
 cording to Shi'a Islam, are discouraged.
 The Shi'a Muslim minority of 500,000 persons lives mostly in the Eastern Prov-
 ince. They are the objects of officially sanctioned social and economic discrimination
 (see Section 5). Prior to 1990, the Government prohibited Shi'ite public processions
 during the Islamic month of Muharram and restricted other processions and con-
 grgations to designated areas in the major Shi'ite cities. Since 1990, the authorities
 pave ermitted marches on the Shi'a holiday of Ashura, provided the marchers do
 not display banners or engage in self-flagellation. Only 1 of the 60 members of the
 Mailis Ash-Shura is a Shia.
 The Government seldom permits private construction of Shiite mosques, and the
 Shi'a have refused government offers to build state-supported mosques,-because Shi
 'ite motifs would be prohibited in them.
 The Government does not permit public or private non-Muslim religious activities.
 Persons wearing religious symbols of any kind in public risk confrontation with the
 Mutawwa'in. The general prohibition against religious symbols applies also to Mus-
 lims. A Muslim wearing a Koranic necklace in public would be admonished. Non-
 Muslim worshipers risk arrest and deportation for engaging in any religious activity
 that attracts official attention.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 p atriation.-The Government restricts the travel of Saudi and non-Saudi women.
 omen must obtain written permission from their closest male relative before the
 authorities will allow them to board public transportation between different parts
 of the country or travel abroad (see Section 5). Males may travel anywhere within
 the country.
 The Government requires foreign residents to carry identification cards. It does
 not permit foreigners to travel outside the city of their employment or change their
 workplace without their sponsor's permission. Foreign residents who travel in the
 Kingdom are often asked by the authorities to show they possess letters of permis-
 sion from their employers.
 Foreign workers must also obtain permission from their sponsors to travel abroad.
 Sponsors generally retain possession of the workers' passport. If sponsors are in-
 volved in a commercial or labor dispute with foreign employees, they may ask the
 authorities to prohibit the employees from departing the country until the dispute
 is resolved. Some sponsors use this pressure tactic to resolve disputes in their
 favor-or to have foreign employees deported.
 The Government seizes the passports of all potential suspects and witnesses in
 criminal cases, and suspends the issuance of exit visas to them, until the case is
 tried. As a result, some foreign nationals are forced to remain in the Kingdom for
 lengthy periods against their will. The authorities sometimes confiscate the pass-
 ports of suspected subversives. The Government prevents Shi'a Muslims believed to
 have pro-Iranian sympathies from traveling abroad.
 Citizens may emigrate, but the law prohilbits dual citizenship. There are no provi-
 sions for long-term foreign residents to acquire citizenship. However, foreigners are
 granted citizenship in rare cases, generally through the advocacy of an influential
 patron.
 In April the Government revoked the citizenship of Osama Bin Laden, a wealthy
 citizen known to support Islamic terrorist grou  or refusing to return from abroad
 to answer charges concerning his activities. The Interior Ministry issued a state-
 ment that Bin Laden "contrdied the Kingdom's interest and harmed its relations
 with sisterly countries." After his citizenship was revoked, Bin Laden was banned
 from reentering the Kingdom.
 Article 42 of the 1992 Basic Law provides that "the State will grant political asy-
 lum if the public interest mitigates in favor of it. The language does not specify
 clear rules or adjudicating asy r cases. In general, the authorities regard refugees
 and displaced persons like other foreign workers: thy must have sponsors for em-
 ployment or risk expulsion at the border.
 After the Gulf War, the Government granted refuge to 35,000 Iraqi civilians and
 former prisoners of war. At year's end, 16,000 have been resettled in third countries
 or were voluntarily repatriated to Iraq. Most of the remaining 18,400 refugees are
 restricted to the Rapha Refugee Camp. In 1993 Human Rights Watch reported that
 refugees were forcibly repatied to Iraq after staging a riot at the Raiha camp.
 However, the UNHCR has monitored over 2,450 refugees voluntarily returning to
 Iraq since 1991 and found no evidence of forcible repatriations in 1993 or 1994.
 
 
 1171
 The Government has temporarily allowed some foreipners to remain in Saudi Ara-
 bia in cases where their safety would be jeopardized if they were deported to their
 home countries. The authorities also worked with the UNHCR to repatriate several
 hundred southern Yemeni refugees after the end of the Yemen civil war.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens do not have the right to change their government. There are no formal
 democratic institutions, and only a few citizens have a voice in the choice of leaders
 or in changing the political system. The King rules in matters civil and religious,
 within certain limitations established by religious law, tradition, and the need to
 maintain consensus among the ruling family and religious leaders.
 The Kinq is also the Prime Minister, and the Crown Prince serves as first deputy
 Prime Minister. The King appoints all other ministers, who in turn appoint subordi-
 nate officials with Cabinet concurrence.
 In 1993 the King appointed 60 members to a Consultative Council, or Majlis Ash-
 Shura. It is an advisory body only. It began to hold sessions in 1994, but it has not
 publicized its work in detail.
 The Council of Senior Islamic Scholars is another advisory body to the King and
 the Cabinet. It issues decisions based on Shari'a law supporting the Government's
 public policies. The Government uses the Council as an important source of religious
 legitimacy.
 Communication between citizens and the Government is usually expressed
 through client-patron relationships and by affimty groups such as tribes, families,
 and professional hierarchies. The opnor audience, or majlis, is the primary
 forum for expressing an opinion or grievance. Any male citizen or foreign national
 may attend these sessions held by the King, princes, or important national and local
 officials. Participation by women is restricted, although some women seek redress
 through female members of the royal family.
 As governmental functions have become more complex, time-consuming, and cen-
 tralized, public access to senior officials has become more difficult. After the assas-
 sination of King Faisal in 1975, Saudi kings have reduced the frequency of their
 personal contacts with the public. Access to King Fahd by ordinary citizens is dif-
 ficult, inpart due to strict security measures.
 Typica. topics raised in a majlis are complaints about bureaucratic delay or insen-
 sitivity, requests for redress or assistance, and criticism of particular acts of govern-
 ment affecting personal or family welfare. Broader "political" concerns-Saudi so-
 cial, economic, or foreign policy-are raised only occasionally.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no publicly active human rights groups, and none critical of government
 policies would be permitted. The Government acted quickly to repress the CDLR fol-
 lowing the announcement of its formation in 1993 (see Section 2.a.).
 The Government does not permit visits by international human rights groups, any
 visits to prisoners by independent monitors, nor has it signed major international
 human rights treaties and conventions. The Government disagrees with internation-
 ally accepted definitions of human rights and views Islamic law as the only nec-
 essary guide to protect human rights.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Women.-By religious law and social custom, women have few political and social
 rights, and are not treated as equal members of society. Women, including foreign-
 ers, may not legally drive motor vehicles or ride bicycles and are restricted in their
 use of public facilities when men are present. Women must enter city buses by selma-
 rate rear entrances and sit in specially designated sections. Women risk arrest by
 the Mutawwa'in for riding alone in a vehicle driven by a male who is not an em-
 ployee or a close male relative. By law and custom, women may not undertake do-
 mestic or foreign travel alone (see Section 2.d.).
 In public women are required to wear the abaya, a black garment covering the
 entire body, including the head and face. The Mutawwa'n generally expect women
 from Arab countries, Asia, and Africa to comply more fully with Saudi customs of
 dress than Western women; nonetheless, in recent years they have increased pres-
 sure on Western women to wear the abaya and cover their hair.
 Women are also subject to discrimination in Islamic law which stipulates that
 daughters receive half the inheritance awarded to their brothers-reflecting the fact
 that men have financial obligations to their mothers and sisters. In a Shari'a court,
 the testimony of one man equals that of two women.
 
 
 1172
 Although Islamic law permits polygyny, it is becoming less common. Islamic law
 limits a husband to four wives, provided that he treats each wife equally. In prac-
 tice such equality is left to the discretion of the husband.
 Women must demonstrate legally specified grounds for divorce, but men may di-
 vorce without giving cause. If divorced or widowed, a woman normally may keep her
 children until they attain the age of 7. Children over 7 are awarded to the divorced
 husband. Divorced women who are foreigners are often prevented by their former
 husbands from visiting their children after divorce.
 Women have access to free, but segregated, education through the university
 level. They constitute 55 percent of all university graduates-but are excluded from
 studying such subjects as engineering, journalism, and architecture. Men are able
 to study overseas; women may do so if accompanied by a spouse or an immediate
 male relative.
 Women make up only 5 percent of the work force. Most employment opportunities
 for women are in education and health care, with lesser opportunity in business,
 philanthropy, banking, retail sales, and the media. Women wishing to enter non-
 traditional fields are subject to arbitrary discrimination. Women may not accept jobs
 in rural areas if they are required to live apart from their families. All workplaces
 where women are present are segregated by sex. Contact with male supervisors or
 clients is allowed only by telephone or facsimile machine.
 Hospital workers report that many women are admitted for treatment of injuries
 that apparently result from spousal violence. "Islamic advice" columns in the press
 sometimes recommend the "strict disciplining" of women, an expression understood
 to encompass some degree of physical force as part of a proper marriage.
 There were credible reports that some Western women married to Saudis, and
 their children, have suffered physical abuse from the spouse or father. Appropriate
 embassy officials must seek the assistance of government officials to intervene in
 such cases. The Government does not keep statistics on spousal or other forms of
 violence against women.
 Embassies receive many reports that employers abuse foreign women working as
 domestic servants. In general, the Government considers such cases as family mat-
 ters and does not intervene unless charges of abuse are brought to its attention. It
 is almost impossible for foreign women to obtain redress in the courts due to the
 court's strict evidentiary rules and the women's own fears of reprisals. Few employ-
 ers have been punished for such abuses. There are no private support groups or reli-
 gious associations to which these women could turn for assistance.
 Children.-The Government provides all children with free education and medical
 care. Children are highly valued in society, and large families are common. Reports
 of abuse of children are rare. Children are not subject to the strict social segregation
 faced by women. Children are segregated by sex in schools starting at age 7. Boys
 are segregated in social situations at age 12, and girls at the onset of puberty.
 Nat ionalIRaciollEthnic Minorities.-Alt.ough racial discrimination is illegal,
 there is substantial societal prejudice based on ethnic or national origin. Foreign
 workers from Africa and Asia are subject to various forms of formal and informal
 discrimination and have the most difficulty in obtain justice for their grievances.
 Religious Minorities.-The Government is intolerant of the practice of any non-
 Islamic religion. It also subjects the Shi'a Muslim minority to stringent religious re-
 pression (see Section 2.c.). Shi'a citizens are discriminated against in government
 and employment, especially in national security jobs. Severalyears ago the Govern-
 ment subjected Shia to employment restrictions in the oil industry and has not re-
 laxed them. Some Sunni clerics, including Al-Awdah and one CDLR founder, have
 made strong anti-Shi'a statements (see Section 2.a.).
 Shi'a also face restrictions on access to social services, despite efforts by the Gov-
 ernment to improve the social service infrastructure in predominantly Shi'a areas
 of the country. Since the Iranian revolution, some Shi'a have been subjected periodi-
 cally to surveillance and limitations on travel abroad. Some Sunni clerics advocate
 stronger government discriminatory measures against Shi'a citizens.
 People With Disabilities.-Traditionally, disabled individuals were secluded within
 the family, but the provision of government social services has brought the disabled
 into the public. Public awareness and acceptance of the disabled are growing. The
 Government and private charitable organizations cooperate in education, employ-
 ment, and other services for the disabled. The law provides hiring quotas for the
 disabled. While there is no legislation for public accessibility, newer commercial
 buildings often include such access.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Government decrees prohibit the establishment of
 labor unions and any strike activity.
 
 
 1173
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Collective bargaining is for-
 bidden. Foreign workers comprise about half of the work force. Wages are set by
 employers on the basis of market forces, but vary according to the nationality of the
 worker. There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced labor has been prohibited
 since 1962 by the royal decree that abolished slavery. Ratification of the Inter-
 national Labor Organization's (ILO) Conventions 29 and 105, which prohibit forced
 labor, has the force of law. However, employers have significant control over the
 movements of foreign employees, giving rise to situations that might involve forced
 labor-especially in remote areas where workers are unable to leave their place of
 work. Sometimes sponsors prevent foreign workers from obtaining exit visas to pres-
 sure them to sign a new work contract. In another pressure tactic, sponsors may
 refuse to provide foreign workers with a "letter of no objection7 which would allow
 them to be employed by another sponsor.
 The labor laws do not protect domestic servants. There were credible reports that
 female domestic servants were sometimes forced to work 12 to 16 hours a day, 7
 days a week. There were numerous confirmed reports of runaway maids. The au-
 thorities often returned runaway maids to their employers against the maids' vish-
 es.
 There have been many reports of workers whose employers have refused to pay
 several months, or even years, of accumulated salary or other promised benefits.
 Nondomestic workers with such grievances have the right to complain before the
 labor courts, but few do so becauise of fear of deportation. The Government abets
 the exploitation of foreign workers because the system for enforcing work contracts
 is weak and generally favors Saudi employers.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum age for employment
 is 13 years, which may be waived by the Ministry of Labor with the consent of the
 juvenile's guardian. There is no minimum age for workers employed in fanily-oper-
 ated businesses or in other situations that are construed as extensions of the house-
 hold, e.g., farmers, herdsmen, and domestic servants. Workers in such fields are not
 protected by labor regulations. There were reports that children aged 5 to 12 years
 are used as jockeys in camel racing.
 Children under age 18 and women may not be employed in hazardous or harmful
 industries, such as mines or industries employing power-operated machinery. While
 there is no formal government entity charged with enforcing the minimum age for
 employment of children, the Ministry of Justice has jurisdiction and has acted as
 plaintiff in the few cases that have arisen against alleged violators.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no lega minimum wage. Labor regu-
 lations establish a 48-hour workweek at regular pay and allow employers to require
 up to 12 additional hours of overtime at time-and-a-half pay. Saudi labor law pro-
 vides for a 24-hour rest period, normally Fridays, although the employer may grant
 it on another day.
 Many foreign nationals who have been recruited abroad have complained that,
 after arrival in Saudi Arabia, they were presented with work contracts specifying
 lower wages and fewer benefits than originally promised. Other foreign workers
 have reportedly signed contracts in their home countries and were later pressured
 to sign less favorable contracts after arrival. Reliable reports indicate that the
 length of service called for in the original contract is sometimes increased after ar-
 rival by as much as 3 years. Some employees report that at the end of their contract
 service, their employers refuse to grant permission to allow them to return home.
 The II) has stated that the Government has not formulated legislation imple-
 menting the ILO Convention on equal pay and that regulations which segregate
 work places by sex, and limit vocational programs for women, violate ILO Conven-
 tion 111.
 Saudi labor regulations require employers to protect most workers from job-relat-
 ed hazards and disease. Workers in family operated businesses, farmers, herdsmen,
 and domestic servants are not covered by these regulations. Ministry of Labor in-
 spectors and the labor courts are seeking, with some success, to enforce the Labor
 Code, but foreign nationals report frequent failures to enforce health and safety
 standards.
