 SAUDI ARABIA
 Saudi Arabia is a monarchy without elected representative institutions or political
 parties. It is ruled by King Fahd Bin Abd Al-Aziz Al Saud, a son of King Abd Al-
 Aziz Al Saud, who unified the country in the early 20th century. Since the death
 of King Abd A1-Aziz, the King and Crown Prince have been chosen from among his
 sons, who themselves have had preponderant influence in the choice. A 1992 royal
 decree reserves for thb King exclusive power to name the Crown Prince. Crown
 Prince Abdullah has played an increasing role in governance since King Fahd suf-
 fered from a stroke in 1995. The Government has declared the Islamic holy book
 the Koran, and the Sunna (tradition) of the Prophet Muhammad, to be the country's
 Constitution. The Government bases its legitimacy on governance according to the
 precepts of a rigorously conservative form of Islam. Neither the Government nor the
 society in general accepts the concept of separation of religion and state. The Gov-
 erment prohibits the establishment of politicaL parties and suppresses opposition
 views. In 1992, King Fahd appointed a Consultative Council and similar provincial
 assemblies. The Consultative Council began holding sessions in 1993 and was ex-
 panded in 1997. The judiciary is generally independent but is subject to influence
 by the executive branch and members of the royal family.
 
 
 1788
 Police and border forces under the Ministry of Interior are responsible for internal
 security. The Mutawaa'in, or religious police, constitute the Committee to Prevent
 Vice and Promote Virtue, a semiautonomous agency that enforces adherence to Is-
 lamic norms by monitoring public behavior. The Government maintains general con-
 trol of the security forces. However, members of the security forces committed
 human rights abuses.
 The- oil industry has fueled the transformation of Saudi Arabia from a pastoral,
 agricultural, and commercial society to a rapidly urbanizing one characterized by
 large-scale infrastructure projects, an extensive social welfare system, and a labor
 market comprised largely of foreign workers. Oil revenues account for around 42
 percent of the gross domestic product (GDP) and 75 percent of government income.
 Agriculture accounts for only about 9 percent of GDP. Government spending, includ-
 ing spending on the national airline, power, water, telephone, education, and health
 services, accounts for 24 percent of GDP. About 34 percent of the economy is nomi-
 nally private, and the Government is promoting further privatization of the econ-
 omy. In 1995 the Government began an aggressive campaign to increase the number
 of Saudi nationals represented in the public and private work forces. The campaign
 has restricted employment of some categories of foreign workers by limiting certain
 occupations to Saudis only, increasing fees for some types of work visas, and setting
 minimum wages for some job categories in order to increase the cost to employers
 of non-Saudi labor. In August the Government announced that Saudi citizens had
 to make up at least 5 percent of the work force-in private sector companies by Octo-
 ber, an amount that.according to a 1995 ministerial decree should be 15 percent.
 The Government's 1997 offer of a limited amnesty under which illegal residents
 could depart the country without penalty was followed up during the year by a
 crackdown on illegal workers and the Saudis who employ or house them.
 The Government commits and tolerates serious human rights abuses. Citizens
 have neither the right nor the legal means to change their government. Security
 forces continued to abuse detainees and prisoners, arbitrarily arrest and detain per-
 sons, and facilitate incommunicado detention; in addition there were allegations
 that security forces committed torture. Prolonged detention without charge is a
 problem. Security forces committed such abuses, in contradiction to the law, but
 with the acquiescence of the Government. Mutawaa'in continued to intimidate,
 abuse, and detain citizens and foreigners. The Government infringes on citizens' pri-
 vacy rights. The Government prohibits or restricts freedom of speech, the press, as-
 sembly, association, religion, and movement. Other continuing problems included
 discrimination and violence against women, discrimination against ethnic and reli-
 gious minorities, and strict limitations on worker rights. The Government disagrees
 with internationally accepted definitions of human rights and views its interpreta-
 tion of Islamic law as its sole source of guidance on human rights.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political
 killings.
 In November several Mutawaa'in attacked and killed an elderly Shi'a prayer lead-
 er in Hofuf for repeating the call to prayer twice (a traditional Shi a practice).
 Mutawaa'in attempts to cover up the killing were unsuccessful. The Government re-
 portedly is investigating the incident (see Sections 2.c. and 5.).
 The investigation of the 1996 Al-Khobar bombing, which killed 19 U.S. service-
 men, continued. The Government has not yet issued a report of its findings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 There were credible reports that the authorities abuse detainees, both citizens and
 foreigners. Ministry of Interior officials are responsible for most incidents of abuse,
 including beatings and sleep deprivation. In addition, there were allegations of tor-
 ture. Although the Government has ratified the Convention Against Torture and
 Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, it has refused to
 recognize the authority of the Committee Against Torture to investigate alleged
 abuses. In April-the Government pledged to cooperate with U.N. human rights
 mechanisms. However, although the Government asks for details of torture and
 other human rights abuses made by international human rights groups, it does not
 permit international observers to investigate them. Rather, it requested the infor-
 mation from the United Nations as a basis for its own investigation of them. The
 Government's general refusal to grant members of diplomatic missions access to the
 Ministry of Interior detention facilities or allow members of international human
 rights groups into the country hinders efforts to confirm or discount reports of
 
 
 1789
 abuses. The Government's past failure to criticize human rights abuses has contrib-
 uted to the public perception that security forces can commit abuses with impunity.
 In May after her release and return to the United Kingdom, a British nurse con-
 victed of murdering a colleague in Saudi Arabia (see Section i.e.) said that she had
 confessed to the killing only after suffering "violence" and "sexual abuse" at the
 hands of Saudi police. Deborah Parry told the British Broadcasting Corporation that
 she confessed to the crime-because Saudi investigators tried to burn her with ciga-
 rettes and hit her across the throat.
 Although the number of reports of harassment by the Mutawaa'in remained rel-
 atively low in comparison with previous years, the Mutawaa'in continued to intimi-
 date, abuse, and detain citizens and foreigners of both sexes (see Section 1.d.).
 The Government punishes criminals according to its interpretation of Islamic law,
 or Shari'a. Punishments include flogging, amputation, and execution by beheading,
 stoning, or -firing squad. During the year, the authorities acknowledged 25 execu-
 tions, a substantial reduction from the 134 executions reported in 1997. Executions
 included 20 men for murder (15 citizens and 5 foreigners) and 5 men for rape (all
 citizens). The men were executed by beheading. No women were executed during the
 year (women are executed by firing squad). There were no executions by stoning.
 In accordance with Shari'a, the authorities may punish repeated thievery by ampu-
 tation of the right hand. Beginning on September 28, the first of six amputations
 took place. These were the first amputations reported since 1995. Five of the ampu-
 tations (one citizen and four foreigners) were punishment for robbing pilgrims in
 Mecca and one citizen received the punishment for repeated robbery in the Riyadh
 area. Persons convicted of less serious offenses, such as alcohol related offenses or
 being alone in the company of an unrelated person of the opposite sex, sometimes
 were punished by flogging with a cane.
 Prison and jail conditions vary throughout the Kingdom. Prisons generally meet
 internationally accepted standards and provide air-conditioned cells, good nutrition,
 regular exercise, and careful patrolling by prison guards. However, some police sta-
 tion jails are overcrowded and unsanitary. Authorities generally allowed family
 members access to detainees.
 Boards of Investigation and Public Prosecution, organized on a regional basis,
 were established by King Fahd in 1993. The members of these boards have the right
 to inspect prisons, review prisoners' files, and hear their complaints. However, the
 Government does not permit human rights monitors to visit prisons or jails. The
 Government does not allow impartial observers of any type access to specialized
 Ministry of Interior prisons, where it detains persons accused of political subversion.
 Representatives of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
 are present at the Rafha refugee camp housing former Iraqi prisoners of war and
 civilians who fled Iraq following the Gulf War. According to UNHCR officials, there
 was no systematic abuse of refugees by camp guards. When isolated instances of
 abuse have surfaced in the past, the authorities have been responsive and willing
 to investigate allegations and reprimand offending guards. The camp receives a high
 level of material assistance and is comparatively comfortable and well run. How-
 ever, the Government generally confines refugees to the camp except in the event
 of approved emigration.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law prohibits arbitrary arrest, how-
 ever, despite the law, officers make arrests and detain persons without following ex-
 plicit legal guidelines. There are few procedures to safeguard against abuse. There
 as been only one known case of a citizen successfully obtaining judicial redress for
 abuse of the Government's power of arrest and detention. In 1995 a citizen success-
 fully sued the Government for wrongful imprisonment and was awarded compensa-
 tion.
 In accordance with a 1983 Ministry of Interior regulation, authorities usually de-
 tain suspects for no longer than 3 days before charging them. However, serious ex-
 ceptions have been reported. The regulation also has provisions for bail for less seri-
 ous crimes. Also, authorities sometimes release detainees on the recognizance of a
 patron or sponsoring employer without the payment of bail. If not released, authori-
 ties typically detain the accused an average of 2 months before sending the case to
 trial or, in the case of some foreigners, summarily deporting them. There is no es-
 tablished procedure providing detainees the right to inform their family of their ar-
 rest.
 The Mutawaa'in have the authority to detain persons for no more than 24 hours
 for violation of strict standards of proper dress and behavior. However, they some-
 times exceeded this limit before delivering detainees to the police (see Section 1.f.).
 Current procedures require a police officer to accompany the Mutawaa'in at the time
 of an arrest. Mutawaa'in generally complied with this requirement. During the year,
 in the more conservative Riyadh district, the number of reports received of
 
 
 1790
 
 Mutawaa'in accosting, abusing, arresting, and detaining persons alleged to have vio-
 lated dress and behavior standards was slightly higher than in 1997. The Jeddah
 district received a similar number of reports as in the previous year.
 Political detainees who are arrested by the General -Directorate of Investigation
 (GDI), the Ministry of Interior's security service, commonly are held incommunicado
 in special prisons durin -the initial phase of an investigation, which may last weeks
 or moliths. The GDI allows the detainees only limited contact with their families
 or lawyers.
 The authorities may detain without charge persons who publicly criticize the Gov-
 ermnent or charge them with attempting to destabilize the Government (see Sec-
 tions 2.a. and 3). The authorities, continued to detain Salman Al-Awdah -and Safar
 Al-Hawai, Muslim clerics who were arrested in September 1994-for publicly criticiz-
 ing the Government. Their detention that year sparked protest demonstrations re-
 sulting in the arrest of 157 persons for antigovernment activities. Most protesters
 have now been released.
 On November 30, the GDI arrested Suha A1-Masari, the sister of exiled dissident
 Mohammed A1-Masari (see Section 3) when she arrived at the, airport on a flight
 from London. She reportedly was imprisoned in Riyadh and released about a week
 later.
 In January, the Government released, under its annual Ramadan amnesty, over
 7,000 prisoners and detainees, including over 3,000 foreigners convicted or held for
 minor offenses. In August more than 3,000 prisoners were released following the de-
 parture of King Fahd from the hospital. An additional 3,500 prisoners convicted for
 minor crimes were released in December by the first day of the new Ramadan
 month.
 The total number of political detainees cannot be determined precisely, but it is
 estimated at more than 200 persons by international human rights organizations.
 Since beginning the investigation of-the 1996 bombing of a U.S. military facility
 in- Saudi Arabia, authorities have detained, interrogated, and confiscated the pass-
 ports of a: number of Shi'a Muslims suspected of fundamentalist tendencies or Ira-
 nian sympathies. The Government reportedly still holds in jail an unknown number
 of Shi'a arrested in the aftermath of the bombing. Government security forces re-
 portedly arrest Shi'a on the smallest suspicion, hold them in custody for lengthy pe-
 riods, and then release them without explanation (see Section 2.c.).
 The Government did not use forced exile, and it did, not revoke citizenship for po-
 litical purposes during the year. However, it previously has revoked, the citizenship
 of opponents of the Government who reside outside the country,-such as Mohammed
 A1-Masari (see Section 3) and Osama Bin Ladin, a suspect in organizing terrorist
 activities including the August bombings of the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanza-
 nia.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The independence of the judiciary is prescribed
 by law and usuallyis respected in practice; however, judges occasionally accede to
 the influence of the executive branch, particularly members of the royal family and
 their associates, who-are not required to appear before the courts. Moreover, the
 Ministry of Justice exercises judicial, financial,- and administrative control of the
 courts.
 The legal system is based on Sharia, or Islamic law. Shari'a courts exercise juris-
 diction over-common criminal cases and civil suits regarding marriage, divorce, child
 custody, and inheritance. These courts base judgments largely on the Koran and on
 the Sunna, another Islamic text. Cases involving relatively small penalties are tried
 in- Shari'a summary courts; more serious crimes are adjudicated in Shari'a courts
 of common pleas. Appeals from Shari'a courts are made to the courts of appeal.
 Other civil proceedings, including those involving claims against the Government
 and enforcement of foreign judgments,.are held before specialized administrative tri-
 bunals, such as the Commission for the Settlement of' Labor Disputes and the Board
 of Grievances.
 The Government permits Shia' Muslims to use their own legal tradition to adju-
 dicate'noncriminal cases within their community.
 The military justice system has jurisdiction over uniformed personnel and civil
 servants charged-with violations of military, regulations. - The Minister of Defense
 and Aviation-and the King review the decisions of courts-martial.
 The Supreme Judicial Council is not a courtand may not reverse decisions made
 by a court of appeals. However, the Council may review lower court decisions- and
 .refer -them backto the lower court for reconsideration. Only the Supreme Judicial
 Council may.discipline or remove a judge. The King appoints the-members of the
 Council.
 
 
 1791
 
 The Council of Senior Religious Scholars is an autonomous body of 15 senior reli-
 gious jurists, including the Minister of Justice. It establishes the legal principles to
 guide lower court judges in deciding cases.
 Defendants usually appear Without an attorney before a judge, who determines
 guilt or innocence in accordance with Shari'a standards. Defense lawyers may offer
 their clients advice before trial or may attend the trial as interpreters for those un-
 familiar with Arabic. The courts do not provide foreign defendants with translators.
 Public defenders are not provided. Individuals may choose any person to represent
 them by a power of attorney fied with the court and the Ministry of Justice. Most
 trials are closed. However, in a highly publicized 1997 case involving two foreign
 women charged with murder, the Saudi court conducted preliminary matters and
 the trial with relatively open and transparent procedures, including more effective
 use of counsel, increased consular presence, and increased family access.
 A woman's testimony does not carry the same weight as that of a man. In a
 Shari'a court, the testimony of one man equals that of two women. In the absence
 of two witnesses, or four witnesses in the case of adultery, confessions before a judge
 almost always are required for criminal conviction-a situation that repeatedly has
 led prosecuting authorities to coerce confessions from suspects by threats and abuse.
 Sentencing is not uniform. Foreign residents often receive harsher penalties than
 citizens. Under Shari'a, as interpreted and applied in Saudi Arabia, crimes against
 Muslims receive harsher penalties than those against non-Muslims. In the case of
 wrongful death, the amount of indemnity or "blood money" awarded to relatives var-
 ies with the nationality, religion, and sex of the victim. A sentence may be changed
 at any stage of review, except for punishments stipulated by the Koran. In a case
 that received much publicity, a British nurse convicted of murdering an Australian
 nurse in 1996 was spared the death penalty when the victim's brother waived his
 right to demand that punishment and agreed to accept "blood money" instead. A
 second British nurse involved in the murder was convicted of a lesser offense. Both
 nurses were released from detention and departed Saudi Arabia in May.
 Provincial governors have the authority to exercise leniency and reduce a judge's
 sentence. In general, members of the royal family, and other powerful families, are
 not subject to the same rule of law as ordinary citizens (see Section l.a.). For exam-
 ple, judges do not have the power to issue a warrant summoning any member of
 the royal family.
 The King and his advisors review cases involving capital punishment. The King
 has the authority to commute death sentences and grant pardons except for capital
 crimes committed against individuals. In such cases, he may request the victim's
 next of kin to pardon the murderer-usually in return for compensation from the
 family or the King.
 There is insufficient information to determine the number of political prisoners.
 The Government does not provide information on such persons or respond to inquir-
 ies about them. Moreover, the Government conducts closed trials for persons who
 may be political prisoners and in other cases has detained persons incommunicado
 for long periods while under investigation.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Government infringes on these rights. The sanctity of family life and the inviolabil-
 ity of the home are among the most fundamental of Islamic precepts. Royal decrees
 announced in 1992 include provisions calling for the Government to defend the
 home from unlawful intrusions. Nonetheless, there are few protections from govern-
 ment interference with one's privacy, family, home, or correspondence.
 The police generally must demonstrate reasonable cause and obtain permission
 from the provincial governor before searching a private home, but warrants are not
 required.
 Customs officials routinely open mail and shipments for contraband, including
 material deemed pornographic and non-Muslim religious material. Customs officials
 confiscated or censored materials considered offensive, including Christian Bibles
 and religious video tapes (see Section 2.c.). The authorities also open mail and use
 informants and wiretaps in internal security and criminal matters. Security forces
 used wiretaps against foreigners suspected of alcohol-related offenses.
 The Government enforces most social and Islamic religious norms, which are mat-
 ters of law (see Section 5). Women may not marry non-Saudis without government
 permission; men must obtain approval from the Ministry of Interior to marry
 women from countries outside the six states of the Gulf Cooperation Council. In ac-
 cordance with Islamic law, women are prohibited from marrying non-Muslims, but
 men may marry Christians and Jews as well as Muslims.
 Mutawaa'in practices and incidents of abuse varied widely in different regions of
 the country, but were most numerous in the central Nejd region. In certain areas,
 both the Mutawaa'in and religious vigilantes acting on their own harassed, as-
 
 
 1792
 saulted, battered, arrested, and detained citizens and foreigners (see Section 1.d.).
 The Government requires the Mutawaa'in to follow established procedures and to
 offer instruction in a polite manner; however, Mutawaa'in did not always comply
 with the requirements. The Government has not criticized publicly abuses by
 Mutawaa'in and religious vigilantes but has sought to curtail these abuses.
 Mutawaa'in enforcement of strict standards of social behavior included the closing
 of commercial establishments during the five daily prayer observances,' insisting
 upon compliance with strict norms of public dress, and dispersing gatherings of
 women in public places. Mutawaa'in frequently reproached Saudi and foreign
 women for failure to observe strict dress codes, and arrested men and women found
 together who were not married or closely related.
 Some 'professors believe that informers monitor comments made in university
 classrooms (see Section 2.a.).
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Government severely limits freedom of
 speech and the press. The authorities do not countenance criticism of Islam, the rul-
 ing family, or the Government. However, during the year, the authorities allowed
 the press some freedom to criticize governmental bodies and social policies through
 editorial comments and cartoons. Persons whose criticisms align them with an orga-
 nized political opposition are subject to arrest and detention until they confess to
 a crime-or sign a statement promising not to resume such criticisms, which is tanta-
 mount to a confession.
 The print media are privately owned but publicly subsidized. A 1982 media policy
 statement and a 1965 national security law prohibit the dissemination -of criticism
 of the Government. The media policy statement urges journalists to uphold Islam,
 oppose atheism, promote Arab interests, and preserve the cultural heritage of Saudi
 Arabia. The Ministry of Information appbints, and may remove, the editors-in-chief.
 It also provides guidelines to newspapers on controversial issues. The Government
 owns the Saudi Press Agency (SPA), which expresses official government views.
 Newspapers typically publish news on sensitive subjects, such as crime or terror-
 ism, only after it has been released by the SPA or when it has'been authorized by
 a senior government official. Two Saudi-owned, London-based dailies, Ash-Sharq A1-
 Awsat and A1-Hayat, are widely distributed and read in Saudi Arabia. Both news-
 papers tend to practice self-censorship in order to comply with government restric-
 tions on sensitive issues. The authorities continue to censor stories about Saudi Ara-
 bia in the foreign press. Censors may remove or blacken the offending articles, glue
 pages together, or prevent certain issues of foreign publications from entering the
 market. However, the Ministry of Information continued to relax its blackout policy
 regarding politically sensitive news concerning Saudi Arabia reported in inter-
 national media, although press restrictions on reporting of domestic news remain
 very stringent. The Government's policy in this regard appears to be motivated in
 part by pragmatic considerations: Saudi access to outside sources of information, es-
 pecially Cable News Network (CNN) and other satellite television channels, is in-
 creasingly widespread.
 The Government tightly restricts the entry of foreign journalists into the King-
 dom. The Government owns and operates the television and radio companies. Gov-
 ernment censors remove any reference to politics, religions other than Islam, pork
 or pigs, alcohol, and sex from foreign programs and songs.
 There are over 1 million satellite receiving dishes in the country, which provide
 citizens with foreign broadcasts. The legal status of these devices is ambiguous. The
 Government ordered a halt to their importation in 1992, at the request of religious
 leaders who objected to foreign programming available on satellite channels. In
 March 1994, the Government banned the sale, installation, and maintenance of
 dishes and supporting devices, but the number of dishes'continues to increase and
 residents legally may subscribe to satellite decoding services that require a dish.
 The Government censors all forms of public artistic expression and prohibits cine-
 mas and public musical or theatrical performances, except those that are considered
 folkloric.
 Academic freedom is restricted. The authorities prohibit the study of evolution,
 Freud, Marx, Western music, and Western philosophy. Some professors believe that
 informers monitor their classroom comments and report to government and religious
 authorities.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Government strictly limits
 freedom of assembly. It prohibits public demonstrations as a means of political ex-
 pression. Public meetings are segregated by-sex.- Unless meetings are sponsored by
 diplomatic missions or approved by the appropriate governor, foreign residents who
 seek to -hold unsegregated meetings risk arrest and deportation. The authorities
 
 
 1793
 
 monitor any large gathering of persons, especially of women. The Mutawaa'in dis-
 persed groups of women found in public places such as restaurants. Government
 policy permits women to attend cultural and social events at diplomatic chanceries
 and residences only if they are accompanied by a father, brother, or husband. How-
 ever, in practice, police often implement the policy in an arbitrary manner. On
 many occasions during the year, authorities actively prohibited women from enter-
 ing diplomatic chanceries or residences to attend cultural events and lectures. How-
 ever, for the first time in several years, authorities in May allowed unescorted Saudi
 women to attend a women only cultural event hosted at a diplomatic mission.
 The Government strictly limits freedom of association. It prohibits the establish-
 ment of political parties or any type of opposition group (see Section 3). By its power
 to license associations, the Government ensures that groups conform to public pol-
 icy.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Freedom of religion does not exist. Islam is the official
 religion, and all citizens must be Muslims. The Government prohibits the public
 practice of other religions. Private non-Muslim worship is permitted.
 Conversion by a Muslim to another religion is considered apostasy. Public apos-
 tasy is a crime under Shari'a law and punishable by death.
 Islamic practice generally is limited to that of the Wahhabi sect's interpretation
 of the Hanbali school of the Sunni branch of Islam. Practices contrary to this inter-
 pretation, such as visits to the tombs of renowned Muslims, are discouraged.
 The Ministry of Islamic Affairs directly supervises, and is a major source of funds
 for, the construction and maintenance of almost all mosques in the country. The
 Ministry pays the salaries of imams (prayer leaders) and others who work in the
 mosques. A governmental committee is responsible for defining the qualifications of
 imams. The Mutawaa'in receive their funding from the Government, and the gen-
 eral president of the Mutawaa'in holds the rank of cabinet minister.
 The Shi'a Muslim minority (roughiy 500,000 of nearly 14 million citizens) lives
 mostly in the eastern province. Its members are the objects of officially sanctioned
 political and economic discrimination (see Section 5). Prior to 1990, the Government
 prohibited Shi'a public processions during the Islamic month of Muharram and re-
 stricted other processions and congregations to designated areas in the major Shi'a
 cities. Since 1990 the authorities have permitted marches on the Shi'a holiday of
 Ashura, provided that the marchers do not display banners or engage in self-flag-
 ellation. Ashura commemorations took place during the year, again without inci-
 dent. The Government seldom permits private construction of Shi'a mosques. The
 Shi'a have declined government offers to build state-supported mosques because the
 Government would prohibit the incorporation and display of Shi'a motifs in any
 such mosques.
 In November several Mutawaa'in attacked and killed an elderly Shi'a prayer lead-
 er in Hofuf for repeating the call to prayer -twice (a traditional Shi a practice).
 Mutawaa'in attempts to cover up the killing were unsuccessful. The Government re-
 portedly is investigating the incident (see Sections l.a. and 5).
 The Government reportedly still holds in jail an unknown number of Shi'a ar-
 rested in the aftermath of the A1-Khobar bombing. Government security-forces re-
 portedly arrest Shi'a on the smallest suspicion, hold them in custody for lengthy pe-
 riods, and then release them without explanation (see Section l.d.).
 The Government does not permit public non-Muslim religious activities. Non-Mus-
 lim worshippers risk arrest, lashing, and deportation for engaging in overt religious
 activity that attracts official attention. There were' no credible reports of government
 action against private religious services during the year. In 1997 for the first time,
 a senior Saudi leader stated publicly that the Government does not "prevent" pri-
 vate non-Muslim religious worship in the home. Such private non-Muslim worship
 occurs on a wide scale through the country, including on the premises of several em-
 bassies. Other high level Saudi authorities confirmed during the year that the Gov-
 ernment's policy allows for private non-Muslim worship and that the Government
 does not sanction investigation or harassment of such private worship services. The
 Government ascribes any residual harassment of private worship services to individ-
 uals and organizations acting on their own authority and in contradiction of govern-
 ment policy. Representatives of many Christian denominations present in the coun-
 try report that the Government is not interfering with their-private worship serv-
 ices.
 However, proselytizing is illegal. One Dutch and 14 Filipino Christian activists
 were arrested in June for actively engaging in efforts to proselytize Saudis. Those
 detained were part of an externally organized evangelical Christian group. All de-
 tainees were released and deported in July. An additional nine Filipino activists left
 the Kingdom voluntarily or were on vacation and did not return after the July de-
 portations. Deportations of over a dozen Filipino- individuals identified as having
 
 
 1794
 connections with proselytizing groups began in September and continued into De-
 cember. They took place without arrest except in two cases of brief detention,
 through an order signed by the Ministry of Interior. A Korean national was arrested
 on November 8 on accusations of proselytization of Christianity. While in custody,
 he was allowed visits by his family. He reported that no mistreatment occurred dur-
 ing his incarceration.
 Persons wearing religious symbols of any kind in public risk confrontation with
 the Mutawaa'in. This general prohibition against religious symbols also applies to
 Muslims. A Christian wearing a. crucifix or a Muslim wearing a Koranic-necklace
 in public would be admonished.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Government restricts the travel of Saudi women, who must obtain
 written permission from their closest male relative before the authorities allow them
 to board domestic public transportation or to travel abroad (see Section 5). Males
 may travel anywhere within the country or abroad.
 Foreigners typically are allowed to reside or work in Saudi Arabia only under the
 sponsorship of a Saudi national or business. The Government requires foreign resi-
 dents to carry identification cards. It does not permit foreigners to travel outside
 the city of their employment orrchange their workplace without their sponsor's per-
 mission. Foreign residents who travel within the country may be asked by the au-
 thorities to show that they possess letters of permission from their employer or
 sponsor.
 Sponsors generally retain possession of foreign workers' passports. Foreign work-
 ers must obtain permission from their sponsors to travel abroad. If sponsors are in-
 volved in a commercial or labor dispute with foreign employees, they may ask the
 authorities to prohibit the employees from departing the cbuntry until the dispute
 is resolved. Some sponsors use this as a pressure tactic to resolve disputes in their
 favor or to have foreign employees deported. There were numerous reports of the
 Government prohibiting foreign employees involved in-labor disputes from departing
 the country until the dispute was resolved.              s
 The Government seizes the passports of all potential suspects and witnesses in
 criminal cases and suspends the issuance of exit visas to them until the case is tried
 or otherwise concluded. As a result, some foreign nationals are forced to remain in
 the country for lengthy periods against their will. The authorities sometimes con-
 �fiscate the passports of suspected oppositionists and their families. The Government
 actively discourages Shi'a travel to Iran to visit pilgrimage sites. The Government
 still punishes Shi'a who travel to Iran, or are suspected of traveling to Iran, by con-
 fiscating passports for up to-2 years (see Section 5).
 Citizens may emigrate, but the law prohibits dual citizenship. Apart from mar-
 riage to a Saudi national, there are no provisions for foreign residents to acquire
 citizenship. However, foreigners are granted citizenship in rare cases, generally
 through the advocacy of an influential patron.
 The 1992 Basic Law provides that "the state Will grant political asylum if the pub-
 lie interest mitigates" in favor of it. The language does not specify clear rules for
 adjudicating asylum cases. In general, the authorities regard refugees and displaced
 persons like other foreign workers: They-must have sponsors for employment or risk
 expulsion. Of the 33,000 Iraqi civilians and former prisoners of -war allowed refuge
 in Saudi Arabia at the end of the Gulf War, none is been granted permanent asy-
 lum in the country; however, the Government has underwritten the entire cost of
 providing safe haven, to the Iraqi refugees, and -continues to provide excellent
 logistical and administrative support to the United Nations High Commissioner for
 Refugees (UNHCR) and other resettlement agencies.
 At year's end, approximately 27,000 of the original 33,000 Iraqi refugees had been
 resettled in other countries or voluntarily repatriated to Iraq. Most of the approxi-
 mately 6,000 remaining refugees are restricted to the Rafha refugee- camp. The
 UNHCR has monitored over 3,000 persons voluntarily returning to Iraq from Rafha
 since December 1991 and found no evidence of forcible repatriation (see Section
 1.c.).
 The Government has.-allowed some foreigners to remain temporarily in the coun-
 try in cases where their safety would be jeopardized if they were deported to their
 home countries.
 Section 3. Respect-for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens do not have the right to change their government. There are no formal
 democratic institutions, and only a few citizens have a voice in the choice of leaders
 or in changing the political system. The King rules on civil and religious matters
 
 
 1795
 within certain limitations established by religious law, tradition, and the need to
 maintain consensus among the ruling family and religious leaders.
 The King is also the Prime Minister, and the Crown Prince serves as Deputy
 Prime Minister. The King appoints all other ministers, who in turn appoint subordi-
 nate officials with cabinet concurrence, In 1992 the King appointed 60 members to
 a Consultative Council, or Majls Ash-Shura. This strictly advisory body began to
 hold sessions in 1993. In 1997 the King expanded the council to 90 members. There
 are two Shi'a on the Council. The Council engages in debates that, while closed to
 the view of the general public, provide advice and views occasionally contrary to the
 Government's proposed policy or recommended course of action. The Government
 usually incorporates the Majlis' advice into its final policy announcements or tries
 to convince the council why the Government's policy is correct.
 The Council of Senior Islamic Scholars is another advisory body to the King and
 the Cabinet. It reviews the Government's public policies for compliance with Shari'a.
 The Government views the Council as an important source of religious legitimacy
 and takes the Council's opinions into account when promulgatifg legislation.
 Communication between citizens and the Government usually is expressed
 through client-patron relationships and by affinity groups such as tribes, families,
 and professional hierarchies. In theory, any male citizen or foreign national may ex-
 press an opinion or air a grievance at a majlis-an open-door meeting held by the
 King, a prince, or an important national or local official. However, as governmental
 functions have become more complex, time-consuming, and centralized, public access
 to senior officials has become more restricted. Since the assassination of King Faisal
 in 1975, Saudi kings have reduced the frequency of their personal contacts with the
 public. Ministers and district governors more readily grant audiences at a majlis.
 Typical topics raised in a majlis are complaints about bureaucratic delay or insen-
 sitivity, requests for personal redress or assistance, and criticism of particular acts
 of government affecting family welfare. Broader "political" concerns-social, eco-
 nomic, or foreign policy-rarely are raised. Complaints about royal abuses of power
 are not entertained. In general, journalists, academics, and businessmen believe
 that institutionalized avenues of domestic criticism of the regime are closed. Feed-
 back is filtered through private personal channels and has affected various policy
 issues, including the Middle East peace process, unemployment of young Saudi men,
 and the construction of new infrastructure.
 The Committee for the Defense of Legitimate Rights (CDLR), an opposition group,
 was established in 1993. The Government acted almost immediately to repress it.
 In 1994 one of its founding members, Mohammed Al-Masari, fled to the United
 Kingdom, where he sought political asylum and established an overseas branch of
 the CDLR. In 1996 internal divisions within the CDLR led to the creation of the
 rival Islamic Reform Movement (IRM), headed by Sa'ad Al-Faqih. Al-Masari ex-
 pressed the CDLR's "understanding" of two fatal terrorist bombings of U.S. military
 facilities in 1995 and 1996 and sympathy for the perpetrators. The IRM implicitly
 condoned the two terrorist attacks as well, arguing that they were a natural out-
 growth of a political system that does not tolerate peaceful dissent. Both groups con-
 tinue to criticize the Government, using computers and facsimile transmissions to
 send newsletters back to Saudi Arabia.
 Women play no formal role in government and politics and are actively discour-
 aged from doing so. Participation by women in a majlis is restricted, although some
 women seek redress through female members of the royal family. Two of the 90
 members of the Majlis Ash-Shura are Shi'a.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no publicly active human rights groups, and the Government has made
 it clear that none critical of government policies would be permitted. Both Amnesty
 International and Human Rights Watch reported that they received no responses
 to their requests for information or access to the country.
 The Government does not permit visits by international human rights groups or
 independent monitors. The Government disagrees with internationally accepted
 definitions of human rights and views its interpretation of Islamic law as the only
 necessary guide to protect human rights. The Government generally ignores or con-
 demns as attacks on Islam citations of Saudi human rights abuses by international
 monitors or foreign governments. However, in April the Government provided a 51-
 page treatise on the functioning of its legal system to the U.N. Commission on
 Human Rights and pledged cooperation with U.N. human rights mechanisms.
 
 
 1796
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 There is legal and systemic discrimination based on sex and religion. The law for-
 bids discrimination based on race, but not nationality. The Government and private
 organizations cooperate in providing services for the disabled. The Shi'a religious
 minority suffers social, legal, and sectarian discrimination.  -  .
 Women.-The Government does not keep statistics on spousal or other forms of
 violence against women. However, based on the information available regarding
 physical spousal abuse anrd violenc6 againit women, such violence and abuse appear
 to be a common problem: Hospital workers report that many women are admitted
 for treatment of injuries that apparently result from spousal violence. Some foreign
 women have suffered physical abuse from their Saudi husbands. A Saudi man can
 prevent his wife and any child or unmarriedadult daughter from obtaining an exit
 visa to depart Saudi Arabia (see Section 2.d.).
 Foreign embassies continued to receive many reports- that employers abuse for-
 eign women working as domestic servants. Some embassies of countries with large
 domestic servant populations maintain safehouses to which their citizens may flee
 to escape work situations that include forced confinement, withholding of food, beat-
 ing and other physical abuse, and rape. Often the reported abuse is at the hands
 of female Saudis. In general, the Government considers such cases 'family matters
 and does not intervene unless charges of abuse are brought to its attefition. It is
 almost impossible for foreign women to obtain redress in the courts due to the
 courts' strict evidentiary rules and the women's own fears of reprisals. Few employ-
 ers have been punished for such abuses. There are no private support groups or reli-
 gious associations to assist such women.
 By religious law and social custom, women have the right to own property and
 are entitled to financial support from their husbands or male relatives. However,
 women have few political or social rights and are not treated as equal members of
 society. There are no active women's rights groups. Women, including foreigners, le-
 gally may not drive, motor vehicles and are restricted in their use of public facilities
 when men are present. Women must enter, city buses by separate rear entrances
 and-sit in specially designated sections. Women risk arrest by the Mutawaa'in for
 riding in a vehicle driven by a male who is not an employee or a close male relative.
 Women are not admitted to a hospital for medical treatment without the consent
 of a male relative. By law and custom, women may not undertake domestic or for-
 eign travel alone (see Section 2.d.).
 In public a woman is expected to wear an abaya, a black garment covering the
 entire body, and to also cover her head and face. The Mutawaa'in generally expect
 women from Arab countries, Asia, and Africa to -comply more fully with Saudi cus-
 toms of dress than they do Western women; nonetheless, in recent years they have
 instructed Western women to wear the abaya and cover their hair. During the year,
 Mutawaa'in continued to admonish and harass 'women to wear their abayas and
 cover their hair.
 Some government officials and ministries still bar accredited female diplomats in
 Saudi Arabia from official meetings and diplomatic functions.
 Women also are subject to discrimination under Islamic law, which stipulates that
 daughters receive half the inheritance awarded to their brothers. In a Shari'a court,
 the testimony of one man equals that of two women (see Section i.e.). Although Is-
 lamic law permits polygyny, with up to four- wives, it is becoming less common. Is-
 lamic law enjoins a man to treat each wife equally. In practice such equality is left
 to the discretion of the husband. Some women participate in al-Mesyar (or "short
 daytime visit") marriages, where the women relinquish their legal rights to financial
 support and nighttime cohabitation. Additionally, the husband is not required to in-
 form his other wives of the marriage, and the children have no inheritance rights.
 The Government places greater restrictions on women than on men regarding mar-
 riage to non-Saudis and non-Muslims (see Section 1.f.).
 Women must demonstrate legally specified grounds for divorce, but men may di-
 vorce without giving cause. If divorced or widowed, a woman normally may keep her
 children until they attain a specified age: 7 years for boys, 9 years for girls. Children
 over these ages are awarded to the divorced husband or the deceased husband's
 family. Numerous divorced women who are foreigners continued to be prevented by
 their former husbands from visiting their children after divorce.
 Women have access to free, but segregated, education through the university
 level. They constitute over 58 percent of all univfrsity students but are excluded
 from studying such subjects as engineering, journalism, and architecture. Men may
 study overseas; women may do so only if accompanied by a spouse or an immediate
 male relative.
 
 
 1797
 
 Women make up approximately 5 percent of the formal work force and own about
 4 percent of the businesses, although they must deputize a male relative to rep-
 resent the business. Most employment opportunities for women are in education and
 health care, with lesser opportunity in business, philanthropy, banking, retail sales,
 and the media. Many foreign women work as domestic -servants and nurses. In 1997
 the Government authorized women to work in a limited capacity in the hotel indus-
 try. Women wishing to enter nontraditional fields are subject to discrimination.
 Women may not accept jobs in rural areas if they are required to live apart from
 their families. Most workplaces where women are present are segregated by sex.
 Contact with male supervisors or clients is allowed by telephone or facsimile ma-
 chine. In 1995 the Ministry of Commerce announced that women would no longer
 be issued business licenses for work in fields that might require them to supervise
 foreign workers, interact with male clients, or deal on a regular basis with govern-
 ment officials. However, in hospital settings and in the oil industry, women and men
 work together, and in some instances women supervise male employees.
 Children.-The Government provides all children with free education and medical
 care. Children are not subject to the strict social segregation faced by women, al-
 though they are segregated by sex in schools starting at the age of 7. In more gen-
 eral social situations, boys are segregated at the age of 12 and girls at the onset
 of puberty.
 It is difficult to gauge the prevalence of child abuse, since the Government cur-
 rently keeps no national statistics on such cases. In September leading academics
 and medical professionals called for the establishment of a National Committee on
 Prevention and Management of Child Abuse and Neglect. A major hospital has
 begun a program to detect, report, and prevent child abuse. Another hospital re-
 ported 13 serious cases in a 1-year period ending in June 1997. In general, Saudi
 culture greatly prizes children and initial studies show that severe abuse and ne-
 glect of children appears to be rare.
 People With Disabilities.-The provision of government social services increasingly
 has brought the disabled into the public domain. The media carry features lauding
 the public accomplishments of disabled persons and sharply criticizing parents who
 neglect disabled children. The Government and private charitable organizations co-
 operate in education, employment, and other services for the disabled. The law pro-
 vides hiring quotas for the disabled. There is no legislation that mandates public
 accessibility; however, newer commercial buildings often include such access.
 Religious Minorities.-Shi'a citizens are discriminated against in government and
 employment, especially in national security jobs. Several years ago the Government
 subjected Shi'a to employment restrictions in the oil industry and has not relaxed
 them. Since the 1979 Iranian revolution, some Shi'a suspected of subversion have
 been subjected periodically to surveillance and limitations on travel abroad. Since
 beginning the investigation of the 1996 bombing of a U.S. military installation, au-
 thorities have detained, interrogated, and confiscated the passports of a number of
 Shi'a Muslims, including Shi'a returning to Saudi Arabia following travel to Iran
 (see Sections 1.d. and 2.d.).
 In November several Mutawaa'in attacked and killed an elderly Shi'a prayer lead-
 er in Hofuf for repeating the call to prayer twice (a traditional Shi'a practice). The
 Government reportedly is investigating the incident (see Sections L.a. and 2.c.).
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Although racial discrimination is illegal,
 there is substantial societal prejudice based on ethnic or national origin. Foreign
 workers from Africa and Asia are subject to various forms of formal and informal
 discrimination and have the most difficulty in obtaining justice for their grievances.
 For example, pay scales for identical or similar labor or professional services are set
 by nationality such that two similarly qualified and experienced foreign nationals
 performing the same employment duties receive different compensation based on
 their nationalities (see Section 6.b.).
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Government decrees prohibit the establishment of
 labor unions and any strike activity.
 In 1995 Saudi Arabia was suspended from the U.S. Overseas Private Investment
 Corporation (OPIC) insurance programs because of the Government's lack of compli-
 ance with internationally recognized worker rights standards.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Collective bargaining is for-
 bidden. Foreign workers comprise about two-thirds of the work force. There is no
 minimum wage; wages are set by employers and vary according to the type of work
 performed and the nationality of the worker (see Section 5).
 There are no export processing zones.
 
 
 1798
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.--The Government prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor pursuant to a 1962 royal decree that abolished slavery. Ratifica-
 tion of the International Labor Organization (ILO) Conventions 29 and 105, which
 prohibit forced labor, gives them the force of law. However, employers have signifi-
 cant control over the movements of foreign employees, giving rise to situations that
 sometimes involve forced labor, especially in remote areas where workers are unable
 to leave their place of work.
 Some sponsors prevented foreign workers from obtaining exit visas to pressure
 them to sign a new work contract or to drop claims-against their employers for un-
 paid salary (see Section 2.d.). In another pressure tactic, some sponsors refused to
 provide foreign workers with a "letter of no objection" that would allow them to be
 employed by another sponsor.
 The labor laws do not protect domestic servants. There were credible reports that
 female domestic servants sometimes were forced to Work 12 to 16 hours a day, 7
 days a week. There were numerous confirmed reports of runaway maids (see Section
 5). The authorities often returned runaway maids to their employers against the
 maids' wishes.
 There have been many reports of workers whose employers refused to pay several
 months, or even years, of accumulated salary or other promised benefits. Nondomes-
 tic workers with such grievances have the right to complain before the labor courts,
 but few do so because of fear of deportation. The labor system is conducive to the
 exploitation of foreign workers because enforcement of work contracts is difficult
 and generally favors employers. Labor courts, while generally fair, may take many
 months to reach a final appellate ruling, during which time the employer can pre-
 vent the foreign laborer from leaving the .country. An employer also may delay a
 case until a worker's funds are exhausted and the worker is forced to return to his
 home country.                         I -                           -
 The law does not specifically prohibit forced dr bonded labor by children. Nonethe-
 less, with the rare exception of criminal begging rings, and the possible exceptions
 of family businesses, forced or bonded child labor does not occur (see Section 6.d.).
 In 1997 the Government actively sought to eradicate forced child begging. According
 to reports, criminal rings consisting almost exclusively of foreigners bought and im-
 ported South Asian children, including disabled children. Ring organizers systemati-
 cally forced the children to beg-in the streets and then confiscated all money that
 the children gained. The authorities arrested-some ring organizers and returned at
 least 76 children to their own countries.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The mini-
 mum age for employment is 13:years of age, which may be waived by the Ministry
 of Labor with the consent of the juvenile's guardian. There is.no minimum age for
 workers employed in family oriented businesses or in other areas that are-construed
 as extensions of the household, such as farmers, herdsmen, and domestic servants.
 The law does not specifically prohibit forced or bonded labor by children, but it is
 not a problem, with the rare exception of forced child begging rings, and possibly,
 family businesses (see Section 6.c.).
 Children under the age of 18 and women may not be employed, in.hazardous or
 harmful industries, such as mining orindustries employing power-operated machin-
 ery. While there is no formal -government entity charged with enforcing the mini-
 mum age for employment-of children, the Ministry of Justice has jurisdiction and
 has acted as plaintiff .in the few cases that have arisen against alleged violators.
 In general, however, children p lay a minimal role in the work force.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no legal minimum wage. Labor regu-
 lations establish a 48-hour workweek at regular pay and allow employers to require
 up to 12 additional -hours of overtime at time-and-a-half pay.-Labor law provides for
 a 24-hour rest period, normally on Fridays, although the employer may grant it on
 another day. The average wage generally provides a decent standard of living for
 a worker and family.
 The ILO has stated that the Government has not formulated legislation imple-
 menting the ILO Convention on Equal Pay and thatregulations that segregate-work
 places by sex -or limit vocational programs -for women violate ILO Convention 111.
 Some foreign nationals who.have.beer recruited abroad have complained that
 after arrival in Saudi Arabia they were presented with work; contracts specifying
 lower wages and fewer benefits than originally promised. Other foreign workers re-
 portedly have signed contracts in their home countries and later were pressured to
 sign less favorable contracts .upon arrival. Some employees report that at the end
 of their contract service, their employers refuse to grant permission to allow-them
 to return home. Foreign- employees involved in disputes -with their employers may
 find their freedom of movement restricted (see Section 2.d.). Some female domestic
 servants often were subjected to abuse (see Sections 5 and 6.c.).
 
 
 1799
 Saudiization is the Government's attempt to decrease the number of foreigners
 working in certain occupations and to replace them with Saudi workers. To this end,
 the Government has taken several long-term steps, most notably limiting employ-
 ment in certain fields to Saudis, prohibiting renewal of existing contracts, and re-
 quiring that 5 percent of the work force in private sector companies be filled by
 Saudi workers. The Government also requires firms to increase the proportion of
 Saudi workers by 5 per cent each year. There is a limited number of persons, both
 influential and otherwise, who attempted to circumvent the requirements of the law.
 For example, employers have altered job descriptions or hired foreigners for nomi-
 nally low-level positions but in fact had them fill Saudi positions. Influential persons
 effectively may circumvent the law because the Ministry of Labor is simply unwill-
 ing to confront them.
 The ongoing campaign to remove illegal immigrants from the country has done
 little to Saudiize the economy because illegal immigrants largely work in low-income
 positions, which most Saudis consider unsuitable. However, the campaign did im-
 prove overall working conditions for legally employed immigrants in low-income po-
 sitions. The Government is carrying out the campaign by widely publishing its en-
 forcement of existing laws- against illegal immigrants and Saudis employing or spon-
 soring illegal immigrants. In addition to deportation for illegal workers and jail
 terms and fines for Saudis hiring illegal workers, the Government in September an-
 nounced that houses rented to illegal aliens would be ordered closed. In 1997 the
 Government offered an amnesty of several months duration, which allowed illegal
 immigrants and their employers or sponsor to avoid the possibility of prosecution
 by voluntarily seeking expeditious repatriation. As many as 750,000 persons de-
 parted the country under terms of the amnesty or were deported for violating resi-
 dence and labor laws in 1997 and 1998. During this process, the Government bowed
 to domestic pressure and granted grace periods and exemptions to certain categories
 of illegal immigrants (such as servants, drivers, and shepherds), thereby allowing
 many ifiegal immigrants to legalize their status without leaving the country. The
 effect of te expeditious repatriation of some ilegal immigrants and the legalization
 of others has been to improve overall working conditions for legally employed expa-
 triates. Illegal immigrants are generally willing to accept lower salaries and fewer
 benefits than legally employed immigrants. Their departure or legalization reduced
 the competition for certain jobs and thereby reduced the incentive for legal immi-
 grants to accept lower wages and fewer benefits as a means of competing with ille-
 gal immigrants. Furthermore, the departure or legalization removeda large portion
 of the class of persons most vulnerable to abuse and exploitation because of their
 illegal status.
 Labor regulations require employers to protect most workers from job-related haz-
 ards and disease. Foreign nationals report frequent failures to enforce health and
 safety standards. Farmers, herdsmen, domestic servants, and workers in family op-
 erated businesses are not covered by these regulations. Workers risk losing employ-
 ment if they remove themselves from hazardous work conditions.
