 SAUDI ARABIA
 Saudi Arabia is a traditional Arab and Islamic monarchy. It is
 ruled by the sons of its founder, the late King Abd al-Aziz
 (known in the West as "Ibn Saud"). There is no written
 national constitution; Islamic Shari'a law, drawn from the
 Koran and the words and deeds of the Prophet Muhammad, is held
 to be the basis of the system of justice. In recent years
 Shari'a-based judicial law has been supplemented with a large
 body of administrative law governing commerce, labor, and
 taxation; government organization; and other matters involving
 society and technology not foreseen by Shari'a law. This new
 body of law is derived from royal decrees, consonant with
 Shari's principles, and is administered by specially created
 tribunals.
 By convention, the King is chosen by and from among the sons of
 Abd al-Aziz and serves also as Prime Minister. The Crown
 Prince is designated First Deputy Prime Minister. Officials
 from the highest levels on down maintain contact with citizens
 by holding open-door audiences regularly. There are no elected
 assemblies or political parties, and non-religious public
 assemblies or demonstrations are not permitted. The legitimacy
 of the regime rests upon its perceived adherence to and defenase
 of Islam, particularly the austere Saudi interpretation of the
 Sunni tradition. Rulers and ruled share a respect for laws
 believed to be divinely-inspired and ancient customs which call
 for authority based on consensus in government, cohesion, and
 conformity in social practice, and private enterprise in the
 economic sphere. There are no rights granted in Saudi Arabia
 that are not consonant with Islamic law. Tradition and social
 custom mandate separation of the sexes outside the home. Great
 strides in women's education have increased the mobility and
 interests of women.
 The centuries-old pastoral, agricultural, and commercial
 economy has been transformed by the inflow of large oil
 revenues. Rapid urbanization, massive public investment in
 social and economic infrastructure, large subsidies to
 industrial and agricultural enterpreneurs and to consumers, the
 emergence of a technocratic middle class, and the presence of
 several million expatriate workers have marked this trans-
 formation. It is public policy that economic activities and
 resources (except oil) remain largely in private hands. There
 are no trade unions, and strikes are banned.
 Unsettled conditions in the Middle East and anti-regime
 disturbances in 1979 have served to heighten the authorities'
 concern about internal security. The Interior Ministry is the
 primary public institution affecting human rights practices.
 In addition to routine police and public safety functions, the
 Ministry is responsible for internal security, including border
 surveillance, suppression of narcotics and alcohol trafficking,
 travel in and out of the Kingdom, investigation and prosecution
 of criminal suspects, and prisons. The Ministry also
 supervises provincial governors, known as amirs, who concern
 themselves particularly with security and public order matters
 within their jurisdictions. Trials, without counsel, are
 generally closed but reportedly fair. The independence of the
 judiciary is insured by law and appears to be followed in
 practice. In certain instances, punishments meted out in
 accordance with Shari'a law would elsewhere be deemed inhuman
 or degrading.
 
 
 1404
 No major events affecting human rights practices or trends
 occurred in 1983. The long-promised creation of an appointive
 Advisory Council is widely anticipated. The Board of
 Grievances, an independent judicial body empowered to
 investigate citizens' complaints of officials' abuse of
 authority, was granted codified, broadened, and potentially
 significant powers. Late in 1983 the Interior Ministry
 published new rules regarding arrest and pre-trial detention
 which, if enforced, should regularize and reduce periods of
 pre-trial detention.
 A significant number of arbitrary arrests and detentions,
 especially among vocal critics of the regime, as well as
 several instances of abuse of incarcerated suspects by police
 to extract confessions, came to light during the year.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Unlawful or Arbitrary Deprivation of Life
 Unlawful or arbitrary deprivation of life by officials is
 unknown. No organized opposition or terrorist groups are known
 to exist, let alone operate, in the Kingdom.
 b. Disappearance
 Disappearances at the hands of unacknowledged or identified
 official agents are unknown.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Shari'a law requires confession for conviction in the absence
 of eyewitnesses. During 1983, there were credible, first-hand
 reports that expatriates, particularly those detained on
 suspicion of narcotics offenses, had been subjected by police
 to inhuman treatment (beatings, high-decible noise, sleep
 deprivation) to extract confessions and information implicating
 others. In late 1983, Saudi officials stated that such
 treatment was not Government policy, evinced concern, and
 pledged to look further into these charges. These officials
 stated that such treatment was not Saudi Government policy,
 evinced concern, and pledged to look further into these
 charges. The Saudi Government has taken steps to correct this
 situation, including an extensive and continuing internal
 investigation by a senior Interior Ministry official. It is
 not known whether any disciplinary actions have been taken,
 however to date no further instances of mistreatment have been
 noted or alleged. Excluding these allegations of police abuse,
 almost all at a single narcotics investigation center, no
 evidence of any pattern of inhuman treatment is present.
 Saudi Arabia, in accordance with Shari'a law, normally imposes
 capital punishment for the crimes of premeditated murder,
 adultery, apostasy from Islam, and, depending upon circum-
 stances, rape and armed robbery. Beheading is the usual way in
 which the sentence is carried out. Stoning may be imposed for
 adultery. Severe social disapproval discourages adultery and
 the rigorous requirement of either confession or testimony by
 
 
 1405
 four eyewitnesses renders convictions for adultery exceedingly
 rare. Absent extenuating circumstances, a recidivist thief
 suffers severance of a hand. For less severe crimes, such as
 drunkenness, or publicly infringing Islamic precepts, flogging
 is often imposed. Public flogging is intended to humiliate.
 The flogger is instructed to use only the lower arm to wield
 the cane and the convict remains clothed. The skin is not
 supposed to be broken, but floggings are painful and leave
 welts and bruises.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Public security agents responsible for making arrests are
 clearly identified and rarely use warrants or notify the
 detainee's family, employer, or (for expatriates) consular
 representative of the arrest or of the reasons for detention.
 Inquiries pursued diligently almost always evoke this
 information. Since Shari'a law, which covers all common
 criminal cases, provides for neither habeas corpus nor bail,
 and since the police are sometimes reluctant to release
 prisoners for lack of evidence due to the absence of a con-
 fession, detainees are often held for months and sometimes even
 several years while investigations proceed, before they are
 charged or released. It is impossible to estimate accurately
 the numbers of persons involved. Consular access to expatriate
 detainees varies with the gravity of the charge and the appre-
 hending agency. Time spent in pre-trial detention is normally
 applied against any term of imprisonment imposed. Good
 behavior merits a 25 percent reduction in sentence. Partial
 amnesties and reductions in sentences may be proclaimed on
 major state or religious occasions. Exile as a form of
 punishment is unknown.
 In 1983 there were plausible reports that more than a hundred
 vocal Saudi critics of the regime were arrested, held for
 several months'without charge for interrogation, warned, and
 released. As the ideological challenge mounted by the Iranian
 regime of Ayatollah Khomeini has persisted, surveillance of the
 Shi'a minority in the Kingdom and temporary preventive
 detention of small numbers of Shi'a activists before major
 religious occasions has been reported.
 In late 1983 the Ministry of Interior published regulations
 intended to clarify the authority of the police to arrest and
 detain suspects before trial. These regulations do not apply
 to authorities outside the Ministry who enjoy the power of
 arrest nor to those arrested for certain crimes against the
 state as defined in Council of Ministers decrees, such as
 treason. The new regulations, when applicable, strictly
 circumscribe the conditions under which the Saudi authorities
 may arrest and detain a person suspected or accused of
 committing a crime. The burden of proof is placed on the
 investigating authorities and senior government officials to
 show adequate cause--defined in the regulation in some detail--
 for detaining a suspect during an investigation. The
 regulations codify the exceedingly rare but existing practice
 whereby detainees who are well and favorably known, who have a
 permanent residence in the Kingdom, and who place a large sum
 in official escrow and/or have another reputable citizen
 guarantee their appearance in court, may at the discretion of
 the Interior Ministry be released from detention during the
 pre-trial investigation. The pre-trial detention period is
 limited to 21 days and may be extended by the provincial
 
 
 1406
 governor or his deputy for another 30 days, after which the
 detainee has the right to object to his continued detention. A
 special governorate committee then passes on this objection.
 Since the regulations are new, it is too soon to assess whether
 they will be effectively enforced and thus prevent excessively
 lengthy pre-trial detentions.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Saudi judicial system is founded upon traditional Islamic
 laws and legal principles known as the Shari'a. These laws and
 principles are embodied in the Koran and in authenticated
 accounts of the acts of the Prophet and are believed to be
 divinely inspired and therefore immutable. The Shari'a courts
 exercise jurisdiction over common criminal cases and over civil
 suits regarding marriage, divorce, child custody, and
 inheritance of real or personal property. Arrest and detention
 are regulated by rules for police procedure which were
 influenced by Ottoman and Egyptian codes. These regulations
 have not always been scrupulously enforced.
 In. recent years, specialized administrative, commercial, and
 labor courts have been established to deal with legal issues
 not envisioned in the Shari'a. The Board of Grievances
 adjudicates suits against the state and its officials and
 agencies, including state-owned companies.
 The Shari'a court system, which is the system of general
 jurisdiction, operates differently in some respects from
 Western systems. It is composed of a "summary" court for
 misdemeanors, full courts for more serious crimes, two
 appellate courts, and a Supreme Judicial Council. The role of
 the court is to determine the rights of civil plaintiffs and
 defendants or the guilt or innocence of criminal defendants,
 and to impose, if warranted, the appropriate Shari'a
 punishment. Appeals against judges' decisions are rare, but
 all decisions are automatically reviewed by the Ministry of
 Justice or, in more serious cases, by the Supreme Judicial
 Council to insure that courtroom procedure was correct and that
 the judge applied the appropriate Shari'a principles and
 punishments.
 In the Shari'a process, there is a substantial role for the
 Ministry of Interior, more than is customary in Western legal
 systems. Formal arraignment before a court, for example, is
 not part of that process. The Ministry of Interior, through
 the police and in consultation with the provincial governorate,
 conducts the pretrial police investigation and decides upon
 filing of charges, without judicial review. Further, Ministry
 officials act as public prosecutors. In practice the Ministry
 respects the responsibility of Shari'a judges' to determine
 guilt or innocence without interference.
 The Islamic character of Saudi society is reflected in the
 judicial system in other ways. Judges in the summary and full
 Shari'a courts and the two appellate courts place great weight
 on confessions in deciding guilt and on repentance in
 recommending sentences, in accordance with Shari'a precepts and
 the circumstances of the case. Equity plays a great role,
 precedent almost none. Qualified foreign observers have been
 impressed with the fairness toward defendants exhibited by
 Shari's court judges. Judges ensure that the investigative
 record and the defendant's testimony agree. Defendants are
 
 
 1407
 permitted to contradict the police, and judges may criticize
 poor police work from the bench.
 There is no procedure for informing defendants' counsel (or
 expatriates' consular representatives) of trial dates and
 venues. Access to trials is usually restricted to relatives of
 the accused. Counsel is not permitted in the court itself but,
 if notified of the trial venue, lawyers may act as interpreters
 for those unfamiliar with Arabic. Interpreters can be
 appointed at the demand of the defendant, but they are often
 poorly qualified, which can affect the fairness of expatriate
 defendants' trials. In practice, there is no consular access
 to expatriates' trials in Riyadh, more conservative and
 traditional than other Saudi cities, but consuls may be
 admitted elsewhere.
 The Shari'a courts are empowered to impose only those
 punishments mentioned in the Shari'a, such as flogging,
 amputation, or death by stoning or beheading. All sentences of
 amputation or capital punishment must be reviewed by the
 Supreme Judicial Council and must receive the concurrence of
 the King. The Ministry of Interior, however, reviews each
 sentence and is permitted to impose additional or alternative
 punishments not mentioned in the Shari'a, such as terms of
 imprisonment, fines, and deportation. Requests for clemency
 are received by the provincial governors or the Ministry itself
 and are most likely to evoke a positive response if supported
 by a senior prince.
 The Ministry of Justice recruits judges from among the most
 oustanding Islamic jurisprudence graduates. Although most of
 their legal training emphasizes the rigorous and locally-
 dominant Hanbali school of jurisprudence, judges are free to
 apply principles from any of the four schools of orthodox Islam
 to the facts of a case.
 In recent years, the Ministry, responsible for the posting,
 transfer, and promotion of judges, has expanded the court
 system to serve even remote provincial towns. Once qualified
 and appointed, judges may be disciplined or removed only by the
 Supreme Judicial Council, an independent body of very senior
 jurists. Judges' salaries and pensions are uniform, fixed, and
 may not be reduced. The Supreme Judicial Council has not
 hesitated to investigate and remove several corrupt judges so
 that they might be prosecuted and jailed.
 Specialized labor and commercial courts decide cases on the
 basis of decrees of the Council of Ministers and regulations
 pursuant to those decrees. The military justice system has
 jurisdiction over civilian government employees charged with
 violations of military regulations as well as over uniformed
 personnel. Decisions of courts-martial are reviewed by the
 Minister of Defense and Aviation and by the King.
 The Board of Grievances in Saudi Arabia is an independent,
 adminstrative tribunal, the concept and legitimacy of which are
 traced to early Islamic history. The Board was established in
 1955 but was granted equal status as a separate court in 1983.
 Although its jurisdiction includes white-collar crimes such as
 forgery, its primary responsibility is adjudicating allegations
 by citizens or corporations against state institutions, public
 sector companies, or individual Saudi officials charging them
 with malfeasance, nonfeasance, bias, or corruption.
 
 
 1408
 The president and vice president of the Board have
 traditionally been experienced jurists, who are aided by Board
 members expert in administrative, contract, corruption, civil
 service, and forgery legislation. The president is responsible
 directly to the King and all members of the Board are
 guaranteed considerable independence. They enjoy all the
 rights and privileges of judges and are not subject to
 dismissal before retirement except for cause, and with the
 concurrence of a majority of senior Board members. Foreign
 litigants and their lawyers commend the impartiality of the
 Board in commercial disputes: it often finds against the
 government. Saudi officials profess a healthy respect for the
 power of the Board to adjudicate citizens' allegations against
 them, but detailed information on the volume, nature and
 disposition of such allegations is lacking. The 1983 decree
 reorganizing the Board granted it broadened powers to call
 erring officials to account; whether disgruntled citizens will
 turn more frequently to the Board and whether the Board will
 wield its new powers vigorously is not yet clear.
 No reports of prisoners formally sentenced for political
 offenses have been received. As mentioned above, detention for
 a few weeks or months, followed by warning and release, has
 reportedly been used to intimidate small groups of critics of
 the regime.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Saudi authorities are committed to upholding Islamic
 Shari'a precepts and Arab traditions. Some Saudi social norms
 and strictures affecting personal life are matters of law and
 are enforced by the government, especially those against
 consumption and possession of alcohol and against pornography
 permitted in many Western societies. The investigation of such
 crime in private homes in Saudi Arabia often becomes, in
 Western eyes, a serious interference in an individual's private
 life. Members of the officially supported Society for the
 Promotion of Virtue and the Suppression of Vice patrol bazaars
 to make sure shop owners close their establishments at prayer
 times: all Muslims present are encouraged to attend daily
 prayers. During Ramadan, the prohibition against public
 eating, drinking, or smoking during daylight hours is enforced
 by officials of the Society on Muslim and non-Muslim alike.
 It should be noted, however, that among the most fundamental of
 Arab traditions respected in Saudi Arabia are the sanctity of
 family life and the inviolability of the home. Generally the
 police demonstrate reasonable cause and then obtain permission
 from the provincial governor before searching a private home.
 Similarly, wiretapping or mail surveillance in cases Involving
 national security requires authorization from the Interior
 Minister or the Director of Intelligence. Unauthorized
 official intrusion, while not unknown, is rare.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Criticism of Islam and the Ruling Family excepted, Saudis as
 individuals are free to speak their minds in private
 conversation, to complain about and to officials, and to seek a
 
 
 1409
 hearing and redress of personal grievances from high
 officials. By custom, even ministers and governors devote
 several hours daily to hearing in a public forum individual
 petitioners at their traditional open-door receptions
 ("majlie). The King or Crown Prince meets weekly with
 religious notables. The Board of Grievances provides another
 means by which citizens may seek redress against abusive or
 corrupt officials.
 The guidance provided in the 1982 Official Media Policy
 Statement is applicable in practice to university curricula and
 professors and to the press (privately published) and to radio
 and television (state-owned) to which it was formally
 directed. The statement enjoins the media to uphold Islam and
 the Shari'a; oppose atheism and subversion; promote Arab
 interests and cooperation; preserve the cultural heritage of
 the Kingdom; and combat human rights violations,
 .expansionism," injustice, and racial discrimination abroad.
 In this environment, certain authors and subjects (especially
 involving Marxism or Zionism) are not taught at universities.
 Newspaper editors, appointed with the concurrence of the
 Information Minister, insure that no criticism of Islam, the
 Royal Family, ministers or governors, the armed forces, or
 religious notables appears in print, but there is no
 precensorship in the domestic media. In the press and at
 universities, journalists and professors may criticize Saudi
 economic policies, bureaucratic abuses, and official
 inattention to economic and social problems, including regional
 disparities, but not other areas of policy.
 The 1964 Press Establishments Law gave the Ministry of
 Information the authority to proscribe a newspaper or ban a
 journalist from writing. Although the Ministry has not
 proscribed a paper to date, it has banned individuals from
 writing for periods ranging from several weeks to several
 months and has dismissed editors. In addition, some
 journalists and university lecturers were among the several
 score critics of the regime reportedly arrested, detained,
 interrogated, warned, and released in late 1982 and early
 1983. Mild criticism of the regime may provoke the authorities
 to forbid the critic to write or speak publicly for several
 months; alternatively, critics may be co-opted by offers of
 government positions in the Kingdom or abroad. In either case,
 full salaries are paid.
 The avoidance of certain subjects which generally prevails in
 the domestic media is matched by Information Ministry
 censorship of foreign publications. The importation of books
 or magazines carrying material or photographs deemed subversive
 or immoral is banned. Foreign publications permitted into the
 Kingdom are rigorously censored to eliminate such material.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Assembly to express political views or press grievances is
 prohibited. Tribal, economic, and professional interest groups
 informally aggregate public opinion which their leaders are
 expected to express to high officials.
 Non-political clubs and interest groups may be organized with
 the permission of the authorities. Many athletic, literary,
 and dramatic organizations meet regularly. Attendance at
 theatrical presentations and art exhibitions organized by
 
 
 1410
 expatriates may be limited to non-Saudis only.
 Labor unions are not sanctioned and none are known to exist.
 Occasionally newspapers print letters calling the attention of
 Labor Ministry inspectors to alleged violations of wage and
 hour regulations by Saudi employers.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Islam is the raison d'etre and official religion of Saudi
 Arabia. All Saudis must be Muslim.. Apostasy is a crime, and
 proselytizing by non-Muslims is prohibited.
 The Shi'as of the Eastern Province, unofficially estimated at
 300,000 persons, constitute a religious minority traditionally
 subject to surveillance and some social discrimination. They
 have been periodically subject to arrest and temporary
 detention, together with limits on travel abroad, especially
 when the Government perceives a potential security threat from
 the Sbi'a community. The Government does not interfere with
 worship by Shi'as but does control, for security reasons,
 public processions to mark Ashura, the holiest and most solemn
 of the exclusively Shi'a holidays. The Government limits the
 issuance of licenses to construct Shi'a mosques. In recent
 years the authorities have intensified efforts to redress the
 Shi'as' legitimate complaints about economic under-development
 in their areas. The Saudi authorities also discourage public
 or private gatherings by non-Shi'a Muslims to engage in rites
 deemed unorthodox.
 All Muslims, including Shi'a, are officially welcome to perform
 the Hajj, the obligatory pilgrimage to Mecca, once in their
 lifetime. Heterodox rites or practices or political activities
 by pilgrims are not permitted. The authorities devoted great
 financial and human resources to ensuring that the 1983
 pilgrimage was accomplished safely and peacefully.
 Non-Muslim expatriates are able to practice their religion
 discreetly in private gatherings. In 1982 and 1983 several
 ordained ministers and lay officers of a Christian fellow-
 ship were summarily expelled or not permitted to return. While
 Saudi visa applications still ask the applicant's religious
 affiliation, there is no recent evidence of discrimination
 based on the response.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel,
 Emigration, and Repatriation
 Saudis may travel freely anywhere within the Kingdom.
 Passports are issued by the Interior Ministry; those of
 suspected subversives have occasionally been temporarily
 seized. Shi'a who travel to Iran may be arrested and
 interrogated on their return home. There have been rare
 instances in which Saudis have emigrated, assumed a foreign
 nationality, returned to Saudi Arabia and been treated as
 citizens of the foreign country whose nationality they
 adopted. One such instance which came to light in 1983
 involved a native-born Saudi man who assumed American
 citizenship. More typically, these exceptional cases involve
 Saudis who have assumed the citizenship of other Arab
 countries. There are no known Saudi refugees abroad; those
 princes and commoners who went into voluntary exile in the
 
 
 1411
 1960's in opposition to the regime of the late King Saud have all
 returned and many occupy responsible positions. Foreigners
 involved in commercial disputes or criminal investigations are
 usually not allowed to leave the country until the problem has
 been resolved.
 Section 3  Respect for Political Rights:  The Right of Citizens to
 Change Their Government
 The focus of legitimate authority is the King. He is usually the
 eldest surviving son of the late King Abd al-Aziz judged by
 consensus as qualified to hold a senior leadership position. He
 is selected from among the adult male members of the House of
 Saud by an informal process involving consultations among (in
 order of importance) senior members of the Royal Family,
 religious leaders, tribal leaders, and, to a minor degree,
 representatives of the technocratic/bureaucratic classes and of
 commercial interests. These leaders swear an oath of personal
 allegiance to the new King. Nearly all Saudis are linked with at
 least one of these interest groups. The opinions of leaders of
 these groups are supposed to represent a consensus of the
 thoughts of the many individuals who comprise them.
 The King appoints a Crown Prince and, as Prime Minister, selects
 a Council of Ministers through a process of consensus similar to
 the one by which he himself was chosen. The King rules as head
 of state in matters secular and religious. The King's legitimacy
 depends not only upon his descent and his selection by consensus,
 but also upon his adherence to the tenets of Islam. Moral and
 administrative laxity can result in forced abdication, as
 occurred in 1964.
 Saudi officials remain in close touch with the citizenry through
 the traditional open-door audience ("majlis") system. Individual
 opinions and those conveyed through the tribal, religious, and
 professional hierarchies coalesce to form Saudi public opinion
 which the Council of Ministers takes into account in formulating
 Saudi domestic and foreign policies.
 This informal consultative means of expressing and ascertaining.
 public opinion so that policy may be based on consensus suffers
 from several limitations: women and members of the Shi'a
 minority participate only indirectly, while the growth of the
 Saudi population renders officials' "majlis" sessions ever more
 crowded. More fundamentally, citizens are incapable of directly
 changing policies or officials through the *majlis," which is
 most often a forum in which grievances are presented or favors
 sought.
 The only, tentative response of the regime to these limitations
 has been to authorize study and drafting of a Basic Law and
 legislation to create an appointed Consultative Council at the
 national level, first rumored twenty years ago, and possibly
 assemblies in the provinces as well. The promulgation of this
 legislation, despite widespread interest in it, has been
 indefinitely postponed.
 Section 4 Government Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 No such organizations have sought to investigate alleged
 violations of internationally recognized human rights during the
 
 
 1412
 last five years. There are no human rights groups in the
 Kingdom. Amnesty International has focussed its attention on
 amputations and the death penalty in Saudi Arabia. It has also
 been concerned about reported arrests of possible prisoners of
 conscience, about unfair detention and trial procedures
 characterized by lengthy pre-trial detention, and about
 allegations of-ill-treatment. Freedom House rates Saudi Arabia
 "not free." In international forums, Saudi representatives have
 protested alleged violations of the political and human rights of
 Palestinians, Afghans, Eritreans, and of Muslim minorities in
 several countries.
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 The Government is increasingly giving attention to the
 development of remote provinces, both to maintain parity among
 regions and to help stem an over-rapid influx into the cities.
 The authorities, again heeding Islamic precepts as interpreted in
 the Kingdom, not only protect but also promote, through subsidies
 and concessions to entrepreneurs, the right to own property
 individually and in association.
 The status of Saudi women reflects the religious values and
 social traditions of the Kingdom. Women inherit, own, purchase,
 and sell real property and businesses independently of their male
 relatives, although in practice women manage their affairs
 through male agents or partners. A divorced woman is entitled to
 payment of the dower pledged by her husband at the time of their
 marriage and will also normally receive custody of elementary
 school-age children. Oualified observers have indicated that
 Saudi women pursue educational opportunities avidly and as a
 result have become increasingly articulate and effective in
 private in achieving the rights guaranteed them in the Shari'a.
 Women still suffer disabilities. By Koranic precept, their
 inheritance share is less than that of male children. By Saudi
 law, they may not drive motor vehicles and there are restrictions
 on their use of public facilities when men may be present. They
 do not by custom travel alone, although they are increasingly
 doing so by using the reserved sections on urban buses. They may
 travel abroad only with the written permission of their nearest
 male relative. In public, they must dress with extreme modesty
 and not wear ostentatious clothing or jewelry. In accordance
 with Islamic law, Saudi women are obliged to demonstrate legally
 specified grounds for a divorce proceeding, whereas men may
 divorce their wives without such grounds.
 Segregated free education through the university level is now
 available to Saudi women in the Kingdom, although recent rulings
 restrict their ability to study abroad. Women may not work
 alongside men, but are increasingly finding employment in
 .teaching, trade, banking and medicine. Reportedly, over half of
 all Saudi doctors are women, who treat only women patients. The
 authorities have granted disproportionate appropriations for
 educational institutions reserved for women, but the negative
 effects of earlier disparities have not been fully overcome.
 The vast petroleum revenues available to the Kingdom have enabled
 the Government to improve all Saudis' living standards. As with
 many labor-importing countries, however, the large expatriate
 worker population does not, for the most part, receive the same
 economic and social benefits available to native Saudis, and must
 abide by considerable restrictions on their normal life style.
 
 
 1413
 The living conditions of the poorest expatriates, almost two
 million Yemenis, Sudanese, Black Africans, and South Asians, are
 comparable to or below Saudi urban lower class standards-- some,
 in fact, are impoverished. North Yemenis are relatively better
 off, since they are granted special immigration and work
 privileges. Most expatriates have tolerated these conditions
 because, by their native standards, expatriates are appreciably
 better off than the majority of their compatriots. Moreover,
 most of their disposable income, after basic subsistence
 expenses, is repatriated to support their families. Thus,
 although the Saudis depend heavily on the foreign work force,
 they have no political or economic incentives to improve these
 conditions because of the sheer number of available expatriates
 and their unwillingness to cause serious trouble for the
 Government.
 Massive outlays, stated by the Planning Minister in September
 1983 to total $196.7 billion, have been made during the last 12
 years to develop social and economic infra-structure. The road,
 telecommunications, and electricity networks are largely
 complete. Health care is free and access unimpeded. Education
 is free through the university level and graduate study abroad by
 male Saudis is subsidized. Free lots and concessional loans are
 available for Saudis wishing to build private homes; those with
 limited incomes may receive additional financial aid from their
 municipality. The International Bank for Reconstruction and
 Development (IBRD), or World Bank, estimated per capita gross
 national product (GNP) as $12,546.30 in 1981. (The Planning
 Ministry calculated citizens' per capita income in 1982 at
 $16,927.)
 The results of Saudi Arabia's only census, completed in 1974,
 have not been published. The IBRD estimated the population in
 1983 at 10,443,000 (presumably including between two and three
 million expatriates). World Bank figures show the infant
 mortality as 105.00. Life expectancy at birth is given as 54.15
 years, while population growth is estimated by the IBRD at 3.3
 percent per year in 1983. These statistics are quite close to
 official estimates. In 1976, according to the IBRD, 84 percent
 of the population (97 percent urban, 65 percent rural) had access
 to safe water (much of it produced by expensive desalination
 plants). Calorie intake was estimated at 86 percent of total
 requirements by the IBRD in 1977, but could reasonably be
 expected to have increased since then.
 The Saudi authorities have set a goal of eliminating illiteracy
 by 1991. Literacy among adult Saudis has undoubtedly risen
 rapidly in recent years. It was estimated by the World Bank at
 only 16.20 percent in 1980; according to official Saudi
 statistics for 1981, 42 percent of the adult population (58
 percent of men and 36 percent of women) are literate. Statistics
 published by the World Bank indicate that 64 percent of Saudi
 children (78 percent of boys and 49 percent of girls) are
 enrolled in public schools. In recent years, primary schools
 have been constructed even in the most remote villages. At the
 other end of the scale, a massive expansion of the university
 system was begun in the late 1970s, with the objective of
 accommodating all applicants for university education within the
 Kingdom. As this goal is reached, the Government has moved
 toward terminating official support for undergraduate study
 abroad.
 Despite official inducements and subsidies to settle down, build
 
 
 1414
 a house, start a farm, enroll the children in school, and take
 advantage of local health clinics and city hospitals, a minority
 (albeit a rapidly declining one) of Saudis cling to the nomadic
 way of life. Material poverty is evident among them, as it is
 among immigrant laborers in the large cities. Many of the latter
 have surreptitiously changed employment or overstayed their
 pilgrimage visas and are exploited by unscrupulous employers.
 Saudi Arabia's liberal labor code is enforced by Ministry
 inspectors and special labor courts. Labor attaches from the
 countries of origin of large groups of workers also attempt to
 ensure that they are not cheated. Wages are largely determined
 by market forces; most disputes arise over hours, working
 conditions, housing, remittances, and repatriation. The number
 of these disputes has risen as the construction industry has
 entered a recessionary period. Strikes are not permitted;
 expatriates organizing labor demonstrations risk summary
 deportation.
 
 
 1415
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: SAUDI ARABIA
 1981     1982     1983
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .................     0.0     0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............       0.0       0.0     0.0
 A.AID  ... ............... ..... .0.0    0.0     0.0
 LOANS ...................0.0        0.0     0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0      0.0     0.0
 ISEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...         0.0     0.0      0.0
 B.FOCD  FOR  PEACE .......      0.0      0.0     0.0
 LOANS ..................   0.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ..........       0.0      0.0     0.0
 REPAY.  IN  $-LOANS .....      0.0      0.0     0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0      0.0     0.0
 TITLE  II-TOTAL .........       0.0      0.0     0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV A WFP.         0.0      0.0     0.0
 VOL.RELIEF  AGENCY .....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .................    0.0       0.0     0.0
 GRANTS ...............     0.0     0.0      0.0
 PEACE  CORPS ......       .      0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        0.0       0.0     0.0
 LOANS .............. ..  . 0.0     0.0     0.0
 GRANTS ...............     0.0     0.0      0.0
 A.MAP  GRANTS ..........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT  FINANCING  ....      0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL  MIL.ED.TRNG ....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER  GRANTS ........       0.0      0.0     0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...         0.0      0.0     0.0
 LOANS .................  . 0.0       0.0     0.0
 GRANTS .............  ...   0.0O     0.0      0.0
 OTHER  US  LOANS ..........      0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM  BANK  LOANS .......      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL  OTHER ................    0.0      0.0     .0.0
 ..........................................................
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1981     1982     1983     1946-83
 TOTAL ........     1.2      1.6      0.0     28.7
 IBRD               0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0
 IFC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDB                0.0     0.0       0.0     O.0
 ADB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFDB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNDP               1.2      1.6      0.0     26.2
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0      0.0      2.5
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 30-231 0 - 84 - 90
 
 
