SAUDI ARABIA
This year's report on Saudi Arabia is relatively frank in its discussion of the overall human rights situation, noting in unqualified terms that "[h]uman rights continue to be subject to pervasive abuse." The use of such language is to be commended as an improvement over the equivocation of previous years, when the State Department somewhat blandly stated that there were "no significant developments in human rights." Also, categorical statements such as "[f]reedom of speech is severely limited" represent a marked improvement over the watered-down formulations of previous years (in which, for example, free speech was labeled only "significantly limited"). Similarly, the assertion that "[f]reedom of religion does not exist" is more direct and more accurate than the formulation "[flreedom of religion is strictly circumscribed" of previous years.
The report also squarely attributes blame to Saudi police and military forces for human rights violations in the introduction, again an improvement over the mere description of their jurisdiction in previous years. In addition, the report points out several instances when government policies inhibit assessing human rights violations.
This year's report is, however, also lacking in certain respects. First, it often fails to be specific when specificity is called for. The report fails to give examples which would make patterns of human rights violations clear, or fails to mention that certain practices violate specific, recognized and binding international legal norms. While the instructions for preparing the report state that reports should not "recite a long collection of specific cases," lack of specifics can create misleading impressions, which is a second shortcoming in the report. This year's report sometimes uses misleading phrasing in order to dilute its description of human rights violations, or describes certain phenomena in a misleading way (perhaps unintentionally in some instances) so that the reader might come away with a false impression of certain events. For instance, the claim that passports "may be seized if security questions arise" is too noncommittal. It would be far more accurate to say that the Saudi government can and has in the past seized the
305
Saudi Arabia
passports of those persons who are suspected of disagreeing with the government. Finally, the report fails in several instances to draw obvious conclusions about certain practices, or to attribute responsibility for certain acts.
A conspicuous failing in this year's report is its discussion of the Saudi government's imprisonment of those who openly disagree with government policies. Although Amnesty International, Article 19 and Middle East Watch all prominently reported on the existence of political prisoners, including, inter alia, Muhammad al-Fassi (still, apparently, detained; there are allegations of torture) and Saleh al-'Azzaz (released March 4), this year's report refrains from discussing the general pattern of imprisonment of persons critical of the government. The report does detect a pattern of abuse in the detention of Shi'ah who oppose government policies. The only other specific detention noted by the report, however, is one "in connection with a[n alleged] terrorist incident." This reference could give the impression that many political prisoners deserve to be imprisoned and so is misleading.
In fact, this year's report distances itself from the reports of independent human rights groups by calling such detainees: "what they [i.e., the human rights groups] termed political prisoners." This tactic of suggesting that such persons may not really be political prisoners at all represents a deplorable departure from the 1990 and 1989 reports, which made good use of information published by Amnesty International. This year's report, for example, refuses to estimate the number of political prisoners held in Saudi Arabia. Yet information concerning political detainees and prisoners was readily available in reports published by human rights groups. Middle East Watch has cited numerous specific instances of imprisonment for political offenses, the trials for which routinely violated minimum international legal standards set forth in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR). Amnesty International, in its 1991 report (covering the year 1990), noted that at least 23 prisoners of conscience were held, without charge, at the end of 1990.
306
Saudi Arabia
The report also fails to mention that Sunni clerics, especially in the period surrounding the Iraq war, have been imprisoned (Ja'far al-Mubarak, Abdul-Latif al-Nasser and Abdul-Karim Hubail, all still imprisoned as of October) and prohibited from preaching, lecturing, or speaking in public (Safar al-Hawali, Abdullah al-Hamad al-Jajali, and Salman Ibn Fahd al-Awdah, who is subject to internal exile in Qasim province). Such persons were mentioned by name in 1991 country reports by Article 19 and Middle East Watch in particular. Omission of these cases leaves the misleading impression that only the Shi'ah disagree with government policies, and that Sunnis are solidly behind the government. In fact, there were public demonstrations against the bans on public speaking by the latter two clerics; security forces put an abrupt end to them (see below).
The report's section on trials does at least place responsibility with the Saudi government for making it difficult to obtain reliable information about political prisoners.
This year's report notes the prohibition on public gatherings for purposes of political demonstrations. The report might have mentioned that the few demonstrations which did occur in 1991 were unceremoniously suppressed by security forces. Of the demonstrations reported by human rights groups, each was accompanied by reports either of arrests, injuries, raiding of homes (apparently an exception to the sacrosanct character of private dwellings noted in the report), or injuries from attacks by police.
Although the report notes the severe limitations on freedom of expression in Saudi Arabia, it is too soft in describing the legal bases of such limitations. The report speaks of policy statements and government-issued guidelines as the source of government control of the press. In fact, as pointed out in the comprehensive October 1991 report on Saudi Arabia by Article 19, it is a 1965 national security law which expressly prohibits any public criticism of the government, or the dissemination of such criticism in any print or broadcast medium, including, for example, newspapers.
307
Saudi Arabia
Moreover, this year's report glibly states that foreign publications "may" be censored and that entire publications are only "sometimes" withheld from distribution. The above mentioned Article 19 report, as well as the February 1, 1992 issue of The Economist, both detail long lists of foreign publications banned entirely. The Economist, for example, became the subject of an open-ended and indefinite ban at the end of the year (it dared to suggest that some Muslims did not support the Saudi regime).
A few examples would have made the sweeping Saudi policy of censorship and tight control over information clearer. Just by way of example, the following British publications were banned at one time or another during the year: The Economist {i.e., once in addition to the year-end ban). The Financial Times, The Guardian, The Independent (subject to a continuing ban and still banned as of October), The Daily Mail, and three Arabic newspapers published in London (all three subject to a continuing ban). Not surprisingly, both this and last years' reports omit any mention of Saudi censorship of reporting on the war against Iraq. Reporting on Iraqi missile attacks against Israel was ordered postponed by 12 hours for Saudi broadcast media and 24 hours for Saudi print media. There were also reports of arrests of both foreign and Saudi journalists for unauthorized reporting during the war. The report thus failed to follow State Department instructions stating that "[t]he most important and relevant cases, including all egregious examples, should be cited to illustrate the general descriptions and conclusions in each section."
The report is frank about instances of beatings and other mistreatment of prisoners, and even notes the Saudi government's refusal to allow outside observers access to prisons. In the same section, however, the report omits any reference to the fact that the Saudi ban on legal representation in the courtroom in criminal proceedings violates Article i4(3)(d) of the ICCPR. Although Saudi Arabia has not ratified the ICCPR, its provisions are generally regarded as minimum standards under international law.
308
Saudi Arabia
Also, this year's report treats far too gently the forcible repatriation by Saudi Arabia of Iraqi and Somali refugees (and omits to mention that the number of Iraqis forcibly deported may have been as high as 1,000, rather more than the 283 mentioned in the report). Forcible repatriation is simply against the law. The principle of non-refoulement {i.e., that persons claiming refugee status not be forcibly repatriated) is a binding norm of international law. The report's attempt to characterize the repatriation of the Iraqis as a local administrative error is unbecoming and may stem from U.S. reluctance to criticize Saudi actions relating to the war with Iraq. Reports which suggest that some of the Iraqis deported were executed upon their return to Iraq belies the report's assertion that "Saudi authorities are responsive in cases where deportation of refugees to their home country would jeopardize their safety." The report also omits any mention of the severe abuse, mental and physical, reported to have been inflicted on the -- largely Shi'ah " Iraqi refugees by Saudi camp guards and clerics.
This year's report also fails to draw an obvious conclusion after setting out its explanation of Islamic criminal law. Because the Saudi interpretation of Islamic criminal procedure relies so heavily on confessions as a means for obtaining a conviction (the requisite number of eye witnesses being difficult to assemble in most cases), the incentive for prison, police or prosecution officials to elicit confessions through beatings is high. Such beatings, whose existence is acknowledged by this and previous years' reports, clearly violate international law (for example, Article 7 of the ICCPR).
Commendably, the report has tried this year to avoid explaining Saudi human rights abuses as an understandable result of the country's "traditional" or "Arab" nature, or of its adherence to Hanbali or Wahhabi Islam (as implied, for example, in the introduction to the 1989 and 1988 reports, where, at the outset, these terms were set out as monolithic, immutable givens). On the other hand, references to Islam in this year's report are still sometimes used to obscure issues surrounding Saudi human rights practices, or to deflect criticism from the government.
309
Saudi Arabia
The report omits significant details of the government's attitude toward the Shi'ah. For example, on September 30, a high ranking Saudi cleric, Abdallah Ibn Jibreen, declared the Shi'ah "idolaters deserving to be killed." Discrimination against hiring Shi'ah continued at Aramco (contrary to the contention in this year's report) and in other national industries. Also, certain Shi'ah liturgical texts remain banned, despite petitions presented to the government by Shi'ah clergy.
Although the report contains a discussion of the excesses of the semi-official religious police, the Mutawwi'in, it merely notes the connection between government inaction and the actions of the Mutawwi'in, but does not go the necessary extra step and provide analysis. The report should have noted that the government's unwillingness to curb the actions of the Mutawwi 'in, who are empowered to imprison persons and whose practice of physical abuse is common, results from a cynical political calculation designed to appease religious conservatives. The failure to report on this may emanate from a reluctance on the part of the State Department to say that some factions within the ruling family advocate a more militant, anti-Western form of government in the Kingdom. The activities of the Mutaww'in include imprisonment, beating and public physical and verbal abuse, often based on gender or national origin. The report should not shy away from drawing conclusions and attributing responsibility for these violations. If, in the State Department's view, the Mutawwi'in are independent and wholly outside government control, the report should have so stated.
In November 1991 King Fahd announced a series of government changes to take place by January 1992. These were to be the formation of an advisory council, the introduction of a written body of laws, and the delegation of greater autonomy to the provinces. Although last year's report mentions a similar announcement made in November 1990, this year's report is silent on the issue (despite the attention the November 1991 announcement received in the press). Because the promise of a constitution and consultative assembly of some sort has been floating around for two decades or so, the prospect of reform had been considered minimal at best by many Saudis. On March 1, 1992, after this year's report was released, King Fahd announced the changes.
310
Saudi Arabia
These announced changes, which will fall outside the scope of the 1991 report, appear to do little to enhance the rights and freedoms of residents of Saudi Arabia.
The report correctly points out the severe restrictions on workers rights in Saudi Arabia due to the government's ban on labor unions, collective bargaining and strikes. In its comments on discrimination, the State Department discusses the problems faced by women, children and indigenous minority communities as workers in the country.
Foreign workers in Saudi Arabia are not only subject to simple wage discrimination, but laws relating to residency put severe restrictions on their freedom of movement. To leave the country, aliens must obtain exit visas, but can only do so with the consent of a Saudi sponsor. Sponsors often hold laborers' passports in order to prevent them from working for another employer or attempting to leave the country without the employer's knowledge. Such practices violate international norms against forced or compulsory labor and arguably constitute contemporary forms of slavery. A complaint filed by an individual, whether or not substantiated, forms the basis for an indefinite ban on a resident alien's departure from the country. The report might have cited the example of Neville Norton, the British businessman who was imprisoned for five years (and denied an exit visa for some 10 years prior to his imprisonment) because of a business dispute. Even sponsors who are guilty of nothing more sinister than inattentiveness have, according to credible reports, caused their foreign employees to wait up to six months simply to go home to visit family.
Substandard housing and working conditions exist for some unskilled labor, including some Saudis from less-developed parts of the country, and many guest workers must pay exorbitant fees to employment agencies to arrange for positions. Foreign migrant workers also routinely face discrimination vis-à-vis Saudi citizens and each other. Nowhere are they accorded equal rights with indigenous workers and wages are routinely determined on the basis of nationality. The report notes that foreign workers from Africa and Asia are subject to "various forms of discrimination." It should have gone further, noting that Asian
311
Saudi Arabia
migrant workers earn lower wages than other non-Saudi Arab workers for equivalent work ~ the minimum accepted wage for North African female domestic servants is SRIOOO (Saudi Riyals), while their Sri Lankan counterparts may be paid as little as SR550.
Guest workers have little ability to comment on or improve the conditions or their labor and generally face stiff rebuke for such attempts. The plight of one U.S. guest worker has recently resurfaced in the case of Nelson v. Saudi Arabia, 923 F.2d 1528 (11th Cir. 1991). Nelson alleged that in 1984 he was tortured and imprisoned by government employees when, as a monitoring systems engineer at a Riyadh hospital, he reported safety hazards to an investigative commission of the government.
Workers from countries with whom the Saudi Arabian government has poor relations have little redress when the country's laws requiring work and residence permits are turned against them. During the Gulf crisis, hundreds of thousands of Palestinian and Yemeni guest workers were forced to leave Saudi Arabia, often losing much of the personal wealth accumulated there. The case of the Yemeni workers is particularly glaring. Yemeni workers who were previously permitted to work and own businesses without a Saudi sponsor or partner found this privilege revoked. The workers were given two months to find a sponsor and businessmen were given three months to find a Saudi partner. Most could not react in such a short time and western press reports included stories of destitute workers and dramatic reductions in the value of Yemeni owned businesses sold at distressed prices.
312
