 SAUDI ARABIA
 Saudi Arabia is a traditional, Arab, and Islamic monarchy
 ruled by the sons of its founder, the late King Abd Al-Aziz
 (known in the West as "Ibn Saud"). The political system is
 based on the Koran and the Shari'a, the codified Islamic
 religious law; there is no written national constitution.
 By convention, the King and Crown Prince have been chosen from
 among the sons of Abd Al-Aziz, who themselves have
 preponderant influence in the choice. Senior religious
 scholars and other princes also have a major voice. The King
 serves as Prime Minister. Officials from the King down
 maintain contact with male citizens by holding open-door
 audiences ("majlis") regularly. Saudis from all social strata
 attend these meetings to seek redress of grievances, which is
 frequently granted. There are no elected assemblies or
 political parties. Nonreligious public assembly and
 demonstrations are not permitted. Non-Muslim public worship
 is banned. The legitimacy of the regime rests to a large
 degree on its perceived adherence to the defense of Islam,
 particularly the austere Hanbali school of Islamic
 jurisprudence. Rulers and ruled share a respect for laws
 believed to be divinely inspired as well as ancient customs
 which call for consensus in government, internal social
 cohesion, and economic private enterprise.
 Saudi Arabia's security rests with three entities, with
 somewhat overlapping functions. The Ministry of Defense and
 Aviation, with its Air Force, Army, Navy, and Air Defense
 services, is responsible for meeting conventional military
 attacks. The Saudi Arabian National Guard is responsible for
 defending vital internal installations (e.g., oil fields and
 refineries), maintaining internal security, and providing
 additional land forces for the Kingdom's defense as required.
 The Ministry of Interior is responsible for internal security
 and police functions as well as paramilitary frontier guard
 elements.
 Massive oil revenues over the last 40 years have transformed
 Saudi Arabia's centuries-old pastoral, agricultural, and
 commercial economy. This transformation has been marked by
 rapid urbanization, large-scale infrastructure development,
 government subsidies to entrepreneurs and consumers, the
 emergence of a technocratic middle class, and the presence of
 around 4 million foreign workers and their families in a total
 population of about 11 million. With the exception of the
 oil, transportation, and utilities sectors, economic activity
 and resources have largely remained in private hands.
 No major new developments affected human rights in 1988. As
 in previous years, there were continuing reports of
 mistreatment of prisoners and incommunicado detention. Civil
 liberties remained significantly restricted.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no known political killings.
 
 
 1484
 SAUDI ARABIA
 b. Disappearance
 There were no known disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Under Islamic Shari'a Law, punishment for some crimes may
 include amputation with anesthetic (reserved for recidivist
 thieves), or execution by beheading, firing squad, or stoning
 (with the convicted person in a drugged state). In the
 absence of four eyewitnesses, confessions before a judge are
 usually required for conviction in Shari'a courts. There were
 reports again in 1988 that the police beat and otherwise
 mistreated some detainees to elicit confessions. Members of
 the Committee for the Propagation of Virtue and Prevention of
 Vice (the "religious police," commonly called Mutawwi'in,
 which means "enforcers") have the legal right to detain
 suspects for supposed infractions of Muslim strictures up to
 48 hours before turning them over to the regular authorities.
 On a few occasions they have claimed the right to flog
 detainees while seeking a confession. In the past, the United
 States has protested Mutawwi'in actions against U.S. citizens
 to the Saudi Government.
 In its 1988 Report, covering 1987, Amnesty International (AI)
 noted that it had received reports of torture of criminal
 suspects by the police and that several accounts again named
 the Drug Detention Center in Dammam as a facility where
 torture frequently takes place.
 Saudi security officials at various levels have indicated that
 a royal order prohibiting the striking of prisoners exists.
 There were no instances of police or other officials being
 disciplined for such conduct, although in the past there have
 been reports of police being transferred to less desirable
 locations as punishment for such misdeeds. There were no
 reports of beatings of U.S. prisoners in 1988, but one U.S.
 detainee was denied sleep and forced to stand upright for a
 long period to induce a confession. The detainee was released
 following a protest by the U.S. Embassy.
 Prison conditions are not intentionally degrading but are
 severe in some correctional institutions. Prisoners often
 sleep on the floor, suffer heat stroke, and sometimes complain
 of difficulty in obtaining adequate medical treatment.
 Although in 1988 the Government continued efforts to expand
 and improve prisons, some facilities remained substandard,
 especially deportation centers, where large numbers of foreign
 detainees are kept prior to being deported.
 In accordance with Shari'a law, Saudi Arabia imposes capital
 punishment for the crimes of intentional murder, adultery,
 apostasy from Islam, narcotics smuggling, and, depending upon
 the circumstances, rape and armed robbery; a 1988 decree added
 sabotage to this list. The Interior Minister and Cassation
 Courts review all cases in which capital punishment has been
 imposed, and the King must approve all such sentences. The
 number of executions fell in 1988 (to 22 in the first 9 months
 of 1988 from 45 in the same period of 1987). Two of those
 executed were convicted of narcotics smuggling. On September
 30, four Saudis--three Shi'as and an accomplice who was
 possibly Sunni--were executed following conviction on a number
 of charges, including conspiracy against the Kingdom, treason,
 explosives smuggling, and, for two of them, murder. At the
 
 
 1485
 SAUDI ARABIA
 time their offenses were committed, the only one of these
 crimes carrying the death penalty was murder.
 Beheading is the usual method of execution, and all executions
 in 1988 were by this method. Death by firing squad or stoning
 may be imposed for adultery, while a recidivist thief may
 suffer severance of a hand. In the first 9 months of 1988, no
 one suffered these punishments. For less severe crimes, such
 as drunkenness or publicly flaunting Islamic precepts,
 flogging with a cane is often imposed. Public flogging is
 intended to humiliate rather than cripple the criminal and to
 serve as a deterrent to others. The skin is not broken, and
 the flogging, though it is painful and leaves welts, is
 administered with a bent elbow.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Saudi security forces are divided into several branches,
 including the regular police and the special investigative
 police. There were no reports of arbitrary arrests or
 imprisonment by the regular police in 1988. There is no
 automatic, prompt procedure for contacting a detainee's- family
 or employer; however, in cases involving foreigners, Saudi
 authorities acknowledge that they have the obligation to do
 so. When asked, the police will almost always confirm an
 arrest. Embassies usually hear about arrests of their
 nationals informally within a few days, and in most cases are
 granted prompt consular access to prisoners. Official
 notification almost always takes several months, if it occurs
 at all.
 Problems may arise when persons are arrested by the General
 Directorate of Investigations (GDI), the security service
 commonly called the "Mubahith' or investigative police. GDI
 prisoners are regularly held incommunicado during the initial
 phase of an investigation, which may last weeks or months.
 Following suspicious accidents at industrial facilities at Ras
 Tanura and Jubayl in the Eastern Province, a number of
 suspects were arrested and held for months without official
 charges while their cases were being investigated. The total
 number of persons affected is unknown.
 Shari'a law makes no provision for bail or habeas corpus;
 prisoners are sometimes released on the recognizance of a
 Saudi patron or employer. Prisoners may be held for long
 periods while investigations proceed before being charged or
 released. Regulations issued by the Interior Ministry in 1983
 to eliminate lengthy pretrial detentions or detentions without
 charges are frequently unenforced. On the other hand, the
 Board of Grievances, an independent judicial body empowered to
 investigate citizens' complaints against official abuse, has
 used the authority granted to it in 1983 to become an
 effective--if slow--avenue of redress. Citizens and private
 corporations take to the Board grievances against state
 institutions, public sector companies, and government
 officials accused of malfeasance, nonfeasance, bias, or
 corruption. The Government does not use exile as a form of
 punishment.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The judicial system is founded upon the Shari'a. Shari'a
 courts exercise jurisdiction over common criminal cases and
 
 
 1486
 SAUDI ARABIA
 civil suits regarding marriage, divorce, child custody, and
 inheritance of real or personal property. Trials are
 generally closed and are normally held without counsel, though
 the advice of Islamic lawyers is available before trial. In a
 Shari'a court, the defendant appears before a judge who
 determines guilt or innocence and, if warranted, imposes the
 appropriate punishment. Counsel is not permitted in the court
 itself, but lawyers may act as interpreters for those
 unfamiliar with Arabic. With rare exceptions, there is no
 consular access to the trials of foreign nationals.
 Sentencing is not uniform and may be handed down by officials
 up to the highest levels of government. Appeals against
 judges' decisions are automatically reviewed by the Justice
 Ministry or, in more serious cases, by the Supreme Judicial
 Council, to ensure that court procedure was correct and that
 the judge applied appropriate Shari'a principles and
 punishments.
 The independence of the judiciary is prescribed by law and
 generally respected in practice. The Justice Ministry is
 responsible for the appointment, transfer, and promotion of
 judges. Judges may be disciplined or removed only by the
 Supreme Judicial Council, an independent body of senior
 jurists. The Supreme Judicial Council has in the past
 investigated and removed corrupt judges to allow for their
 prosecution and imprisonment.
 Specialized labor and commercial courts decide cases on the
 basis of decrees issued by the Council of Ministers and
 regulations issued pursuant to those decrees. The labor and
 commercial courts' effectiveness is frequently vitiated by
 long delays in reaching decisions and practical difficulties
 in enforcing judgments reached. The military justice system
 has jurisdiction over uniformed personnel and civilian
 government employees charged with violations of military
 regulations. Court-martial decisions are reviewed by the
 Minister of Defense and Aviation and the King.
 The Board of Grievances arbitrates claims against the State.
 The President and Vice President of the Board are experienced
 jurists. They are aided by Board members expert in
 administrative, contract, corruption, civil service, and
 forgery legislation. The President is responsible directly to
 the King, and members of the Board are guaranteed considerable
 independence. The Board has on occasion used powers granted
 by a 1983 decree to call erring officials to account.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The sanctity of family life and the inviolability of the home
 are among the most fundamental of Islamic precepts. The
 police must generally demonstrate reasonable cause and obtain
 special permission from the provincial governor before
 searching a private home, but warrants are not required. The
 Mutawwi'in may enter homes to search for evidence of
 un-Islamic behavior when they have grounds for suspicion, but
 instances of this appear to be rare. Wiretaps and mail
 surveillance can be carried out on the authority of officials
 of the Interior Ministry or the Directorate of Intelligence.
 Informants are reliably reported to be widely employed in
 internal security matters.
 Some social and religious norms and strictures affecting
 personal life are matters of law and are enforced by the
 
 
 1487
 SAUDI ARABIA
 Government. Saudi women may not marry non-Saudis without
 government permission. Saudi men must obtain approval to
 marry women from countries other than the six members of the
 Gulf Cooperation Council. During the Muslim holy month of
 Ramadan, the prohibition against public eating, drinking, or
 smoking during daylight hours is enforced on Muslims and
 non-Muslims alike. Prohibitions against alcohol and
 pornography are strictly enforced, a reality sometimes learned
 the hard way by expatriate workers. The Mutawwi'in are in
 charge of enforcing Islamic decorum in dress and demeanor as
 well as making sure that shops are closed during the five
 daily prayer periods.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The freedom of speech and press is significantly restricted.
 Criticism of Islam or of the ruling family is not allowed.
 The potential presence of informers renders public criticism
 of the regime rare. In private, complaints are expressed
 relatively freely. Saudis are able to voice complaints and to
 seek redress of grievances through the open-door audiences
 which are held regularly by even the highest officials, but
 such grievances are generally personal rather than political
 or social.
 Saudi television and radio are state owned and operated-
 Besides entertainment, their basic aim is to project and gain
 public support for official policies and views, with. the
 corollary that conflicting viewpoints are not presented.
 Foreign news is increasingly presented objectively.
 The press is privately owned. It is effectively controlled by
 a 1982 media policy statement and the firm understanding that
 nothing embarrassing to the Government, ruling family, or
 religious leadership may be published. The media policy
 statement enjoins the press to uphold Islam, oppose atheism,
 promote Arab interests, and preserve the cultural heritage of
 Saudi Arabia. Newspapers receive guidelines issued by the
 Information Ministry on government positions, on controversial
 issues, and the government-owned Saudi Press Agency (SPA)
 expresses the official viewpoint on such issues.
 Editors-in-chief are appointed with the tacit approval of the
 Information Minister, and the Government has the power to have
 them removed. Foreign publications circulate but can be
 censored for materials deemed immoral or explicitly or
 implicitly critical of Saudi policies and actions. For
 example, international publications such as Time or the
 International Herald Tribune often appear on the newsstand
 with ads for alcoholic beverages, pictures of female
 celebrities, or beach scenes torn out or obscured with black
 ink, and entire publications have sometimes been withheld from
 distribution.
 Academic freedom is constrained by similar guidelines; for
 example, the study of Freud and Marx, representational art,
 and philosophy are forbidden. Professors commonly believe
 that classroom comments which would be taken as antiregime
 will be reported to the authorities. There is also an
 injunction against the study of music and art in educational
 institutions, including universities. Nevertheless, there has
 been an increase in artistic activities outside these
 institutions, as evidenced by classes sponsored by the Saudi
 
 
 1488
 SAUDI ARABIA
 Arabian Society for Culture and Arts, an association whose
 head holds ministerial rank.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Public demonstrations as a means of political expression or to
 present grievances are prohibited. Tribal, familial, and
 economic interest groups informally aggregate public opinion,
 which their leaders express to high officials. Nonpolitical
 clubs and professional groups may be organized with the
 permission of the authorities. The few existing professional
 bodies are permitted but not encouraged to maintain contacts
 with their recognized international counterparts.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is greatly circumscribed. Islam is the
 official religion. All Saudi citizens must be Muslims.
 Conversion to another religion is a crime punishable by
 death. The Saudis scrupulously uphold the Islamic injunction
 that all Muslims have a responsibility to make a pilgrimage,
 or hajj, to Mecca, and all Muslims who can are encouraged to
 visit the holy places. Travel to these places by non-Muslims
 is illegal. Political activities by pilgrims have been
 banned since the 1987 Iranian demonstrations in Mecca, in
 which over 400 persons were killed. Saudi authorities have
 made it clear that persons disrupting the hajj would face
 severe penalties.
 The Shi'a Muslims of the Eastern Province, estimated at up to
 400,000 persons, constitute a religious minority subject to
 social and economic discrimination. Since the Iranian
 revolution, they have been periodically subjected to
 surveillance and limitations on travel abroad. After the
 Eastern Province industrial sabotage incidents in March, a
 number of suspects, including some Shila, were detained
 without charges, in some cases for months.
 For security reasons, the Government does not permit Shi'a
 public processions during Ashura, the holiest of the
 exclusively Shi'a holidays. Ashura passed without incident in
 1988. The Shi'a are free to adjudicate exclusively
 intra-Shi'a disputes within their own legal tradition. Shi'a
 judges refuse to receive any stipend or salary from the
 Government. The Government provides no financial support for
 the Shi'a religious establishment and seldom permits private
 construction of Shi'a mosques, while the Shi'a have refused
 government offers to build state-supported mosques for them.
 In recent years the authorities have made efforts to redress
 Shi'a complaints about the economic underdevelopment of their
 areas. Although a few Shi'a have become comparatively
 wealthy, many continue to live under conditions notably poorer
 than those of their Sunni compatriots.
 Non-Muslim religious activities are not permitted, and
 importation of non-Islamic.religious materials is illegal.
 Proselytizing by non-Muslims is illegal and leads to
 deportation. Non-Muslim places of worship may not exist, and
 foreign nationals may practice their religions only in private
 services. Large gatherings or elaborate organizational
 structures are likely to attract official attention and lead
 to the expulsion of their leaders.
 
 
 1489
 SAUDI ARABIA
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Saudis may travel freely anywhere within the country. Male
 Saudis may travel abroad freely. In the case of government
 officials, the permission of the Royal Court is required for
 foreign travel but apparently is normally perfunctory. Women
 must obtain prior written permission from their closest male
 relative each time before being allowed to leave the country.
 The passports of suspected subversives have occasionally been
 seized. Since the breaking of relations between Saudi Arabia
 and Iran in April 1988, travel between the two countries has
 become extremely difficult. Detection of such travel by Saudi
 authorities may be followed by interrogation. Shi'a known to
 have pro-Khomeini sympathies may not be allowed to travel
 abroad. Saudis are permitted to emigrate and assume foreign
 nationality, which results in the loss of Saudi nationality.
 Citizenship is not revoked for political reasons.,
 There is no explicit formal policy regarding refugees or
 granting asylum. Refugees and displaced persons are in most
 cases dealt with like other foreign workers. With some
 exceptions (including all North Yemenis), persons seeking
 residence in the Kingdom must meet strictly enforced
 requirements of sponsorship and employment. There are over
 250,000 resident foreigners who fled their native countries,
 primarily Palestinians, Lebanese, Eritreans, Somalis, Afghans,
 and South Yemenis. These persons generally receive no special
 treatment, privileges, or services. Individual Saudis
 (frequently members of the ruling family) permanently sponsor
 such individuals to enable them to remain in Saudi Arabia,
 permitting them to find work where they may. In a small
 number of cases, sponsors reportedly have charged fees to such
 persons for'providing documentation required by the
 Government. There are few Saudi refugees outside the country.
 Foreigners living in Saudi Arabia, except for North Yemenis,
 are required to carry identification cards. They are not
 permitted to travel outside the city of their employment or to
 change their workplace without their sponsor's permission.
 Foreign national employees are not permitted to travel abroad
 without their sponsor's permission, since sponsors hold their
 passports and are responsible for obtaining exit visas for
 them. Foreigners involved in commercial disputes are often
 not allowed to leave the country until the dispute has been
 resolved. Sponsors have taken advantage of this arrangement
 at times to exert unfair pressure to resolve commercial
 disputes in their favor. Occasionally Saudi sponsors or
 business partners have been able to prevent foreign nationals
 from departing Saudi Arabia for long periods or to have them
 arrested or deported. In criminal cases, Saudi regulations
 require that the passports of all potential suspects and
 witnesses be seized. This has sometimes forced foreign
 nationals to remain in Saudi Arabia for lengthy periods.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Saudi Arabia has no formal democratic institutions, and most
 of its citizens do not have a say in the choice of leaders or
 in changing the political system. The King rules the country
 within limits established by religious law, tradition, and the
 need to maintain consensus among the ruling family and
 religious leaders. The King's legitimacy is based upon his
 descent, his selection by consensus, his adherence to the
 
 
 1490
 SAUDI ARABIA
 tenets of Islam, his ability to govern, and his perceived
 concern for the welfare and security of the nation. The King
 is also the Prime Minister, and the Crown Prince serves as
 First Deputy Prime Minister. The King appoints all other
 Ministers, who in turn appoint subordinate officials with
 cabinet concurrence. There are no popularly elected
 officials. Political parties are not permitted, and there are
 no known organized opposition groups.
 Traditionally, public opinion has been expressed through
 client-patron relationships and interest groups such as
 tribes, families, and professional hierarchies. The open-door
 audience (majlis) remains the primary forum for expression of
 opinion or grievance. Any male citizen or expatriate may
 attend these sessions, which all important officials, national
 and local, hold regularly and openly. Since the assassination
 of King Faisal during a majlis in 1975, however, kings have
 reduced the frequency of their personal contacts with the
 public. Typical topics raised in a majlis are complaints
 about bureaucratic dilatoriness or insensitivity, requests for
 redress or assistance, and criticism of particular acts of
 government affecting personal or family welfare. Broader
 "political" concerns--Saudi social, economic, or foreign
 policy--are raised only occasionally. Either the King or the
 Crown Prince meets with Sunni religious leaders at least once
 a week.
 This relaxed but institutionalized means of ascertaining
 public opinion through consultation has serious limitations.
 Citizens are not directly able to change policies or officials
 through the majlis system, which is largely a forum in which
 grievances are aired and favors sought. As governmental
 functions have become increasingly complex, time-consuming,
 and centralized in Riyadh, direct access to senior officials
 has become more difficult.
 Open participation by women in the political life of the
 country is severely restricted in practice, both by law and by
 tradition.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There were no reports that international or nongovernmental
 organizations sought to investigate alleged violations of
 human rights in Saudi Arabia during 1988. In its 1988 Report,
 AI noted that it has appealed several times to Saudi
 authorities on various human rights matters in 1987, but that
 no response was received to any of its inquiries. There are
 no human rights groups in Saudi Arabia. In international
 forums, Saudi representatives continued regularly to protest
 violations of the human rights of Afghans, Eritreans,
 Palestinians, and Muslim minorities in European and Asian
 countries.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Racial discrimination is outlawed in Saudi Arabia by Shari'a
 law, and Muslims of all races and nationalities are encouraged
 to make the pilgrimage to Mecca.
 Women do not enjoy equality with men. By Koranic precept, a
 daughter's share of an inheritance is less than that of her
 
 
 1491
 SAUDI ARABIA
 brother. Women must demonstrate legally specified grounds for
 divorce, but men may divorce without grounds. If divorced or
 widowed, a Muslim woman normally may keep her children until
 the boys attain the age of 7 years and girls 9 years. Then
 the children revert to the husband's family, to whom they
 belong under Islamic law. In Shari'a court, the testimony of
 one man equals that of two women. Women may not drive motor
 vehicles, and there are restrictions on their use of public
 facilities when men are present. By custom, women do not
 travel alone. They are restricted to specially designated
 sections with a separate entrance in the rear of urban buses.
 Employment opportunities for Saudi women either in the civil
 service or with public corporations are extremely limited,
 although there has been some slight improvement in recent
 years. In practice, their employment is largely restricted to
 the media and to the teaching and health care professions. In
 general, women are not permitted to work side by side with
 men; the health profession provides the major exception. In
 public, women are required to dress with extreme modesty,
 including (in the case of Muslim women) a black outer garment
 covering the entire body. Free but segregated education
 through the university level is available to Saudi women; the
 number of women enrolled in the educational system now totals
 more than a million, up about 50 percent in the past 5 years.
 Polygamy is becoming less common, especially in cities and
 among younger Saudis. Islamic law limits the number of wives
 to four, and requires a husband who has more than one wife to
 treat each of his wives equally.
 The large expatriate work force does not, for the most part,
 receive, the same economic and social benefits available to
 native Saudis, and must conform to restrictive Saudi social
 standards. Employment opportunities for non-Muslims are
 circumscribed. The poorest of the foreign nationals, almost 3
 million Yemenis, Africans, and Asians, live under conditions
 significantly more harsh than those of the Saudi urban
 classes. Foreign embassies have received numerous reports of
 sexual abuse of low-paid non-Muslim female domestics by Saudi
 employers. It appears that stich victims have limited options
 for redress in the courts, although a few employers have
 reportedly been punished for such abuses.
 Saudi Shi'a face discrimination in government and industrial
 employment, especially in jobs with national security
 implications. They also face some limitations on their access
 to social services, despite efforts by the Government to
 improve the social service infrastructure in predominantly
 Shi'a areas of the country.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Government decrees prohibit the formation of labor unions and
 strike activity.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The right to organize and bargain collectively is not
 recognized in Saudi Arabia.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced or compulsory labor is not known to exist in Saudi
 Arabia. In cases where employers try to exact services
 
 
 1492
 SAUDI ARABIA
 greater than those specified in the contract or otherwise
 violate a work contract's provisions, employees have recourse,
 in theory, to labor courts for adjudication.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 There is no minimum age for those employed in agriculture,
 family enterprises, private homes, or repair of agricultural
 machinery. Children under 18 and women may not be employed in
 hazardous or unhealthy industries, such as mining or
 industries employing power-operated machinery. In other
 cases, the labor law provides for a minimum age of 13, which
 may be waived by the Ministry of Labor in certain areas with
 the consent of the juvenile's guardian. In general,
 enforcement is effective, and child labor does not appear to
 be a significant problem.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 There is no legal minimum wage. The labor law provides,
 however, that minimum wages may, if necessary, be set by the
 Council of Ministers on the recommendation of the Minister of
 Labor. The effective minimum wage is the amount required to
 induce foreign laborers to come to work at any given work site
 in Saudi Arabia at any given time. Saudi labor law
 establishes a maximum 48-hour workweek at regular pay and
 allows employers to require up to 12 additional hours of
 overtime at time and a half. Employees may volunteer for
 additional overtime.
 The 1969 Saudi Labor Law requires employers to protect most
 workers from job-related hazards and disease. Domestic
 employees and workers employed in enterprises with fewer than
 five employees are not covered in the labor code. Labor
 Ministry inspectors and the labor courts are seeking with some
 success to enforce the labor code, but foreign nationals
 report frequent failures to enforce health and safety
 standards. Saudi authorities reportedly have enjoyed greater
 success in enforcing contract terms and working hours.
 Saudi Arabia has a generous social security program. Most
 foreign workers formerly were eligible to participate in this
 program on the same basis as Saudis, but were excluded from
 participation in March 1987. Some foreign workers,
 particularly those in unskilled positions, such as lower-level
 construction workers and housemaids, have been subjected to
 abuse due to their ignorance of the labor code, inability to
 understand Arabic, lack of written contracts, or fear of
 retribution from their employers. Such labor problems can be
 settled in labor courts, which have the reputation of being
 reasonably fair, if at times slow. But the poorest employees
 may face insuperable practical and financial obstacles in
 trying to take advantage of these courts. Moreover, labor
 courts have no compulsory enforcement powers. In 1986 the
 Government increased its authority over recalcitrant employers
 through a written code that permits it to attach assets.
 Still, during 1988 there were reports of conoitions facing
 expatriate workers from several countries which included
 meager wages, squalid labor camps where conditions are
 deteriorating, and harassment from employers, with allegations
 of sexual abuse.
 
 
 1493
