SAUDI ARABIA
In 1994 the Saudi Arabian government's pervasive abuse of human rights continued unabated. The kingdom singled out critics of the government for mistreatment, including persons associated with the Committee for Defense of Legitimate Rights {al-lajna Vl-difa' 'an aUhuquq al-shar'iyya, CDLR). One of the CDLR's founders, Dr. Muhammad al-Mas'ari, fled to England in 1994 after a lengthy period of confinement in 1993, during which it is likely that he was tortured by Saudi security forces. Other elements of the increasingly vocal opposition also suffered at the hands of the Saudi security apparatus in 1994 for their public criticism of the government. In addition, the many deplorable human rights abuses not directly connected with the present dynamic political situation in the kingdom, but noted in previous years both in the State Department's report and in this Critique, remained unchecked. Thus, the overall human rights situation in Saudi Arabia during 1994 cannot be said to have improved.
To make sense of the current human rights situation in Saudi Arabia, some reference to the changing political circumstances in the kingdom is required. Opposition groups, an unprecedented phenomenon, have borne the brunt of Saudi human rights abuses in the last two years, including arbitrary detainment, incommunicado detention, absence of due (or, for that matter, any) process, and, most distressingly, torture. All of these practices violate accepted and binding norms of international human rights law. In addition, the fact that such groups criticize the Saudi government from a religious perspective reinforces the government's perceived need to advertise its religious legitimacy, thus providing an incentive for it to tolerate human rights abuses perpetrated in the name of Wahhabi Islam, for example, those committed by the religious police (Mutawwi'in).
This year's report, like its predecessors, provides a fair and reasonably accurate catalogue of human rights abuses committed, or tolerated, by the Saudi government. In an encouraging development, the report has gone some way toward remedying two principal shortcomings addressed in last year's edition of the Critique — the failure to provide a
203
CRITIQUE 1994
coherent context for Saudi human rights abuses and the failure to explain with sufficient precision the role of the Mutawwi'in and related persons. While further improvements could have been made in both areas, the fact that the drafters of this year's report turned their attention to both problems is in itself noteworthy. The report could now take a major step forward by including in its introductory section a statement to the effect that the Saudi government has so far failed to cope with the challenges posed by a nascent opposition movement. Other problems in this year's report include confused references to the role of Islam, an over-eager reliance on government information, and an occasional lack of illuminating detail.
This year's report acknowledges, but only very obliquely, that religious and political discourse are indissolubly linked in Saudi Arabia. The introduction states that: "The Government's legitimacy is based on its adherence to the Shari'a and upon the consent of the governed, who are obliged to obey the ruler as long as he continues to govern according to Islamic law." This vague paraphrase of classical theories of Islamic government is not, however, expressly linked either to the recent expressions of dissent or to the government's response. Nevertheless, this faint thread is picked up again in the report's characterization of the Council of Senior Islamic Scholars {hay'at kibar al-'ulama^ as supportive of government policies and as "an important source of religious legitimacy" for the government.
While this modest attempt to link religion and politics in the kingdom is laudable, the analysis must still be taken a step farther. Nervous about criticism from Islamic quarters, especially from conservatives, the Saudi government has opted to perpetrate, or at least tolerate, two categories of human rights abuses: those designed for public consumption — such as denial of women's rights, repression of religious minorities and corporal and capital punishment, which are apparently considered quintessentially Islamic — and those designed to mute political discussion in the kingdom — such as arbitrary arrest of opponents, prohibition of free speech and expression and the acquisition of foreign media. For the most part, the report gives an adequate description of individual incidents of both types. However, for the pattern of abuse to
204
SAUDI ARABIA
emerge more clearly, this dual aspect of Saudi human rights violations requires further elucidation.
This point has ramifications for a number of interrelated human rights problems discussed in this year's report. For example, the government's decision in March to outlaw TV satellite dishes reflects on one hand its deep-seated fear that its citizens might gain uncontrolled access to information. At the same time, it allows the government to claim that it is sanitizing the air waves of un-Islamic broadcasts. While the report's discussion of this issue is not lacking in helpful detail, the overall context is not sufficiently fleshed out.
The 1994 report again fails to mention the deliberate policy of the Saudi government to buy up free organs of the Arabic press operating abroad. This policy, discussed in last year's Critique, is directly traceable to the human rights situation in Saudi Arabia. It is designed to extend to other countries the severe limits on expression that prevail within the kingdom's borders, and to remove all vestiges of criticism of the Saudi government from public view. Disturbing evidence of this policy in 1994 — which the report ignores — was the censorship of news programs on a Saudi-controlled radio network in the United States, the Arab Network of America (ANA). After an appearance by CDLR member Dr. Muhammad al-Mas'ari for an on-the-air interview on ANA in September, the program in which he appeared was cancelled by the network's owners (relatives of King Fahd) and replaced by a news show hosted by an employee of the Saudi-owned Saudi Arabian Academy. Perhaps now that Saudi censorship has reared its ugly head in the United States, the State Department will take seriously Saudi attempts to control media abroad and discuss them in fiiture reports.
As noted above, the descriptions of actions by the Saudi religious police have improved in this year's report. It states that the Mutawwi'in "are government employees; however, other citizens sometimes represent themselves as Mutawwa'in [sic] when in fact they are not." This statement seeks to clarify the relationship between the Mutawwi'in, those who act as
205
CRITIQUE 1994
though they were Mutawwi'in, and the government. More important, the report notes that the Mutawwi'in and "religious vigilantes" continued to harass both foreigners and Saudis, and that the Saudi government "has not condemned the actions of religious vigilantes or sought to disband such groups." Past reports have often implied that human rights abuses committed by the Mutawwi'in were equally (or perhaps solely) attributable to their unofficial imitators, as though that relieved the Saudi government of responsibility. It is a very welcome improvement that this year's report attributes some measure of responsibility to the Saudi government for the actions both of the vigilantes and of the Mutawwi'in proper.
As last year's edition of the Critique pointed out, the Saudi government is prepared to accept a certain baseline of human rights abuses by such groups in order to project its commitment to a puritanical interpretation of Islam. The indignant recounting in this year's report of the brutal assault on a female US citizen by the religious police, and the Saudi response to US protests indicating that "very strong measures had been taken," highlight the limits of the behavior that the government will tolerate. That the government would have responded similarly to Egyptian or Venezuelan diplomatic protests concerning beatings of their citizens — also noted in the report — is unlikely. It remains to be seen whether, as the report claims, abuses committed by the Mutawwi'in are in fact declining.
This year's report, like its predecessors, is dogged by the problem of how to make appropriate references to Islam. For example, the statement in this year's introduction that "[mjost Saudis respect the legal system, which they believe is divinely inspired," appears to contradict the assertion in the section on the denial of fair public trial that "[i]n general, the public perceives members of the royal family, and other powerful families, as not subject to the same rule of law as ordinary citizens." Since it is unlikely that "most Saudis" believe this situation to be "divinely inspired," it would probably be more accurate to say that many (perhaps most) Saudis support the application of Islamic law in Saudi Arabia, and believe that Islamic law itself derives from God's commandments. As recent events in the kingdom indicate, however, there is serious disagreement about the Saudi government's adherence to Islamic norms of
206
SAUDI ARABIA
governance and law in practice. Such disagreement reflects a larger discussion among Muslims generally about what these norms are, or should be, and is, of course, not limited to Saudi Arabia. However, it is that debate which underlies the manner of expression of opposition to the Saudi government, and the Saudi government's response.
Similarly, the report's discussion of the denial of equal rights to women under Saudi law could have been clearer. The report states that "by religious law and social custom" women suffer pernicious and pervasive discrimination in Saudi Arabia. It should be noted that such discrimination — adequately detailed by the report — is in some instances reinforced by the Saudi government's support for a certain interpretation of Islamic law, such as strict segregation of the sexes, rules for appropriate attire for women, and discrimination against women in many sectors of the economy. On the other hand, it would be appropriate to cite openly the purported Koranic basis for such ugly practices as the instances of "spousal abuse" noted in the report. The Koran enjoins husbands as follows:
Men have been put in charge of women^ inasmuch as God has preferred one over the other... As for those women whose rebelliousness is feared, admonish them, desist from conjugal relations with them {wa'hjuruhunna fi al-madaji% and beat them (wa'drubuhmna). (Koran IV:34)
While it is difficult to interpret away such passages, it is deplorable — as the report says — that the state-controlled media in Saudi Arabia deliberately urges them upon men as acceptable behavior.
This year's report also has difficulty in deciding how to characterize the CDLR and similar groups, a further sign of its general uncertainty about how to deal with manifestations of Islam. Inexplicably, the report's introduction omits all mention of opposition groups operating inside Saudi Arabia, a critical fact necessary to an understanding of the overall human rights situation there. This glaring omission may stem from the apparent unease of the report's authors at the Islamic character of the
207
CRITIQUE 1994
opposition. For example, two detainees (probably Salman al-'Awdah and Safar al-Hawali) are described as "two fundamentalist Shaykhs." The loaded term "fundamentalist" obviously has little meaning as a distinguishing feature in a country where the chief government-sponsored cleric, Shaykh Ibn Baz, is an arch-conservative who could just as easily be described as "fundamentalist." The reader is led to the inescapable conclusion that this label is intended to be pejorative.
Similarly, the report states that "the CDLR criticizes the Government's human rights record from the perspective of Islamic principles and advocates stricter adherence to Islamic principles by the Royal family and the Government." While this characterization is accurate as far as it goes, it takes on an additional resonance when read in conjunction with the description of Dr. al-Mas'ari's views, which, according to the report, "have expressed opposition to peace with Israel and to Saudi support for the peace process." It is unclear what relevance this has to the government's persecution, arrest and torture of persons such as Dr. al-Mas'ari. Such information is relevant only if the drafters of the report wish to make the point, advanced last year in this Critique, that the Saudi government offers token support for a particular brand of Islam — such as human rights abuses by the Mutawwi'in — to certain constituencies in exchange for those constituencies not opposing policies that are inconsistent with that same brand of Islam — such as peace with Israel. Recent events suggest that the Saudi government's ability to keep such constituencies in line is waning. Otherwise, Dr. al-Mas'ari's position on peace with Israel is irrelevant and its inclusion in the report could be construed as an attempt to justify the Saudi government's persecution of CDLR members.
To its credit, the 1994 report does note the detention and mistreatment of members of Dr. al-Mas'ari's family and others after his dramatic escape to England in April. The report might also have pointed out that the United Kingdom — in a baffling failure to correctly apply accepted norms of international humanitarian law — denied Dr. al-Mas'ari's claim for political asylum in November. The report should also have noted the allegation — which appeared in a widely publicized article
208
SAUDI ARABIA
in The New Yorker — that the Saudi government engineered the snatching of Dr. al-Mas'ari's young stepson, bom to his American wife in a previous marriage. If this allegation, and the disturbing suggestion that US embassy officials dragged their feet in relation to this matter, was not credible, the report should have said so.
In dealing with certain instances of human rights abuses, the drafters of this year's report also chose to rely on information emanating from the Saudi government instead of adopting a more skeptical attitude. In September the government carried out mass arrests of supporters of the popular preachers Salman al-'Awdah and Safar al-Hawali, both of whom are openly critical of the government and have been banned from public speaking since 1991. The report states that 157 persons were arrested in connection with demonstrations of support for the two shaykhs, 130 of whom were subsequently released, with 27 remaining in detention. The source for these figures is the Saudi government. They stem from an official statement by the Ministry of the Interior given to the state-controlled Saudi press and published on September 26, and repeated by King Fahd himself in an interview with the Egyptian press released on October 20. Since the report itself notes thai in general "[tjhere is insufficient information to determine the number of political prisoners because the Government does not provide information on such persons or respond to inquiries about them," it is difficult to see why it would rely on the Saudi government's own figures in such a case. The CDLR estimated the total number of detainees at between 1,000 and 1,500; even if that figure is exaggerated, it does not mean that the government figures are accurate.
A related problem concerns an Amnesty International report detailing the abuses to which Iraqi refugees from the Gulf War were subjected while housed in camps in Saudi Arabia between 1991 and 1993. While instances of abuse have been referred to in previous reports, as well as in prior editions of the Critique, the sheer brutality of the abuses described by the Amnesty report, which was based on interviews with refugees from the al-Rafha camp (still housing approximately 23,000 Iraqi
209
CRITIQUE 1994
refugees) and the now closed Artawiya camp, was shocking. Among the abuses recounted were forced repatriation, beatings, shootings, trials falling far short of internationally accepted standards, corporal punishment, torture and even killings — all in violation of recognized standards of international human rights and humanitarian law. Sadly, this year's report attempts to discredit Amnesty's findings, claiming that its "allegations were inaccurate and exaggerated," though it noted that some of the incidents reported had been confirmed by the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and UNHCR. In criticizing Amnesty's findings, the report cites "reliable sources." Since UNHCR and the ICRC are cited by name in the same paragraph, one may surmise that the "reliable sources" are none other than the Saudi government. Recognizing that confidential sources of information may legitimately require protection, the report should have stated whether the source in this instance was non-govemmental. To do so would have enhanced the report's credibility. If, on the other hand, the source was the Saudi government, the report should either note that fact explicitly so that its readers may make their own judgments, or be more cautious in its assertions.
The report should have noted two additional facts relating to the situation of Iraqi refugees. First, the Saudi government declined to assist a UN-sponsored investigation into the March 1993 death of Jabbar Muhammad Karim al-Etaym at the al-Rafha camp, conducted under the auspices of the Special Rapporteur on Extrajudicial, Summary and Arbitrary Executions. Second, as reported by Amnesty, the ICRC closed its office in Riyadh in January following a dispute with the Saudi government over the status of the Iraqi refugees. It is thought that the ICRC believed the Iraqis at al-Rafha to be civilian internees covered by the protections of the Fourth Geneva Convention (relating to civilians during time of war), and therefore falling within the mandate of the ICRC, and that the Saudi government regarded them instead as refugees, thus limiting the ICRC's potential protection function. Omission of such information perpetuates a disturbing trend in recent reports—namely a failure to report on Saudi Arabia's many disputes with intergovernmental organizations, such as the UN and now the ICRC, responsible for monitoring compliance with international human rights and humanitarian law.
210
SAUDI ARABIA
The report paints a grim picture of abuses of worker rights in Saudi Arabia, noting among other problems the prohibition on the right to organize, to strike and to bargain collectively. Nevertheless, important details were omitted. The report should have noted that employees who complain about violations of labor regulations face the possibility of arbitrary arrest, detainment and torture, as happened to the plaintiff in the recent case of Saudi Arabia, et al. v. Nelson, decided by the US Supreme Court in early 1993. In that case, the US government sided with Saudi Arabia in seeking to bar US citizens from suing foreign governments for acts of torture committed abroad, even though the plaintiff had been recruited in the United States. Echoes of the Nelson case linger. In October, an Egyptian national was sentenced to public flogging for complaining that a school principal had sexually abused his son, an incident that the report fails to mention.
The report might also have mentioned the disturbing allegations that surfaced in a lawsuit brought against Prince Saad (a brother of King Fahd), namely that he confined two maids against their will in a Houston hotel. The London Times reported that in July a Saudi consular officer in Houston, Ahmed Zahrany, fled to England in connection with this matter and requested asylum. Although the report does not mention Mr. Zahrany, it does note the much discussed defection of another Saudi diplomat to the United States, Mohammed Khilewi. Mr. Khilewi was granted political asylum by the United States, indicating that he was able to demonstrate a well-founded fear of persecution had he returned to his native country. The report should also have commented on the reports of sudden mass deportations of workers from developing countries undertaken by the Saudi government begining in November. Finally, the report should have noted, as pointed out in last year's edition of the Critique, that Saudi Arabia's eligibility for certain insurance and guarantee programs offered by the Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC) remains under review as a result of an application filed by the AFL-CIO with the US government, alleging systematic abuse of worker rights.
211
CRITIQUE 1994
212
