 SAUDI ARABIA
 Saudi Arabia is a traditional family monarchy. It grew to its
 present geographic extent fifty years ago under King Abd
 al-Aziz ibn Saud. He fostered unity among the tribes and
 provinces through personal alliances and informal
 consultations, particularly with religious leaders. Senior
 princes and other high officials maintain the traditional
 Imajlis,' or public audience, in which any Saudi may present
 his views. These informal institutions are a major factor in
 the politics of the Kingdom.
 Saudi Arabia is ruled by the sons of Abd al-Aziz. King Fahd is
 the fourth to do'so, reigning since the death in June 1982 of
 his brother, King Khalid. By convention, the King serves as
 Prime Minister and the Crown Prince as his deputy. The King
 appoints other cabinet members, whether princes, eminent
 traditional figures, or technocrats. There are no elected
 assemblies or political parties. The legitimacy of the regime
 rests upon its adherence to and defense of Islam, particularly
 the austere Saudi interpretation of the Sunni tradition.
 The centuries-old pastoral, agricultural, and commercial
 economy has been transformed by the inflow of large oil
 revenues. Rapid urbanization, massive public investment in
 social and economic infrastructure, large subsidies to
 entrepreneurs and consumers, incipient industrialization, the
 emergence of a technocratic class, and the presence of several
 million expatriates needed to effect rapid development have
 marked this transformation. Despite pervasive state
 participation in economic development projects, public policy
 dictates that economic activities and resources (except oil)
 remain largely in private hands. There are no trade unions,
 and strikes are banned.
 Spurred by the Mecca disturbances of late 1979, the eruption of
 antagonistic regimes in several nearby states, the outbreak of
 war between Iran and Iraq, and the December 1981 coup attempt
 in Bahrain, the authorities have evinced continuing great
 concern about internal security. The commitment of the regime
 to Islamic values and Arab customs, challenged by
 fundamentalist critics abroad and strained by the presence of
 so many non-Arab and non-Muslim expatriates at home, is
 unquestionable. The authorities have responded with greater
 encouragement of those values and heavier emphasis on those
 customs, with the most noticeable impact on education and the
 role of women.
 The government and civil administration are conducted in a
 manner that can be described as a synthesis of modern
 institutions, Islamic law, and elements of traditional
 (including tribal) practice. The judicial process is guided by
 Islamic Sharia law, a codification of the Koran and the words
 and deeds of the Prophet Muhammad -- viewed as divinely
 inspired, perfect, complete, immutable. The Sharia sets forth
 legal guidelines for judges in civil and criminal cases as well
 as appropriate punishments for transgressors, but is not
 precise about pretrial protections and procedures. Arbitrary
 or extra-legal execution or disappearance are unknown; reported
 instances of physical abuse are few. Cases of cruel, inhuman,
 or degrading treatment or punishment (caning excepted), or of
 invasion of the home, are exceedingly rare. The strict Sharia
 punishments, including amputation for theft and stoning for
 adultery, are sometimes carried out. The Islamic judiciary is
 effectively independent. Appeals may be made in various
 
 
 1261
 circumstances to panels of Sharia judges, provincial governors,
 the Ministry of Interior, or royal authority. There is no
 notification of arrest by police authorities; pretrial delays
 as investigations proceed can be lengthy; trials -- without
 counsel -- are closed in some criminal and all security cases.
 The elevation of Fahd from Crown Prince to King has had no
 immediately discernible effect on the political system or the
 human rights situation. On two public occasions in 1982, King
 Fahd has stated his support for a basic law and appointed
 consultative council for the Kingdom, which have been under
 study for years. King Fahd's accession engendered widespread.
 private speculation over possible political and social
 liberalization. For the present, no change is evident; the
 outlook over the short term is for a continuation of the
 conservative trends evident over the last several years.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Killing
 There have been no reports of summary executions. Whether
 under cover of law or otherwise, arbitrary killing by Saudi
 authorities is unknown. No opposition or terrorist groups are
 known to exist, let alone operate in the Kingdom.
 b. Disappearance
 No reports or rumors of disappearance have been received.
 c. Torture
 The Kingdom as a matter of policy does not permit torture or
 other abuse of the person by its officials or agents. However,
 the Sharia requires confession to convict, in the absence of
 eye-witnesses. There are occasional unconfirmed accounts of
 physical mistreatment of suspects, particularly in narcotics
 trafficking cases.
 d. Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 The Sharia imposes capital punishment for premeditated murder,
 adultery, and apostasy from Islam. it may also be imposed for
 other crimes considered heinous, such as rape. (Those
 convicted of murder or manslaughter must also compensate the
 family of the victim financially, according to officially set
 rates.) Capital punishment may take the form of shooting or
 beheading or, for adultery, may also take the form of stoning.
 The press reported several beheadings for murder each month in
 1982. The robbery and murder of an Arab man and assault on his
 wife by two expatriate Asian servants, subsequently tried and
 beheaded, was re-enacted on Saudi television as a warning to
 other potential criminals. One instance of the stoning of an
 adultress in a provincial capital several years ago came to
 light in 1982. The rigorous requirement of a confession or
 testimony by four eyewitnesses, plus severe social disapproval
 of adultery, render such convictions exceedingly rare. In the
 absence of extenuating circumstances, a recidivist thief
 suffers severance of a hand. For less severe crimes, such as
 drunkenness or simple possession of small quantities of
 narcotics, flogging is often imposed. This degrading form of
 punishment is inflicted less to cause pain than to humiliate;
 it is often carried out in public. The flogger uses only the
 lower arm to wield the cane; the convict remains clothed; his
 skin should not be broken, but floggings leave welts and
 bruises.
 
 
 1262
 Prison conditions are not unusually harsh or intentionally
 degrading. Overcrowding has generated some complaints. On
 King Fahd's accession, many sentences were reduced by half.
 e. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 There is no evidence of capricious arrest or imprisonment in
 Saudi Arabia, but procedural safeguards in the Western
 tradition are weak. In national security cases, or when the
 existence of a criminal ring is suspected, the authorities have
 arrested and held suspects for weeks, or even months, while
 investigations proceed. When an individual is detained, there
 is no automatic procedure for contacting his family or
 employer. Inquiries to the police almost always evoke official
 confirmation of the arrest; the facility of consular access to
 expatriate suspects varies with the gravity of the charge.
 Formal charges are not brought until the investigation is
 completed, which can take a long time. The Sharia does not
 provide for habeas corpus. Time spent in pretrial is normally
 applied against the length of any term of imprisonment imposed..
 f. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Access to criminal trials is usually restricted to relatives or
 associates of the accused. Consular access to expatriates'
 trials varies from nonexistent in Riyadh to fairly frequent
 elsewhere. National security cases, and trials of those
 accused of white-collar crimes and hailed before the Board of
 Grievances, are conducted behind closed doors. Defendants are
 normally not represented by counsel, although Saudi lawyers may
 participate as interpreters for expatriates. The burden of
 proof is on the prosecution. The judge weighs the evidence
 gathered and presented by the police and hears witnesses'
 testimony. Confessions are accorded great importance. The
 judge decides guilt or innocence. There is no evidence of
 partiality or political pressure. The judge recommends
 sentencing in accordance with the Sharia, taking into account
 applicable decrees and regulations. Sentences are imposed by
 the Interior Ministry after review of the proceedings.
 Evidence of repentance can mitigate the severity of sentences
 meted out. If imprisonment is recommended, the ministry
 determines its length. The ministry hears all appeals and
 requests for clemency. Decisions of the Board of Grievances
 are routinely reviewed by the Council of Ministers. The
 military justice system has jurisdiction over civilian
 employees of the Defense Ministry charged with violations of
 military regulations as well as over uniformed personnel and
 their dependents. Decisions of courts-martial are
 automatically submitted for review to the Defense Minister and
 the King.
 g. Invasion of the Home
 The sanctity of the home is traditionally respected. The
 provincial governors may grant permission, oral or written, to
 the police to search private homes if the police demonstrate
 reasonable cause. In investigating large-scale drug and
 alcohol trafficking, the police have not always been scrupulous
 in obtaining warrants before searching homes. In cases
 involving national security, wire-tapping may be authorized by
 the Interior Minister or Director General of Intelligence.
 
 
 '1263
 
 2. Respect for Civil and Political Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Short of attacks on religion or the ruling family, Saudis in
 their individual capacities are free to speak their minds, to
 complain to officials, and to seek a hearing and redress of
 personal grievances from high officials. Many high officials,
 including ministers and governors, devote up to four hours
 daily to hearing individual petitions in their "majlis.* The
 King meets weekly with religious and tribal notables.
 As to the press, there is no official prior censorship. In
 Saudi universities, which are operated by the government,
 certain authors and subjects may not be taught. The effects of
 these restrictions are diminished by the great freedom given
 Saudi students to study abroad. Criticism of Saudi economic
 policies, of bureaucratic abuses, and of official inattention
 to economic or social problems or to regional disparities is
 voiced on campus and published in editorials and letters to the
 editor. However, the Information Ministry examines
 appointments of editors-in-chief of Saudi newspapers, which are
 privately owned. Ten papers appear daily. The editors adjust
 their statements to their sense of what will be permitted.
 Political criticism of the founding principles of the Kingdom,
 especially Islam, of the legitimacy or actions of the royal
 family, of cabinet members and governors, of the armed forces,
 or of religious notables, is not permitted.
 In October 1982 the Cabinet and King approved an information
 policy emphasizing that the media should uphold Islam and the
 Sharia, oppose atheism and subversion, promote Arab interests
 and cooperation, and preserve the Kingdom's cultural heritage.
 Journals were enjoined to oppose human rights violations,
 expansionism, injustice, and racial discrimination abroad.
 Publication of articles or pictures deemed subversive or
 morally offensive may provoke suspension of the journal or
 discipline of the journalist responsible. Errant journalists
 are usually forbidden to publish for several months or are
 posted to a Saudi mission abroad; in either case their salaries
 are paid in full. Pictures of women rarely appear in the
 press. The importation of numerous books and magazines
 carrying material regarded as immoral or threatening to
 political stability or national security is forbidden. Foreign
 publications permitted into the Kingdom are rigorously censored
 to eliminate such material.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Assembly to express political views or press grievances is
 prohibited. Labor unions are not sanctioned nor are any known
 to exist.
 Traditional communities, such as tribes and their subgroups,
 generally associate freely under their ancestral leaders. The
 opinions and interests of these groups are to a varying
 extentrepresented before the central Government by their
 leaders.
 Non-political clubs and interest groups may be organized. Many
 meet regularly. Attendance at theatrical presentations and
 exhibitions of art sponsored by expatriates may be restricted
 to foreigners.
 
 
 1264
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Islam is the raison d'etre and the official religion of Saudi
 Arabia. All Saudis must be Muslim. Conversion from Islam is
 illegal, as is proselytizing by non-Muslims. 'Volunteers* from
 the official Society for the Promotion of Virtue and Prevention
 of Vice patrol bazaars to encourage shop owners to close their
 establishments at prayer time and, along with pedestrians,
 attend daily prayers. The "volunteers" also actively
 discourage what they consider immodest dress, wearing of
 religious symbols or ornaments, and the appearance in public of
 women unless escorted by male members of their families. The
 zeal of the 'volunteers' did not slacken in 1982. The
 situation remained less restrictive in Jidda than in Riyadh or
 the Eastern Province.
 The Shia minority, unofficially estimated at 300,000 persons,
 is found almost exclusively in the Eastern Province. This
 traditionally subordinated group remains subject to some
 discrimination. Following disturbances there in 1979, the
 authorities made greater efforts to redress local grievances.
 Devotees of all Islamic sects are welcome to perform the Hajj
 (pilgiimage), even when their governments are bitterly opposed
 to the Saudi regime, but heterodox rites or practices and
 political activities by pilgrims are prohibited.
 Non-Muslim foreigners are tacitly permitted t.o assemble to
 practice their religion discreetly in private buildings not
 exclusively.used for-that-purpose. While Saudi visa
 applications still include the question of an applicant's
 religious affiliation, in recent years there has been no
 discernible pattern of discrimination on this basis.
 d.- Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Saudis may travel anywhere in the Kingdom. Customarily, women
 do not travel alone, but they are increasingly doing so, using
 the sections reserved for them.in the rear of urban buses.
 They are not permitted to drive motor vehicles. After the
 Bahrain coup attempt, some Saudis in the eastern province were
 temporarily.prevented from leaving the country, while .
 expatriates were more frequently asked to explain their reasons
 for wishing to visit areas deemed sensitive. The National
 Guard, charged with the security of major petroleum
 installations, official buildings and embassies, has recently
 appeared more zealous. Visas continued to be granted only to
 businessmen and professionals with specific purposes in
 visiting the Kingdom, to foreigners employed there and their
 dependents and relatives in approved cases, and to Muslim
 pilgrims, who are required to leave Saudi Arabia when the
 pilgrimage concludes.
 Both Saudisrand expatriates nust obtain exit permits .to travel
 abroad. A Saudi woman must- obtain written permission from her
 husband or nearest male relative. A Saudi male may marry a
 woman from a foreign country, other than one of the Gulf
 Emirates, only with Interior Ministry permission.
 A Saudi woman requires rarely-granted official permission to
 marry a foreigner, who must be a Muslim. Saudis cannot take
 new nationality or emigrate permanently. There is no problemof
 repatriation. There are no known Saudi refugees.
 
 
 1265
 The Kingdom has no public policy on refugees and publishes no
 refugee statistics. Saudi Arabia provides asylum for many
 Muslims, notably Afghans, Eritreans, and refugees from South
 Yemen, who risk persecution if they return home.
 e. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 The nexus of legitimate authority is the King. He is usually
 the eldest surviving son of the late King Abd al-Aziz judged by
 consensus as qualified to hold a senior leadership position.
 He is selected from among the adult male members of the House
 of Saud by an informal process involving consultations among
 (in order of importance) senior members of the royal family,
 religious leaders, tribal leaders, and, to a minor degree,
 representatives of the technocratic/bureaucratic classes and of
 commercial interests. Nearly all Saudis are linked with at
 least one of these interest groups. The opinions of the
 leaders of these groups are supposed to represent a consensus
 of the thoughts of the many individuals who comprise them.
 The King appoints a Crown Prince and, as Prime Minister,
 selects a council of ministers through a process of consensus
 similar to one by which he himself was chosen. The King rules
 as head of state in matters secular and religious, no
 distinction between the two realms being made in traditional
 Islam. The King's legitimacy depends not only upon his descent
 and his selection by consensus, but also upon his adherence to
 the tenets of Islam; moral andadministrative laxity can result
 in forced abdication, as occurred in 1964.
 Political parties are not allowed, and there are no known
 organized opposition groups in Saudi Arabia. Some Saudi
 students abroad have reportedly organized small opposition
 discussion groups. Within the norms of their family, tribal,
 religious, or professional groups, Saudis are free to express
 views on political or social questions which, if endorsed by
 their confreres, may eventually be conveyed upward to the
 highest councils of state. Public opinion exists and carries
 weight with the authorities, who in formulating domestic and
 foreign policies must bear in mind the attitudes and interest
 of various social groups. Domestic policy is developed in the
 light of concern for the country's religious and social
 traditions. Foreign policy formulation takes into account
 nationalist, Arab, Islamic, and non-aligned viewpoints, the
 latter most warmly espoused by members of the younger Saudi
 generation. The deficiencies of the informal, traditional,
 consultative means of expressing and ascertaining public
 opinion have been tacitly recognized in King Fahd's allusions
 to the possible appointment of a consultative council.
 3. Government Attitude Regarding International and Non-
 governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations of
 Human Rights
 In 1978 Amnesty International requested that the Kingdom
 abolish the death penalty. That group has also expressed its
 concern about floggings and amputations. In late 1981, Amnesty
 wrote to the Minister of Interior, expressing its concern about
 two executions. There are no human rights groups in the
 Kingdom.
 unilaterally and through such organizations as the United
 Nations, the Organization of the Islamic Conference, and
 theLeague of Arab States, the Kingdom has championed the rights
 of Afghan, Palestinian, and Eritrean refugees and of Muslim
 minorities in the Philippines, Ethiopia, and Cyprus.
 
 
 1266
 
 4. Economic, Social, and Cultural Situation
 The orthodox religious beliefs and traditional social practices
 of the Arabian Peninsula have been preserved in remarkably
 unchanged form in modern Saudi Arabia. Thus, the Islamic
 injunction in favor of equality among believers regardless of
 racial or ethnic origin has guided official efforts to meet the
 economic and social needs of all Saudis. While many large
 projects have been constructed in urban areas, the government
 is increasingly giving attention to the development of remote
 provinces, both to maintain parity among regions and to help
 stem an over-rapid influx into the cities. The authorities,
 again heeding Islamic precepts as interpreted in the Kingdom,
 not only protect but also promote, through subsidies and
 concessions to entrepreneurs, the right to own property
 individually and in association.
 The status of Saudi women reflects the religious values and
 social traditions of the Kingdom. They may and do inherit,
 own, purchase, and sell real and other property, although not
 :on an equal basis with men. Their 'bride price' returns to
 them in the event of divorce, and they in that instance receive
 custody of elementary school-age children. The Saudi tradition
 of segregating women from all males but their closest relatives
 hinders but does not nullify the exercise of these Sharia-based
 rights. This segregation also limits the fields in which women
 may work -- now primarily teaching, healing, and trade. The
 number of gainfully employed Saudi women rises constantly, and
 debate over sanctioning new fields in which they might work --
 offering the possibility of replacing some expatriate employees
 -- continues. In the provision of health and education
 facilities, the authorities have granted disproportionate
 appropriations for institutions reserved for women, to
 compensate for earlier shortcomings. Nonetheless, the negative
 effects of earlier official inattention have not yet been fully
 overcome.
 The vast petroleum revenues available to the Kingdom have
 enabled the Government to move toward the improvement in all
 Saudis' living standards, which was proclaimed as the objective
 of Saudi development efforts in 1975. Massive outlays have
 been made to develop the road, telecommunications, and
 electricity networks. Concessional loans are available to
 those wishing to build private homes. Health care is free and
 access to it unimpeded. Education is free through the
 university level, while graduate study abroad for male Saudis
 is heavily subsidized. Per capita GNP was estimated at $11,265
 in 1980.
 No census results have been published; the usual estimates of
 the indigenous population are about five million. Infant
 mortality statistics are not available, but life expectancy at
 birth was calculated at 54 years in 1976. In 1980 births per
 thousand per year were estimated at 49 and deaths at 18,
 yielding an annual population growth rate of 3.1 percent. In
 1975 an estimated 97 percent of urban and 64 percent of all
 Saudis enjoyedaccess to safe water, much of it produced by
 expensive desalination plants; since then, government
 effortshave brought safe water to all but the nomads, a small
 minority of the-population. Calorie intake was estimated at 88
 percent of nutritional requirements in 1976-79.
 The Saudi authorities intend to eliminate illiteracy in 1991.
 Estimated at only 15 percent in 1970, adult male literacy had
 risen to 48 percent and adult female literacy to 36 percent by
 
 
 1267
 1981, according to official figures, which yielded an overall
 literacy rate of 42 percent. In 1981, it was announced that
 879,000 Saudis were enrolled in school, including adults. In
 1976-79, according to international aid agency estimates,
 primary school attendance was 59 percent (boys 74 percent,
 girls 44 percent). Efforts accelerated in the late 1970's to
 accommodate all applicants for undergraduate education within
 the Kingdom were sustained in 1982, with the expansion of
 several universities and colleges.
 Apart from the rapidly declining minority of Saudis clinging to
 the nomadic way of life despite official inducements to settle
 down, build a house, and use free schools and clinics,
 financial poverty is evident only among immigrant laborers and
 shopkeepers, particularly those illicitly resident in the
 Kingdom. Immigrant laborers remit as much of their earnings as
 possible. Those without valid visas are exploited by
 unscrupulous employers. Saudi Arabia's labor code is generous,
 including maternity leave, and is enforced by Labor Ministry
 inspectors and special labor courts; labor attaches from
 countries sending large numbers of laborers also help maintain
 standards. Wages are determined by market forces; most
 disputes arise over hours, working conditions, housing,
 remittances, and responsibility for repatriation when contracts
 conclude. Strikes are not permitted, and expatriates
 organizing labor demonstrations risk summary expulsion.
 
 
 1268
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- 3ELIGAT!ONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONJS OF OCLLARS)
 COUNTRY: 5AU L ARA3IA
 1930     19q1     1982
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         0.0      3.0      0.0
 LOANS ....... *......       0.3      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.AIC  ..................        0.      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 (SEC. UPP.ASSIST.)...         0.0      ).0     0.0
 d.FO3D  FOR  PEACE .......      0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  I-TOTAL..........        3.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN i-LOANS.....         0.0      0.3      0.0
 VAY. ZN FOR. CURR.....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 TTL  I-TUTAL.........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 ERELIEF.EC.OrV t WMP.         0.3      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIPF AGENCY.....         0.0      3.0      0.0
 ;.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ....... : .......   .0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE COROS ......        0.0      1.Q      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........         .0.0             0.0
 OTMR ............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS...............     0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.MAP  GRANTS ..........       1,C      0.0      0.0
 d.LREOIT SALES-FMS ....        0.0      3.0      0.0
 C.INTL ML.E.TPNG ....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 U.7RAN- XCESS STOCK ....                0.0      0.0
 E.UTHER GRANTS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 Ill.TOTAL  CON. A PAL...         0.0      3.0      0.0
 LOANS .......; ......      0.0     .0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .................   0.0      3.0      0.0
 UTHER US LOANS ..........        9.7      1.0      0.0
 EX-IM 3ANK LOANS .......        9.7      0.0      0.3
 ALL  OTHER. ............. .    0.0      0.0      0.0
 AS51STANCC FROM INTERNATIONAL AZ'NCIES
 1FO     1?41     1912     1946-82
 TOTAL ........     2.1      1.2      0.0     27.1
 laa               0.0      0.3      0.0      3.0
 IFC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDA                C.0      0.0      0.0      o.O
 IO                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AOa                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFOB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNOP               2.1      1.z      0.0     24.6
 UTHER-UN           O.u      0.0      0.0      2.5
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
 1269
