Saudi Arabia
Human rights violations are pervasive in Saudi Arabia, an absolute
monarchy. Despite international and domestic pressures to implement
reforms, improvements have been halting and inadequate.
Many basic rights are not protected under Saudi law, political parties
are not allowed, and freedom of expression remains extremely limited.
In recent years, the government has carried out a campaign of harassment
and intimidation of Saudi Arabian human rights defenders and has
stifled all efforts to establish independent groups to monitor and report
on abuses.
Arbitrary detention, mistreatment and torture of detainees, restrictions
on freedom of movement, and lack of official accountability remain
serious concerns. The kingdom carried out some fifty executions in
2003; as of mid-November about fifteen executions had been carried
out so far in 2004. Saudi women continue to face serious obstacles to
their participation in the economy, politics, media, and society. Many
foreign workers face exploitative working conditions; migrant women
working as domestics often are subjected to round-the-clock confinement
by their employers, making them vulnerable to sexual abuse and
other mistreatment.
Media attention to political reform and government proclamations
regarding human rights have not led to changes in practices or
enhanced public access to information about rights violations. The
Saudi government established a national human rights commission in
2004, but it lacks independence.
Terror and Internal Security
Saudi Arabia’s internal security situation worsened in 2004. On May 12,
2003, nine suicide bombers killed themselves and twenty-six other people using car bombs when they attacked three compounds housing foreign
workers, mainly from other Arab countries. Since then, suicide
bombings, attacks with automatic weapons, and hostage-taking, mostly
directed against Western expatriate workers, have plagued the country.
The authorities claim to have killed or captured at least thirteen of the
twenty-six people they have identified as leading suspects in the attacks.
In March 2004 Deputy Interior Minister Prince Ahmad bin Abd al-Aziz
said that some security detainees had been convicted and are serving
prison sentences, while others remained under interrogation. The
prince declined to comment on the trials, or on why they were not public.
At this writing, authorities had released no additional information
about any trials of security detainees or alleged terrorists.
The Reform Movement and Arrests of Activists
2003 and 2004 saw a number of public petitions calling for reforms and
enhanced rights protections. In late January 2003, 104 Saudi Arabian
citizens sent a charter entitled “Vision for the Present and the Future of
the Homeland” to Crown Prince Abdullah, the country’s de facto ruler,
and other high-ranking officials. The charter urged comprehensive
reforms including guarantees of freedom of expression, association, and
assembly, and requested release or fair trials for political prisoners. The
crown prince received a group of the signatories, and in June 2003 convened
a “national dialogue conference” that invited religious scholars
from the country’s Muslim communities, including Shi`a and non-
Wahhabi Sunnis. A subsequent petition, in September 2003, criticized
the slow pace of reform and the absence of popular participation in
decision-making. Signed by 306 academics, writers, and businesspeople,
including fifty women, it advocated popular election of the 120-member
Consultative Council (members currently are appointed by the government)
and observed that lack of freedom of expression fosters the
growth of intolerance and extremism.
Crown Prince Abdullah’s favorable disposition toward the reformers,
however, was not shared by others in the royal family. Minister of
Interior Prince Nayif in October 2003 dismissed calls for reform as
“useless barking.” When Saudi citizens, in an unprecedented initiative,
took to the streets on the October 14, 2003, during the opening of an
officially-sponsored human rights conference, security forces arrested
hundreds of demonstrators and forcibly dispersed the rest. About eighty
people were kept in detention for several months afterwards without
charge or trial, while others were sentenced to jail terms and floggings;
as of November 2004 most had reportedly been released.
On March 9, 2004, the government announced the establishment of a
National Human Rights Commission, comprised mainly of government
officials. In November members of the commission announced that
they had visited prison facilities, and were preparing a report for the
Interior Ministry. They were quoted in the Saudi media as saying that
“in general conditions were good” but that the prisons were badly overcrowded
and that approximately 80 percent of the inmate population
was non-Saudi.
March 2004 also saw the arrest of thirteen reformers who attempted to
circulate a petition calling for Saudi Arabia to become a constitutional
monarchy with an elected parliament. They also indicated their intent
to establish a human rights group independent of the government. All
but three were released within several weeks, evidently after agreeing to
halt their public petition efforts. The trial of the remaining three, who
declined to agree to those terms, began with a first public session on
August 9, 2004. The official Saudi Press Agency had earlier quoted an
unnamed interior ministry official as saying that the three had issued
statements “which do not serve national unity or the cohesion of society
based on shari`a law.” The official National Human Rights Commission
has not publicly commented on the case.
The government has twice postponed elections for half the members of
178 municipal councils around the country, at this writing scheduled for
February 2005. The remaining council members are to be appointed by
the government. Although the elections law states that all citizens twenty-
one and older are eligible to vote, and several women announced
their intention to stand for election, on October 10, 2004 Prince Nayif
bin Sultan, the minister of interior, ruled that out, saying, “I don’t think
that women’s participation is possible.”
On September 13, 2004, the Council of Ministers announced that the
government planned to enforce existing laws prohibiting all public
employees from “participating, directly or indirectly, in the preparation
of any document, speech or petition, engaging in dialogue with local
and foreign media, or participating in any meetings intended to oppose
the state’s policies.” Public employees, including academics, have been
among the signatories to recent reform petitions.
Women’s Rights
Women in the kingdom suffer from severe discrimination and restrictions
in their freedom. The Committee for the Promotion of Virtue
and the Prevention of Vice, or the “religious police,” enforces strict
gender segregation and obliges women and girls to wear long black
cloaks and head coverings in public. Although some women hold professional
jobs at hospitals, schools, banks, offices, and elsewhere, they
still need written permission from a male relative to travel.
When women are mistreated or suffer violence at the hands of male relatives,
they often have no means for redress. Rania al-Baz, a presenter
on state-run Channel One television, raised the issue of domestic violence
in an unprecedentedly public way in April 2004 when she gave
press interviews from her hospital bed and released photos of her badly
bruised face after her husband had savagely beaten her. Her case galvanized public opinion and stimulated considerable debate about the
problem of spousal abuse.
Migrant Workers
Foreign workers in Saudi Arabia are estimated to number 8.8 million,
or a third of the country’s population, according to Minister of Labor
Ghazi al-Gosaibi. The majority comes from South and Southeast Asian
countries, such as India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Indonesia,
and the Philippines, but significant numbers of migrants also come
from countries such as Sudan and Egypt. They often face exploitative
working conditions, including twelve- to sixteen-hour workdays, often
without breaks or access to food and drink, lack of pay for months at a
time, and confinement to locked dormitories during their time off.
Many women migrants are employed as household domestic workers,
and are especially at risk for human rights abuses due to their isolation
in private homes and their exclusion from many employment protections.
Migrant workers’ NGOs in many Asian countries have documented
hundreds of cases in which such workers have suffered physical,
psychological, and sexual abuse, including rape, with little or no redress.
Foreign workers who are detained by the police face torture, prolonged
incommunicado detention, and forced confession. About two thirds of
the approximately fifty persons executed in Saudi Arabia in 2003 were
foreign nationals.
Key International Actors
The United States is a key ally of Saudi Arabia and a major trading
partner, although relations have been somewhat strained in the aftermath
of the September 11, 2001 attacks on New York and Washington,
D.C.. The presence of thousands of active duty U.S. military personnel
stationed in Saudi Arabia has been a major source of domestic opposition to the government, and the numbers have been reduced from
about 5,000 in early 2003 to around 500 by late 2004, although thousands
of U.S. personnel servicing military sales contracts remain in the
kingdom. In September 2004, for the first time, the State Department’s
annual International Religious Freedom Report designated Saudi Arabia
as “a country of particular concern.” U.S. non-military merchandise
exports to Saudi Arabia were U.S. $4.6 billion in 2003, the last year for
which figures are available; exports of military and other services have
averaged U.S. $2 billion per year recently. Saudi Arabia is a major supplier
of oil to the United States and its allies. Saudi Arabian investments
in the U.S. were estimated to be around U.S. $250 billion in early 2003.
Saudi Arabia also maintains military ties with Britain and France.

