 SAUDI ARABIA
 Saudi Arabia-is a traditional, Arab, and Islamic monarchy
 ruled by the sons of its founder, the late King Abd al Aziz
 (known in the West as "Ibn Saud"). There is no written
 national constitution, although the King has spoken again this
 year of his intention to institute some basic juridical
 reforms and to establish a consultative council in the near
 future.
 Islamic Shari'a law, drawn from the Koran and the words and
 deeds of the prophet Mohammed, is held to be the basis of the
 system of justice. Trials are normally held without counsel,
 though the advice of Islamic lawyers is available. Trials are
 generally closed but reportedly fair. The independence of the
 judiciary is ensured by law and respected in practice. Some
 punishments meted out under Shari'a law would be deemed
 inhuman or degrading by international standards. In recent
 years Shari'a-based judicial law has been supplemented with a
 growing body of administrative law governing commerce, labor,
 taxation, government organizations, and other matters
 involving society and technology not foreseen by Shari'a law.
 This new body of law is embodied in royal decrees, is
 consonant with Shari'a principles, and is administered by
 specifically created tribunals.
 By convention, the King is chosen from among the sons of Abd
 al Aziz, who themselves have preponderant influence in the
 choice. Senior religious scholars and other princes also have
 a voice. The King serves concurrently as Prime Minster.
 Officials from the highest levels on down maintain contact
 with citizens by holding open-door audiences regularly. There
 are no elected assemblies or political parties, and
 nonreligious public assembly and demonstrations are not
 permitted. The legitimacy of the regime rests upon its
 perceived adherence tc the defense of Islam, particularly the
 austere Hanbali school of Islamic jurisprudence. Rulers and
 ruled share a respect for laws believed to be divinely
 inspired and ancient customs which call for authority based on
 consensus in government, internal social cohesion, and
 economic pLivate enterprise. Social custom mandates
 separation of the sexes.
 During the past 30 years massive oil revenues have transformed
 Saudi Arabia's centuries-old pastoral, agricultural, and
 commercial economy. This tranformation has been marked by
 rapid urbanization (with absolute decline in rural
 population), large-scale infrastructure development,
 government subsidies to entrepreneurs and consumers, the
 emergence of a technocratic middle class, and the presence of
 approximately 3 million expatriate workers. Economic activity
 and resources (except oil) have largely remained in private
 hands. There are no trade unions, and strikes are banned.
 The Government's efforts to curb unwelcome foreign influences
 and to reduce the inevitable tensions between modernization
 and traditicn also result in limitations on human rights in
 Saudi Arabia.
 No major new developments affected human rights during 1984.
 Due to unsettled conditions in the Middle East, the Iran-Iraq
 war, the continued hostility of the Khomeini regime to Saudi
 Arabia, the lingering memory of anti-regime disturbances in
 1979-80, and the 1983 bombings in Kuwait, the authorities
 remain deeply concerned about internal security. Regulations
 issued by the Interior Ministry in 1983 to eliminate lengthy
 
 
 1377
 SAUDI ARABIA
 pretrial detentions or detentions without charge have not been
 vigorously applied. On the other hand, the Board of
 Grievances, an independent judicial body empowered to
 investigate citizens' complaints against official abuse, has
 used new authority granted to it in 1983 and is becoming an
 increasingly effective avenue of redress for citizens and
 private corporations against state institutions, public sector
 companies, and Government officials accused of malfeasance,
 nonfeasance, bias, or corruption. The Interior Ministry
 investigated reports that surfaced in 1983 alleging that
 expatriate prisoners had been subjected to beatings, sleep
 deprivation, and high frequency noise in order to extract
 confessions. In cases where the reports were found accurate,
 the Government took disciplinary action.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section I Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Political killings are unknown.
 b. Disappearances
 Disappearances at the hands of official agents are unknown.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Government policy prohibits torture. There have been a few
 reports in 1984 of police beatings (including bastinado) of
 prisoners to elicit confessions, which in the absence of
 witnesses are usually required for conviction in Shari'a
 courts. The paucity of specific reports suggests that such
 beatings are rare. Prison conditions are apparently not
 unusually harsh or intentionally degrading.
 In accordance with Shari'a law Saudi Arabia imposes capital
 punishment for the crimes of premeditated murder, adultery,
 apostasy from Islam, and, depending upon the circumstances,
 rape and armed robbery. The Interior Minister and Cassaticn
 Courts review all cases in which capital punishment has been
 imposed. Beheading is the usual method of execution, although
 execution by firing squad or stoning may be imposed for
 adultery. Severe social disapproval discourages adultery and
 the rigorous requirement of either confession or testimony by
 four eyewitnesses renders conviction for adultery exceedingly
 rare. Absent extenuating circumstances, a recidivist thief
 suffers severance of a hand. For less severe crimes, such as
 drunkenness, or publicly infringing Islamic precepts, flogging
 with a cane is often imposed. Public flogging is intended to
 humiliate the criminal and serve as a deterrent to others.
 The flogger uses only the lower arm to wield the cane and the
 prisoner remains clothed. The skin is not to be broken, but
 floggings are painful and leave welts. In its report Torture
 in the Eighties, Amnesty International expressed concern about
 allegations of incommunicado detention, solitary confinement,
 and torture.
 d. Arbitrary Arrests, Detention, or Exile
 There have been no reports of arbitrary arrest and
 
 
 1378
 SAUDI ARABIA
 imprisonment in 1984. There is no automatic procedure for
 contacting a detainee's family, employer, or consular
 representative. If asked, however, the police will almost
 always confirm an arrest. Shari's law makes no provision for
 bail or habeas corpus. Prisoners may be held for months or
 even years while an investigation proceeds before being either
 charged or released. Police authorities frequently deny
 consular access during the investigative phase. It is
 impossible to estimate accurately the number of individuals
 affected. New regulations issued by the Interior Ministry in
 1983 to correct this situation have not proven effective. In
 September, 1984, the Under Secretary of Interior, speaking in
 an inter-Arab seminar in Riyadh on temporary detention,
 stressed the importance of charging or releasing detainees
 promptly. The practical impact of this pronouncement cannot
 yet be assessed. Forced labor and exile as a form of
 punishment are unknown.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The judicial system is founded upon the Shari'a. The Shari'a
 courts exercise jurisdiction over common criminal cases and
 civil suits regarding marriage, divorce, child custody, and
 inheritance of real or personal property. In the Shari's
 court the defendant appears before a judge, who determines
 guilt or innocence and, if warranted, imposes the appropriate
 punishment. Appeals against judges' decisions are
 automatically reviewed by the Justice Ministry or, in more
 serious cases, by the Supreme Judicial Council to insure that
 court procedure was correct and that the judge applied
 appropriate Shari'a principles and punishments. Counsel is
 not permitted in the court itself, but lawyers may act as
 interpreters for those unfamiliar with Arabic. In practice,
 there is no consular access to expatriates' trials in Riyadh
 or in the Eastern Province, but consular officers may be
 admitted elsewhere. Qualified foreign observers have been
 impressed with the fairness towards defendants exhibited by
 Shari's court judges. The Justice Ministry is responsible for
 the appointment, transfer, and promotion of judges. Judges
 may be disciplined or removed only by the Supreme Judicial
 Council, an independent body of very senior jurists. The
 Supreme Judicial Council has investigated and removed corrupt
 judges so that they might be prosecuted and jailed.
 Specialized labor and commercial courts decide cases on the
 basis of decrees issued by the Council of Ministers and
 regulations issued pursuant to those decrees. The military
 justice system has jurisdiction over uniformed personnel and
 civilian government employees charged with violations of
 military regulations. Decisions of courts martial are
 reviewed by the Minister of Defense and Aviation and by the
 King. The Board of Grievances arbitrates claims against the
 State. The President and Vice President of the Board are
 experienced jurists. They are aided by board members expert
 in administrative, contract, corruption, civil service, and
 forgery legislation. The President is responsible directly to
 the King, and the 11 members of the board are guaranteed
 considerable independence. The Board has vigorously wielded
 new powers, granted by a 1983 decree, to call erring officials
 to account. No reports of prisoners formally sentenced for
 political offenses have been received. The method of
 detention for a few weeks or months followed by a warning and
 release has reportedly been used to intimidate the few Saudis
 who have publicly criticized the regime.
 
 
 1379
 SAUDI ARAPIA
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Among the most fundamental of Islamic precepts are the
 sanctity of family life and the inviolability of the home.
 The police generally must demonstrate reasonable cause and
 obtain permission from the provincial governor before
 searching a private home, but warrants are not required.
 Wiretapping and mail surveillance can be carried out against
 suspected officials and political activists on the authority
 of officials of the Interior Ministry or the Directorate of
 Intelligence. A wide network of informants is believed tc be
 employed.
 Some social norms and strictures affecting personal life are
 matters of law and are enforced by the Government. Saudi
 women may not marry non-Saudis without government permission.
 Saudi men must seek approval to marry women from countries
 other than the six members of the Gulf Cooperation Council.
 During Ramadan, the prohibition against public eating,
 drinking, or smoking during daylight hours is enforced on
 Muslims and non-Muslims alike. Prohibitions against alcohol
 and pornography are strictly enforced. Members of the
 officially supported Society for the Promotion of Virtue and
 the Suppression of Vice patrol the streets and markets to
 assure Islamic decorum in dress and demeanor, and the closing
 of shops during the daily prayer periods.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil and Political Rights
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Criticism of Islam and the ruling family is not allowed.
 The potential presence of informers renders open criticism of
 the regime rare except among trusted friends. Otherwise,
 Saudis are free to speak their minds and to complain to and
 about government officials.
 The press is privately owned. It is effectively controlled by
 both the 1982 media policy statement and the firm
 understanding that nothing embarrassing to the Government,
 ruling family, or religious leadership may be published. The
 media policy statement enjoins the press to uphold Islam,
 oppose atheism, promote Arab interests, preserve the cultural
 heritage of Saudi Arabia, and combat human rights violations.
 Guidelines issued by the Information Ministry instruct the
 press on the position to take on controversial political
 issues. Editors are appointed with the approval of the
 Information Minister and he may have them removed. One editor
 was removed in 1984 for publishing articles deemed not
 consonant with the national interest.
 Saudi television and radio are state owned and operated.
 Their basic aim is to project and gain public support for
 official policies and views, with the corollary that
 conflicting viewpoints are not presented. Increasingly,
 foreign news is presented objectively, as, for example, in
 television coverage of the recent Israeli elections. Foreign
 publications circulate, but are rigorously censored for
 materials deemed immoral or critical of Saudi policies and
 actions.
 Academic freedom is constrained by similar guidelines; the
 study of Freud and Marx, for example, is taboo. Professors
 
 
 1380
 SAUDI ARABIA
 commonly believe that classroom comments which would be taken
 as anti-regime will be reported to the authorities.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Assembly as a means of political expression or to present
 grievances is prohibited. Tribal, familial, and economic
 interest groups informally aggregate public opinion, which
 their leaders express to high officials. Nonpolitical clubs
 and professional groups may be organized with the permission
 of the authorities. The few existing professional bodies are
 permitted but not encouraged to maintain contacts with their
 recognized international counterparts. Labor unions are not
 sanctioned and none is known to exist.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Islam is the official religion. All Saudis must be Muslim.
 Apostasy is a crime, and proselytizing by non-Muslims is
 prohibited. The Saudis scrupulously uphold the Islamic
 injunction that all Muslims have a responsibility to make a
 pilgrimage, or Hajj, to Makkah, and all Muslims are welcome to
 visit the holy places. Political activities by pilgrims are
 banned.
 The Shi'a Muslims of the Eastern Province, usually estimated
 at 600,000 persons, constitute a religious minority subject to
 social and economic discrimination. In the wake of the
 Iranian Revolution they have been periodically subject to
 surveillance, arrest, temporary detention, and limitations on
 travel abroad. For security reasons, the Government does not
 permit Shi'a public processions to mark Ashura, the holiest of
 the exclusively Shi'a holidays. Shi'ites are free to
 adjudicate exclusively inter-Shi'a disputes within the bounds
 of their own legal tradition, but Shi'a judges receive no
 stipend or salary from the Government. Likewise, the
 Government provides no financial support for the Shi'a
 religious establishment and does not permit the construction
 of Shi'a mosques. In recent years the authorities have made
 efforts to redress the Shi'ites' complaints about the economic
 underdevelopment of their areas. Nevertheless, most Shi'ites
 continue to live under conditions notably poorer than do their
 Sunni compatriots.
 Non-Muslim religious services are illegal. Expatriates
 practice their religions only in discreet, private
 gatherings. Large gatherings or elaborate organizational
 structures may attract official attention and lead to
 deportation of leaders, as occurred to one group in 1984.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Immigration, and Repatriation
 Saudis may travel freely anywhere within the country.
 Passports are issued by the Interior Ministry. Male Saudis
 may travel abroad freely. Females must obtain prior
 permission from their closest male relative before leaving the
 country. The passports of suspected subversives have
 occasionally been seized. Shi'ites who travel to Iran may be
 subject to interrogation upon their return. Shi'ites known to
 have pro-Khomeini sympathies may not be allowed to travel
 abroad. Saudis are permitted to emigrate and assume foreign
 nationality. This results in the loss of Saudi nationality.
 Citizenship is not revoked for political reasons.
 
 
 1381
 SAUDI ARABIA
 There is no formal policy regarding refugees or political
 asylum. Refugees and displaced persons are in most cases
 dealt with like all other foreign workers. Anyone seeking
 residence in the Kingdom, except Yemenis, must meet strictly
 enforced requirements of sponsorship and employment. There
 are over 250,000 foreigners in Saudi Arabia who fled their
 native countries because of persecution, political violence,
 civil strife, or foreign invasion. The largest groups are
 Palestinians, Lebanese, Eritreans, Afghans, and South
 Yemenis. For the most part these individuals receive no
 special treatment, privileges, or services. However, some
 Eritreans are allowed to remain without specific sponsorship.
 There have been no reports of forced repatriation of persons
 who are in effect refugees. There are no known Saudi refugees
 outside of the country.
 Foreigners living in Saudi Arabia, except for Yemenis, are
 required to carry identification cards. They are not
 permitted to travel outside of the city of their employment or
 to change their work place without the permission of their
 sponsor. They are likewise not permitted to travel outside
 the country without their sponsor's permission since sponsors
 hold expatriate employees' passports and are responsible for
 obtaining exit visas for them. Foreigners involved in
 commercial disputes or criminal investigations are usually not
 allowed to leave the country until the problem has been
 resolved.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The King rules the country in matters secular and religious,
 within limits established by religious law, tradition, and the
 need to maintain consensus among the ruling family and
 religious leaders. The King's legitimacy is based upon his
 descent, his selection by consensus, his adherence to the
 tenets of Islam, and his concern for the welfare of the
 nation. With the consent of other senior princes, the King,
 who is also the Prime Minister, appoints the Crown Prince, who
 is the First Deputy Prime Minister. All other ministers are
 appointed by the King. They, in turn, appoint subordinate
 officials with cabinet concurrence. There are no elected
 officials in Saudi Arabia. Likewise, political parties are
 not permitted, and there are no known organized opposition
 groups.
 Traditionally, public opinion has been expressed through
 client-patron relationships, and interest groups such as
 tribes, families, and professional hierarchies. The open-door
 audience (majlis) remains the primary forum for expression of
 opinion or grievance. The King meets on a weekly basis with
 religious leaders.
 This informal consultative means of ascertaining public
 opinion has limitations. Participation by women and Shi'ites
 in the process is severely restricted. Rural urban migration
 has weakened tribal and familial links. Citizens are not
 directly able to change policies or officials through the
 majlis system, which is largely a forum in which grievances
 are aired and favors sought. As governmental functions have
 become increasingly complex, time-consuming, and centralized
 in Riyadh, direct access to senior officials has decreased.
 The creation of a national consultative council to augment
 traditional means of consultation between rulers and ruled has
 
 
 1382
 SAUDI ARABIA
 been under consideration for many years. No steps toward its
 implementation were taken in 1984.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 No international or non-governmental organizations sought to
 investigate alleged violations of human rights during the past
 year. There are no human rights groups in Saudi Arabia. In
 international forums, Saudi representatives regularly protest
 violations of the human rights of Palestinians, Afghans,
 Eritreans, and Muslim minorities in several countries.
 In its 1984 report, Amnesty International expressed concern
 about the reported detention of possible prisoners of
 conscience, incommunicado detention, allegations of torture
 and ill treatment of detainees, and the use of amputations,
 floggings, and the death penalty. Freedom House rates Saudi
 Arabia as "not free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION:
 Vast petroleum revenues have permitted the Government to
 improve the living standards of most Saudis, whose annual per
 capita gross domestic product is estimated by Saudi Government
 sources at $12,266. According to the World Bank (IBRD), per
 capita gross national product in 1982 was $16,000. The
 Government has promoted public welfare through massive
 development projects, consumer subsidies, and concessions to
 entrepreneurs. Fealth care and education through the
 university level are available to all Saudis without cost.
 Building lots and interest-free housing lcans are easily
 available. The economy is still adjusting to the fall in
 national income caused by declining oil prices and production
 in the past two years. The Government has used its huge
 foreign reserves to complete major infrastructure projects
 while promoting private agricultural and industrial
 development and maintaining consumer purchasing power through
 subsidized loans and welfare payments.
 The Islamic Development Bank (IDB) estimated Saudi Arabia's
 population at 9,680,000 in 1983. The IBRD gives a figure of
 10,443,000 for the same year and 10,794,000 for 1984. Both
 IBRD and IDB estimates include the approximately
 3 million expatriates. The IERD puts life expectancy at birth
 at 56.4 years and the population growth rate at 3.3 percent
 for 1984. The IDB states that the population grew at an
 annual rate of 4.5 percent between 1970 and 1981. According
 to IBRD figures 72 percent of the population had access to
 safe water in 1976, and calorie intake was 108.4 percent of
 the total requirements in 1977.
 The development of a modern education system is a major
 government objective. Appropriations made for education in
 the current budget amounted to 10.7 percent of the total,
 against 10.2 percent last year. Over the past year 880
 schools and colleges were opened, raising the total to
 approximately 10,000. During the same period the number of
 students enrolled at all levels rose by 7.6 percent, and the
 number of teachers increased by 9.5 percent. In recent years
 primary schools have been constructed in even the most remote
 villages and a massive expansion of the university system was
 begun in the late 1970's, with the objective of accommodating
 
 
 1383
 SAUDI ARABIA
 all undergraduate applicants within the country. Literacy
 among adult Saudis has risen rapidly. According to IBRD
 statistics for 1980, 25 percent of the adult population (35
 percent of men and 12 percent of women) are literate.
 Statistics published by the IBRD indicate that approximately
 61 percent of Saudi children (70 percent of boys and 52 percent
 of girls) are enrolled in primary schools.
 Despite these efforts, poverty has not been eliminated. Some
 of the remaining Bedouin prefer a traditional lifestyle and
 only selectively take advantage of available opportunities to
 improve their standard of living. Other Saudis have limited
 opportunities to improve their economic position due to lack
 of education or government inefficiency. In the cities, poor
 Saudis are likely to have recently migrated from rural areas.
 In the rural areas, the poor are mostly small farmers in
 provinces where government resources have not yet been so
 generously applied to infrastructure development as in the
 cities. The Bedouin, who comprise perhaps five to seven
 percent of the population, cling to a nomadic way of life
 which frequently precludes the accumulation of substantial
 wealth.
 Due to orthodox religious beliefs and traditional social
 practices women do not enjoy equality with men. By Koranic
 precept, a daughter's share of an inheritance is less than
 that of a male offspring. Women are obliged to demonstrate
 legally specified grounds for divorce, whereas men may divorce
 their wives without such grounds. In Shari'a Court the
 testimony of one man equates to that of two women. Women may
 not drive motor vehicles, and there are restrictions on their
 use of public facilities when men are present. They do not by
 custom travel alone. They are restricted to reserved women's
 sections on urban buses. Women may travel abroad only with
 the written permission of their nearest male relative. Women
 are not permitted to work alongside men. In practice their
 employment is largely restricted to the teaching and health
 care professions. In public women are required to dress with
 extreme modesty and to avoid ostentatious clothing or jewelry.
 In recent years the share of allocated funds devoted to
 women's education has been proportionally greater than the
 number of women students. Free but segregated education
 through the university level is now available to Saudi women
 locally. The number of Civil Service jobs available to women
 (in segregated offices) has increased somewhat. Polygamy is
 becoming less common, particularly among younger Saudis.
 The large expatriate work force does not, for the most part,
 receive the same economic and social benefits available to
 native Saudis and must abide by considerable restrictions on
 its lifestyle. The poorest of these expatriates, almost
 2 million Yemenis, Africans, and Asians, live under conditions
 significantly worse than those of the Saudi urban classes.
 Labor Ministry inspectors and the labor courts seek with
 considerable success to enforce a generous labor code which
 regulates hours and working conditions, but not wages. Some
 foreign workers, particularly those in unskilled positions
 such as housemaids, are exploited due to their ignorance of
 the labor code, inability to understand Arabic, and/or lack of
 written contracts.
 
 40-387 0 - 85 - 88
 
 
 1384
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 
 COUNTRY: SAUDI ARABIA
 
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...
 LOANS ..............
 GRANTS .............
 A.AID  .................
 LOANS ..............
 GRANTS .............
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......
 LOANS ..............
 GRANTS .............
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ..........
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS.....
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....
 TITLE  I-TOTAL .........
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...
 LOANS ..............
 GRANTS .............
 PEACE CORPS ......
 NARCOTICS ........
 OTHER ............
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...
 LOANS ..............
 GRANTS .............
 A.MAP  GRANTS ..........
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG ....
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...
 LOANS ..............
 GRANTS .............
 --------------------------------
 OTHER US LOANS ..........
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......
 ALL  OTHER...............
 
 1982     1983     1984
 ...........................
 
 0.0   0.0   0.0
 0.0   0.0   0.0
 0.0   0.0   0.0
 0.0   0.0   0.0
 0.0   0.0   0.0
 0.0   0.0   0.0
 0.0   0.0   0.0
 0.0   0.0   0.0
 0.0   0.0   0.0
 0.0   0.0   0.0
 0.0   0.0   0.0
 0.0   0.0   0.0
 0.0   0.0   0.0
 0.0   0.0   0.0
 0.0   0.0   0.0
 0.0   0.0   0.0
 0.0   0.0   0.0
 0.0   0.0   0.0
 0.0   0.0   0.0
 0.0   0.0   0.0
 0.0   0.0   0.0
 0.0   0.0   0.0
 0.0-  0.0   0.0
 0.0   0.0   0.0
 0.0   0.0   0.0
 0.0   0.0   0.0
 0.0   0.0   0.0
 0.0   0.0   0.0
 0.0   0.0   0.0
 0.0   0.0   0.0
 0.0   0.0   0.0
 0.0   0.0   0.0
 0.0   0.0   0.0
 ..0....0..0.....0..0......
 '0.0   0.0   0.0
 0.0   0.0   0.0
 0.0   0.0   0.0
 
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1982     1983     1984    1946-84
 TOTAL .........    1.6      1.2      0.0    29.9
 IBRD               0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 IFC                0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 IDA                0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 IDB                0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 ADS                0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0
 AFOS               0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0
 UNDP               1.6      1.2      0.0    27.4
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0      0.0     2.5
 EEC                0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 
 
 1385
