 SAUDI ARABIA
 Saudi Arabia is a monarchy without democratically elected institutions or political
 parties. It is ruled by descendants of its founder, King Abdulaziz A] Saud, known
 in the West as Ibn Saud, who unified the country in the early part of the 20th cen-
 tury. The concept of separation of religion and state is foreign to Saudi society and
 governance. The legitimacy of the royal regime depends to a large degree on its per-
 ceived adherence to the precepts of a puritanically conservative form of Islam.
 
 
 1274
 There is no written constitution. The legal system is based on Islamic religious
 law. Traditional practice calls for consensus in government, internal social cohesion,
 respect for private property, and private economic enterprise. Since the death of
 King Abdulaziz, therin and Crown Prince have been chosen from among his sons,
 who themselves have had preponderant influence in the choice. Legislative changes
 announced in March 1992 however, granted the King the exclusive power to name
 the Crown Prince. They aiso called for establishment of an appointed Consultative
 Council (Mailis Ash-Shura) and for similar provincial assemblies. A 60-member
 Council has been formed and was formally inaugurated on secember 29. Political
 parties are not permitted in Saudi Arabia. Political expression that is unfavorable
 to the regime is forbidden. There are no elected assemblies.
 Police and border forces under the Interior Ministry are responsible for internal
 security. Security personnel committed human rights abuses during the year.
 Massive oil revenues have transformed Saudi Arabia's centuries-old pastoral, agri-
 cultural, and commercial economy. Agriculture accounts for only about 5 percent of
 the gross domestic product. This transformation has been marked by rapid urban-
 ization, large-scale development of economic and social infrastructure, the emer-
 fence of a welfare state and technocratic middle class, and the importation of mil-
 ions of foreign workers for skilled and menial labor. It has also been marked by
 widespread expenditure of public funds in ways that improved the quality of life for
 most Saudis but have also enriched members of the royal family and their associ-
 ates. With some important exceptions, mainly the hydrocarbon sector which ac-
 counted for one-third of the gross national product andthree-fourths of the govern-
 ment budget, the economy remains largely in private hands.
 Human rights cohtinued to be pervasively abused. Principal human rights prob-
 lems include torture and other abuse of prisoners and incommunicado detention;
 prohibitions or severe restrictions on the freedoms of speech and press, peaceful as-
 sembly and association, and religion; the denial of the right of citizens to change
 their government; and systematic discrimination against women and ethnic and reli-
 gious minorities and suppression of workers' rights. The Mutawwa'in, Saudi Ara-
 bia's official proctors of proper moral behavior, and other religious zealots acting as
 vigilantes continued to harass and abuse Saudis and foreigners of both sexes.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no confirmed reports of
 political killings. Relatives of a Saudi citizen under investigation in connection with
 a bank robbery reported that he was tortured to death. According to one human
 rights group, the suspect, Hussain Ali A-Shuwaikhat, died while in police custody
 on January 18. He reportedly died after being transferred to a hospital near the
 Awamia western prison. The Government did not acknowledge his death.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no known disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 As in 1992 there continued to be reports that Saudi authorities tortured and abused
 detainees, both Saudi citizens and foreigners. Abuse included the practice of fallaqa,
 beating the soles of the feet to cause intense pain, and sleep deprivation. A foreign
 journalist was arrested in a business dispute, subjected to fallaqa, and deported. Al-
 legations appeared in the international Arabic-language media in August that de-
 tained members and sympathizers of the Committee for the Defense of Legitimate
 Rights, which announced its formation in May, were subjected to torture while in
 detention. In keeping with their customary practice, Saudi officials made no com-
 ment on these allegations.
 Following a March 9 riot at the Raffia refugee camp in which eight people were
 killed, including four Saudis, there were reports that some refugees had been beaten
 duringthe investigation into the cause of the riot. Responding to the United Nations
 High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), Saudi authorities promptly relieved the
 responsible guards from duty at the camp, but there was no indication the guards
 were otherwise reprimanded. The UNHCR reported that Saudi soldiers responding
 to the riot did so with minimum force and that documented cases of torture and
 abuse of refugees by Saudi guards had dropped significantly.
 Agents of the Interior Ministry were alleged to be responsible for most incidents
 of torture. The Government's failure to punish human rights abusers is a salient
 factor in the climate of impunity that prevails. While it is general government prac-
 tice not to respond to reports of abuse, the Saudi Government has been responsive
 to diplomatic inquiries in some specific cases. The Mutawwa'in sometimes physically
 abused detainees while seeking to elicit confessions for supposed social misconduct.
 They often used switchlike sticks to harass those they perceived as violating reli-
 
 
 1275
 giously mandated standards of behavior and sometimes hit or slapped persons for
 alleged infractions of proper behavior. One of the 49 women who were arrested in
 1990 for driving cars to protest the ban on women driving reportedly had the car
 in which she was riding run off the road in June while returning from visiting
 friends and was detained by Mutawwa'in. She was held for 3 days and beaten while
 in custody because she hadbeen at a family gathering in which men who were not
 close relatives were present. In another instance an American woman and her
 Saudi female companion were picked up by the Mutawwa'in and held incommuni-
 cado; the Saudi woman was struck by the Mutawwa'in and injured herself in trying
 to run away. In most areas, Mutawwa'in are seldom punished for such acts; so far
 as is known, none of those involved in the instances cited were punished.
 Representatives of the International Committee for the Red Cross (ICRC) and the
 UNHCR both visited Saudi detention facilities where Iraqi refugees were jailed in
 1993. Officials from the UNHCR, officially recognized by the Government m June,
 regularly visit detained refugees in the Kingdom. Recognized international human
 rights organizations like the UNHCR reported that the Saudi Government improved
 conditions and treatment for some detainees in specific cases.
 The Saudis rigorously observe criminal punishments prescribed in their interpre-
 tation of Islamic law, including execution by beheading and stoning, and amputation
 for reported theft. In the absence of two witnesses (four witnesses in the case of
 adultery), confessions before a judge are almost always required for conviction-re-
 sulting in credible charges that this induces many forced confessions. Defendants
 are tried in closed chambers, without benefit of defense counsel being present.
 All 85 capital sentences in 1993 were carried out by beheading, sometimes fol-
 lowed by gibetting, which was confirmed in two of the cases. An Amnesty Inter-
 nationaireport noted the increased number of executions in Saudi Arabia in 1993
 which government officials explain is due to the rise in drug trafficking, a capital
 offense in the Kingdom. Death by firing squad is imposed for capital sentences for
 women instead of beheading. Repeated thievery is punishable by amputation of the
 right hand as prescribed by Shari'a law. For less severe crimes, such as drunken-
 ness or publicly flouting Islamic precepts, the Shari'a punishment of flogging with
 a cane is often imposed. Egyptian Mikhail Cornelius Michail received 500 of the
 1,000 lashes to which he was sentenced for blasphemy before being released from
 prison and deported.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Saudi law prohibits arbitrary arrest. A
 person may be arrested and charged with a crime or on the basis of an investigation
 of a crime. When a person is arrested, the time of his arrest and the charges are
 to ]:,k written in the olice log book at the jail. Actual charges or the charges being
 investigated are listed for every detainee. Investigations often take weeks or months
 to complete.
 Criminal procedure and the grounds for arrest have generally been determined at
 the discretion of the arresting officer, which has led, despite the law, to arbitrary
 arrest and detention. In October King Fahd issued a decree providing for a new of-
 fice of investigation and public prosecution. According to its provisions, the public
 prosecutor is to receive all evidence and investigate all alleged criminal activity
 prior to any decision to prosecute, thereby assuming the limited prosecutorial pow-
 ers currently enjoyed by a number of agencies. Despite regulations issued by the
 Ministry of Interior in 1985 to eliminate lengthy pretrial detention without charge,
 prisoners have been held for long periods be or they are charged or released. The
 Mutawwa'in sometimes exceeded their legal mandate by detaining suspects for peri-
 ods exceeding 24 hours before turning them over to the civil authorities. Moat
 arrestees have been held no longer than 3 days before being formally charged.
 In one of many reported cases, a Filipino man was held in prison for 4 years be-
 fore he was released without charge. Thepaaperwork concerning his arrest ad een
 misplaced by the arresting officer. Forty hi a were held since 1988 without charge
 in prison near Riyadh; several sources have confirmed that all were released in
 July. Sadi law makes no prvision for bail or habeas corpus; prisoners are, how-
 ever, sometimes released on the recognizance of a patron or employer.
 There is no automatic procedure or contating a detainee's family or employer
 when an arrest occur. In cases involving foreiger, however, Saudi authorities, if
 asked, usually confirm an arrest promptly. Embase usually hear about arrests of
 their nationals through informa channels; notification often comes after the ar-
 rested person has already been deported. A formal diplomatic note is required before
 consular officials may visit prisoners.
 Human rights groups from outside Sadi Arabia continued in 1993 to report cases
 of long-term incommunicado detention of political prisoners. Problems may arise
 articularly when persons are arrested by the General Intelligence Directorate
 Gil)), the Ministry hf InterioBs security service, commonly called the "Mubahith"
 
 
 1276
 or investigative police. The GiD regularly holds prisoners incommunicado during the
 initial phase of an investigation, which may last weeks or months. It has held at
 least four suspects incommunicado in Jeddah since Februar 1991 while investigat-
 ing their suspected connection with a terrorist incident against U.S. soldiers during
 the Gulf war and has denied relatives permission to visit the prisoners.
 The Government does not use exile as a form of punishment.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judicial system is based on Islamic jurispru-
 dence (the Shari'a). Regular Shari'a courts exercise jurisdiction over common crimi-
 nal cases and civil suits regarding marriage, divorce, child custody, and inheritance
 of real or personal property. In Saudi courts, the defendant appears before a judge
 who determines guilt or innocence in accordance with Shari'a standards and, if war-
 ranted, imposes sentence. Although Saudi law requires that trials be public, almost
 all trials are closed and are held without legal counsel present. The advice of law-
 yers is available before trial, and lawyers may act as court interpreters for those
 unfamiliar with Arabic. However, trials occur in which the defendant does not un-
 derstand Arabic and does not have a translator. Sentencing is not uniform and may
 vary according to the nationality of the defendant. Iraqi refugees and third-country
 nationals regularly receive longer sentences for the same offense than do Saudi citi-
 zens. A sentence may be changed at any stage of review.
 Appeals against judges' decisions are automatically reviewed by the Justice Min-
 istry or, in more serious cases, by the Court of Cassation and the Supreme Judicial
 Council to ensure that court procedures were correct and that judges applied appro-
 priate legal principles and punishments. Cases involving capital punishment must
 also be reviewed by the King. The Shi'a community is permitted to adjudicate exclu-
 sively noncriminal intra-Shi a disputes according to their own legal tradition.
 Although the independence of the judiciary is prescribed by law, jurists are never-
 theless aware of, and reportedly have on occasion acceded to, the power and influ-
 ence of royal family members and their associates. At the provincial level, governors
 have reportedly threatened, and even detained, judges with whom they disagreed.
 In one reported case for example, a domestic servant from another country was
 raped repeatedly by her employer, who videotaped and photographed the act. De-
 spite the graphic evidence, the employer, a prominent doctor, was not prosecuted
 because of his connections with government officials. The servant was charged with
 prostitution and deported. Members of the royal family and of other powerful fami-
 lies are not subject to the same legal constraints as other Saudis. Judges do not
 for example, have the power to issue a warrant summoning any member of the royal
 family.
 The Justice Ministry is responsible for the appointment, transfer, and promotion
 of juCs. Judges may be disciplined or removed only by the Supreme Judicial Coun-
 cilfa body of senior jurists, or by royal decree.
 The military justice system has jurisdiction over uniformed personnel and civilian
 government employees charged with violations of military regulations. Court-mar-
 tial decisions are reviewed by the Minister of Defense and Aviation and the King.
 Under Shari'a law as applied in Saudi Arabia, crimes directed against Muslims
 receive harsher penalties than those against non-Muslims. In the case of accidental
 death, the amount of indemnity or "blood money" paid to relatives varies with the
 religion and sex of the victim.
 The number of political prisoners being held at year's end was unknown owing
 to the Government's policy of not providing data or responding to inquiries about
 such persons, conducting closed trials, and detaining persons incommunicado for
 lon# periods while under investigation. (See Section 1.d. concerning the release of
 Shia "political" _prisoners.)
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 sanctity of family life and the inviolability of the home are among the most fun-
 damental of Islamic precepts, and legislative changes announced in March 1992 in-
 cluded provisions calling for the Government to maintain the sanctity of the home
 from unlawful incursions. However, Saudi religious police (Mutawwa'in) continued
 to enter homes to search for evidence of un-Islamic behavior and to harass and
 abuse perceived transgressors. Saudi police must generally demonstrate reasonable
 cause and obtain permission from the Provincial Governor before searching a pri-
 vate home, but warrants are not required.
 Saudi customs officials routinely open mail coming into the Kingdom to look for
 forbidden items, including material deemed pornographic and non-Muslim religious
 material. Materials deemed offensive are seized.  iretaps and mail surveillance
 may be carried out on the authority of officials of the Interior Ministry or the GID.
 To buttress claims that the Government had incriminating evidence against
 Mohamed A-Masari of the Committee for the Defense of Legitimate Rights, one
 high-ranking government official reportedly made reference to and played tapes
 
 
 1277
 made of Al-Masari's telephone conversations with foreign media journalists and
 human rights organizations. Informants are reliably reported to be regularly used
 for internal security matters.
 Most social and Islamic religious norms and strictures affecting personal life are
 matters of law and are enforced by the Government. Saudi women may not marry
 non-Saudis without government permission, which is rarely given. According to Is-
 lamic strictures, Saudi women are prohibited from marrying any non-Muslim, while
 Saudi men may marry Christians and Jews. Saudi men must obtain approval to
 marry women originally from countries other than the six members of the Gulf Co-
 operation Council (GCC). During Ramadan, the Islamic month of fasting and absti-
 nence, the prohibition against public eating, drinking, or smoking during daylight
 hours is enforced on Muslims and non-Muslim alike. Prohibitions against alcohol,
 pork products, and material deemed pornographic are strictly enforced and apply as
 well to foreign residents.
 Both Saudis and foreigners were targets of harassment by members of the
 Mutawwa'in or by religious zealots acting as vigilantes. The Mutawwa'in sought to
 enforce their increasingly strict standards of social behavior, from observance of
 prayer time closings of commercial establishments to appropriate dress in public
 and patronage of videotape rental shops. In August cassette tape stores in Riyadh
 were closed for 3 weeks due to pressure from the Mutawwa'in. Cassette tape sec-
 tions in variety stores, however, remained open.
 In addition to the Mutawwa'in harassment of non-Muslims attempting to conduct
 religious services (see Section 2.c.), the number and seriousness of incidents in
 which Saudi and foreign women were harassed, rose still further in 1993. Women
 were most often harassed for failure to observe Mutawwa'in-enforeed dress codes
 and for being in the company of males who are not close relatives. Since December
 1992, 48 incidents involving the Mutawwa'in were reported by American citizens.
 Such abuses have become so common that most incidents are not even reported to
 the authorities.
 In some cases, the Mutawwa'in or their sympathizers took unilateral action
 against individuals without the knowledge of the civil police. The U.S. Government
 protested to the Saudi Government the instances involving American citizens- the
 Saudi Government took no action in most areas to prevent recurrences and did not
 issue specific guidance for dress that would preclude Mutawwa'in harassment. In
 several of the cases involving Westerners, the authorities justified Mutawwa'in ac-
 tion by claiming there was credible evidence of transgressions of Sadi law involving
 alcohol or drugs.
 Government reforms announced in July created a Ministry of Islamic Affairs; the
 M'utawwa'in have been inorporated into this Ministry and will be under its super-
 vision.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Freedm of speech and press is severely limited
 by law (Article 39 of the Basic Law) and in practice. Criticism of Islam, the ruling
 family, or the Government is not allowed. The potential presence of informers ren-
 ders criticism of the regime rare.
 In May a group of six Saudis, including some signers of earlier petitions, an-
 nounced the formation of the Committee for the Defense of Legitimate Rights
 (CDLR). Although the organizers described their group as a human rights orga.ceza-
 tion, they also expressed concern that the Government was not a     eg closely
 enough to Islamic precepts. When the CDLR criticized the Government in the inter-
 national press, several of its members, including the son of one of the founding
 members, Mohamed Bin Abdullaw A-Masari, were detained. The Government dis-
 missed all six of the CDLR founders from their government jobs. The CDLR was
 denounced by the Senior Council of Ulema for overstepping the bounds of legitimate
 Islamic behavior and expression. One of the six signers withdrew from the Commit-
 tee. In August a   up of 38 professors was detained for a period of several weeks
 because o their public efforts o   tbtai  th release of AIMsari. He was released
 from custody in November.
 Since 1991 clandestine audio tapes and petitions signed by dozens of religious fig-
 ures calling for closer government adherence to Islam have been circulated widely
 through informal channels. King Fahd, in a public speech in December 1992,
 stressed the rht of all Saudis to approach senior officials directly to offer advice
 but criticized the authors of the petitions for what he called their improper use of
 the pulpit.
 The press is privately owned. It is effectively controlled by a 1982 media policy
 statement and a 1965 national security law which expressly prohibits the dissemi-
 nation of public criticism of the Government in any print or broadcast medium. The
 
 
 1278
 media policy statement enjoins the press to uphold Islam, oppose atheism, promote
 Arab interests, and preserve the cultural heritage of Saudi Arabia. Editors in chief
 are appointed with the explicit approval of the Ministry of Information, and the
 Government has the power to have them removed. Newspapers receive guidelines
 issued by the Information Ministry on government positions on sensitive issues, and
 the government-owned Saudi Press Agency (SPA) expresses the official viewpoint on
 such issues.
 In 1993 a newspaper editor was fired and later reinstated for an editorial lauding
 the King's position on opposing Islamic extremism. The editorial was said to be too
 strident in its criticism of Islamic extremism. The editor in chief of another news-
 paper was transferred to another position, and one of his editors was deported be-
 cause of a comic strip to which religious authorities objected.
 Domestic news concerning sensitive subjects, such as crime or terrorism, is often
 published only after the perpetrators have been arrested, convicted, and sentenced.
 Most foreign news that does not directly concern Saudi Arabia is presented objec-
 tively. Foreign press access to Saudi Arabia is tightly restricted.
 Saudi television and radio are state owned and operated. Foreign programs and
 sons are heavily censored, with references to politics, religions other than Islam,
 or or p is, alcohol, or sexual innuendo removed. In 1993 a television producer was
 for a owing a scene to be shown on Saudi television in which a man kissed
 a woma n dithe cheek. Although foreign news is generallypresented on television
 and radio in an objective manner, news about subjects affecting Saudi Arabia is
 tightly controlled, and conflicting viewpoints are usually not offered.
 There are an estimated 100,000 to 200,000 private satellite dishes operating in
 the Kingdom which receive foreign broadcasts. Despite widespread installation of
 satellite dishes, the status of these devices remains ambiguous. Importation and
 sale of the dishes were resumed after their prohibition in the summer of 1992 at
 the behest of religious leaders who objected to television programming available on
 satellite channels. Mutawwa'in were reported to have damaged satellite dishes on
 private residences with air rifles and slingshots to prevent their use.
 Foreign publications circulate but may be censored for materials deemed immoral
 or critical of Saudi policies and actions. Entire publications are sometimes withheld
 from distribution. In 1993 the issues of the International Herald Tribune containing
 articles from U.S. newspapers critical of the Saudi Government's economic policies,
 as well as issues of another newspaper that discussed the articles, were not distrib-
 uted in Saudi Arabia.
 Academic freedom is also constrained; for example, the study of evolution, Freud,
 Marx, and Western philosophy is proscribed. Some professors believe that classroom
 comments that could be taken as antiregime will be reported to the authorities.
 There continues to be an injunction against the study of music in educational insti-
 tutions through the university level. There are, however, some private organizations
 for the study of Western classical music.
 Artistic activities in schools and universities and in society in general continue
 to be limited and subjected to arbitrary closure. There are a few private art gal-
 leries, principally in Jeddah and Dhahran. Abstract and representational artists as
 well as photographers in general are allowed to work. However, in 1993 an exhibit
 of photographs prepared by a Saudi woman and sponsored by the French Embassy
 was closed hours before the opening, allegedly because the invitation card depicted
 the image of a woman although she was completely veiled. Cinemas and public mu-
 sical or theatrical perf'ormances, other than those that are strictly folkloric, are pro-
 hibited.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-These rights are strictly lim-
 ited. The Government prohibits public demonstrations as a means of political ex-
 pression or presenting grievances. Tribal, familial, and economic interest groups in-
 ormally aggregate public opinion, which their leaders express to high officials. Po-
 litical parties are prohibited (see Section 3), but nonpolitical clubs and professional
 groups may be organized with the permission of the authorities. The few existing
 professional groups are permitted to maintain contacts with their recognized inter-
 national counterparts. Public meetings are segregated by sex. Foreign members of
 groups seekingto hold unsegregated meetings risk arrest, incarceration, and depor-
 tation unless these meetings are sponsored by diplomatic missions.
 A children's winter concert at the Yanbu International School attended by 200
 people was raided by four Mutawwa'in and two policemen. The intruders grabbed
 children performing in the concert and pulled them from the stage. The Mutawwa'in
 tried to confiscate cameras and video equipment from members of the audience. U.S.
 and British officials formally protested the matter with senior Saudi officials, who
 reported that the incident was being given high-level attention and that an official
 investigation was being conducted. The officials gave assurances that the matter
 
 
 1279
 was taken very seriously by the Government and that such an incident would not
 recur. On December 30, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in a diplomatic note stated
 that the Government neither approves nor agrees with this behavior by members
 of the (Mutawwa'in) organization and that the necessary measures have been taken
 to ensure that what they have done will not be repeated in the future.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Freedom of religion does not exist. Islam is the official
 religion, and all Saudi citizens must be Muslims. An injunction against the practice
 of other religions in Arabia, attributed to the Prophet Mohammed, is enforced in the
 Kingdom. Public apostasy is a crime under Shan a law, punishable by death. There
 were no executions in 1993 for the crime of apostasy.
 Islamic practice in Saudi Arabia is generally limited to that sanctioned by the
 Wahhabi sect's interpretation of the Hanbali jurisprudential school of Islam. Prac-
 tices contrary to this interpretation, such as the visiting of graves of famous Mus-
 lims by pilgrims to Mecca or Medina or public Shi'a prayer practices, are discour-
 a d.
 he Shi'a Muslims, mostly in the Eastern Province, usually estimated at up to
 500,000 persons, constitute a religious minority subject to officially sanctioned forms
 of social and economic discrimination (see Section 5). Historically, the Government
 has prohibited Shi'a public processions during the Islamic month of Muharram and
 restricted public processions and congregations to specially designated areas within
 major Shi'a cities. However, since 1990, authorities have permitted marches on the
 Shi a holiday of Ashura, provided they take place without banners or public self-
 flagellation. King Fahd has quietly invited dissident Shi'a residents abroad to return
 to the Kingdom without regard for their past political activities. A number of Shi'a
 dissidents, including some who had spent many years abroad, have returned.
 The Government occasionally offers to provide financial support for the Shi'a reli-
 gious establishment, which is generally refused. The Government seldom permits
 private construction of Shi'a mosques, and the Shi'a have refused government offers
 to build state-supported mosques, in which Shi'a motifs would be prohibited.
 Public or private non-Muslim religious activities are not permitted. Persons wear-
 ing non-Islamic religious symbols in public may be arrested or publicly harassed by
 the Mutawwa'in. There are no public non-Muslim places of worship, and non-Mus-
 lim foreign nationals must practice their religions in secret.
 Proselytizing, large gatherings, or elaborate organizational structures are likely to
 attract official attention and lead to the imprisonment or expulsion of those in-
 volved. Following the destruction of the Babri mosque in India in December 1992,
 many Hindus working for the Government were fired from their jobs and deported.
 In May the home of an American woman and her Filipino husband was raided by
 the Mutawwa'in, who acted without a search warrant, after they were reported to
 be hosting a clandestine prayer group in their home. The man was arrested and
 held in jail without being formally charged until his deportation in November.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Travel for women, Saudi and non-Saudi, is restricted; they must obtain
 written permission from their closest male relative before being allowed to travel
 on public transportation between different parts of the country or to leave the coun-
 try. Male Saudis may travel freely within the country. A regulation promulgated in
 1990 requires most single Saudi men under the age of 18 to obtain permission be-
 fore traveling abroad; such permission may be easily obtained. In the case of govern-
 ment officials the permission of the royal court is required but appears to  e rou-
 tinely granted.
 All foreigners living in Saudi Arabia are required to carry identification cards. Of-
 ficially, foreigners are not permitted to travel outside the city of their employment
 or change their workplace without their sponsor's permission. Officials at internal
 checkpoints within the Kingdom enforce travel restrictions on foreigners, checking
 for letters of permission from employers.
 Foreign employees are prevented from traveling abroad without their sponsor's
 permission, since sponsors generally hold their passports and are responsible for ob-
 taining exit visas for them. Foreign diplomats are ordered by the Government not
 to travel outside the major cities without notifying the Government, but this order
 is rarely enforced. Foreigners involved in commercial disputes are sometimes not al-
 lowed to leave the country until the dispute has been resolved. Some sponsors have
 taken advantage of this arrangement to exert pressure to resolve commercial dis-
 putes in their favor. Occasionally, Saudi sponsors or business partners have been
 able to prevent foreign nationals from departingSaudi Arabia for years or to have
 them arrested or deported. In criminal cases, Saudi regulations require that the
 passports of all potential suspects and witnesses be seized, which sometimes forces
 foreign nationals to remain in Saudi Arabia for lengthy periods against their will.
 Denial of exit visas is a fairly common form of punishment, and passports of sus-
 
 
 1280
 
 pected subversives have occasionally been seized. Shi'a believed to have pro-Iranian
 sympathies may be prevented from traveling abroad.
 Saudis are permitted to emigrate but those who assume foreign nationalities
 come into conflict with Saudi law, which prohibits dual citizenship. Citizens do not
 have the right to relinquish their Saudi citizenship. Saudis born in the United
 States who have U.S. passports may have their U.S. passports confiscated by Saudi
 immigration authorities.
 There is no explicit formal policy regarding refugees or the granting of asylum.
 Refugees and displaced persons are often dealt with like other foreign workers who
 must meet strictly enibreed requirements of sponsorship and employment or risk
 being turned back at the border. Saudi authorities are responsive however in some
 cases where deportation of refugees to their home country woufd jeoparize their
 safety.
 In the aftermath of the Gulf war, 22,000 Iraqi citizens, primarily Shi'a, fled Iraq
 and were granted refuge in camps in Saudi Arabia near the city of Raiha. Similarly,
 13,000 Iraqi deserters declined repatriation to Iraq and were housed in the Kingdom
 under government custody near the city of Artawiyah. In December 1992, the refu-
 gee camp at Artawiyah was consolidated with the camp at Rafha. The decision to
 close the Artawiyah camp, scene of earlier human rights problems, was in part a
 response to advice from the UNHCR. The approximately 25,000 Iraqi refugees re-
 maining in Saudi Arabia are, with a few exceptions, restricted to the refugee camp.
 (See Section 1.c. on the March riot.) Saudi officials have worked with international
 humanitarian organizations to provide care for these Iraqis but have stressed that
 Islamic principles rather than international humanitarian law are the basis for this
 policy. In January the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees, Sadako Ogata, paid
 an official visit to Saudi Arabia and the UNHCR office in the Kingdom received offi-
 cial status in June. UNHCR officials have been informed that a few Somali refugees
 are on one of the Farasan Islands but have not been asked to provide assistance
 and have not been able to visit these refugees.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens cannot change their government peacefully. There are no formal demo-
 cratic institutions, and only a few Saudi citizens have a voice in the choice of leaders
 or in changing the political system. The King rules the country in matters civil and
 religious, within limits established by religious law, tradition, and the need to main-
 tain consensus among the ruling family and religious leaders. The King's legitimacy
 is based upon his adherence to the t.nets of Islam, his descent, his selection by con-
 sensus of the royal family, his ability to govern, and his perceived concern for the
 welfare of the nation. The King is also the Prime Minister, and the Crown Prince
 serves as deputy Prime Minister. The King appoints all other ministers, who in turn
 appoint subordinate officials with Cabinet concurrence. Ministers may retire only
 with the King's permission. In August the King announced that Cabinet ministers
 would have 4-year terms, with the possibility of reappointment.
 In 1992 King Fahd announced the formation of a Consultative Council, or Majlis
 Ash-Shura, which is to be an advisory body to the King and the Council of Min-
 isters. In August the King announced a constitution for the Majlis Ash-Shura and
 the names of the 60 Majlis Ash-Shura members. The Majlis was formally inaug-
 rated on December 29. In September the King announced rles and regulations for
 the provincial assemblies and their memberships.
 There are no popularly elected officials in Saudi Arabia. Political parties are not
 permitted, and there are no publicly organized opposition groups.
 Traditionally, public opinion has been expressed through client-patron relation-
 ships and affinity groups such as tribes, families, and professional hierarchies. The
 open-door audience (majlis) remains the primary forum for expression of opinion or
 rievance. Any male citizen or male foreign national may attend these sessions held
 by the King princes, or important national and local officials. Occasionally, women
 without maie relatives present petitions in some majlis sessions. Since the assas-
 sination of King Faisal in 1975, Saudi kings have reduced the frequency of their
 personal contacts with the public. Access to King Fahd, to whom decisions even on
 some apparently minor matters are referred, is considered by ordinary Saudis to be
 quite difficult, in part due to strict security measures.
 Typical topics raised in a majlis are complaints about bureaucratic delay or insen-
 sitivity, requests for redress or assistance, and criticism of particular acts of govern-
 ment affecting personal or family welfare. Broader "political" concerns--Saudi so-
 cial, economic, or foreign policy-are raised only occasionally. As governmental func-
 tions have become increasingly complex, time consuming, and centralized in Riyadh,
 direct public access to senior officials has become more difficult. Either the King or
 
 
 1281
 
 the Crown Prince meets with Sunni religious officials at least once a week. This in-
 stitutionalized but indirect means of ascertaining public opinion through consulta-
 tion falls short of internationally accepted democratic practice.
 Participation by women in the process is severely restricted, although there are
 reports that women may seek redress through female members of the royal family.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no human rights gups in the usual sense publicly active in Saudi Ara-
 bia, and none critical of Saudi policies would be permitted. In May a group of six
 Saudis, including some signers of earlier petitions announced the formation of the
 Committee for the Defense of Legitimate Rights (dDLR). When the CDLR criticized
 the Government in the international press, the Government took a number of puni-
 tive actions, closing the group's office and detaining several of its members, includ-
 ing the son of one of the founding members, Mohamed Bin Abdullah A-Masari, who
 was released in November.
 Some U.N. agencies concerned with humanitarian issues, including the UNHCR,
 maintain offices in Saudi Arabia and have regular contact with Saudi authorities.
 The Saudis have generally facilitated the work of the ICRC and UNHCR with Iraqi
 deserters refugees, and displaced persons from the Gulf war. Cooperation between
 the UNHCR and the Saudi Government has expanded, with a corresponding im-
 provement in the living conditions for Iraqi refugees living in Saudi camps. This co-
 operation is based on a June 22 memorandum of understanding between the
 UNHCR and the Saudi Government.
 Saudi Arabia has not signed major human rights treaties and conventions.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Women.-The lives of women in Saudi Arabia are rigidly circumscribed. They
 have few political and social rights and are not equal members of society.
 Violence against women is known to occur in Saudi Arabia. Although the Govern-
 ment does not keep statistics on such abuse, hospital workers report that it is not
 uncommon that women are admitted for treatment of injuries that appear to be the
 result of domestic violence. "Islamic advice" columns in the Saudi press sometimes
 recommend the "strict disciplining" of women, which is understood to encompass
 some degree of physical force, as part of a proper marriage.
 Foreign embassies receive frequent reports of the physical and sexual abuse of fe-
 male domestics by Saudi employers. The Government, in general, considers cases in-
 volving domestic servants to be private family matters and will not intervene unless
 clear-cut charges of severe abuse are brought to its attention. It is almost impossible
 fcr abused women to obtain redress in the courts due to the court's strict evi-
 dentiary rules and the women's own fears of reprisals. Few employers have been
 punished for such abuses. There are no private support groups or religious associa-
 tions to which abused women could turn for assistance.
 In 1993 women experienced an increased number of restrictions on their public
 activities. Many restaurants closed their family sections or refused to serve women
 unaccompanied by a male relative. Some restaurant managers who attempted to ig-
 nore this restriction were arrested and detained by the Mutawwa'in. In public, Mus-
 lim women are required to wear the abaya, headscarf, and face veil (lightweight,
 black garments covering the entire body, head, and face). Saudi authorities have re-
 peatedly said that non-Muslim women need not wear the abaya and headscarf, but
 should maintain decorum and modesty in appearance. However, the Mutawwa'in
 have increasingly tried to force all foreign women to wear the abaya and cover their
 hair.
 Women, including foreign women, may not legally drive motor vehicles or ride bi-
 cycles. Women are restricted to specially designated sections in the rear of urban
 buses with separate entrances. Of the 49 women who were arrested in 1990 for driv-
 ing cars to protest the ban on female drivers, all have had their passports returned
 and received compensation for some of the wages lost while in disfavor. Most have
 returned to work, although some continue to be harassed by the Mutawwa'in (see
 Section 1.c.).
 In addition to customary and legal restrictions, Saudi women are subject to dis-
 crimination inherent in the Islamic legal system. Under Islamic law, a daughter's
 share of an inheritance is half that of her brother's, under the presumption that the
 brother has financial obligations to his mother and sisters. Women must dem-
 onstrate legally specified grounds for divorce, but men may divorce without grounds.
 If divorced or widowed, a woman normally may keep her children until they attain
 the age of 7, but then they revert to the husbands family, to which they belong
 
 
 1282
 under Islamic law. Foreign women married to Saudis have frequently been barred
 from visiting their children after divorce.
 In a Shar'a court, the testimony of one man equals that of two women. Although
 Islamic law permits plygyny, it is becoming less common, especially in cities and
 among younger Saudis. Islamic legal precepts limit the number of wives to four and
 require a husband who has more than one wife to treat each of his wives equally.
 In practice, this norm is not always achieved.
 Employment opportunities for Saudi women are extremely limited. This fact,
 along with the ease of divorce for males, creates a situation of great economic vul-
 nerability and a sense of insecurity for many women. Insecurity is reported to be
 greatest among married women who fear their lack of legal protection if their hus-
 bands decide to divorce them. Some women join together to form clandestine savings
 clubs as insurance against the possibility of divorce. The younger generation of edu-
 cated Saudis, men and women, tend to express a greater interest in having women
 work, and the number of employed women in Riyadh has increased in the last few
 years. However, there is evidence that the influence of religious extremists has in-
 creased in various government institutions and that female employees are increas-
 ingly segregated and subjected to various forms of harassment. Women remain ex-
 cluded from the vast majority of occupations.
 Free, but segregated, education through the university level is available to Saudi
 women. Women constitute 55 percent of all university graduates but are excluded
 from studying certain subjects such as engineering, journalism, and architecture.
 Saudi men are able to study overseas; Saudi women generally can do so only if ac-
 companied by a spuse or an immediate male relative. Despite the high percentage
 of university graduates, women make up only 5 percent of the work force. In prac-
 tice, most employment opportunities are in the field of education, with some avail-
 able in health care and a relative few in business, philanthropy, banking, retail
 sales, and the media. Women wishing to enter nontraditional fields are subject to
 arbitrary discrimination. In August the Ministry of Commerce announced that it
 had stopped issuing licenses to women and students who wished to undertake main-
 tenance, contracting, or janitorial services. When asked for clarification, a Ministry
 official said the ban would be temporary.
 Children.-The Government provides all Saudi children with free education and
 medical care. Reports of societal abuse directed against children are rare, except for
 the practice of female circumcision which is thought to persist among African na-
 tionals, especially in the southwestern Tihama region.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Although racial discrimination is illegal in
 Saudi Arabia, substantial societal prejudice based on ethnic or national origin ex-
 ists. Foreign workers from Africa and Asia are subject to various forms of informal
 discrimination and have difficulty in attempting to enforce their rights under Saudi
 law. In 1993 there continued to be credible reports of informal discrimination, in-
 cluding wage discrimination, against Jordanians, Palestinians and Yemenis, pri-
 marily because of positions their governments or the Palestine Liberation Orgamza-
 tion took in the Gulf crisis.
 Religious Minorities.-Saudi Shi'a, in addition to being subject to stringent reli-
 gious repression (see Section 2.c.), also face discrimination in government and indus-
 trial employment, especially in jobs with national security implications, broadly de-
 fined. Employment restrictions at Aramco, traditionally an important employer for
 the Shi'a, were imposed on them several years ago and have not been relaxed. Shi'a
 also face limitations on their access to social services, despite efforts bX the Govern-
 ment to improve the social service infrastructure in predominantly Shi a areas of the
 country. Since the Iranian revolution, some Sl:i'a have been subjected periodically
 to surveillance and limitations on travel abroad. Among 60 members appointed to
 the Consultative Council in August, only 1 was a Shi'a.
 People with Disabilities.-The Saudi Government and charitable organizations co-
 operate to provide education, employment opportunities, and other needed services
 for the disabled. While there is no legislation or otherwise mandated provision of
 accessibility for the disabled, new construction for public and business uses often in-
 cludes access for them.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Government decrees prohibit the formation of labor
 unions and strike activity, and there have been no attempts to defy these restric-
 tions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Collective bargaining is for-
 bidden, and there are no special economic zones in the country. Foreign workers
 comprise approximately half of the work force. Wages are set by the employers on
 the basis of market factors.
 
 
 1283
 
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced labor has been prohibited
 since 1962 by a royal decree that abolished slavery, and Saudi ratification of Inter-
 national Labor Organization (ILO) Conventions 29 and 105 have the force of law.
 Nonetheless, vestiges of the master-slave relationship remain; a great number of
 former slaves chose to remain in the princely households where many now enjoy a
 quasi-familial status as household supernumeraries. Additionally, since employers
 generally exercise control over the movements of foreign employees, situations that
 could be described as forced labor can occur, especially in remote areas where work-
 ers are unable to leave their place of employment. Diplomats desiring to visit work
 sites to check on the welfare and conditions of citizens of their countries were some-
 times denied access. There also have been reports that female domestic workers
 sometimes have been prevented from leaving the homes of their employers and
 forced to work 12 to 16 hours a day, 7 days a week. Maids who run away from their
 employers are often returned to the employers by Saudi authorities against the
 maids' wishes. In addition, there have been reports of workers whose employers re-
 fused to pay several months or even years of accumulated salary or other promised
 benefits. Domestic workers, i.e., maids and family drivers, are not covered under
 Saudi labor law. However, nondomestic workers have recourse to the labor courts.
 Foreign workers have reported, however, considerable difficulty in attempting to en-
 force their rights under Saudi law.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-There is no minimum age for
 workers employed in family-operated businesses or in other situations that are con-
 strued as extensions of the household, e.g., farmers, herdsmen, and domestic serv-
 ants, since they are not covered by Saudi Arabia's labor regulations. In other cases,
 the labor regulations provide for a minimum age of 13, which may be waived by
 the Labor Ministry with the consent of the juvenile's guardian. Children aged 13
 to 18 are prohibited from working more than 6 hours per day. Children under age
 18 and women may not be employed in hazardous or harmful industries, such as
 mines or industries employing power-operated machinery. While there is no formal
 government entity charged with enforcing the minimum age for employment of chil-
 dren, the Justice Ministry has jurisdiction and has acted as plaintiff in the few
 cases that have arisen against alleged violators.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no legal minimum wage. A provision
 providing for the Council of Ministers to set a minimum wage has not been imple-
 mented. Saudi labor regulations establish a standard 48-hour workweek at regular
 pay and allow employers to require up to 12 additional hours of overtime at time-
 and-a-half pay. Saudi labor law provides for a 24-hour rest period, normally on Fri-
 days, although the employer may grant it on another day.
 There continue to be numerous reports of foreign nationals coming to Saudi Ara-
 bia on promises by private contractors of a certain level of pa( and benefits, only
 to find that the contract they sign upon arrival specifies lower levels of both. Other
 reports suggest that some workers sign contracts in their home countries and are
 then asked to sign ones less favorable to them upon arrival. Reliable reports indi-
 cate that the length of service called for in the original contract is sometimes in-
 creased upon arrival by as much as 3 years and that employees reaching the end
 of their term of service in a contract have been refused permission to return home
 by their employer, effectively extending the workers' term of employment involun-
 tarily. There are reports as well of workers who are indentured to Saudi sponsors
 for a set amount each month and who must then find their own employment upon
 arrival in the Kingdom. To solve these problems, some foreign governments have
 begun utilizing employment organizations that negotiate salary and benefits in ad-
 vance for their nationals. These organizations periodically check on the results of
 their efforts through their embassies and the Saudi labor courts.
 Occupational health and safety standards are outlined in the Kingdom's Labor
 Law. In  eneral, the law requires employers to protect "workmen from hazards and
 diseases in the workplace. The Labor Ministry enforces these standards more effec-
 tively against large enterprises due to their higher profile and to limited Ministry
 resources. The law does not apply to enterprises with fewer than five employees,
 family businesses, and domestic employees. The Labor Law allows employees to re-
 move themselves from situations that endanger their health or safety without jeop-
 ardy to their continued employment, provided the employer has been notified of the
 dangerous conditions and has not taken corrective action. Labor law protects work-
 ers reporting health and safety violations from reprisal by their employers, but
 there have been instances of sanctions against foreign workers making such com-
 plaints.
 
 
 1284
