 SAUDI ARABIA
 Saudi Arabia is an Islamic monarchy. Religious law forms
 the basis of the legal system and Islamic precepts and
 traditions play a major role in society. Saudi Arabian
 society is of tribal origin. It is "open" and egalitarian
 in many ways. However, most Saudis define themselves and
 others in terms of group membership. This can have strong
 effects on individual bahaviour. While Saudi justice may at
 times appear harsh by Western standards, it is not normally
 capricious or cruel. Most Saudis have an intensely felt
 traditional sense of justice and support their legal system
 wholeheartedly.
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a.   Torture
 Torture is not sanctioned or, to the best knowledge of the
 Department of State, practiced in Saudi Arabia. Individual
 cases of occasional mistreatment have proved to be isolated
 and unsanctioned. Documented cases have resulted in
 disciplinary action towards those responsible.
 b.   Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 Islamic law, which is the constitution of Saudi Arabia,
 sanctions the practice of severing the hand of convicted
 thieves. This punishment is reserved primarily for
 recidivists. First or second time offenders could conceivably
 receive such punishment if the crime were sufficiently grave
 and premeditated, but such severity is unusual. In fact,
 there have been few instances of hand severing during the
 past several years. Capital punishment by public beheading
 is provided by law for murder, adultery and other crimes
 considered heinous. For example 63 members of the group
 which occupied the Grand Mosque in Mecca were beheaded.
 Public flogging under strict controls is occasionally used
 as a punishment for lesser crimes by the Saudi courts.
 Prisoners live under difficult conditions, particularly
 during the hot season, but are not deliberately mistreated.
 c.   Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 Arbitrary arrest and detention are not condoned or practiced
 by the government. There is no evidence that individuals
 are presently imprisoned in Saudi Arabia for their political
 beliefs. There are individuals presently under detention
 for their involvement in the recent violent incidents in
 Mecca and the Eastern Province. There is no right of habeas
 corpus; arrestees can be held awaiting trial for weeks
 without formal charges because of administrative deficiencies
 and extended police investigation. There is, however, a
 recognized informal system of releasing prisoners on bond
 when they are charged with minor offenses. Sharia (Islamic)
 law does not condone preventive detention, however the
 government has been known to restrict the movements of
 individuals for brief periods of time. People can be
 imprisoned for non-payment of debts. Benevolent societies
 exist which use private contributions to pay the debts and
 obtain the release of large numbers of these prisoners each
 year.
 (818)
 
 
 S819
 d.   Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Saudi Arabia's judicial system is based directly on Islamic
 law. The accused ordinarily receives a public trial before
 qualified and impartial judges. The judge can permit a
 counsellor to assist the defendant (or the plaintiff).
 Interpreters of varying ability are sometimes provided to
 non-Arabic speakers. Trials are closed only when the
 security of the state is at issue, as in the case of the
 assassination of King Faisal in 1976, or in cases of alleged
 treason. Similarly, drug cases are treated in a highly
 confidential manner. Should parties in a criminal trial be
 dissatisfied with the verdict, they have the right to appeal
 to a higher court, as well as to the King.
 e.   Invasion of the Home
 Saudi law and custom require respect for privacy. Although
 the situation varies considerably in different areas in the
 Kingdom, Saudi police are required to have prior authorization
 from the provincial governor's office for a raid, except in
 "hot pursuit" situations. House searches are not common and
 usually relate to smuggling of narcotics, alcohol, or
 pornographic materials.
 2.   Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 The Saudi Government is making use of its massive oil
 revenues to improve the living conditions of all levels of
 society. The Saudi economy is free enterprise oriented,
 with heavy government involvement in the industrialization
 and infrastructure development that is rapidly changing the
 society from rural to urban. Yearly per capita income is
 approximately $10,000. There are disparities in income and
 wealth, but all Saudis are considered to have a right to
 employment and housing. Free education and health care
 facilities are available to all citizens. Basic foodstuffs
 are subsidized; interest-free loans are provided for home
 purchases by citizens. There are no income or sales taxes.
 In addition to its concern for the welfare of its own
 people, the Saudi Government is a major source of foreign
 aid to poorer countries.
 3.   Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a.   Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion, and Assembly
 Saudis are generally free to say whatever they wish.
 Indeed, the government, and even the King, is expected by
 cultural tradition to receive any petition and listen to any
 grievance a citizen may wish to put forth. Although there
 is no express prohibition on assembly, any meeting of a
 political nature would fall under the more general
 prohibition against political activity and organizations.
 The press is not formally censored prior to publication, but
 it does keep within bounds that     are acceptable to the
 government. Occasionally a newspaper oversteps these bounds
 and the government suspends its publication for a number of
 days. Thus, criticism of policies and senior officials in
 the press is rare. There is frequent criticism of the
 negative effect of domestic policies, particularly in the
 
 
 820
 economic sphere. Pictures and statements thought offensive
 to Saudi society are excised from the foreign press prior to
 distribution.
 Islam is the established religion of Saudi Arabia and Saudis
 are not permitted to practice other religions. Non-Muslim
 foreigners hold private and discreet religious services.
 Civil marriage does not exist in Saudi Arabia. The Muslim
 religion prohibits Muslim women from marrying non-Muslim
 men, but permits Muslim men to marry women who are either
 Muslim or "People of the Book" (Christian, Jewish, or
 Zorastrian). Marriage between Saudis and non-Saudis is
 regulated by the Ministry of Interior. Saudi citizens
 wishing to marry a non-Saudi of any religion or nationality
 (except a native of another Arab state on the Gulf) must
 first obtain permission from that Ministry.
 b.   Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, and Emigration
 Saudi males are free to move about the country and travel
 abroad. By social custom, however, the movement of women is
 restricted. Women cannot drive cars and Saudi women must
 obtain permission from their husband , father, or guardian
 to travel abroad. They also require a male relative to escort
 their     travel inside the country or to leave it, although
 an adolescent son or brother is usually sufficient.
 Emigration requires the permission of the government. Few
 Saudis choose to live permanently outside the country and
 virtually all students abroad return to Saudi Arabia upon
 completion of their studies.
 Nearly one and one-half million foreign Muslims congregate
 each year for the annual Mecca pilgrimage. The security
 problems created by this large mass of people are enormous.
 After the pilgrimage, the Saudis endeavor to round up all
 those who attempt to stay and work after their pilgrimage
 visas expire.
 There is no tourism, as such, in Saudi Arabia, and all
 visitors must have a local sponsor. Entry visas have at
 times been refused by Saudi authorities on grounds of
 religious affiliation when it might indicate a political
 orientation considered to be a security threat. Those cases
 are increasingly rare and generally limited to self-proclaimed
 atheists and others whom the Saudis consider to be a threat
 to their way of life.
 The law and practices regarding work permits, visas and
 holding of passports give Saudi employers an unusually high
 degree of control over their expatriate employees. It gives
 unscrupulous employers the potential for creating hardship
 for their employees, such as extracting financial concessions
 and creating obstacles in the way of foreigners attempting
 to leave Saudi Arabia.
 c.   Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Saudi Arabia is an Islamic monarchy whose King is chosen by
 consensus of the senior members of the royal family. Major
 governmental decisions are also made by consensus. The
 Kingdom does not have an elected assembly and political
 
 
 821
 parties are prohibited. The accessibility of officials and
 the right of any citizen to redress, through presentation of
 petition or grievance to the King'at his weekly public
 audience, or to one of several special grievance and
 administrative tribunals, function as restraints against
 arbitrary use of authority. Although the King is the head
 of the legal system, which in Islamic law is at one with the
 religious system, he may be sued in his own court.
 Women in Saudi Arabia occupy a social position that
 reflects the conservative tradition and sanctions of Islamic*
 law as interpreted by the Saudis. Women are segregated from
 all men except close relatives. Their primary focus is on
 the home and family. When they leave their homes they are
 expected to be veiled and to be escorted   by a male
 relative.               Divorce in Saudi Arabia, which is
 relatively uncommon, is in accordance with Islamic law. In
 practice, men initiate divorce more often than women.
 Divorced wives must be adequately provided for, generally by
 a return of the dowry. Polygamy is sanctioned by Islam and
 men can have up to four wives at a time, but this practice
 has become rare, especially in the younger generation.
 Women's opportunities for employment are limited by law to
 certain occupations such as teaching and nursing where
 contact with men is minimal. However, Saudi women have
 occasionally been employed in other fields. An increasing
 number of women are being educated through the university
 level, and a few have studied for advanced degrees abroad.
 Unions or other forms of labor organizations are prohibited.
 Official institutions and an extensive and relatively
 enlightened labor law have been established to protect the
 interests of labor and to hear grievances.
 4.   Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 To the best of the Department of State's knowledge, the
 Saudi Government has not been asked to accept outside
 independent investigation of human rights conditions.
 
 
 822
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 
 COUNTRY: SAUDI ARABIA
 
 1977     1978     1979
 
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL,..          0.0      0.0       0.0
 LOANS..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS..............        . 0.0     0.0      0.0.
 A.AIO ..................       0.0        0.0       0.0
 LOANS..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 ORANTS.............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 (SECSUPPASSIST.).           0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE,......          0.0      0.0       0.0
 LOANS..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL ,...,....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS,....          0.0      0.0       0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR,...,          0.0      0.0       0.0
 TITLE Il-TOTAL,,.,.....          0.0      0.0       0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP,          0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY.            0.0      0.0       0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 CONTR. TO IFI..,.          0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS,.....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER.............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.TOTAL . .         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS...............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............       . 0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS,.........          0.0      0.0       0.0
 B.CREDIT SALS-FMS..            0.0      0.0       0.0
 C.INTL MILEDTRNG,,,,          0.0      0.0      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK,..          0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ......          0.0      0.0       0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL,..          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS..............       . 0.0      0.0      0.0
 -----       ------------------------------------------------
 OTHER US LOANS,,..   ,,.         0.0      0.0     19.1
 EX-IN BANK LOANSS......          0.0      0.0      19.1
 ALL OTHER..............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 SE------------------------------------------------
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES-COMMITMENTS
 
 1977
 
 TOTAL*.*..,
 !SRO
 IFC
 IDA
 IDB
 ADB
 AFDB
 UNDP
 OTHER-UN
 EEC
 
 1978     1979     1946-79
 
 24.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 21.4
 2.6
 0.0
 
 ----------------------------------------------------------
 
 
