Saudi Arabia
T^his year's State Department report on human rights in Saudi •1- Arabia is much improved over previous years. It adopts an even-handed tone, discusses the deplorable human rights situation in Saudi Arabia in frank terms, and rectifies many of the shortcomings identified in previous Critiques. The drafters of this year's report also make an effort to correct some of the very serious problems which marred last year's report in particular. Even if there remain areas which need further improvement, the report's discussion of human rights in Saudi Arabia during 1996 represents the State Department's best effort since the Lawyers Committee has focused on it in the Critique.
While the drafters of the report make great strides, especially in the areas of tone and lucidity, they must nevertheless turn their attention to a few remaining problems which stand between the report's merely being improved and it's being a thoroughly credible and objective account of human rights in Saudi Arabia. The Saudi government's discomfort at or rejection of the report must not be the yardstick by which success in this regard is measured, since the Saudi government is hyper-sensitive to criticism and can be expected to reject any scrutiny of its human rights practices. Furthermore, a merely negative portrayal of the human rights situation in Saudi Arabia could lead to oversimplification. Past reports have rightly sought to portray the human rights situation in Saudi Arabia as nuanced. While such attempts might have contributed to the perception that the report was soft-pedaling human rights abuses perpetrated by the Saudi government, attention to complexity and nuance should not be abandoned.
Among the problems in this year's report is subtie slanting of information by inappropriate tone or vocabulary. Such instances are far fewer this year than last year, and some problems in this year's report seem to result merely from careless drafting. The report may have also understated numbers of political detainees and downplayed the issue of executions, especially in 1995. Lack of attention to United Nations human rights mechanisms is perhaps the only area in which the report continues, with little sign of improvement, an unfortunate trend of previous years. The report is too equivocal about the human rights implications of the treatment of persons arrested or detained in
211
Critique 1996
connection with bombings in 1995 and 1996, which took the lives of a number of U.S. military personnel and others. Finally, this year's report again ignores the issue of the Saudi government's acquisition of foreign media, part of an ongoing attempt to rid print and broadcast media of criticism of the Saudi government, both in Saudi Arabia and abroad.
The 1995 report suffered from misguided attempts to shade information in such a way as to minimize criticism of the Saudi government while making its critics appear to be dangerous extremists. This problem appears again in this year's report, though it is less pervasive. Again this year it is the exiled Saudi opposition group, the Committee for Defense of Legitimate Rights (CDLR), which the report seeks to portray as comprised of extremist Muslim fanatics, while casting the Saudi government as the proponent of a comparatively harmless, paternalistic form of Islam. This year's report, repeating verbatim the distinction made last year, labels the Saudi government's brand of Islam "rigorously conservative," while identifying CDLR as "rigidly fundamentalist." That this year's report limits itself to this distinction represents a definite improvement over last year's report, where many colorful drafting devices were employed to discredit CDLR by contrasting its vicious "fundamentalism" with the benign "conservatism" of the Saudi government.
Nevertheless, the distinction between governmental "conservatism" and opposition "fundamentalism" remains of doubtful utility or validity. In the first place, the term "conservative" has a largely social connotation; the pejorative "fundamentalism," by contrast, has an exclusively religious flavor. Moreover, in light of the fact that the report castigates the Saudi government for egregious human rights violations in almost every category discussed — some committed in the name of Islam — the distinction appears ludicrous. It is instructive to note that the most damaging information the report can muster against CDLR and similar groups is that they "implicitly condoned" or "expressed . . .'understanding"' of the November 1995 and June 1996 bombings in Saudi Arabia.
Even conceding for the sal<.e of argument that CDLR and similar persons have made statements which are universally recognized as morally reprehensible, the simple fact remains that it is the Saudi government,
212
Saudi Arabia
according to the report, which commits acts of violence, sometimes in the name of Islam, which are brutal and deliberate violations of binding international human rights norms. One may well ask whether "conservatism" is the appropriate appellation for such actions, and whether such "conservatism" is appropriately contrasted with an ostensibly more dangerous "fundamentalism." The report further complicates this issue of "conservatism" versus "fundamentalism" where it states, in another context, that "[s]ome professors believe that the government and conservative religious informers monitor their classroom comments." In this sentence, "conservative" is expressly distinguished from the government, and appears to have acquired a mildly pejorative sense. Although the term "fundamentalist" is itself by no means free of difficulties, the problem lies less in its use to describe one strand of the Saudi position than in the contrast which the report's drafters use it to draw. It is to be hoped that next year's report abandons this unhelpful and misleading distinction.
Apart from the issue of the CDLR's "fundamentalism," the report's discussion of the CDLR and a rival breakaway group represents a vast improvement over last year. It could have been further improved by dropping its reference to the fact that CDLR was "established in 1993 by six citizens." (emphasis added.) While true, the statement implies that CDLR's followers are so few as to constitute a thoroughly marginal group. In fact, as is patently obvious from the Saudi government's detention of CDLR's founders and 38 "professors" in 1993 and its detention of 157 religious anti-government activists in 1994 in the wake of the founding of the Committee, CDLR is representative of an important, specifically Sunni-Wahhabi trend in the internal opposition to the Saudi government.
Also, the statement that CDLR co-founder Dr. Muhammad al-Mas'ari "secretly fled to the United Kingdom" (emphasis added) suggests some kind of furtive and inappropriately clandestine action on his part. In fact, as noted in the 1993 State Department report. Dr. al-Mas'ari was imprisoned and likely tortured for public expressions of opposition to the government. After he fled, according to the 1994 report, "15-20 of his relatives and supporters" were arrested by Saudi security forces. The sentence should either have stated that he was forced to flee, or dropped
213
Critique 1996
the word "secretly." This kind of petty point-scoring could usefully be excised from future reports and stands in stark contrast to the otherwise objective discussion of CDLR and al-Mas'ari's asylum case in England, and the Saudi government's related threats against British economic interests in Saudi Arabia.
Another area which has called for comment in past editions of the Critique is the report's characterization of the Saudi judiciary as "generally independent." This assertion seems again this year, as in past years, to be contradicted by the report's own analysis. According to the report:
The judiciary "is subject to influence by the executive branch and members of the royal family."
Judges "occasionally accede to the influence of the executive branch, particularly members of the royal family and their associates."
"Provincial governors have the authority to exercise leniency and reduce a judge's sentence."
"In some instances, governors have reportedly threatened and even detained judges over disagreements on their decisions."
"In general, members of the royal family, and other powerful families, are not subject to the same rule of law as ordinary citizens."
Judges "do not have the power to issue a warrant summoning any member of the royal family."
The above statements, when considered in light of the sheer numbers of the royal family (6,000 princes, not including wives and children), "their associat^es," and "other powerful families," suggest that the judiciary is not, in fact, very independent at all.
214
Saudi Arabia
In addition, the statement that the "I<jng and his advisors review cases involving capital punishment to ensure that the court applied the proper legal and Islamic principles" {emphasis added) is very curious. Kjng Fahd is neither a trained jurist nor an Islamic legal scholar, so there is some question as to the nature of this "review." A more fitting analysis would be that members of the executive branch "suggest" that lower courts reconsider their decisions when they offend executive branch sensibilities. One example of that kind of review would be last year's case of Abdullah al-Hidaif (discussed in last year's report and Critique), whose life sentence was reportedly rejected after "review" by angry Interior Minister Prince Nayif A dutiful reconsideration of the case led to the imposition and swift execution of a death sentence. Mr. al-Hidaif was accused of assaulting a member of the Saudi security apparatus with acid. It was also reported that he had previously been tortured by that same official.
Finally, given that Section 1 .e of the report carries the title "Denial of Fair Public Trial," the report should state whether Saudi trials are public. The report notes only that trials are closed for persons "who may be political prisoners."
The report describes the Saudi religious police, the Mutawwi'in, as a "semiautonomous agency that encourages adherence to Islamic principles." "Encourages" is too mild a term; "enforces" would be much better (in fact, the report uses "enforcement" elsewhere), since the report indicates that they routinely intimidate, harass, abuse and detain persons who run afoul of their vague notions of un-Islamic behavior. In addition, attempts by the Mutaymi'in to enforce what the report refers to as "modest dress in public" — a practice no doubt aimed exclusively at women — deserve a more frank discussion. The report itself describes what women are expected to wear: "the abaya, a black garment covering the entire body. A woman's head and face should also be covered." The report specifically connects the Mutamvi'in with the enforcement of such rules. It is offensive to even the most rudimentary notions of women's rights to refer to this oppressive requirement as "modest dress."
A final point on careless drafting and inappropriate shading: by and large, the report employs clear and direct topic sentences at the beginning of its various sections and subsections. For example; "The Government
215
Critique 1996
severely limits freedom of speech and the press," and "[sjystematic discrimination based on sex and religion are built into the law." Accordingly, one is surprised to find the section on "Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence" beginning with the cosy maxim, "[t]he sanctity of family life and the inviolability of the home are among the most fundamental of Islamic precepts." This may well be true, but the report follows this lofty Islamic principle by noting that no warrant is required before searching a private home, mail is routinely opened, wiretaps and informants are routinely employed and the Mutavfwi'in arrests persons for conducting non-Muslim religious services (presumably sometimes in private residences).
In specific cases, it might be useful to note where Saudi practice contravenes a principle of Islamic law, since the Saudi government routinely invokes Islam as a pretext for ignoring binding norms of international human rights law. However, in view of the report's analysis, the topic sentence of this section would appear unrelated to actual Saudi government practices, references to relevant provisions of the 1992 Basic Law purporting to "defend the home from unlawful incursions," notwithstanding. A more appropriate topic sentence might have been: "Although the sanctity of family life and the inviolability of the home are thought to be among the most fundamental of Islamic precepts, Saudi laws and Government practices provide few protections in this regard."
This year's report may have understated the extent of Saudi Arabia's human rights abuses in the area of arbitrary arrest and detention. While the report's discussion of arrest procedures and practices is adequate, the discussion of actual numbers of detainees is lacking. The report notes that two religious scholars arrested in September 1994, Salman al-'Awdah and Safar al-Hawali, remain in detention, probably along with 27 others. An allusion is made to "thousands of prisoners and detainees released under the annual Ramadan amnesty" and to the fact that this amnesty included no political dissidents. Finally, it is stated that "[t]he total number of political detainees is impossible to determine." In the section on "Denial of Fair Pubhc Trial," the report notes that "[a]t year's end, at least nine persons were serving prison terms for their connections to the rigidly fundamentalist [CDLR] . . .and their alleged involvement in a 1994
216
Saudi Arabia
assault on an Interior Ministry Official." This analysis leaves, for anyone keeping score, between 29 and 34 persons in detention for anti-government activities, while simultaneously trumpeting the release of "thousands."
By contrast. Human Rights Watch reported the following incidents which occurred during 1996: March: a campaign of arrests and detention of Shi'ah; June: hundreds of warrantless arrests carried out in the Eastern Province with 2,000 persons still in detention as of early October; August: five relatives of Dr. al-Mas'ari detained; October: 200 Shi'ah still detained. Admittedly, it is notoriously difficult to form an accurate estimate of political detainees in Saudi Arabia, as the report itself points out. However, one has to assume that the U.S. Embassy in Riyadh has as good an idea as anyone, apart from the Saudi government. Therefore, if information of the type related by Human Rights Watch is wildly inaccurate, the report would do a great service in so stating.
Regarding unlawful detention and the Saudi judiciary in light of the foregoing, one wonders what the relevance is of the statement, "[hjowever, there was a case in 1995 in which a Saudi citizen successfully sued the Government for wrongful imprisonment and was awarded compensation." The uniqueness of this case suggests that the use of the word "however" is inappropriate. As this case represents, one suspects, a rare occurrence, it should be used to support the report's assertion that "[t]here are few procedures to guard against abuse." The report might have reworded the sentence thus: 'The only known case in which a citizen obtained judicial redress for a case of wrongful imprisonment occurred in 1995."
In November 1995 and June 1996, Saudi Arabia was rocked by terrorist attacks against security and defense installations, in particular, facilities connected or associated with the U.S. military presence in the country. U.S. military personnel were among the casualties of both incidents. On April 22, 1996, four suspects in the November bombing appeared on Saudi television and confessed. To no one's surprise, the suspects implicated Dr. al-Mas'ari and others who have been publicly condemned by the government. Many observers believed that the confessions appeared coerced. The report stated that "[a]ll four were tried and found guilty in accordance with Saudi judicial procedures, which
217
Critique 1996
include several levels of appellate review, and mandatory review by the lOng prior to their execution on May 31." Given that the Saudi government's arrest and adjudication practices fall, according to the report's own analysis, well short of standards mandated by binding norms of international human rights law, one may well wonder at the speed with which this case was concluded.
Because both bombings took the lives of U.S. military personnel, the U.S. government was eager to interview those detained. However, they were executed before that could happen, to the great frustration of U.S. investigative authorities. In November, U.S. Defense Secretary William Perry disclosed that combined U.S. and Saudi intelligence efforts had resulted in a new round of arrests. Although the arrests were characterized as preventative, they gave rise to rumors of the detention of as many as 40 Saudi Shi'ah in connection with the June bombing, and fueled speculation that some or all of those detainees were in danger of imminent execution.
Early this year, worried that the rumors might be true, U.S. Attorney General Janet Reno and FBI director Louis Freeh complained publicly about the failure of Saudi officials to cooperate meaningfully with U.S. investigators. Trapped between a desire to see the perpetrators of the bombing brought to justice and prevent further attacks against U.S. personnel, and a Saudi internal security apparatus and judiciary accused year after year of committing serious human rights abuses, the U.S. government found itself forced to acquiesce to the very practices it condemns.
In dealing with executions, the report again attempts to downplay the Saudi government's human rights violations. The report states that "[n]o executions were performed during the five-month period from October 17, 1995 to March 14, [1996]," and estimates that there were 68 executions in all during the remainder of 1996. Estimates in press reports ranged from 61 to 70 total executions, so the report's data for 1996 appears reasonable. The problem lies in the report's emphasis on the five-month lull in executions covering the end of 1995 and continuing through the beginning of 1996. Estimates for executions during 1995 ranged from 180 to 191. (Last year's report estimated 191 executions, and called that
218
Saudi Arabia
number "considerably higher" than the previous year.) To mention the lull without also mentioning the remarkably high number of executions in 1995 is misleading, and leads to the inference that executions in general may be declining. They may or may not be, depending on the time frame under consideration. A more objective presentation of the data would have allowed the report to mention, more credibly and more directly, a potential improvement. It might more accurately have said: "Executions, after reaching a record high of 191 in 1995, stopped entirely for a six-month period from October 1995 to March 1996, and then resumed at a greatly reduced level in 1996." One additional piece of information which the report might have included is that Saudi Arabia is second only to China, a country of one billion people, in the number of executions it carries out.
As argued in previous editions of the Critique, it is time the report paid attention to the Saudi government's ongoing strategy of acquiring foreign media in order to squelch criticism at home and abroad. In April, the British Broadcasting Company (BBC) Arabic language television service ended its affiliation with a Saudi-owned satellite company. Orbit Communications, when the satellite owners breached their agreement with the BBC by denying it editorial control over content. The breach apparendy consisted of unilateral blacking out of BBC broadcasts relating to Saudi Arabia. This incident presents only one example of a disturbing tiend. Saudi royal family members or their associates now own the following broadcast media entities: Middle East Broadcasting Center (MBC), a satellite broadcasting Arabic television programs across the entire Middle East, Orbit Communications, and Arab Radio and Television (ART). As reported in last year's Critique, MBC has teamed up with the U.S. government-run Voice of America to produce the program "Dialogue." This partnership has already led to the sanitizing of broadcasts deemed potentially offensive to the Saudi government.
In addition to broadcast media, Saudi ownership extends to al-Hayat, perhaps the most widely read Arabic newspaper outside the Arab world, the newspaper al-Sharq al-Amat, and many other publications. Formerly independent organs such as al-Hayat have now ceased objective reporting on Saudi Arabia. The deliberate Saudi drive to acquire and cleanse the
219
Critique 1996
airwaves and print media reflects their realization that globalization of media is unstoppable. Thus, unless the Saudi government or its allies can control media which will sooner or later filter through to the information-starved Saudi populace, the government's human rights record (and other unpleasant facts) will appear for all to see. Because Saudi acquisition of media worldwide aims to limit the freedoms of speech and press within Saudi Arabia, it should be included in future reports.
Finally, the report might have provided a brief account of Saudi interaction with UN human rights mechanisms. In past years, the Critique has criticized the report for ignoring this topic, in particular because the Saudi government simply chose to disregard queries from a number of special rapporteurs. Recentiy, however, it appears that the Saudi government has begun to respond to such queries, even if those responses have been inadequate and disappointing in most cases. Over the last two years, the Saudi government has responded to queries from or made submissions to the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances, the Sub-Commission on the Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, to the Special Rapporteur on Torture, and the Commission on Human Righ^ itself. The responses appear mostiy curt and defensive, but some engagement with UN mechanisms is better than none, and the report could have pointed to this as an area in which slight improvement occurred.
In addition, it is inexcusable for the report to ignore cases where a UN mechanism has come to a decision about a Saudi-related matter. For example, in December 1995 the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention officially declared the detention of Dr. Abdullah al-Hamed, Tuyan al-Tuyan, and Ahmad bin Saleh al-Sa'wi (all allegedly released), and of Salman al-'Awdah, Safar al-Hawali, Sulayman al-Rushudi, Khalid al-Duwaysh, and Muhsin al-Awaji (all apparentiy still in detention) "arbitrary ... [,] being in contravention of articles 19 and 20 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and articles 19, 21, and 22 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights." This decision by the Working Group was mentioned neither in the 1995 nor the 1996 State Department report on Saudi Arabia. UN activity must be
220
Saudi Arabia
considered a baseline of legal standards for human rights law, and it is deplorable that the report again omits such information.
It would be unfair not to point out those instances this year's report has made significant strides. The criticisms made above and in last year's Critique have become more specific and detailed because problems now stand out more clearly in contrast to a report which is otherwise good. For example, the paragraph summarizing the general human rights situation in Saudi Arabia is excellent and admirably outlines, in frank and accurate terms, a wide array of serious problems.
The section on religious freedom also constitutes a comprehensive and lucid discussion, and presents useful and relevant information on the relationship of the government to the religious establishment. The accurate description of the Council of Senior Islamic Scholars as "an important source of religious legitimacy" for the government should have noted that it is sometimes used by the government to give religious legitimacy to policies which can have negative consequences on human rights, as noted in previous editions of the Criticfue. The report states that the government takes the Council's advice into consideration, but past pronouncements of the Council suggest that it sometimes functions only as a rubber stamp. This fact may readily be inferred from the existence of such groups as the CDLR, and the opposition to the government of such persons as the still-imprisoned shaykhs al-'Awdah and al-Hawali.
The statement that the Consultative Council {majlis al-shura) "is not regarded as a significant political force by the citizenry or those in power" rightly implies that this body exists for appearances' sake only. The report could have bolstered its analysis by noting that the Consultative Council meets in secret, and that in 1996 its president, Muhammad bin Ibrahim bin Jubayr, echoing past statements of King Fahd, characterized democracy as un-Islamic.
Other good sections of this year's report include those on the government's attitude toward international and non-governmental investigations of human rights, physical and sexual abuse of Asian female domestic employees, and worker rights, which includes an acknowledgment that the U.S.-government sponsored Overseas Private Insurance Corporation (OPIC) has discontinued Saudi Arabia's eligibility
221
Critique 1996
because of its "lack of compliance with internationally recognized worker rights standards." Given that workers are often denied their wages, runaway maids are often returned against their will to their employers by authorities, and, in general, legal redress is difficult if not impossible for foreign workers to obtain, the report may wish to consider whether a de facto form of slavery may be said to exist in Saudi Arabia. The discussion of women's rights competently covers a wide variety of topics. In comparison with past years, the report does an especially good job of distinguishing between general rules of Islamic law which might be considered inherenUy discriminatory against women, and practices unique to Saudi Arabia or which represent idiosyncratic interpretations of Islamic law.
222
t:
