 SAUDI ARABIA
 Saudi Arabia is a monarchy ruled by the descendants of its founder, King Abd
 al-Aziz Al Saud, known in the West as Ibn Saud, who unified the country in the
 early part of the 20th century. The concept of separation of religion and state is for-
 eign to Saudi society and governance. The legitimacy of the royal regime depends
 to a large degree on its perceived adherence to the precepts of a puritanically con-
 servative form of Islam.
 There is no written national constitution. The legal system is based on Islamic
 religious law. Most Saudis share a respect for this legal system, which they believe
 to be divinely inspired, as well as for ancient customs which call for consensus in
 government, internal social cohesion, respect for private property, and private eco-
 nomic enterprise. Since the death of King Abd al-Aziz, the King and Crown Prince
 have been chosen from among his sons, who themselves have had preponderant in-
 fluence in the choice. Government reforms announced in March, however, granted
 the King the exclusive power to name the Crown Prince. The reforms also called
 for the establishment of an appointed consultative council (majlis ash-shura). The
 Government also announced plans for similar provincial assemblies. The King
 named a speaker for the planned consultative council but by year's end had not im-
 plemented the reforms. Political parties are not permitted in Saudi Arabia, and all
 forms of political expression except those favorable to the regime are forbidden.
 There are no elected assemblies.
 Police and border forces under the Ministry of Interior are responsible for internal
 security. Security personnel committed human rights abuses during the year. Ac-
 cording to the US. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, total military expendi-
 tures for 1989 were $14,690 million. There is no indication that efforts will be made
 to reduce these expenditures in the near future.
 Massive oil revenues have transformed Saudi Arabia's centuries-old pastoral, agri-
 cultural, and commercial economy. Agriculture now accounts for only about 5 per-
 cent of the gross domestic product. This transformation has been marked by rapid
 urbanization, large-scale development of economic and social infrastructure, the
 emergence of a welfare state and technocratic middle class, and the importation of
 millions of foreign workers for skilled and menial labor. It has also been marked
 by widespread expenditure of public funds in ways that improved the quality of life
 for most Saudis but also have enriched members of the royal family and their asso-
 ciates. With some important exceptions, the economy remains largely in private
 hands.
 The human rights situation in 1992 remained largely unchanged, and these rights
 continued to be pervasively abused. Principal human rights problems included tor-
 ture and other abuse of prisoners and incommunicado detention; execution for apos-
 tasy; prohibitions or severe restrictions on the freedoms of speech and press, peace-
 ful assembly and association, religion, women's rights and worker rights; and denial
 of the right of citizens to change their government. Abuse (usually verbal but some-
 times physical) of Saudis and foreigners of both sexes by the Mutawwai'in, Saudi
 Arabiaa official proctors of proper moral behavior, or other religious zealots acting
 as vigilantes without government control was again commonplace in 1992.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no confirmed reports of
 political killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no known disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 There were confirmed reports in 1992 of torture and abuse of persons, the majority
 foreigners, while detained by Saudi authorities. Abuse included the practice of
 fallaqa, beating the soles of the feet to cause intense pain. There was one confirmed
 report that a person in official custody had his toenails pulled out. In another case,
 a detainee was subjected to fallaqa and burned by cigarettes. Another person was
 beaten so badly that his kidney had to be removed, and he requires dialysis to sur-
 vive; he left the Kingdom for treatment abroad. A Ghanaian citizen awaiting depor-
 tation by immigration authorities in Jeddah was reportedly abused while in official
 custody and later died from lack of medical treatment. There were credible reports
 that torture by electric shock was also practiced.
 Saudi guards tortured and beat refugees at refugee camps at Artawiyah and
 Raffa (see Section 2.d.). Those Saudi officials who forcibly returned Iraqi refugees
 to Iraq in late 1991 were immediately relieved of their duties, although they were
 not otherwise punished. Subsequent commanders have been responsive to interven-
 
 
 1080
 tions by the International Committee of the Red Cross, the United Nations High
 Commissioner for Refugees, and the Embassy on behalf of the refugees. The Govern-
 ment's failure to punish human rights abusers is a salient factor in the climate of
 impunity that prevails.
 Agents of the Ministry of Interior were alleged to be responsible for most incidents
 of torture. Although it is general government policy not to respond to reports of
 abuse, the Government has been responsive to criticism in some cases. Regular ac-
 cess to detention facilities by impartial observers has been rare in the past, but rep-
 resentatives of the ICRC and the UNHCR both visited Saudi detention facilities in
 1992. The ICRC and the UNHCR reported that the Saudi Government improved
 conditions and treatment for some detainees in specific cases based on their obser-
 vations. The Government allowed the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights to visit
 Iraqi refugee camps in the Kingdom. There was no indication, however, that these
 visits materially altered the prevailing climate of impunity for abuses.
 The Saudis rigorously observe criminal punishments prescribed in the Koran, in-
 cluding execution by beheading, stoning, and amputation for repeated theft. In the
 absence of two witnesses (four witnesses in the case of adultery), confessions before
 a judge are almost always required for conviction-resulting in credible charges that
 this induces many forced confessions. For the first time in many years, the Govern-
 ment handed down and carried out a death sentence against a member of the Shi'a
 minority for apostasy (see Section 2.c.). According to Saudi officials, the sentence
 was carried out only after the man refused several chances to recant.
 All 59 capital sentences in 1992 were carried out by beheading, sometimes fol-
 lowed by gibbetting. Death by firing squad or stoning may be imposed for adultery.
 Repeated thievery is punishable by amputation of the right hand as prescribed by
 Shari'a law. For less severe crimes, such as drunkenness or publicly flouting Islamic
 precepts the Shari'a punishment of flogging with a cane is otn imposed.
 d. Aritrary Arrest, Detention, or Exle.-Since criminal procedure and the
 grounds for arrest are generally determined at the discretion of the arresting officer,
 arbitrary arrest and detention can and does occur. Under normal circumstances
 most arrestees are held no longer than 3 days before being formally charged. How-
 ever, despite regulations issued by the Interior Ministry in 1985 to eliminate
 lenghy   retrial detention without charge, prisoners are frequently held for long pe-
 riod before they are charged or released; 40 Shi'a, for example, have, according to
 sources outside Saudi Arabia, been in a prison near Riyadh since 1988. Saudi law
 makes no provision for bail or habeas corpus; prisoners, are, however, sometimes re-
 leased on the recognizance of a patrn or employer.
 There is no automatic procedure for contacting a detainees's family or employer.
 In cases involving foreigners, however, Saudi aurhorities, if asked, usually confirm
 an arrest promptly. Embassies usually hear about arrests of their nationals through
 informal channels; official arrest notification almost always takes several months,
 if it is given at all.
 Problems particularly may arise when persons are arrested by the General Direc-
 torate of Intelligence, the Ministry of Interior's security service, commonly called the
 "mubahith" or investigative police. The GDI regularly holds prisoners incommuni-
 cado during the initial phase of an investigation, which may last weeks or months.
 It has held at least four suspects incommunicado in Jeddah since February 1991
 while investigating their suspected connection with a terrorist incident against U.S.
 soldiers there during the Gulf war. It has denied relatives permission to visit the
 prisoners. It is not known if the GDI permitted legal counsel. Human rights groups
 from outside Saudi Arabia continued in 1992 to report cases of long-term incommu-
 nicado detention of what they termed political prisoners.
 One human rights group from outside Saudi Arabia alleges that a large number
 of Shi'a who are suspected of being political opponents were being arrested without
 warrants and held for long periods without trial. The detainees, 25 of whom appar-
 ently remain in detention, were reportedly tortured or otherwise abused in the first
 days or weeks of detention and denied access to counsel and family. Shi'ite scholar
 Sayyid Tahir Al Shimimy was reported among them. As the Government made no
 comment on these reports and refuses access to the detainees, first-hand verification
 of these cases is not possible. For the same reason, the number and condition of po-
 litical detainees cannot be accurately verified.
 The Government does not use exile as a form of punishment.
 e. Denial of Fair Public TriaL.-The judicial system is based on Islamic jurispru-
 dence (the Shari'a). Regular Shari'a courts exercise jurisdiction over common crimi-
 nal cases and civil suits regarding marriage, divorce, child custody, and inheritance
 of real or personal property. In Saudi courts, the defendant appears before a judge
 who determines guilt or innocence in accordance with Shari'a standards, and, if
 warranted, imposes the sentence. Trials are generally closed and are normally held
 
 
 1081
 without legal counsel, although the advice of lawyers is available before trial, and
 lawyers may act in court as interpreters for those unfamiliar with Arabic. Sentenc-
 ing is not uniform, and a sentence may be changed at any of the stages of review.
 Appeals against judges' decisions are automatically reviewed by the Justice Min-
 istry or, in more serious cases, by the Court of Cassation and the Supreme Judicial
 Council to ensure that court procedures were correct and that judges applied appro-
 priate legal principles and punishments. Cases involving capital punishment must
 also be reviewed by the Kin~. The Shi'a community is permitted to adjudicate exclu-
 sively noncriminal intra-Shi a disputes within their own legal tradition.
 The independence of the judiciary is prescribed by law and is usually respected
 in practice, although jurists are nevertheless aware of, and reportedly have on occa-
 sion acceded to, the power and influence of royal family members and their associ-
 ates. The Justice Ministry is responsible for the appointment, transfer, and pro-
 motion of judges. Judges may be disciplined or removed only by the Supreme Judi-
 cial Council, a body of senior jurists.
 The military justice system has jurisdiction over uniformed personnel and civilian
 government employees charged with violations of military regulations. Court-mar-
 tial decisions are reviewed by the Minister of Defense and Aviation and by the King.
 Under Shari'a law as interpreted and applied in Saudi Arabia, crimes directed at
 Muslims receive harsher penalties than those against non-Muslims. In the case of
 a Nigerian drug trafficker arrested while transiting Riyadh's international airport
 en route to Nigeria with 30 kilograms of heroin, the judge ruled that, since the nar-
 cotics were going to a country with a large Islamic population, the trafficker should
 be sentencedtothe death penalty.
 Although human rights groups allege that there are political prisoners, the num-
 ber being held at year's end was unknown because of the Government's policies of
 not providing data or responding to inquiries about such persons conducting closed
 trias, and detaining persons incommunicado for long periods while under investiga-
 tion.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Saudis
 and foreign nationals alike continued to experience interference by Mutawwai'in
 and by vigilantes, in these various areas. The sanctity of family fife and the invio-
 lability of the home are among the most fundamental of Islamic precepts. Saudi po-
 lice must generally demonstrate reasonable cause and obtain permission from the
 provincial governor before searching a private home, but warrants are not required.
 Government reforms announced in March included clauses calling for the Govern-
 ment to maintain the sanctity of the home from unlawful incursions. However,
 Saudi religious police (Mutawwai'in) continued to enter homes to search for evidence
 of un-Islamic behavior and to harass and abuse perceived transgressors.
 Wiretaps and mail surveillance may be carried out on the authority of officials
 of the Interior Ministry or the Directorate of Intelligence. Informants are reliably
 reported to be widely employed in internal security matters. Saudi customs officials
 routinely open mail coming into the Kingdom to look for forbidden items, including
 non-Muslim religious material. Materials deemed offensive are seized.
 Most social and Islamic religious norms and strictures affecting personal life are
 matters of law and are enforced by the Government. Saudi women may not marry
 non-Saudis without government permission, which is rarely given. Although Saudi
 women are prohibited from marrying any non-Muslim, Saudi men may marry Chris-
 tians and Jews. Saudi men must obtain approval to marry women originally from
 countries other than the six members of the Gulf Cooperation Council. During
 Ramadan, the Islamic month of fasting and abstinence, the prohibition against pub-
 lic eating, drinking, or smoking during daylight hours is enforced on Muslims and
 non-Muslims alike.
 Prohibitions against alcohol and material deemed pornographic are strictly en-
 forced and apply as well to foreign residents. A rigid standard of dress for women
 and modest dress for men, as well as the closing of shops for a half-hour period dur-
 ingthe daily prayers, are enforced by the Mutawwai'in.
 Both Saudis and foreigners were targets of harassment by members of the
 Mutawwai'in or by unsanctioned religious zealots acting as vigilantes. The
 Mutawwai'in sought to enforce their increasingly strict standards of social behavior,
 from observance of prayer time closings of commercial establishments to appropriate
 dress in public and patronage of video tape rental shops. The Mutawwai in some-
 times exceeded their legal mandate by detaining suspects for up to 24 hours before
 turning them over to the civil authorities and by verbally and sometimes physically
 abusing detainees while seeking to elicit confessions for supposed scial misconduct.
 They often used switch-like sticks to harass those whom they perceived as violating
 religiously mandated standards of behavior and sometimes hitor slapped persons
 for alleged infractions of proper behavior. In September Mutawwai'in raided an
 
 
 1082
 
 international women's group meeting attended by 200 people in the Eastern Prov-
 ince, verbally abusing and harassing the women before allowing, them to leave.
 Members of the group, which included 25 to 30 American citizens, said the
 Mutawwai'in searched the building, confiscated cookbooks, club stationery, news-
 letters, and other property. In a separate incident in August, Mutawwai'in disrupted
 a Christian prayer service held in a private home. The Saudi Government has stat-
 ed that such meetings are illegal. Fourteen members of the group were held and
 forced to sign confessions at a Mutawwa detention center. Some incidents escalated
 into violent confrontations. In May a commissioned officer with a U.S. security as-
 sistance organization was restrained and assaulted by a policeman and a crowd in-
 cited bya Mutawwa.
 The .S. Government protested to the Saudi Government the instances involving
 American citizens; the Saudi Government often placed the blame on self-appointe
 vigilantes acting outside official channels. However, government authorities did not
 act to prevent recurrences and did not issue specific guidance for dress that would
 preclude Mutawwai'in harassment.
 In addition to the Mutawwai'in harassment of non-Muslims attempting to conduct
 religious services (see Section 2.c.), the number and seriousness of incidents in
 which Saudi and foreign women were harassed for alleged failure to observe
 Mutawwa-enforeed dress codes rose still further in 1992.
 Section P. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Freedom of speech and press is severely limited.
 Criticism of Islam, the ruling family or the Government is not allowed. The poten-
 tial presence of informers renders public criticism of the regime rare.
 A number of clandestine audio tapes and two petitions signed by dozens of reli-
 gious figures calling for government reform were circulated widely through informal
 channels in 1991 but were not published in the local press. The country's senior
 body of religious scholars formally criticized their circulation, and the local press did
 so obliquely. Ministry of Interior officials reportedly interviewed some of the peti-
 tions' signatories. In September 1992, another petition was informally circulated,
 again drawing censure from Saudi religious scholars and negative press comment.
 King Fahd, in a public speech in December, directly criticized the authors of the pe-
 titions and their improper use of the pulpit. He stressed the right of all Saudis di-
 rectly to approach senior officials to offer advice.
 The press is privately owned. It is effectively controlled by a 1982 media policy
 statement and a 1965 national security law which expressly prohibits the dissem-
 nation of public criticism of the Government in any print or broadcast medium. The
 media policy statement enjoins the press to uphold Islam, oppose atheism, promote
 Arab interests, and preserve the cultural heritage of Saudi Arabia. Editors in chief
 are appointed with the explicit approval of the Ministry of Information, and the
 Government has the power to have them removed. Newspapers receive guidelines
 issued by the Information Ministry on government positions on controversial issues,
 and the government-owned Saudi Press Agency (SPA) expresses the official view-
 point on such issues. Domestic news concerning sensitive subjects, such as crime or
 terrorism, is usually published only after the perpetrators have been arrested, con-
 victed, and sentenced. Most foreign news that does not directly concern Saudi Ara-
 bia is presented objectively. There was a dramatic increase in foreign press access
 to Saudi Arabia following  aq's invasion of Kuwait in 1990, but this increase proved
 to be temporary, and access is again tightly restricted. However, a few foreign Jour-
 nalists were allowed to visit Iraqi refugee camps in the Kingdom and enjoyed rel-
 atively free access while at the camps.
 Saudi television and radio are state owned and operated. Foreign progams and
 songs are heavily censored, with references to politics, religions other tan Islam,
 pork or pigs, alcohol, or sexual innuendo removed. Although foreign news is gen-
 erally presented in an objective manner, news about subjects affecting Saudi Arabia
 is tightly controlled, and conflicting viewpoints are usually not offered.
 There are an estimated 100,000 to 200,000 private satellite dishes operating in
 the Kingdom which receive foreign broadcasts. Despite widespread installation of
 satellite dishes, the status of these devices remains ambiguous. The importation and
 public sale of satellite dishes was stopped in late summer at the behest of religious
 leaders who objected to television programming available on satellite channels.
 Mutawwai'in were reported to have damaged satellite dishes on the tops of private
 residences with air rifles and sling shots to prevent their use.
 Foreign publications circulate but may be censored for materials deemed immoral
 or critical of Saudipolicies and actions. Entire publications are sometimes withheld
 from distribution. issues of Newsweek and the Economist were briefly banned in
 1992 because of news stories viewed unfavorably by the Government.
 
 
 1083
 Academic freedom is constrained by similar guidelines; for example, the study of
 evolution, Freud, Marx, and Western philosophy is proscribed. Some professors be-
 lieve that classroom comments that would be taken as antiregime will be reported
 to the authorities. There continues to be an injunction against the study of music
 in educational institutions through the university level, although there are some
 private organizations for the study of Western classical music.
 Nevertheless, there continues to be a very gradual increase in some artistic activi-
 ties in schools and universities and in society in general. The mass communications
 faculty at King Saud University instituted a liberal arts major in drama during the
 1991-1992 academic year. There are also private art galleries. Abstract and rep-
 resentational artists as well as photographers are allowed to work. Cinemas and
 most public musical or theatrical performances are, however, still prohibited. There
 was a credible report that a Saudi singer was placed under house arrest for objec-
 tionable lyrics used in a performance recorded outside the Kingdom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Public demonstrations as a
 means of political expression oi presenting grievances are prohibited. Tribal famil-
 ial, and economic interest groups informally aggregate public opinion whichi their
 leaders express to high officials.Political parties are prohibited (see Section 3). Non-
 political clubs and professional groups may be organized with the permission of the
 authorities. The few existing professional bodies are permitted but not encouraged
 to maintain contacts with their recognized international counterparts. Public meet-
 ings are segregated by sex. Unless they are sponsored by diplomatic missions, expa-
 triate members of groups seeking to hold unsegregated meetings risk arrest, incar-
 ceration, and deportation.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Freedom of religion does not exist. Islam is the official
 religion, and all Saudi citizens must be Muslims. An injunction against other reli-
 gions in Arabia, attributed to the Prophet Mohammed, is enforced in the Kingdom.
 ublic apostasy is a crime under Shari'a law punishable by death. On September
 3, the authorities publicly beheaded Saudi citizen Sadiq Malallah for the crime of
 apostasy based on charges of importing a Bible and other religious material, accord-
 ing to sources outside Saudi Arabia. There was also an unconfirmed report that a
 Saudi court had sentenced two other Saudi Shi'a to death for apostasy. There was
 no confirmation that the sentences had been carried out.
 Islamic practice in Saudi Arabia is generally limited to that sanctioned by the
 Wahhabi sect's interpretation of the Hanbali jurisprudential school of Islam. Prac-
 tices contrary to this interpretation, such as the visiting of graves of famous Mus-
 lims by pilgrims to Mecca or Medina or public Shi'ite prayer practices are discour-
 aged. The  ha    usims, mostly in the Eastern Province, usually estimated at up
 to 500,000 persons, constitute a religious minority subject to officially sanctioned
 forms of social and economic discrimination. Historically, the Government has pro-
 hibited Shi'ite public processions during the Islamic month of Muharram and re-
 stricted public processions and congregations to specially designated areas within
 the major Shi'a cities. However, as in 1990 and 1991, reliable reports indicate that
 authorities permitted marches on the Shi'a holiday of Ashura in 1992, provided they
 took place without banners or public slflagellation.
 The Government occasionally offers to provide financial support for the Shi'a reli-
 gious establishment, which is generally refused. The Government seldom permits
 riVate construction of Shi'ite mosques, and the Shi'a have refused government of-
 frs to build state-suppotd mosques, in which Shi'ite motifs would be prohibited.
 Public or private non-Muslim religious activities are not permitted, and in 1992
 this was enfoed. Persons wearing non-Islamic religious symbols in public may be
 arrested or publicly harassed by the Mutawwai'in. There are no public non-Muslim
 places of worship, and foreign nationals must practice their religions in secret. Pros-
 elytizing, large gatherings, or elaborate organizational structures are likely to at-
 tract ofcial attnentiona lead  to   prionent or expulsion of those involved.
 Mutawwai'in raided a clandestine Christian religious service in the Eastern Prov-
 ince, confiscating Bibles and religious literature, and are considering deporting the
 man who hosted the service in his home. In a separate incident, a man suspected
 of conducting secret Christian worship services was expelled from the Kingdom.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country. Foreign Travel, Emicration, and Re-
 patriation.-Travel for women, Saudi and non-Saudi, is restricted; they must obtain
 written permission from their closest male relative before being allowed to travel
 on public transportation between different parts of the country or to leave the coun-
 try. Male Saudis may travel freely anywhere within the country. A regulation pro-
 mulgated in 1990 requires most single Saudi men under the age of 18 to obtain per-
 mission before traveling abroad; such permissio               in ecrthe case
 of government officials, the permission of the RoyalCourt is required but appears
 to be routinely granted.
 
 
 1084
 All foreigners living in Saudi Arabia are required to carry identification cards.
 Foreigners are officiall not permitted to travel outside the city of their employment
 or change their workplace without their sponsor's permission. Officials at internal
 checkpoints within the Kingdom enforce travel restrictions on foreigners, checking
 for letters of permission from employers.
 Foreign employees are prevented from traveling abroad without their sponsor's
 permission, since sponsors generally hold their passports and are responsible for ob-
 taining exit visas or them. Foreign diplomats are ordered by the Government not
 to travel outside the major cities without notifying the Government, but this is rare-
 ly enforced. Foreigners involved in commercial disputes are sometimes not allowed
 to leave the country until the dispute has been resolved. Some sponsors have taken
 advantage of this arrangement to exert pressure to resolve commercial disputes in
 their favor. Occasionally, Saudi sponsors or business partners have been able to pre-
 vent foreign nationals from departing Saudi Arabia for years or to have them ar-
 rested or aeported. In criminal cases, Saudi regulations require that the passports
 of all potential suspects and witnesses be seized, which sometimes forces foreign na-
 tionals to remain in Saudi Arabia for lengthy periods against their will. Denial of
 exit visas is a fairly common form of punishment. Passports of suspected subver-
 sives have occasionally been seized. Shi  believed to have pro-Iranian sympathies
 may not be allowed to travel abroad.
 Saudis are permitted to emigrate and assume foreign nationality, which results
 in the loss of Saudi nationality. There was a reliable report that a long-term resi-
 dent who had been granted Saudi citizenship had that citizenship revoked years
 later after leaving his employer for another job in the Kingdom. Dual citizenship
 is illegal, and Saudis born in the United States, and thus required to travel to the
 United States on a U.S. passport, have had their passports confiscated by Saudi im-
 migration authorities.
 There is no explicit formal policy regarding refugees or the granting of asylum.
 Refugees and displaced persons--the urgency of many cases notwithstanding-are
 often dealt with like other foreign workers who must meet strictly enforced require-
 ments of sponsorship an emoyment or risk being turned back at the border.
 Saudi authorities are responsive, however, in some cases where deportation of refu-
 gees to their home country would jeopardize their safety. In the aftermath of the
 Gulf war, 22,000 Iraqi citizens, primarily Shi'a, fled Iraq and were granted refuge
 in camps in Saudi Arabia near the city of Raiha. Similarly, 13,000 Iraqi prisoners
 of war declined repatriation to Iraq and remain in the Kingdom under government
 custody near the city of Artawiyah. This population of approximately 35,000 Iraqis
 is, with a few exceptions, restricted to refugee camps. Saudi officials have worked
 with international humanitarian organizations to provide care for these Iraqis but
 have stressed that Islamic principles rather than international humanitarian law
 are the basis for this policy. Reports in 1991 and 1992 indicated that about 300
 Iraqi refugees from the Rah a and the Artawiyah camps were forcibly repatriated
 to Iraq. While Saudi officials said repatriations were contrary to government policy
 and began an investigation, the official report on the investigation denied that any
 Iraqi refugees were forcibly repatriated. Others seeking refuge in Saudi Arabia were
 turned away at the berder, altough smuggling activities across Saudi Arabia's bor-
 ders make it diffficuit to distinguish refugees from those engaged in illegal com-
 merce. There were reports that Saudi officials may have denied asylum to Somali
 refugees as well. There were confirmed reports that Somali refugees arrived in
 Jizan province of Saudi Arabia. The United Nations High Commissioner fur Refu-
 gees (   CR) was informed that a few Somali refugees are on one of the Farasan
 islands but was not asked to provide assistance.
 There are over 250,000 other resident foreigners who left their native countries-
 primarily Palestinians, Lebanese, Eritreans, Somalis, and fghans. Most of these
 ersons generally receive no special treatment, privileges, or services as refugees.
 ndividual Saudis, including many members of the ruling family, permanently spon-
 sor such persons to enable them to remain in Saudi Arabia, permitting them to find
 work where they may. Some sponsors reportedly have charged fees to such persons
 for providing documentation required by the Government.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 mnent
 Citizens cannot change their government peacefully. There are no formal demo-
 cratic institutions, and only a few Saudi citizens have a voice in the choice of leaders
 or in changing the poitica stem. The King rules the country in matters civil and
 religious, within limits established by religious law, tradition, and the need to main-
 tain consensus among the ruling family and religious leaders. The King's legitimacy
 is based upon his adherence to the tenets of Islam, his descent, his selection by con-
 
 
 1085
 sensus of the royal family, his ability to govern, and his perceived concern for the
 welfare and security of the nation. The  igis also the -Prime Minister, and the
 Crown Prince serves as First Deputy Prime Minister. The King appoints all other
 ministers, who in turn appoint subordinate officials with cabinet concurrence. Min-
 isters may retire only with the King's permission.
 There are nopopularly elected olcals in Saudi Arabia. Political parties are not
 permitted, and there are no publicly organized opposition groups. Traditionallyppub-
 lic opinion has been expressed through client-patron relationships and affinity
 groups such as tribes, families, and professional hierarchies. The open-door audience
 (majils) remains the primary forum for expression of opinion or grievance. Any male
 citizen or male foreign national may attend these sessions held bythe King, princes,
 or important national and local officials. Occasionally, women wit out male relatives
 present petitions in some majlis sessions. Since the assassination of King Faisal in
 5, Sadi kings have reduced the frequency of their personal contacts with the
 public. Access to-King Fahd, to whom decisions even on some apparently minor mat.
 ters are referred, is considered by ordinary Saudis to be quite difficult. Typical top-
 ics raised in a majlis are complaints about bureaucratic delay or insensitivity, re-
 quests for redress or assistance, and criticism of particular acts of government af-
 fecting personal or family welfare. Broader "political" concerns-Saudi social, eco-
 noric, or foreign policy-are raised only occasionally. As governmental functions
 have become increasingly complex, time consuming, and centralized in Riyadh, di-
 rect public access to senior officials has become more difficult. Either the King or
 the Crown Prince meets with Sunni religious leaders at least once a week. This in-
 stitutionalized but relaxed means of ascertaining public opinion through consulta-
 tion falls far short of Western democratic practice.
 Participation by women in the process is severely restricted, although there are
 reports that women may seek redress through female members of the royal family.
 In the Eastern Province, women may make written appeals to the provincial gov-
 ernor, though they are barred from appearing in person at his weekly mallis.
 In 1992 King Fahd announced the formation of a consultative council, or Majlis
 ash-Shura, which is to be an advisory body to the King. The members, all to be ap.
 pointed by the King, are to represent different segments of society. Plans for similar
 bodies to be namedat the provincial level were also announced. In September King
 Fahd named an Islamic jurist to act as speaker of the Majls ash-Shura. Further
 implementing action on these reforms remains under discussion.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no human rights groups publicly active in Saudi Arabia, and none criti-
 cal of Saudi policies would be permitted. However, as noted earlier, members of the
 Lawyers Committee for Human Rights were permitted to visit Iraqi refugee camps
 in the Kingdom in March. Amnesty International has been invited to the Kingdom.
 Some U    . agncies onerned .with humanitarian issues, including the UNHCR,
 maintain offices in Saudi Arabia and have regular contact with Saudi authorities.
 The Sadis have generally facilitated the work of the ICRC and UNHCR with Iraqi
 ex-prisoners of war, refugees, and displaced persona from the Gulf war. Cooperation
 between the UJNHCR and the Sadi Government has grown stronger in 1992, with
 a corresponding improvement in the living conditions for Iraqi refugees living in
 Saudi camps. However, the UNHCR has not been asked to provide assistance or
 been allowed access to Somali refugees reported in Jizan province.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Language, or Social Status
 Although racial discrimination is illegal in Saudi Arabia, substantial societal prej-
 udice based on ethnic or national origin exists. Foreign workers from Africa and
 Asia are subject to various forms of informal discrimination. In 1992 there contin-
 ued to be credible reports of informal discrimination against Jordanians, Palestin-
 ians and Yemenis, primarily because of positions taken by the governments on the
 Gul  crisis.               -,
 Women in Saudi Arabia have few substantive political and social rights, and they
 are not equal members of society. Women, including foreigners, may not legally
 drive motor vehicles or ride bicycles, and there are restrictions on their use of public
 facilities when men are present. In 1990, 49 women were arrested in Riyadh for
 driving cars to protest the ban on women driving. Eighteen months later, all had
 their passports returned and received compensation for for some of the wages lost
 while in disfavor. Most have returned to work, although some who were previously
 employed in government jobs have not resumed their positions.
 By law and custom, women may not undertake domestic or foreign travel alone.
 They must have the written permission (and sometimes physical escort) of their
 
 
 1086
 
 nearest male relative, especially for travel abroad. Some women, however, report-
 edly travel by air between major Saudi cities without such permission. Women are
 restricted to specially designated sections in the rear of urban buses with separate
 entrances. In public, Muslim women are required to wear the abaya (a lightweight,
 black garment covering the entire body and often the face).
 Saudi authorities have repeatedly said that non-Muslim women need not wear the
 abaya. However, Saudi custom encourages many to do so or at least to wear loose-
 fitting clothing extending below elbows and knees. Mutawwai'in have traditionally
 appeared to expect women from Arab countries, Asia, and Africa to comply more
 fully with Saudi customs of dress than women from Western countries, but women
 from Western countries came under increasing pressure in 1992 to conform to strict-
 er norms of dress.
 Female circumcision may persist among African nationals, especially in the south.
 western Tihama region. There was a report of a genital mutilation performed in a
 doctor's office in Riyadh. Hospital workers report that it is not uncommon that
 women are admitted for treatment of injuries that appear to be the result of domes-
 tic violence. Little is known about the extent of violence against women in Saudi
 society, and the Government does not keep statistics on such abuse. "Islamic advice"
 columns in the Saudi press sometimes recommend "strict disciplining" of women,
 which is understood to encompass some degree of physical force as part of a proper
 marriage.
 Foreign embassies receive repeated reports of physical and sexual abuse of female
 domestics by Saudi employers. The Government, in general, considers cases involv-
 ing domestic servants to be private family matters and will not intervene unless
 clear-cut charges of severe abuse are brought to its attention. It is almost impossible
 for these women to obtain redress in the courts due to the court's strict evidentiary
 rules and the women's own fears of reprisals. Few employers have been punished
 for such abuses. There are as yet no private support groups or religious associations
 to which these women could turn for assistance.
 In addition to customary and legal restrictions, Saudi women are subject to dis-
 crimination inherent in the Islamic legal system. Under Islamic law a daughter's
 share of an inheritance is half that of her brother, reflecting the fact that the broth-
 er has fmancial obligations to his mother and sisters. Women must demonstrate le-
 gally specified grounds for divorce, but men may divorce without grounds. If di-
 vorced or widowed, a woman normally may keep her children until they attain the
 age of 7 but then they revert to the husband's family, to which they belong under
 Islamic law. Western women married to Saudis have frequently been barred from
 visiting their children after divorce. In a Shari'a court, the testimony of one man
 equals that of two women. Although Islamic law permits polygamy, it is becoming
 less common, especially in cities and among younger Saudis. Islamic legal precepts
 limit the number of wives to four and require a husband who has more than one
 wife to treat each of his wives equally. In practice, this norm is not always achieved.
 Employment opportunities for Saudi women are extremely limited. This fact,
 along with the ease of divorce for males, creates a situation of great economic vul-
 nerability and a sense of insecurity for many women. A recent study conducted by
 a research firm showed that such insecurity is greatest among married women who
 fear their lack of legal protections if their husbands decide to divorce them and that
 some women join together to form clandestine savings clubs as insurance against
 the possibility of divorce. The younger generation of educated Saudis, men and
 women, tend to express a greater interest in having women work and, in fact, the
 number of employed women in Riyadh has doubled in the last few years. Still, al-
 though women constitute about 55 percent of all university graduates, they make
 up only 5 percent of the work force. In practice, most employment opportunities are
 in the field of education, with some available in health care and a relatively few
 in business, engineering, and the media. Free but segregated education through the
 university level is available to Saudi women, and the number of women enrolled in
 the university system is said to be more than a million and to be rising rapidly.
 Saudi men are able to study overseas; Saudi women cannot, unless accompanied by
 a spouse or an immediate male relative-usually a practical impossibility.
 The large foreign work force does not generally receive the same economic and
 social benefits available to native Saudis and must conform to restrictive Saudi so-
 cial standards. Highly skilled or high-ranking foreign workers are allowed to bring
 their immediate families to live with them. However, visits by other relatives of for.
 eigners working in Saudi Arabia, including foreign diplomats, are difficult to ar-
 range. Employment opportunities for non-Muslims are circumscribed.
 Saudi Shi'a are subject to stringent religious repression (see Section 2.c.) and also
 face discrimination in government and industrial employment, especially in jobs
 with national security implications, which is broadly defined. The Government pe-
 
 
 1087
 troleum company, Saudi Aramco, which traditionally provided large numbers of jobs
 to Shi'a, reportedly was instructed several years ago to cease all further hiring of
 Shi'a and to phase out gradually all Shi'a working in responsible positions. There
 was no sign that restrictions let up in 1992. Shi'a also face some limitations on their
 access to social services, despite efforts by the Government to improve the social
 service infrastructure in predominantly Shi'a areas of the country. Since the Iranian
 revolution, some Shi'a have been subjected periodically to surveillance and limita-
 tions on travel abroad.
 Members of the royal family and of other powerful families are not subject to the
 same legal constraints as other Saudis. The luggage of princes and other influential
 persons may not be subject to customs inspection on entering the country. Govern-
 ment contracts are often awarded on the basis of influence, and fore!n companies
 doing business in Saudi Arabia are often said to need an influential sponsor," fre-
 quently a member of the royal family, to be successful.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Government decrees prohibit the formation of labor
 unions and strike activity.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectiuely.--Collective bargaining is for-
 bidden, and there are no special economic zones in the country. Foreign workers
 comprise the overwhelming majority of the work force. Wages are set by the market.
 C. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced labor has been prohibited
 since 1962 by a royal decree that abolished slavery, and Saudi ratification of Inter-
 national Labor Organization Conventions 29 and 105 has the force of law. Nonethe-
 less, vestiges of the master-slave relationship remain; a great number of former
 slaves chose to remain in the princely households where many now enjoy a quasi.
 familial status as household supernumeraries. Additionally, since employers gen-
 erally exercise control over the movements of foreign employees, situations that
 could be described as forced labor can occur, especially in remote areas where work-
 ers are unable to leave their place of work. There were reports that diplomats desir-
 ing to visit work sites to check on the welfare and condition of citizens of their coun-
 tries were denied access. There were also reports that female domestic workers were
 sometimes prevented from leaving the homes of their employers and forced to work
 12 to 16 hours a day, 7 days a week. Maids who run away from their employers
 are often returned to the employers by Saudi authorities against the maids' wishes.
 In addition, there were reports of workers whose employers refused to pay several
 months or even years of accumulated salary or other promised benefits. In such
 cases workers have recourse to the labor courts, where workmen's wages are consid-
 ered "first-class privileged debts," secured by a lien on all of the employer's property
 and enforceable for collection before all other debts.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-There is no minimum age for
 workers employed in family-operated businesses or in other situations that are con-
 strued as extensions of the household; e.g., farmers, herdsmen, and domestic serv-
 ants, since they are not covered by Saudi Arabia's labor regulations. In other cases,
 the labor regulations provide for a minimum age of 13, which may be waived by
 the Ministry of Labor with the consent of the juvenile's guardian. Children under
 age 18 and women may not be employed in hazardous or harmful industries, such
 as mines or industries employing power-operated machinery. While there is no for-
 mal government entity charged with enforcing the minimum age for employment of
 children, the Ministry of Justice has jurisdiction and has acted as plaintiff in the
 few cases that have arisen against alleged violators.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no legal minimum wage. A provision
 providing for the Council of Ministers to set a minimum wage has not been imple-
 mented. Saudi labor regulations establish a standard 48-hour workweek at regular
 pay and allow employers to require up to 12 additional hours of overtime at time-
 and-a-half pay.
 There are numerous reports of foreign nationals coming to Saudi Arabia on prom-
 ises by private contractors of a certain level of pay and benefits, only to find that
 the contract they sign upon arrival specifies lower levels of both. Other reports sug-
 gest that some workers sign contracts in their home countries and are then asked
 to sign ones less favorable to them upon arrival. Reliable reports indicate that the
 length of service called for in the original contract is sometimes increased upon ar-
 rival by as much as 3 years and that employees reaching the end of the term of
 service in a contract have been refused permission to return home by their em-
 ployer, effectively extending the workers' term of employment involuntarily. There
 are reports as well of workers who are indentured to Saudi sponsors or a set
 amount each month and who must then find their own employment upon arrival
 in the Kingdom. To solve those problems, some foreign governments have begun uti-
 
 
 1088
 
 lizing employment organizations which negotiate salary and benefits in advance for
 their nationals. These organizations periodically check on the results of their efforts
 through their embassies and the Saudi labor courts.
 Saudi labor regulations require employers to protect most workers from job-relat-
 ed hazards and disease, but workers employed in family-operated businesses farm-
 ers, herdsmen, and domestic servants are not covered by these regulations. The law
 specifically prohibits employers from requiring workers to work outside when the
 temperature exceeds 122 degrees Fahrenheit. Labor Ministry inspectors and the
 labor courts are seeking, with some success, to enforce the Labor Code, but foreign
 nationals report frequent failures to enforce health and safety standards.
