Saudi Arabia
1992 was marked by a significant development in human rights reporting about Saudi Arabia, with the appearance of two reports on the country's human rights situation by U.S.-based human rights organizations: the Minnesota Lawyers International Human Rights Committee's (MLIHRC) Shame in the House of Saud: Contempt for Human Rights in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and Middle East Watch's Empty Reforms: Saudi Arabia's New Basic Laws. 1992 also saw the institutionalization of a monthly human rights newsletter in English dealing primarily with Saudi Arabia, Arabia Monitor, published by the International Committee for Human Rights in the Gulf and Arabian Peninsula, a group of Saudi and other Gulf Arab exiles whose organization seeks "to promote human rights and democracy in the Gulf and Arabian Peninsula region." In addition to their significance as documents on the deplorable state of human rights in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, these additions to the literature also symbolize the increasing scrutiny being leveled at Saudi Arabia's abysmal human rights record.
Sadly, these publications appear not to have been reviewed by the preparers of this year's report on Saudi Arabia. Nor did UN investigations into Saudi human rights practices - another significant development in 1992 -- receive any mention in the report.
As with last year, the report's general and introductory remarks paint a relatively accurate picture of the human rights situation in Saudi Arabia. The report notes that human rights "continued to be
subject to pervasive abuse," and that such pervasive abuse represented a continuation of past practices. The introduction gives a generic list of human rights violations found in Saudi Arabia from every category required to be reported by the State Department: respect for integrity of the person, civil liberties, political rights and worker rights. Specifically identified in the introduction are the responsibility of Saudi "security personnel" for human rights abuses and the outright prohibition on speech critical of the government. Throughout the report, general characterizations of human rights abuses are for the most part frankly and plainly worded, and so do not obscure the government's responsibility for human rights violations.
The primary problem with this year's report, as with last year's, remains its lack of adequate analysis. This problem usually manifests itself in one of two ways: failure to draw conclusions when appropriate or failure to cite to relevant legal standards. The overall effect of these shortcomings is to give the report a certain ethereal and unconnected quality, despite the generally accurate (if atomistic) presentation of the material. In this sense, this year's report, taken as a whole, cannot be said to be a marked improvement over last year's.
In certain discrete areas, notably the section on torture and other forms of impermissible punishment, the report improves on its past shortcomings and does a commendable job. On the other hand, discussions of the "reforms" enacted by King Fahd and of the Mutawwai'in
328
Saudi Arabia
are particularly deficient.
One example of a failure of analysis is the report's discussion of the excesses of the Mutawwi'in (also identified as a problem in last year's report), a semi-official group of persons who have taken it upon themselves to enforce stringent religious norms against Saudis and non-Saudis alike, a kind of amateur, if dangerous, religious police. The report's discussion of the Mutawwi'in is both contradictory and misleading. The report at its very outset divides persons responsible for acts attributed to the Mutawwi'in into two groups, the Mutawwi'in themselves and "other religious zealots acting as vigilantes without government control." The basis for this distinction turns out to be the explanation offered by the Saudi government when confronted with the violent behavior of the Mutawwi'in: such excesses are said to be carried out, in effect, by unauthorized persons. In fact, and incredibly, the report itself notes that this is the Saudi government's explanation and implies that, when applied to harassment of U.S. citizens, it is an unconvincing one.
If, as implied, the State Department believes that this excuse is not credible, then it should say so. Certainly it should not adopt the Saudi government's own explanation in the introduction to the report and then later question that explanation when it is employed to excuse harassment of U.S. citizens.
This confused approach stems from a failure of analysis. The Mutawwi'in -whoever they may be -- symbolize a basic dilemma of the Saudi government. For years, Saudi Arabia has promoted a viru-
lently anti-Western brand of Islam both at home and abroad. At the same time, the government has endorsed peace talks with Israel, produced oil at a pace designed to keep energy prices low in the U.S., participated in armed conflict against Saddam Hussein on the side of the U.S., and adopted a generally pro-Western tone in its foreign policy. More than anything, it was the Gulf War --showing Saudi Arabia to be totally dependent on Western military assistance --which brought home to Saudis raised on anti-Western diatribes the stark contradiction between Saudi rhetoric in the Muslim world and Saudi policy in practice.
The Mutawwi'in and their sympathizers have realized that their government does not practice what it preaches. The increasing excesses of the Mutawwi'in reflect the frustrations of a generation of unemployed Saudis who expect their government to toe the fundamentalist line. The Mutawwi'in embarrass the government by forcing it to take its own rhetoric seriously. Stopping the day-today harassment by the Mutawwi'in would be tantamount to an admission that the government is "un-lslamic" by its own definition.
The distinction between the "official" semi-official Mutawwi'in and the "vigilantes" is an obfuscation, since neither could act without government approval or encouragement. Such acts are tolerated by the Saudi government (one might speculate that they are even encouraged by some factions within the ruling family) because the political price of holding them in check is one the Saudi government is not willing to pay.
329
Saudi Arabia
In its discussion of torture and other impermissible mistreatment of persons, this year's report excels in tone, accuracy, use of detail and breadth of coverage, despite a critical omission. This section, in a marked improvement over previous years, presents a wealth of factual material which fairly portrays some of Saudi Arabia's most egregious departures from recognized and binding norms of international law. Especially noteworthy is the report's characterization of the sources of information, which is much less tentative than last year. Still, despite its overall balance and accuracy, this section could be further improved in the following ways: 1 ) analysis is required as to why the majority of victims of torture and other mistreatment seem to be detained for reasons of religion or political dissent -- to the extent there is a pattern it should be more conspicuously identified; 2) the report -- as pointed out last year -- should not continue to distance itself from human rights groups' characterizations of certain prisoners as "political"; 3) the report should refer more often to objective legal standards in order to put these violations of international law in their proper context (for example, a UN investigation into Saudi Arabia's human rights practices, discussed below, was ignored altogether).
1992 marked the beginning of two investigations by the United Nations Commission on Human Rights (the Commission) into several cases of human rights abuse in Saudi Arabia. The fact that the report is entirely silent about the UN investigation is more than curious, it is inexcusable. Inclusion of this information would buttress international efforts to encourage Saudi Arabia to abide by
human rights norms.
In December, a special rapporteur to the Commission reported that he had sent to the Saudi government a request for information about the execution for apostasy of a 17-year-old Shiite Muslim, Sadiq Malallah. The special rapporteur noted that two other Shiah had been arrested and could also face execution for their religious beliefs. Although Malallah's execution was noted by the report, it should have provided analysis: bluntly stated, execution for apostasy amounts to a death sentence for a thought crime. As a legal matter, Malallah was executed for the same crime which forms the basis for the death sentence issued against Salman Rushdie by the late Ayatollah Khomeini.
A second special rapporteur to the Commission had requested information from the Saudi government regarding the reported detention and torture of Muhammad al-Fassi (detained since October 1991, noted in last year's critique but not in this or last year's report). It does not appear that the rapporteur received a reply. The Commission's Working Group on Arbitrary Detention concluded that al-Fassi was arrested and detained for exercising his "right to freedom of opinion and expression, a right guaranteed by article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and by article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights." The Working Group further declared his detention to be "arbitrary" and in contravention of the two instruments just cited, formally requesting the Saudi government to "take the necessary steps to remedy the situation."
330
Saudi Arabia
The special rapporteur additionally made inquiries with the Saudi government regarding the case, also reported by human rights groups, of a female Syrian national alleged to have been flogged based on an unsubstantiated charge of adultery. The Saudi government claimed that the allegations concerning the woman were untrue. The State Department's omission of UN criticism of Saudi Arabia's human rights practices is deplorable and mars what would otherwise have been an excellent discussion of Saudi Arabia's lack of respect for the integrity of the person.
On a related note, another important piece of UN-related information was omitted from this year's report. The representative of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees was granted official diplomatic status by the Saudi government at the end of 1992. This represents at least a symbolic step forward in protections afforded to refugees in the Kingdom. To its credit, this year's report fairly identified the abuses to which refugees from the Gulf war at the Rafha and Artawiya camps were subject during the year.
To underscore the point that human rights abuses in Saudi Arabia are contrary to law, and not just something unpleasant, the report should make more references to various legal standards. The report should note 1) where internationally recognized and binding legal norms have been violated; 2) where Saudi Arabia's human rights practices violate Saudi Arabia's own laws; and 3) where Saudi Arabia's own laws expressly allow for such abuses.
Numerous practices described in the section of this year's report on respect for the integrity of the person, for example, violate norms contained in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR): torture and cruel forms of physical punishment (Arts. 7, 10); arbitrary arrest and detention, especially by the General Directorate of Intelligence and in some cases by the Mutawwi'in (Art. 9); lack of public trials (Art. 14); and absence of legal representation before tribunals (Art. 14). This list is by way of example only and could easily be expanded. Although Saudi Arabia is not a signatory to the ICCPR, the ICCPR is generally considered to embody binding minimum standards of international human rights law.
Saudi Arabia's practices violate in many instances its own laws. A number of the provisions of Saudi Arabia's new Basic Law of Government (ai-nizam al-asasi lil-hukm, promulgated in March and discussed below) contain language which purports to guarantee certain rights to the citizenry. For example, the following are prohibited: arbitrary arrest and imprisonment (Art. 36); entry by the government into private homes (Art. 37); censorship of personal communications (Art. 40); and confiscation of private property (Arts. 18, 19). However, each of these prohibitions may be trumped by other laws, thus leaving the protections largely meaningless. For example, Article 37 states:
Dwellings shall be protected, and it shall not be permitted to enter them without the permission of their owner, nor to search them, except in those cases which are specified by law.
331
Saudi Arabia
The "law" (ai-nizam) is not specified, nor is any specific provision cited from which a person could determine when their dwelling might be entered or searched. Perhaps such entering and searches are allowed under Article 12:
Fostering of national unity is mandatory, and the state shall prohibit anything which leads to factionalism, civil unrest, or divi-siveness.
The vagueness of such important statutes should have been emphasized in the report. In any event, the report could usefully have pointed out that the newly adopted laws which would appear to guarantee certain basic rights in fact do not.
Perhaps more distressingly, the report fails to mention those Saudi laws which expressly allow the government to violate human rights. For example, Article 39 of the Basic Law virtually outlaws a free press.
Political reforms of various degrees have been on the horizon io Saudi Arabia since 1932; they reappeared -- still shimmering mirage-like on the horizon -- in 1962, in 1980, in 1990 and again in 1991 and 1992. King Fahd announced certain proposed institutional changes in late 1991, and then furnished further details in a series of three statutes promulgated in March 1992. Yet, judging from the scant protections afforded to residents of Saudi Arabia and the hollow and largely meaningless changes announced in the new laws, Saudi Arabia appears unlikely to abandon its autocratic style of government in the near future.
It is quite surprising that so little space in the report is devoted to a discussion of the new laws after the warm, if not enthusiastic, reception they received from the U.S. government (as reported in detail by Middle East Watch). The new laws are mentioned briefly in the introduction and only a very short paragraph is devoted to them in the body of the report.
The label "reform" used in the report is a misnomer for many of the new laws since they either codify existing repressive practices such as the King's power to remove judges and effective repeal of a former law allowing local elections, or, worse yet, represent a step backwards in terms of human rights.
Absent from the report are remarks made by King Fahd in a press interview in late March in which he bluntly stated that democracy was inappropriate for his part of the world and, much worse, implied that Islam was absolutely inconsistent with democracy. Surely that comment deserved some mention, both to convey the spirit in which the "reforms" were enacted and to put them in their proper context. Moreover, when seen against the background of recent developments in the majority of Saudi Arabia's neighbors, the King's remarks are all the more questionable: Kuwait's impressively independent parliament is again functioning; elections were recently and successfully held in Yemen; Jordan has a functioning and independent-minded parliament; the Sultan of Oman has announced his intention to achieve democratic reforms; and one mainstream Arabic newspaper in the United Arab Emirates (a! Khalij) has called for election of members of the federal
332
Saudi Arabia
legislative body.
This year's report gives a relatively accurate account of the state of worker rights in Saudi Arabia. The report notes prohibitions on unionization and collective bargaining, the existence of situations resembling in practice forced labor, vestiges of master-slave relationships, contract switching perpetrated on Asian workers, and the usually lax enforcement of certain worker safety and other labor regulations. In addition, the report notes in its section on gender discrimination the continued abuse (including sexual) of Asian female domestic servants.
Although the report mentions that foreign workers from Asia and Africa "are subject to various forms of informal discrimination," these should have been described more fully so that the word "informal" is not misunderstood. As a general matter, foreign workers, especially those from less developed countries in Asia, often, and for a variety of reasons, encounter great difficulty in attempting to enforce their rights under Saudi law. Thus, this "informal" discrimination could not exist unless the Saudi government tolerated or even sanctioned such practices.
Another significant omission in this year's report -- as in last year's and as pointed out in last year's critique -- is any mention of overt wage discrimination based on national origin. Despite the report's contention that wages are set by operation of market forces (and so such discrimination is therefore excusable?), the practice violates binding international legal norms such as the ICCPR (Arts. 2, 3 and 7), and the 1990 Convention on
Migrant Workers (Arts. 7, 25) (discussed below).
The report could have, as the MLIHRC publication did, put the sad state of worker rights practices in Saudi Arabia in context by reference to international labor and human rights instruments. The MLIHRC notes that Saudi Arabia voted in the UN General Assembly in 1990 to adopt the International Convention on Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, and also voted to urge ratification of the same treaty the following year. Yet a quick glance at the provisions of that treaty reveals that even the brief list of abusive and illegal worker rights practices catalogued in this year's report violates numerous articles: arbitrary deprivation of property (contract switching) (Art. 15); liberty and security of person (Art. 16); imprisonment for failure to fulfill a contractual obligation (also prohibited by the ICCPR) (Art. 20); prohibition on collective expulsion (for example, of Yemenis, as reported in last year's report) (Art. 22); right to unionize (Art. 26); the list is not exhaustive. Again, the report's failure to cite relevant legal standards makes it impossible to evaluate the severity of Saudi Arabia's human rights violations.
Finally - and doubtless a great relief to the State Department -- certiorari was granted by the U.S. Supreme Court in Nelson v. Saudi Arabia in June 1992, and the case was decided in late March 1993. Nelson's suit was based on his claim that he was imprisoned and tortured by government employees as a result of his reporting of safety hazards at the hospital in Saudi Arabia where he worked as a systems engineer. The U.S. Court of
333
Saudi Arabia
Appeals for the 11th Circuit reversed a lower court finding that it had no jurisdiction over the defendant under the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act. The U.S. Supreme Court, in a narrow and coldly logical reading of the commercial activities exception to the Act, reversed the appeals court, holding that intentionally tortious conduct committed by police and penal officers is a sovereign activity. Nevertheless, the appeal focused attention both on the abuses to which foreign workers (not only those from developing countries) are exposed in Saudi Arabia, as well as on the failure of foreign governments to pursue instances of abuse of their nationals with the Saudi government.
334
