 SAUDI ARABIA
 Saudi Arabia is a monarchy without elected representative institutions or political
 parties. It is ruled by King Fahd Bin Abd Al-Aziz Al Saud, a son of King Abd Al-
 Aziz Al Saud, who unified the country in the early 20th century. Since the death
 of King Abd al-Aziz, the King and Crown Prince have been chosen from among his
 sons, who themselves have had preponderant influence in the choice. A 1992 royal
 decree reserves for the King exclusive power to name the Crown Prince. The Gov-
 ernment has declared the Islamic holy books, the Koran and the Sunna (tradition)
 of the Prophet Muhammad, to be the country's Constitution. The Government bases
 its legitimacy on governance according to the precepts of a rigorously conservative
 form of Islam. Neither the Government nor the society in general accept the concept
 of separation of religion and state. The Government prohibits the establishment of
 political parties and supp resses opposition views. In 1992 King Fahd appointed a
 Consultative Council and similar provincial assemblies. The Consultative Council
 began holding sessions in 1993 and was expanded in 1997. The judiciary is gen-
 erally independent but is subject to influence by the executive branch and members
 of the royal family.
 Police and border forces under the Ministry of Interior are responsible for internal
 security. The Mutawwa'in, or religious police, constitute the Committee to Prevent
 Vice and Promote Virtue, a semiautonomous agency that enforces adherence to Is-
 lamic norms by monitoring public behavior. The Government maintained general
 control of the security forces. However, members of the security forces committed
 human rights abuses.
 The oil industry has fueled the transformation of Saudi Arabia from a pastoral,
 agricultural, and commercial society to a rapidly urbanizing one characterized by
 large-scale infrastructure projects, an extensive social welfare system, and a labor
 market comprised largely of foreign workers. Oil revenues account for around 35
 percent of the gross domestic product (GDP) and 72 percent of government income.
 Agriculture accounts for only a out 8 percent of GDP. Government spending, includ-
 ing spending on the national airline, power, water, telephone, education, and health
 services, accounts for 36 percent of GDP. About 37 percent of the economy is in pri-
 vat hands, and the Government is promoting further privatization of the economy.
 In 1995 the Government began an aggressive campaign to increase the number of
 Sadi nationals represented in the public and private work forces. The campaign
 has restricted empoment of some categories of foreign workers by limiting certain
 occupations to Saudis only, increasing fees for some types of work visas, and setting
 minimum wages for some job categories in order to increase the cost to employers
 of non-Saudi labor. In 1997 the Government has offered a limited amnesty under
 which illegal residents may depart the country without penalty.
 The Government commits and tolerates serious human rights abuses. Citizens
 have neither the right nor the legal means to change their government. Security
 forces continued to abuse detainees and prisoners, arbitrarily arrest and detain per-
 sons, and facilitate incommunicado detention. Prolonged detention is a problem. Se-
 curity forces committed such abuses, in contradiction of law, but with the acquies-
 cence of the Government. Mutawwa'in continued to intimidate, abuse, and detain
 citizens and foreigners. The Government prohibits or restricts freedom of speech, the
 press, assembly, association, and religion. Other continuing problems included dis-
 
 
 1557
 crimination and violence against women, discrimination against ethnic and religious
 minorities, and strict limitations on the rights of workers. The Government dis-
 agrees with internationally accepted definitions of human rights and views its inter-
 pretation of Islamic law as its sole source of guidance on human rights.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 The investigation of the 1996 Al-Khobar bombing, which killed 19 U.S. service-
 men, continued. The Government has not yet issued a report of its findings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other- Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 There were credible reports that the authorities continued to abuse detainees, both
 citizens and foreigners. Ministry of Interior officials are responsible for most inci-
 dents of abuse, including beatings, sleep deprivation, and torture. The Government's
 general refusal to grant members of diplomatic missions access to the Ministry of
 Interior detention facilities or allow members of international human rights groups
 into the country hinders efforts to confirm or discount reports of abuses. The Gov-
 ernment's past failure to denounce human rights abuses has contributed to the pub-
 lic perception that abuses can be committed with impunity.
 Although the number of reports of harassment by the Mutawwa'in remained rel-
 atively low in comparison with previous years, the Mutawwa'in continued to intimi-
 date, abuse, and detain citizens and foreigners of both sexes (see Section 1.d.).
 The Government punishes criminals according to its interpretation of Islamic law
 or-Shari'a. Punishments include flogging, amputation, and execution by beheading,
 stoning, or firing squad. In 1997 the authorities acknowledged 134 executions: 47
 men and 1 woman for murder (34 Saudis and 14 foreigners); 6 men for rape (all
 Saudis), 5 men for forcible sodomy (all Saudis); 64 men and 2 women for narcotics
 offenses (2 Saudis and 64 foreigners); and 9 men for armed robbery (2 Saudis and
 7 foreigners). The men were-executed by beheading. The women were executed by
 firing squad. There were no executions by stoning. Irr accordance with Shari'a, the
 authorities may punish repeated thievery by amputation of the right hand. How-
 ever, there were no amputations. Persons convicted-of less serious offenses, such as
 alcohol related offenses or being alone in the company of an unrelated person of the
 opposite sex, were sometimes punished by flogging with a cane.
 Prison and jail conditions vary throughout the Kingdom. Prisons generally meet
 minimum international standars and provide air-conditioned cells, good nutrition,
 regular exercise, and careful patrolling by prison guards. However, some police sta-
 tion jails are overcrowded and unsanitary. Authorities generally allowed family
 members access to detainees.
 Boards of Investigation and Public Prosecution, organized on a regional basis,
 were established by King Fahd in 1993. The members of these boards have the right
 to inspect prisons, review prisoners' files, and hear their complaints. The Govern-
 ment, however, does not permit human rights monitors to visit prisons or jails. Dip-
 lomats were regularly granted access to incarcerated foreign citizens. However, the
 Government does not allow impartial observers of any type access to specialized
 Ministry of Interior prisons, where it detains persons accused of political subversion.
 Representatives of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
 are present at the Rafiha refugee camp housing former Iraqi prisoners of war and
 civilians who fled Iraq following the Gulf War. According to UNHCR officials, there
 was no systematic abuse of refugees by camp guards. Wen isolated instances of
 abuse have surfaced in the past, the authorities have been responsive and willing
 to investigate allegations and reprimand offending guards. The camp receives a high
 level of material assistance and is comparatively comfortable and well run. How-
 ever, the Government generally confines refugees to the camp except in the event
 of approved emigration from Saudi Arabia.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law prohibits arbitrary arrest. De-
 spite the law, however, officers make arrests and detain persons without following
 explicit legal guidelines. There are few procedures to safeguard against abuse. There
 was only one known case of a citizen successfully obtaining judicial redress for
 abuse of the Government's power of arrest and detention. In 1995 a citizen success-
 fully sued the Government for wrongful imprisonment and was awarded compensa-
 tion.
 In accordance with a 1983 Ministry of Interior regulation, authorities usually de-
 tain suspects for no longer than 3 days before charging them. However, serious ex-
 ceptions have been reported. The regulation also has provisions for bail for less seri-
 
 
 1558
 ous crimes. Also, authorities sometimes release detainees on the recognizance of a
 patron or sponsoring employer without the payment of bail. If not released, authori-
 ties ticaly detain the accused an average of 2 months before sending their case
 to trial or, in the case of some foreigners, summarily deporting them. There is no
 established procedure providing detainees the right to inform their family of their
 arrest. If asked, the authorities usually confirm the arrest of foreigners to their
 countiy's diplomats. In general, however, foreign diplomats learn about such arrests
 through informal channels. The authorities may take as Iong as several months to
 provide official notification of the arrest of foreigners, if at all. In capital cases, au-
 thorities have arrested, tried, and executed foreigners without notifying the foreign
 government. In 1997 authorities frequently failed to notify diplomats of the arrest,
 detention, and even deportation of foreign nationals.
 The Mutawwa'in have the authority to detain people for no more than 24 hours
 for violation of strict standards of proper dress and behavior. However, they some-
 times exceeded this limit before delivering detainees to the police (see Section 1.f.).
 Current procedures require a police officer to accompany the Mutawwa'in at the
 time of an arrest. Mutawwa'in generally complied with this requirement. The num-
 ber of reports of Mutawwa'in arresting and detaining persons who allegedly violated
 dress and behavior standards was approximately at the same reduced level as in
 the previous year.
 Detainees arrested by the General Directorate of Investigation (GDI), the Ministry
 of Interior's security service, are commonly held incommunicado in special prisons
 during the initial phase of an investigation, which may last weeks or months. The
 GDI allows the detainees only limited contact with their families or lawyers.
 The authorities detain people without charge who publicly criticize the Govern-
 ment or charge them with attempting to destabilize the Government (see Sections
 2.a. and 3). The authorities continued to detain Salman Al-Awdah and Safar Al-
 Hawali, Muslim clerics who were arrested in September 1994 for publicly criticizing
 the Government. Their detention that year sparked protest demonstrations result-
 ing in the arrest of 157 persons for antigovernment activities. At the end of 1994,
 27 of these persons remained in detention pending investigation. In 1997 there were
 unverified but credible reports that a number of such persons were released from
 prison, including Suleiman Al-Rushudi, a founding member of the dissident Com-
 mittee for the Defense of Legitimate Rights (CDLR). The total number of current
 political detainees cannot be determined but is estimated at less than 200 persons.
 The Government released under its annual Ramadan amnesty hundreds or thou-
 sands of prisoners and detainees convicted or held for minor offenses.
 The total number of political detainees can not be accurately determined, but is
 probably less than 50.
 Since beginning the investigation of the 1996 bombing of a U.S. military facility
 in Saudi Arabia, authorities have detained and interrogated an increased number
 of Shi'a Muslims suspected of fundamentalist tendencies or Iranian sympathies.
 The Government did not use forced exile, and it did not revoke citizenship for po-
 litical purpses in 1997. However, it has previously revoked the citizenship of oppo-
 nents of the Government who reside outside the country, such as Mohammed Al-
 Masari (see Section 3) and Osama Bin Ladin, widely regarded as a financier and
 organizer of terrorist activities.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The independence of the judiciary is prescribed
 by law and is usually respected in practice. However, judges occasionally accede to
 the influence of the executive branch, particularly members of the royal family and
 their associates. Moreover, the Ministry of Justice exercises judicial, financial, and
 administrative control of the courts.
 The legal system is based on Shari'a or Islamic law, Shari'a courts exercise juris-
 diction over common criminal cases and civil suits regarding marriage, divorce, child
 custody, and inheritance. These courts base judgments largely on the Koran and on
 the Sunna, another Islamic text. Cases involving relatively small penalties are tried
 in Shari'a summary courts; more serious crimes are adjudicated in Shari'a courts
 of common pleas. Appeals from Shari'a courts are to the courts of appeal.
 Other civil proceedings, including those involving claims against the Government
 and enforcement of foreign judgments, are held before specialized administrative tri-
 bunals, such as the Commission for the Settlement of Labor Disputes and the Board
 of Grievances.
 The Government permits Shi'a Muslims to use their own legal tradition to adju-
 dicate noncriminal cases within their community.
 The military justice system has jurisdiction over uniformed personnel and civil
 servants charged with violations of military regulations. The Minister of Defense
 and Aviation and the King review the decisions of courts-martial.
 
 
 1559
 
 The Supreme Judicial Council is not a court and may not reverse decisions made
 by a court of appeals. However, the Council may review lower court decisions and
 refer them back to the lower court for reconsideration. Only the Supreme Judicial
 Council may discipline or remove a judge. The King appoints the members of the
 Council.
 The Council of Senior Religious Scholars is an autonomous body of 15 senior reli-
 gious jurists, including the Minister of Justice. It establishes the legal principles to
 guide lower court judges in deciding cases.
 Defendants usually appear without an attorney before a judge, who determines
 guilt or innocence in accordance with Shari'a standards. Defense lawyers may offer
 their clients advice before trial or may attend the trial as interpreters for those un-
 familiar with Arabic. The courts do not provide foreign defendants with translators.
 Public defenders are not provided. Individuals may choose any person to represent
 them by a power of attorney filed with the court and Ministry of Justice. Most trials
 are closed. However, in a highly publicized 1997 case involving two foreign women
 charged with murder, the Saudi court conducted preliminary matters and the trial
 with relatively open and transparent procedures, including more effective use of
 counsel, increased consular presence, and increased family access.
 A woman's testimony does not carry the same weight as that of a man. In a
 Shari'a court, the testimony of one man equals that of two women. In the absence
 of two witnesses, or four witnesses in the case of adultery, confessions before a judge
 are almost always required for criminal conviction-a situation that repeatedly has
 led prosecuting authorities to coerce confessions from suspects by threats and abuse.
 Sentencing is not uniform. Foreign residents often receive harsher penalties than
 citizens. Under Shari'a, as interpreted and applied in Saudi Arabia, crimes against
 Muslims receive harsher penalties than those against non-Muslims. In the case of
 wrongful death, the amount of indemnity or "blood money" awarded to relatives var-
 ies with the nationality, religion, and sex of the victim. A sentence may be changed
 at any stage of review, except for punishments stipulated by the Koran. In a case
 that received much publicity, a British nurse convicted of murdering an Australian
 nurse in 1996 was spared the death penalty when the victim's brother waved his
 right to demand that punishment and agreed to accept "blood money" instead. A
 second British nurse involved in the murder was convicted of a lesser offense and
 not sentenced to death.
 Provincial governors have the authority to exercise leniency and reduce a judge's
 sentence. In general, members of the royal family, and other powerful families, are
 not subject to the same rule of law as ordinary citizens. For example, judges do not
 have the power to issue a warrant summoning any member of the royal family.
 The King and his advisors review cases involving capital punishment. The King
 has the authority to commute death sentences and grant pardons except for capital
 crimes committed against individuals. In such cases, he may request the victim's
 next of kin to pardon the murderer-usually in return for compensation from the
 family or the King.
 There is insufficient information to determine the number of political prisoners.
 The Government does not provide information on such persons or respond to inquir-
 ies about them. Moreover, the Government conducts closed trials for persons who
 may be political prisoners and in other cases has detained persons incommunicado
 for long periods while under investigation.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 sanctity of family life and the inviolability of the home are among the most fun-
 damental of Islamic precepts. Royal decrees announced in 1992 include provisions
 calling for the Government to defend the home from unlawful intrusions. Nonethe-
 less, there are few protections from government interference with one's privacy,
 family, home, or correspondence.
 The police must generally demonstrate reasonable cause and obtain permission
 from the provincial governor before searching a private home, but warrants are not
 required.
 Customs officials routinely open mail and shipments for contraband, including
 material deemed pornographic and non-Muslim religious material. Customs officials
 confiscated or censored offending materials, including Christian Bibles and religious
 video tapes (see Section 2.c.). The authorities also open mail and use informants and
 wiretaps in internal security and criminal matters. Security forces used wiretaps
 against foreigners suspected of alcohol-related offenses.
 The Government enforces most social and Islamic religious norms, which are mat-
 ters of law (see Section 5). Women may not marry non-Saudis without government
 permission; men must obtain approval from the Ministry of Interior to marry
 women from countries outside the six states of the Gulf Cooperation Council. In ac-
 
 
 1560
 cordance with Islamic law, women are prohibited from marrying non-Muslims, but
 men may marry Christians and Jews as well as Muslims.
 %-Mutawwa'in practices and incidents of abuse varied widely, in different regions of
 -the country. However, in certain areas, the Mutawwa'in and religious vigilantes act-
 ing on their own. harassed,-assaulted, battered, arrested, and detained citizens and
 foreigners, albeit on a lesser scale than in 1995 and earlier years (see Section 1.d.).
 The Government requires the Mutawwa'in to follow established procedures and to
 offer instruction in a- polite manner, however, Mutawwa'in did not always comply
 with the requirements. The Government has not publicly condemned abuses by
 Mutawwa'in and religious vigilantes but has sought to curtail them.
 Mutawwa'in enforcement of strict standards of-social behavior included the closing
 of commercial establishments during daily prayer observances, insisting upon com-
 pliance with strict norms of public dress, and dispersing gatherings of women in
 F ublic places. Mutawwa'in frequently remonstrated with Saudi and foreign women
 or. failure to observe strict dress codes, arrested men and women found together
 who were not married or otherwise close relatives, and arrested men suspected of
 homosexual activity.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Government severely limits freedom of
 speech and of thepress.,The authorities do not countenance criticism of Islam, the
 ruling family, or the Government. Persons whose criticisms align them with an or-
 ganized political opposition are subject to arrest and detention until they confess
 their crime or sign a statement promising not to resume such criticisms, which is
 tantamount to a confession.
 The print media are privately owned but publicly subsidized. A 1982 media policy
 statement and a 1965 national security law prohibit the dissemination of criticism
 of the Government. The media policy statement urges journalists to uphold Islam,
 oppose atheism, promote Arab interests, and preserve the cultural heritage of Saudi
 Arabia. The Ministry of Information appoints, and may remove, the editors-in-chief.
 It also provides guidelines to newspapers on controversial issues. The Government
 owns the Saudi Press Agency (SPA), which expresses official government views.
 Newspapers typically publish news on sensitive subjects, such as crime or terror-
 ism, only after it has been released by the SPA or when it has been authorized by
 a senior government official. Two Saudi-owned, London-based dailies, Ash-Sharq al-
 Awsat- and AI-Hayat, are widely distributed and read in Saudi Arabia. Both Ash-
 Sharq al-Awsat and A1-Hayat tend to practice self-censorship in order to comply
 with government restrictions on sensitive issues. The authorities continue to censor
 stories about Saudi Arabia in the foreign press. Censors may remove or blacken the
 offending articles, glue pages tgether, or prevent certain issues of foreign publica-
 tions from entering the market. However, the Ministry of Information continued to
 relax its blackout policy regarding politically sensitive news concerning Saudi Ara-
 bia reported in international media, although press restrictions on reporting of do-
 mestic news remain very stringent. The Government's policy in this regard appears
 to be motivated in part by pragmatic considerations: Saudi access to outside sources
 of information, especially Cable News Network (CNN) and other satellite television
 channels, is increasingly widespread.
 The Government tightly restricts the entry of foreign journalists into the King-
 dom. The-Government owns and operates the television and radio companies. Gov-
 ernment censors remove any reference to politics, religions other than Islam, pork
 origs, alcohol, and sex from foreign programs and songs.
 There are approximately 1 million satellite receiving dishes in the country, which
 provide citizens with foreign broadcasts. The legal status of these devices is ambigu-
 ous. The Government ordered a halt to their import in 1992, at the request of reli-
 gious leaders who objected to foreign programming available on satellite channels.
 In March 1994, the Government banned the sale, installation, and maintenance of
 dishes and supporting devices, but the number of dishes continues to increase and
 residents may legally subscribe to satellite decoding services that require a dish.
 The Government censors all forms of public artistic expression. The authorities
 prohibit cinemas and public musical or theatrical performances, except those that
 are strictly folkloric.
 Academic freedom is restricted. The authorities prohibit the study of evolution,
 Freud, Marx, Western music, and Western philosophy. Some professors believe that
 informers monitor their classroom comments and report to government and religious
 authorities.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Government strictly limits
 the freedom of assembly. It prohibits public demonstrations as a means of political
 expression. Public meetings are segregated by sex. Unless meetings are sponsored
 
 
 1561
 by diplomatic missions or approved by the appropriate governor, foreign residents
 seeking to hold unsegregated meetings risk arrest and deportation. The authorities
 monitor any large gathering of people, especially of women. Government policy per-
 mits women to attend cultural and social events at diplomatic chanceries and resi-
 dences only if they are accompanied by a father, brother, or husband. However, in
 practice, police often implement the policy in an arbitrary manner. On repeated oc-
 casions during the year, authorities actively prohibited escorted and unescorted
 women from entering diplomatic chanceries to attend cultural events and lectures.
 The Mutawwa'in dispersed groups of women found in public places such as res-
 taurants.
 The Government strictly limits the freedom of association. It prohibits the estab-
 lishment of political parties or any type of opposition group (see Section 3). By its
 power to license associations, the Government ensures that groups conform to public
 polliPosnteit                                              Isa   ist eofc   l
 c. Creedom of Religion.-Freedom of religion does not exist. Islam is the official
 religion, and all citizens must be Muslims. The Government prohibits the public
 practice of other religions.
 Conversion by a Muslim to another religion is considered apostasy. Public apos-
 tasy is a crime under Shari'a law and punishable by death.
 Islamic practice is generally limited to that of the Wahhabi sect's interpretation
 of the Hanbali school of the Sunni branch of Islam. Practices contrary to this inter-
 pretation, such as visits to the graves of renowned Muslims, are discouraged.
 The Ministry of Islamic Affairs directly supervises and is a major source of funds
 for the construction and maintenance of almost all mosques in the country. The
 Ministry pays the salaries of imams and others who work in the mosques. A govern-
 mental committee is responsible for defining the qualifications of imams. The
 Mutawwa'in receive their funding from the Government, and the general president
 of the Mutawwa'in holds the rank of cabinet minister.
 The Shi'a Muslim minority (roughly 500,000 of over 13 million citizens) lives
 mostly in the eastern province. They are the objects of officially sanctioned political
 and economic discrimination (see Section 5). Prior to 1990, the Government prohib-
 ited Shi'ite public processions during the Islamic month of Muharram and restricted
 other processions and congregations to designated areas in the major Shi'ite cities.
 Since 1990 the authorities have permitted marches on the Shilte holiday of Ashura,
 provided the marchers do not display banners or engage in self-flagellation. Ashura
 commemorations took place in 1997 without incident. The Government seldom per-
 mits private construction of Shi'ite mosques. The Shi'a have declined government of-
 fers to build state-supported mosques because the Government would prohibit the
 incorporation and display of Shi'ite motifs in any such mosques.
 The Government does not permit public non-Muslim religious activities. Non-Mus-
 lim worshippers risk arrest, lashing, and deportation for engaging in religious activ-
 ity that attracts official attention. There were no reports of government action
 against private religious services in 1997. Furthermore, for the first time, a senior
 Saudi leader stated publicly that the Government does not "prevent" private non-
 Muslim religious worship in the home. Such private non-Muslim worship activities
 occur on a wide scale through the country, including on the premises of several em-
 bassies. Other high level Saudi authorities have privately confirmed that the Gov-
 ernment's policy allows for private non-Muslim worship and that the Government
 does not sanction investigation or harassment of such private worship services. The
 Government ascribes any residual harassment of private worship services to individ-
 uals and organizations acting on their own authority and in contradiction of govern-
 ment policy. In 1997 there were unverifiable, second-hand reports indicating that
 the Mutawwa'in broke up two non-Muslim worship services in private homes in
 Hafr Al-Batn and Hail.
 Persons wearing religious symbols of any kind in public risk confrontation with
 the Mutawwa'in. This general prohibition against religious symbols also applies to
 Muslims. A Christian wearing a crucifix or a Muslim wearing a Koranic necklace
 in public would be admonished. There were credible reports that Mutawwa'in ar-
 rested and beat foreigners found trafficking in religious symbols.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Government restricts the travel of Saudi women, who must obtain
 written permission from their closest male relative before the authorities will allow
 them to board public transportation between different parts of the country or travel
 abroad (see Section 5). Men may travel anywhere within the country or abroad.
 Foreigners are typically allowed to reside or work in Saudi Arabia only under the
 sponsorship of a Saudi national or business. The Government requires foreign resi-
 dents to carry identification cards. It does not permit foreigners to travel outside
 the city of their employment or change their workplace without their sponsor's per-
 
 
 1562
 mission. Foreign residents who travel within the country may be asked by the au-
 thorities to show that they possess letters of permission from their employer or
 sponsor.
 Sponsors generally retain possession of the workers' passports. Foreign workers
 must obtain permission from their sponsors to travel abroad. If sponsors are in-
 volved in a commercial or labor dispute with foreign employees, they may ask the
 authorities to prohibit the employees from departing the country until the dispute
 is resolved. Some sponsors use this as a pressure tactic to resolve disputes in their
 favor or to have foreign employees deported. There were numerous reports of the
 Government prohibiting foreign employees involved in labor disputes from departing
 the country until the dispute was resolved.
 The Government seizes the passports of all potential suspects and witnesses in
 criminal cases and suspends the issuance of exit visas to them until the case is tried
 or otherwise concluded. As a result, some foreign nationals are forced to remain in
 the country for lengthy periods against their will. The authorities sometimes con-
 fiscate the passports of suspected oppositionists and their families. The Government
 sometimes prevents Shi'a Muslims believed to have pro-Iranian sympathies from
 traveling abroad. The Government also detained and interrogated some Saudi Shi'a
 Muslims who had traveled to Iran, upon their return to Saudi Arabia (see Section
 5).
 Citizens may emigrate, -but the law prohibits dual citizenship. Apart from mar-
 riage to a Saudi national, there are no provisions for foreign residents to acquire
 citizenship. However, foreigners are granted citizenship in rare cases, generally
 through the advocacy of an influential patron.
 The 1992 Basic Law provides that "the State will grant political asylum if the
 public interest mitigates" in favor of it. The language does not specify clear rules
 for adjudicating asylum cases. In general, the authorities regard refugees and dis-
 placed personske other foreign workers: They must have sponsors for employment
 orrisk expulsion. Of the 35,000 Iraqi civilians-and former prisoners of war allowed
 refuge in Saudi Arabia at the end of the Gulf War, none has been granted perma-
 nent asylum by the Saudis; however, the Government has -underwritten the entire
 cost of providing safe haven to the Iraqi refugees, and it continues to provide excel-
 lent logistical anadministrative support to the United Nations High Commissioner
 for Refugees (UNHCR) and other resettlement agencies.
 At year's end, approximately 29,000 ofthe original 35,000 Iraqi refugees had been
 resettled in other countries or voluntarily repatriated to Iraq. Most of the approxi-
 mately 6,000 remaining refugees are restricted to the R    a refugee camp. The
 UNHIR has monitored over 2,800 persons voluntarily returning to Iraq from Raia
 since December 1991 and found no evidence of forcible repatriation (see Section
 1.c.).
 The G-overnment has allowed some foreigners to remain temporarily in Saudi Ara-
 bia in cases where their safety would be jeopardized if they were deported to their
 home countries.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens do not have the right to change their government. There are no formal
 dlemocratic institutions, and only a few citizens have a voice in the choice of leaders
 or in changing the political system. The King rules on civil and religious matters
 within certain limitations established by religious law, tradition, andthe need to
 maintain consensus among the ruling family and religious leaders.
 The King is also the Prime Minister, and the Crown Prince serves as Deputy
 Prime Minister. The King appoints all other ministers, who in turn appoint subordi-
 nate officials with cabinet concurrence. In 1992 the King appointed 60 members to
 a Consultative Council, or Mailis Ash-Shura This strictly advisory ody began to
 hold sessions in 1993. In 1997 the King expanded the Council to 90 members, in-
 cluding at least 3 Shi'a members. The Council has maintained a low profile and is
 not regarded as a significant political force by either the citizenry or those in power.
 The Council of Senior Islamic Scholars is another advisory body to the King and
 the Cabinet. It reviews the Government's public policies for compliance with Shari'a.
 The Government views the Council as an important source of religious legitimacy
 and takes the Councirs opinions into account when promulgating legislation.
 Communication between citizens and the Government is usually expressed
 � through client-patron relationships and by affinity groups such as tribes, families,
 and professional hierarchies. In theory, any male citizen or foreign national may ex-
 pess an opinion or air a grievance at a mails-an open-door meeting held by the
 King, a Prince, or an important national or local official. However, as governmental
 functions have become more complex, time-consuming, and centralized, public access
 
 
 1563
 to senior officials has become more restricted. Since the assassination of King Faisal
 in 1975, Saudi kings have reduced the frequency of their personal contacts with the
 public. Ministers and district governors more readily grant audiences at a majlis.
 Typical topics raised in a majlis are complaints about bureaucratic delay or insen-
 sitivity, requests for personal redress or assistance, and criticism of particular acts
 of government affecting family welfare. Broader "political" concerns-social, eco-
 nomic, or foreign policy-are rarely raised. Complaints about royal abuses of power
 would not be entertained. In general, journalists, academics, and businessmen be-
 lieve that institutionalized avenues of domestic criticism of the regime are closed.
 Feedback is filtered through private personal channels and during the year affected
 policy issues such as the Middle East peace process, unemployment of young Saudi
 men, and the construction of new infrastructure.
 The Committee for the Defense of Legitimate Rights, an opposition group, was es-
 tablished in 1993. The Government acted almost immediately to repress it. In 1094
 one of its founding members, Mohammed al-Masari, fled to the United Kingdom,
 where he sought political asylum and established an overseas branch of the CDLR.
 In 1996 internal divisions within the CDLR spawned the rival Islamic Reform Move-
 ment (IRM), headed by Sa'ad al-Eaqih. Al-Masari expressed the CDLR's "under-
 standing" of two fatal terrorist bombings of American military facilities in 1995 and
 1996 and sympathy for the perpetrators. The IRM implicitly condoned the two ter-
 rorist attacks m Saudi Arabia also, arguing that they were a natural outgrowth of
 a political system that does not tolerate peaceful dissent. Both groups continue to
 criticize the Government, using computers and facsimile transmissions to send
 newsletters back to Saudi Arabia.
 Women play no formal role in government and politics and are actively discour-
 aged from doing so. Participation by women in a maJlis is restricted, although some
 women seek redress through female members of the royal family. At least 3 of the
 90 members of the Majlis Ash-Shura are Shi'a.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no publicly active human rights groups, and the Government has made
 it clear that none critical of government policies will be permitted. Both Amnesty
 International and Human Rights Watch reported that they received no responses
 to their requests for information or access to the country.
 The Government does not permit visits by international human rights groups or
 independent monitors, nor has it fully acceded to all major international human
 rights treaties and conventions. The Government disagrees with internationally ac-
 cepted definitions of human rights and views its interpretation of Islamic law as the
 only necessary guide to protect human rights. The Government generally ignores,
 or condemns as attacks on Islam, citations of Saudi human rights abuses by inter-
 national monitors or foreign governments.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 There is legal and systemic discrimination based on sex and religion. The law for-
 bids discrimination based on race, but not nationality. The Government and private
 organizations cooperate in providing services for the disabled. The Shia religious mi-
 nority suffers social, legal, and sectarian discrimination.
 Women.-The Government does not keep statistics on spousal or other forms of
 violence against women. However, based on the limited amount of information avail-
 able regarding physical spousal abuse and violence against women, such violence
 and abuse appear to be a problem. Hospital workers report that many women are
 admitted for treatment of injuries that apparently result from spousal violence.
 Some foreign women have suffered physical abuse from their Saudi husbands. A
 Saudi man can prevent his wife and any child or unmarried adult daughter from
 obtaining an exit visa to depart Saudi Arabia (see Section 2.d.).
 Foreign embassies continued to receive many reports that employers abuse for-
 eign women working as domestic servants. Some embassies of countries with large
 domestic servant populations maintain safehouses to which their citizens may flee
 to escape work situations that include forced confinement, withholding of food, beat-
 ing and other physical abuse, and rape. Often the reported abuse is at the hands
 of female Saudis. In general, the Government considers such cases family matters
 and does not intervene unless charges of abuse are brought to its attention. It is
 almost impossible for foreign women to obtain redress in the courts due to the
 courts' strict evidentiary rules and the women's own fears of reprisals. Few employ-
 ers have been punished for such abuses. There are no private support groups or reli-
 gious associations to assist such women..
 
 
 1564
 By religious law and social custom, women have the right to own property and
 are entitled to financial support from their husbands or male relatives. However,
 women have few political or social rights and are not treated as equal members of
 society. There are no active women's rights groups. Women, including foreigners,
 may not legally drive motor vehicles an are restricted in their use of public facili-
 ties when men are present. Women must enter city buses by separate rear en-
 trances and sit in specially designated Sections. Women risk arrest by the
 Mutawwa'in for riding in a vehicle driven by a male who is not an employee or a
 close male relative, Women are not admitted to a hospital for medica treatment
 without the consent of a male relative. By law and custom, women may not under-
 take domestic or foreign travel alone (see Section 2.d.).
 In public a woman i expected to wear an abaya, a black garment covering the
 entire body, and to also cover her head and face. The Mutawwa'in generally expect
 women from Arab countries, Asia, and Africa to comply more fully with Saudi cus-
 toms of dress than they do Western women; nonetheless, in recent years they have
 instructed Western women to wear the abaya and cover their hair. In 1997
 Mutawwa'in continued to admonish and harass women to wear their abayas and
 cover their hair.
 Some government officials and ministries still bar accredited female diplomats in
 Saudi Arabia from official meetings and diplomatic functions.
 Women are also subject to discrimination under Islamic law, which stipulates that
 daughters receive hal the inheritance awarded to their brthers. In a Shari'a court,
 the testimony of one man equals that of two women (see Section i.e.). Although Is-
 lamic law permits polygyny, it is becoming less common. Islamic law enjoins a man
 to treat each wife equally. In practice such equality is left to the discretion of the
 husband. Some women participated in al-Mesyar (or "short daytime visit") mar-
 riages, where the women relinquish their legal rights to financial support and night-
 time cohabitation. Additionally, the husband is not required to inform his other
 wives of the marriage, and the children have no inheritance rights. The Government
 places greater restrictions on women than on men regarding marriage to non-Saudis
 and non-Muslims (see Section l.fi).
 Women must demonstrate legally specified grounds for divorce, but men may di-
 vorce without giving cause. If divorced or widowed, a woman normally may keep her
 children until they attain a specified age: 7 years for boys, 9 years for girls. Children
 over these ages are awarded to the divorced husband or the deceased husband's
 family. Numerous divorced women who are foreigners continued to be prevented by
 their former husbands from visiting their children after divorce.
 Women have access to free, but segregated, education through the university
 level. They constitute 55 percent of all university graduates but are excluded from
 studying subjects such as engineering, journalism, and architecture. Men may study
 overseas; women may do so only if accompanied by a spouse or an immediate male
 relative.
 Women make up approximately 5 percent of the work force. Most employment op-
 portunities for women are in education and health care, with lesser opportunity m
 business, philanthropy, banking, retail sales, and the media. In 1997 the Govern-
 ment authorized women to work in a limited capacity in the hotel industry. Women
 wishing to enter nontraditional fields are subject to discrimination. Women may not
 accept jobs in rural areas if they are required to live apart from their families. All
 workplaces where women are present are segregated by sex. Contact with male su-
 pervisors or clients is allowed by telephone or facsimile machine. In 1995 the Mi-
 istry of Commerce announced that women would no longer be issued business li-
 censes for work in fields that might require them to supervise foreign workers,
 interact with male clients, or deal on a regnlar basis with government oflicials.
 Children.-(The Government provides all children with free education and medical
 care. Children are not subject to the strict social segregation faced by women,
 though they are segregated by sex in schools starting at the age of 7. In more gen-
 eral social situations, boys are segregated at the age of 12 and girls at the onset
 ovedhescut to gauge the prevalence of child abuse, since the Government keeps
 no statistics on such cases and is disinclined to infringe on family privacy. Societal
 abuse of children does not appear to be a major problem.
 People With Disabiitie -The provision of government social services has increas-
 ingybrought the disabled into the public domain. The media carry features lauding
 the public accomplishments of disabled persons and sharply criticizing parents who
 neglect disabled children. The Government and private charitable organizations co-
 operate in education, employment, and other services for the disabled. The law pro-
 vides hiring quotas for the disabled. While there is no legislation for public acces-
 sibility, newer commercial buildings often include such access.
 
 
 1565
 Religious Minorities.-Shi'a citizens are discriminated against in government and
 employment, especially in national security jobs. Several years ago the Government
 subjected Shi'a to employment restrictions in the oil industry and has not relaxed
 them. Since the Iranian revolution, some Shi'a suspected of subversion have been
 subjected periodically to surveillance and limitations on travel abroad. Since the au-
 thorities began investigating the 1996 bombing of an American military installation,
 they have detained and interrogated an increased number of Shi'a, including Shi'a
 returning to Saudi Arabia following travel to Iran (see Sections 1.d and 2.d.).
 Nat ional/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Although racial discrimination is illegal,
 there is substantial societal prejudice based on ethnic or national origin. Foreign
 workers from Africa and Asia are subject to various forms of formal and informal
 discrimination and have the most difficulty in obtaining justice for their grievances.
 For example, pay scales for identical or similar labor or professional services are set
 by nationality such that two similarly qualified and experienced foreign nationals
 performing the same employment duties will receive -different compensation based
 on their nationalities (see Section 6.b.).
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Government decrees prohibit the establishment of
 labor unions and any strike activity.
 In 1995 Saudi Arabia was suspended from the U.S. Overseas Private Investment
 Corporation (OPIC) insurance programs because of the Government's lack of compli-
 ance with internationally recognized worker rights standards.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Collective bargaining is for-
 bidden. Foreign workers comprise about half of the work force. There is no mini-
 mum wage; wages are set by employers and vary according to the type of work per-
 formed and the nationality of the worker (see Section 5).
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Government prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor pursuant to a 1962 royal decree that abolished slavery. Ratifica-
 tion of-the International Labor Organization (ILO) Conventions 29 and 105, which
 prohibit forced labor, gives them the force of law. However, employers have signifi-
 cant control over the movements of foreign employees, giving rise to situations that
 might involve forced labor, especially in remote areas where workers are unable to
 leave their place of work.
 Some sponsors prevented foreign workers from obtaining exit visas to pressure
 them to sign a new work contract or to drop claims against their employers for un-
 paid salary (see Section 2.d.). In another pressure tactic, some sponsors refused to
 provide foreign workers with a "letter of no objection" that would allow them to be
 employed by another sponsor.
 The labor laws do not protect domestic servants. There were credible reports that
 female domestic servants were sometimes forced to work 12 to 16 hours a day, 7
 days a week. There were numerous confirmed reports of runaway maids (see Section
 5). The authorities often returned runaway maids to their employers against the
 maids' wishes.
 There have been many reports of workers whose employers refused to pay several
 months, or even years, of accumulated salary or other promised benefits. Nondomes-
 tic workers with such grievances have the right to complain before the labor courts,
 but few do so because of fear of deportation. The labor system abets the exploitation
 of foreign workers because enforcement of work contracts is difficult and generally
 favors employers. Labor cases can take many months to reach a final appellate rul-
 ing, during which time the employer can prevent the foreign laborer from leaving
 the country; alternatively, an employer can delay a case until a worker's funds are
 exhausted and the worker is forced to return to his home country.
 The law does not specificallyprohibit forced or bonded labor by children. Nonethe-
 less, with the rare exeption of criminal beging rings, and the possible exceptions
 of family businesses, forced or bonded child labor does not occur (see Section 6.d.).
 In 1997 the Government actively sought to eradicate forced child begging. According
 to reports, criminal rings consisting almost exclusively of foreigners bought and im-
 ported South Asian children, including disabled children. Ring organizers systemati-
 cally forced the children to beg in the streets and then confiscated all money that
 the children gained. Saudi authorities arrested some ring organizers and returned
 at least 76 children to their own countries.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The mini-
 mum age for employment is 13 years of age, which may be waived by the Ministry
 of Labor with the consent of the juvenile's guardian. There is no minimum age for
 workers employed in family oriented businesses or in other situations that are con-
 strued as extensions of the household, e.g., farmers, herdsmen, and domestic serv-
 
 
 1566
 ants. The law does not specifically prohibit forced or bonded labor by children, but
 it is not a problem, with the rare exception of forced child begging rings, and, pos-
 sibly, family businesses (see Section 6.c.).
 Children under the age of 18 and women may not be employed in hazardous or
 harmful industries, such as mining and industries employing power-operated ma-
 chinery. While there is no formal government entity charged with enforcing the min-
 imum age for employment of children, the Ministry of Justice has jurisdiction and
 has acted as plaintiff in the few cases that have arisen against alleged violators.
 In general, however, children play a minimal role in the work force.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no legal minimum wage. Labor regu-
 lations establish a 48-hour workweek at regular pay and allow employers to require
 up to 12 additional hours of overtime at time-and-a-half pay. Labor law provides for
 a 24-hour rest period, normally Fridays, although the employer may grant it on an-
 other day.
 Some foreign nationals who have been recruited abroad have complained that
 after arrival in Saudi Arabia they were presented with work contracts specifying
 lower wages and fewer benefits than originally promised. Other foreign workers
 have reportedly signed contracts in their home countries and were later pressured
 to sign less favorable contracts upon arrival. Some employees report that at the end
 of their contract service, their employers refuse to grant permission to allow them
 to return home. Some female domestic servants were often subject to abuse (see Sec-
 tions 5 and 6.c.).
 Saudiization is the Government's attempt to decrease the number of expatriates
 working in certain occupations and to replace them with Saudi workers. To this end,
 the Government has taken several long term steps, most notably limiting employ-
 ment in certain fields to Saudis, by prohibiting renewal of existing contracts, and
 requiring that open positions be filled by Saudi workers. There is a limited number
 of persons, both influential and otherwise, who attempt to circumvent the require-
 ments of the law. For example, employers have altered job descriptions or hired for-
 eigners for nominally low-level positions but in fact had them fill Saudi positions.
 Furthermore, influential persons may effectively circumvent the law because the
 Ministry of Labor is simply unwilling to confront them.
 The campaign to remove illegal immigrants from the country did little if anything
 to Saudiize the economy since illegal immigrants largely work in low-income posi-
 tions, which most Saudis consider unsuitable. The campaign did, however, improve
 overall working conditions for legally employed immigrants in low-income positions.
 The Government carried out the campaign by widely publishing its intent to enforce
 existing laws against illegal immigrants and Saudis employing or sponsoring illegal
 immigrants. At the same time, the Government offered an amnesty of several
 months duration, which allowed illegal immigrants and their employers or sponsors
 to avoid the possibility of prosecution by voluntarily seeking expeditious repatri-
 ation. Not less than 200,000 persons departed the country under terms of the am-
 nesty. In the process, the Government bowed to domestic pressure and granted
 grace periods and exemptions for certain categories of illegal immigrants, thereby
 allowing many illegal immigrants to legalize their status without leaving the coun-
 try. The effect of the expeditious repatriation of some illegal immigrants and the le-
 galization of others has been to improve overall working conditions for legally em-
 ployed expatriates. Illegal immigrants are generally willing to accept lower salaries
 and fewer benefits than legally employed immigrants. Their departure or legaliza-
 tion reduced the competition for certain jobs and thereby reduced the incentive for
 legal immigrants to accept lower wages and fewer benefits as a means of competing
 with illegal immigrants. Furthermore, the departure or legalization removed a large
 portion of the class of persons most vulnerable to abuse and exploitation because
 of their illegal status.
 The ILO has stated that the Government has not formulated legislation imple-
 menting the ILO Convention on Equal Pay and that regulations that segregate work
 places by sex or limit vocational programs for women violate ILO Convention 111.
 Labor regulations require employers to protect most workers from job-related haz-
 ards and disease. Foreign nationals report frequent failures to enforce health and
 safety standards. Farmers, herdsmen, domestic servants, and workers in family op-
 erated businesses are not covered by these regulations. Workers risk their employ-
 ment if they were to remove themselves from hazardous work conditions.
 
 
 1567
