Saudi Arabia
Overall human rights conditions remain poor in Saudi Arabia, an absolute monarchy.
Despite international and domestic pressure to implement reforms, King
Abdullah has not met expectations of improvements following his succession to
the throne in August 2005. The government undertook no major human rights
reforms in 2006, and there were signs of backsliding on issues of human rights
defenders, freedom of association, and freedom of expression.
Saudi law does not protect many basic rights and the government places strict
limits on freedom of association, assembly, and expression. Arbitrary detention,
mistreatment and torture of detainees, restrictions on freedom of movement, and
lack of official accountability remain serious concerns. Saudi women continue to
face serious obstacles to their participation in society. Many foreign workers,
especially women, face exploitative working conditions.
The United States in 2006 transferred 29 Saudi detainees at Guantanamo Bay to
Saudi custody. Nine of the 29 were released after three months, in addition to
three other former Guantanamo detainees who had been transferred in July 2005.
Political and Social Reform
Nascent political reform stalled in 2006. The government did not take up the recommendations
of the fifth and most recent National Dialogue session of
December 2005, or of previous Dialogue sessions, such as considering women for
judgeships.
Conservative views hardened in response to small steps in social liberalization. In
February 2006 conservatives including the religious police harassed visitors and
authors, especially women, at the Riyadh International Book Fair, which displayed
a Bible and works by the banned author Turki al-Hamad for the first time. In
March conservatives rallied against proposals to reform the education curriculum,
which had received strong US support.
Several court decisions raised concern over a lack of standardized canon law to
rein in biased judges. In February a judge barred a Saudi Shia from bearing legal witness to the marriage of his Sunni boss’s son. Another judge annulled a marriage,
finding the husband “inadequate” because he followed the Ismaili (Shia)
creed and not the prevailing Wahhabi (Sunni) creed like his wife. A third judge
annulled a marriage, finding in favor of a man who claimed the inferior tribal lineage
of his sister’s husband made the latter ineligible to marry into their family,
although Saudi sharia law places no conditions of heritage on couples who
intend to marry.
Arbitrary Detention, Torture and Ill-Treatment, and the Death
Penalty
Dr. Saud al-Musaibih, the head of a special consultative committee of the
Ministry of Interior and the Ministry of Islamic Affairs, said 700 detainees “who
were not involved in terrorist acts,” but suspected of “harboring extremist
thoughts,” had been released, the newspaper Okaz reported on October 12.
Dammam secret police (mabahith) moved Shia activist Kamil ‘Abbas Al Ahmad
from the General Prison to their own prison one week before his five-year sentence
was due to expire in July. Mabahith officials denied all knowledge of Al
Ahmad when Human Rights Watch telephoned giving the date of his transfer.
After the governmental Human Rights Commission intervened, the mabahith
released Al Ahmad in September.
A former prisoner in Mecca General Prison alleged to Human Rights Watch that
prison guards regularly beat him, burned his back on a hot metal block, and kept
him in solitary confinement for six months. He said such abuse was routine during
his time as an inmate between 2002 and 2006. Thirty-six inmates of al-Ha’ir
prison in Riyadh in late 2005 issued a “Cry for Help to Global Rights
Organizations” detailing their “despondence” due to beatings in prison and public
lashings.
Saudi judges routinely issue sentences of thousands of lashes as punishment,
often carried out in public. The beatings lead to severe mental trauma and physical
pain, and the victims do not receive medical treatment.
The kingdom carried out some 22 executions as of November 2006, around onefourth
the figure for 2005.
Freedom of Expression, Assembly, and Association
In February 2006 Saudi authorities briefly closed al-Shams newspaper for republishing
cartoons of the Prophet Muhammad deemed offensive. In March 2006 the
mabahith arrested Muhsin al-‘Awaji for several days for openly criticizing the
king’s alleged heavy reliance on the advice of liberals. In April the mabahith
arrested Rabbah al-Quwa’i for “harboring destructive thoughts” displayed in his
internet writings critiquing al Qaeda. The judge extracted an unspecified pledge
from al-Quwa’i, who described himself as “half-free” to Human Rights Watch following
his release. In June the mabahith arrested Sa’d bin Zu’air for 20 days for
saying in an interview on al-Arabiya television that the death of Abu Mus’ab al-
Zarqawi (the head of al Qaeda in Iraq) was “sad for most Muslims.”
In February 2006 the authorities arrested several Shia publicly celebrating their
religious holiday ‘Ashura’ in Safwa. In August security forces stopped Shias who
had begun to demonstrate against Israeli attacks in Lebanon. In October security
forces arrested four Shia in the Eastern Province for several days for displaying
Hezbollah emblems.
In September 2006 around 300 Ismailis demonstrated peacefully and undisturbed
in Najran against discrimination, amidst a heavy security presence.
In March the appointed national Shura (Advisory) Council did not pass a draft law
regulating nongovernmental organizations that would have further restricted freedom
of association, including by giving a governmental National Commission
extensive and excessively intrusive supervisory powers over nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs).
Human Rights Defenders
More than one year after the king pardoned three prominent reformers, Ali al-
Dumaini, Abdullah al-Hamid, and Matruk al-Falih, and their lawyer, Abd alRahman al-Lahim, the government has not responded to their demands to lift a
ban on their traveling abroad.
In September the mabahith detained women’s rights activist Wajeha al-Huwaider,
forcing her to pledge to refrain from speaking to the media and to cease her
human rights advocacy as a condition for release. Saudi non-judicial authorities
often extract such pledges from regime critics.
In August 2006 the government failed to reply to a request to open a new human
rights organization. The government also continued to refuse to license Human
Rights First in Saudi Arabia, an independent group that nonetheless continued to
monitor violations.
The government-approved National Society for Human Rights (NSHR) became
more active and outspoken in 2006. It proposed an HIV patients bill of rights, and
publicly criticized the draft NGO law. The NSHR also called for judicial reforms to
ensure equal sentences for the same crime.
The Ministry of Interior approved the long-delayed governmental Human Rights
Commission’s 24-member board, but has yet to announce the members who
reportedly include several Shia (including one Ismaili), but no women. The king
has instructed all government bodies to cooperate with the commission.
Women’s Rights
Women in Saudi Arabia continue to suffer from severe discrimination in the workplace,
home, and the courts, and from restrictions on their freedom of movement
and their choice of partners. The religious police enforce strict gender segregation
and a women’s public dress code of head-to-toe covering. Women are excluded
from the weekly majlis (council), where senior members of the royal family listen
to the complaints and proposals of citizens.
Women need permission from their male guardian to work, study, or travel. In
February 2006 the Transport Committee of the Shura Council declined a motion to
discuss the possibility of allowing women to drive. Minister of Information Iyad al-
Madani, however, said there was no obstacle to women applying for driver’s
licenses.
A directive to replace male staff in lingerie shops with Saudi women under a new
provision in the labor law allowing women to work in jobs “suitable to their
nature” met with strong conservative objections. In December 2005 women could
cast ballots for women running for local chamber of commerce boards; women
won seats in Jeddah, Lama al-Sulaiman, and Nashwa al-Taher.
Migrant Worker Rights
Many of the estimated 8.8 million foreign workers face exploitative working conditions,
including 16-hour workdays, no breaks or food and drink, and being
locked in dormitories during their time off. The government promised to publish
in November 2006 a special annex to the new labor law that regulates domestic
migrant workers’ rights. Women domestic workers, whom the labor law currently
does not protect, are often at risk of serious abuse in private homes.
In September the government began to ease its discriminatory ban of August
2004 on all Chadians renewing their residency permits, attending school, and
accessing emergency medical care. Security forces in October rounded up 7,000
mostly illegal immigrants around the Bukhariya quarter of Ta’if, the Hindawiya
and Karantina quarters of Jeddah, and elsewhere. The authorities deported tens
of thousands of illegal immigrants in 2006 without assessing whether they have a
well founded fear of persecution in their home country.
Key International Actors
Saudi Arabia is a key United States ally. The US-Saudi Strategic Dialogue, initiated
in 2005, held its second round of working meetings in March 2006, but human
rights discussions in the working group on “Education, Exchange and Human
Resources” produced no results.
The 2006 US State Department’s international religious freedom report maintained
Saudi Arabia’s designation as “a country of particular concern,” but no
longer claimed that “freedom of religion does not exist.” Citing a Saudi undertaking
in July to reform school textbooks, curb the religious police’s powers of arrest,
and strengthen the Human Rights Commission, the US government did not
impose sanctions for religious freedom violations.
The United Kingdom in August reportedly agreed to sell Saudi Arabia 72 advanced
Eurofighter “Typhoon” war planes worth around $10 billion. The UK Foreign and
Commonwealth Office’s Human Rights Report 2006 continued to list Saudi Arabia
as a “major country of concern.”