 SAUDI ARABIA
 Saudi Arabia is an Islamic monarchy in which
 religious law forms the basis of the legal system
 and Islamic precepts and traditions play a major role
 in the society. By origin tribal, Saudi Arabian
 society is basically egalitarian and individualistic.
 Saudis have a finely drawn and intensely felt tradi-
 tional sense of justice.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Torture is not sanctioned or, to the best knowledge
 of the Department of State, practiced in Saudi Arabia.
 There are occasional reports of torture but none has
 been confirmed.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Islamic law, which is the constitution of Saudi
 Arabia, sanctions the practice of severing the hand
 of convicted thieves. This punishment is not meted
 out to first or second offenders but only to clear
 recidivists, and in fact there have been few instances
 of such punishment during the past several years.
 Capital punishment by public beheading is provided by
 law for murder, adultery and other crimes considered
 heinous. Public flogging under strict controls is
 occasionally used as a punishment for lesser crimes by
 the Saudi courts. Prisoners live under difficult con-
 ditions, particularly during the hot season, but are
 not deliberately mistreated.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 Arbitrary arrest and detention are not condoned or
 practiced by the Government. There is no evidence
 
 (621)
 
 
 622
 that individuals are presently imprisoned in Saudi
 Arabia for their political beliefs. In some cases,
 foreigners accused of breaking the law are deported
 and prohibited from reentering the Kingdom.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Saudi Arabia's judicial system is based directly on
 Islamic law. The accused is tried before qualified
 and impartial judges. Trials are open to the public,
 including foreign consular officials, except when the
 security of the state is at issue, as in the case of
 the assassin of King Faisal in 1976, or in cases of
 alleged treason. Closed trials have occurred rarely
 in recent years. Extended police investigations and
 administrative deficiencies frequently lead to trial
 delay during which time, in criminal cases, the
 accused normally remains in jail. There is, however,
 a recognized, informal system of releasing prisoners
 on bond when they are charged with minor offenses.
 Should parties in a criminal trihl be dissatisifed
 with the verdict, they have the right to appeal to the
 higher court as well as the King.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 Saudi law and custom require respect for privacy.
 However, Saudi law enforcement authorities do not
 hesitate to search premises without a warrant in cases
 where they have reason to believe illegal activities
 are taking place. Such cases are not common and
 usually relate to smuggling of alcohol or pornographic
 materials.
 2. Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 The Saudi Government is using its oil revenues for the
 benefit of the poor. The annual budget of Saudi
 Arabia, which in 1978 was $38 billion, is committed to
 major defense, infrastructure, and industrial projects
 
 
 623
 as well as a rapidly expanding social services sector.
 Per capita income is approximately $10,000. There
 are disparities of income but all Saudi nationals are
 guaranteed employment and provided housing. In
 addition, free education and health care facilities
 are available to all citizens and non-citizen
 residents. If adequate medical care is not available
 within the Kingdom, the patient and one family escort
 are flown abroad at government expense. A real estate
 development fund which provides interest-free 25-year
 loans has been created to finance the acquisition of
 homes by Saudi citizens. The Government subsidizes
 basic foodstuffs. In addition to its concern for the
 welfare of its own people, the Saudi Government is a
 major source of foreign aid to poorer countries.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Includ-
 ing:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion
 and Assembly
 Saudis are generally free to say whatever they wish.
 Indeed, citizens are invited to take their grievances
 to higher authority. Although there is no express
 prohibition on assembly, any meeting of a political
 nature would fall under the more general prohibition
 against political activity and organizations. The
 press is not censored prior to publication, but it
 does keep within bounds it presumes are acceptable to
 the Government. Thus, criticism of policies and
 senior officials in the press is rare. There is
 frequent criticism of the negative effect of domestic
 policies, particularly-in the economic sphere. The
 press often writes of the failure of middle-level
 officials properly to discharge their duties. The
 foreign press is censored prior to distribution in
 order to excise pictures and statements thought
 offensive to the traditional Islamic values of Saudi
 society.
 Unions or other forms of labor organizations are
 
 
 624
 prohibited. Official institutions have been es-
 tablished to protect the interests of labor and hear
 grievances. Islam is the established religion of
 Saudi Arabia and Saudis are not permitted to practice
 other religions, although non-Muslim foreigners have
 been able to hold private and discreet religious
 services.
 Women in Saudi Arabia occupy a social position in
 keeping with conservative tradition and the sanctions
 of Islamic law as interpreted by the Saudis. Women
 are segregated from all men except close relatives.
 Their primary focus in on home and family. When
 they leave their homes they are expected to be
 veiled and to be accompanied by a male escort. How-
 ever, more and more Saudi women are appearing in public
 without veils. As specified in Islamic law, wives
 can be easily divorced but cannot easily divorce their
 husbands. Divorced wives must be adequately provided
 for, generally by a return of the dowry. Divorce is
 relatively uncommon. Polygamy is sanctioned by Islam,
 and men can have up to four wives at a time, but this
 practice has become rare. Women's opportunities for
 employment are limited to certain occupations such as
 teaching and nursing where contact with men is
 minimal. However, enforcement of segregated employ-
 ment is weakening. An increasing number of women are
 being educated, and a few have studied for advanced
 degrees abroad. In 1978 the first Saudi woman became
 Dean of the Riyadh Girls School and the 1978 entering
 class of the School of Medicine of King Abdulaziz
 University is comprised of seventy men and fifty
 women.
 Civil marriage does not exist in Saudi Arabia. Muslim
 women are prohibited from marrying non-Muslim men,
 but Muslim men may marry women who are either Muslim
 or "people of the book" (Christian, Jewish, or
 Zoroastrian). Marriage between Saudis and non-Saudis
 is regulated by the Ministry of Interior. Saudi
 citizens wishing to marry a non-Saudi of any religion
 or nationality (except a native of one of the Persian
 Gulf Arab states) must first obtain permission from
 
 
 that Ministry.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 Saudi males are generally free to move about the
 country and travel abroad. By social custom, however,
 the movement of women is restricted. They cannot
 drive cars and must obtain permission from their hus-
 band, father or guardian to travel abroad. Emigration
 requires the permission of the Government and is dealt
 with on a case-by-case basis. Few Saudis choose to
 live permanently outside the country.
 Neary one million foreign Muslims congregate each year
 for the annual Mecca pilgrimage. The security prob-
 lems created by this large mass of people are enormous,
 and after the pilgrimage Saudis endeavor to round up
 all the illegal aliens who attempt to stay after their
 pilgrimage visas expire.
 There is no tourism as such in Saudi Arabia and all
 visitors must have a local sponsor. Entry visas
 have at times been refused by Saudi authorities
 because of religious affiliation, but such cases are
 increasingly rare and generally limited to self-
 proclaimed atheists and other persons whom the Saudis
 consider to be a threat to Saudi security or its way
 of life.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Saudi Arabia is an Islamic monarchy whose King is
 chosen by consensus of the senior members of the Royal
 Family. The Kingdom does not have an. elected assembly
 and political parties are prohibited. Tht accessi-
 bility of officials, and the fact that any citizen has
 the right to redress through presentation of petition
 or grievance to the King at his weekly public audience
 or to one of several special grievance and adminis-
 trative tribunals, function as restraints against
 arbitrary use of authority. Although the King is the
 head of the legal system, which in Islamic law is at
 
 
 626
 one with the political system, he may be sued in his
 own court.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 To the best of our knowledge the Saudi Government has
 not been asked to accept outside independent investi-
 gation of alleged human rights violations.
 
 
