Saudi Arabia
*he 1995 report on Saudi Arabia is marred by a very serious overall shortcoming, one that was raised in last year's edition of the Critique. This is the State Department's tendency to cheer for the unrepentantly fundamentalist Saudi government while subtly representing its opponents as extremists. The specious distinction which the report attempts to draw between the benign fundamentalism of an important U.S. ally — the Saudi government — and the malevolent fundamentalism of the religious opposition spoils an otherwise good discussion of human rights in the lOngdom. This is unfortunate because, in terms of detail, breadth and factual accuracy, this year's report otherwise continues a welcome trend of steady improvement in reporting on human rights in Saudi Arabia. Facts are presented clearly and most of the salient issues discussed frankly.
However, the report's insidious attempt to discredit the opposition to the Saudi regime by subtle shadings of meaning and tone has no place in a serious human rights report. This problem has ramifications for the report's discussions of Islam and Islamic law, two areas which are critical for evaluating the human rights situation in the Kingdom. It also leads the report's drafters to overstate in an irresponsible manner the existence of popular support for the current Saudi government. Finally, and most distressingly for a document that styles itself an objective report on human rights, the partisanship displayed on behalf of the Saudi government subtly imparts the suggestion that governments which support U.S. foreign policy initiatives are held to a lower standard than those that do not.
As in 1994, the introduction to this year's report omits the main item of interest in the Kingdom, namely the appearance of an organized opposition movement. This opposition, until recenUy represented principally but not exclusively by the Committee for the Defense of Legitimate Rights (CDLR) has a pronounced conservative religious character and apparently comprises a large number of clerics and intellectuals. Clearly it does not include all persons opposed to the government or all persons who urge reform, but it does constitute the one group which continues to speak out consistentiy against the Saudi
185
Critique 1995
government and whose supporters have become special targets of that government's oppressive practices.
Given the unprecedented fact of an opposition group operating within {and now also outside) Saudi Arabia, despite enormous obstacles in the form of Saudi laws prohibiting all forms of free speech and association (which the report describes in detail), it is simply incredible that the report's introduction should fail to mention the CDLR, or at least the phenomenon for which it stands. The introduction should have stated in no uncertain terms that a more or less organized opposition movement has formed, and that the Saudi government has responded to it with a disappointing and brutal pattern of human rights violations. That is a simple and indisputable fact of primary relevance, and precisely the sort of "key human rights development" that drafters of the County Reports are instructed to include in their introductions.
If the State Department does not believe that the Saudi government considers the CDLR a serious threat, then its drafters should consider Saudi Arabia's widely reported attempts to have the CDLR's head, Dr. Abdullah al-Mas'ari, expelled from Britain for expressing and publicizing criticism of the Saudi government. Dr. al-Mas'ari was forced to secretly flee Saudi Arabia in 1994 after being detained and tortured for his public criticism of the Saudi government. In March the British Home Office rejected Dr. al-Mas'ari's asylum application, after British government spokesmen had alluded publicly to the potentially negative effect of Dr. al-Mas'ari's presence in Britain on British exports to Saudi Arabia. In January 1996, the Home Office ordered Dr. al-Mas'ari deported, which order was, however, rejected by Chief Immigration Appeals Adjudicator, Judge David Pearl, in March. Judge Pearl criticized the Home Office for attempting to circumvent the U.N. Convention on Refugees for "diplomatic and trade reasons." In April, after reconsidering its precarious legal position, the Home Office granted Dr. al-Mas'ari exceptional leave to stay in Britain for four years in a move that has been characterized as a grant of asylum in all but name. Furious over Dr. al-Mas'ari's presence in Britain, the Saudi government has publicly threatened to boycott British firms, most recently through its ambassador in London, Ghazi al-Ghosaibi, and its Interior Minister, Prince Nayef
186
Saudi Arabia
According to one British engineering firm, Saudi Arabia began a de facto boycott of British contractors in November 1995 which was still in effect as of April 1996. Britain's Department of Trade and Industry has denied that British business has been adversely effected.
It is possible that the State Department shares the Saudi government's concern about the CDLR. Although the CDLR is not mentioned in the introduction, many unflattering references to it appear in the body of the report, which gives the following characterizations of the CDLR and other persons:
"[The CDLR and Mohamed al-Mas'ari] were associates of Abdullah Bin Abd Al-Rahman AI-Hidaif, who was executed for assaulting a security official with acid ..."
"The vociferously antigovemment CDLR . .
"[Al-Mas'ari's] publicized views have expressed opposition to peace with Israel and to Saudi support for the peace process."
"The CDLR does not advocate internationally recognized human rights but takes a rigidly Islamic fundamentalist approach. Statements by CDLR supporters have advocated policies and actions that are antiwomen and anti-Shi'a. [The group has expressed] 'understanding' of the National Guard headquarters bombing."
"[One CDLR founder has] made strong anti-Shi'a statements." (all emphases added)
To label CDLR members "associates" of Mr. Hidaif is nothing less than an attempt to suggest guilt by association. To label CDLR "vociferous" is gratuitous and redundant. The CDLR's views on peace with Israel are so egregiously irrelevant to the human rights situation in the ICingdom that it is astonishing that this claim should appear in the report for the second year running. This claim serves solely to underline the (admittedly likely) fact that the CDLR may not agree with U.S. foreign policy objectives in the Middle East, which, it hardly needs saying,
187
Critique 1995
has no bearing whatsoever on the state of human rights in the ICingdom. The report might just as well have mentioned that The Economist, too, routinely criticizes the current incarnation of the Israeli-Arab peace process. Or, to be fair, it might speculate about how deep support for the Arab-Israeli peace process runs among the members of the Council of Senior Ulema.
In addition, the report could have presented a more balanced description of the trial and execution in mid-August of Mr. al-Hidaif. The report takes two swipes at the late Mr. al-Hidaif. In the first, it notes that he, "a supporter of [CDLR,] was sentenced to death by a Saudi court and executed for the 1994 attempted murder by acid of an Interior Ministry official." The second is quoted above. As noted already, both passages aim to discredit the CDLR by mentioning it and the word "acid" in the same sentence. {It bears emphasizing in this context that the CDLR's manifesto expressly eschews violence, though Dr. al-Mas'ari has made public statements which seem to contradict the principle of non-violence.) Neither passage states that the charges against Mr. al-Hidaif included his support for the CDLR, thus ignoring direct evidence of the Saudi government's prohibition of freedom of association and speech in his case. That fact is stated in more neutral territory where the charges against his co-defendants are mentioned, but where neither the word "acid" nor the name of Mr. al-Hidaif appear.
Now, it is important to condemn violence whatever its source, and if Mr. al-Hidaif attacked a Saudi security official with acid, that act ought rightly to be punished in accord with applicable criminal law, whatever the circumstances. But the circumstances, even if they do not excuse, are not therefore irrelevant, and in this particular case they should have been mentioned in the report. Human Rights Watch/Middle East reported that the victim of the attack had interrogated and tortured Mr. al-Hidaif during a previous detention and, further, that the Saudi government refused to return Mr. al-Hidaif s body to his family, suggesting that he had been tortured prior to his execution. The fact that Mr. al-Hidaif s alleged accomplices included several of his family members suggests a revenge motive and lends credence to the report by Human Rights Watch.
188
Saudi Arabia
Wliolly irrelevant is the claim that the CDLR rejects international human rights norms. Paragraph 8.G of the State Department's instructions to those drafting the Country Reports requires them to discuss human rights violations by "guerrilla forces, terrorists or occupying forces of a foreign power" and by "rebel/insurgent forces." The CDLR is none of these. Neither is Saudi Arabia "affected by serious international or internal conflict," as spelled out in paragraph 12 of the State Department instructions. Thus, the CDLR, being neither a government nor an armed insurrection in progress, is not in a position to violate anyone's human rights. It is true that the distaste for international human rights norms which the CDLR seems to share with the Saudi government represents an interesting facet of political discourse in the Kingdom (although this is ignored in the report, as discussed below). Of primary relevance, however, is that the CDLR's supporters have been victims of human rights violations committed by the Saudi government (as noted in this year's and the previous two reports), which denies the validity of such norms (as noted by this year's report). Mention of the "anti-women" and "anti-Shi'a" tendencies of the CDLR is vulnerable to the same criticism of irrelevance.
Finally, the allegation that the CDLR exhibits a rigid Islamic fundamentalism presents a particularly pernicious drafting tactic in the report. Assuming that such a characterization is accurate, it would be relevant only if the report's drafters wished to make the point that the Saudi government holds itself out as a rigidly fundamentalist Islamic regime in the belief that this constitutes an effective claim to political legitimacy (the report could even go further and note that the Saudi government seems to understand its asserted fundamentalism as license to commit certain kinds of human rights abuses in the name of Islam). Then, it would make perfect sense to say that the CDLR challenges the asserted religious legitimacy of the Saudi regime, claiming for itself a more authentic or different form of Islamic fundamentalism (even assuming that "fundamentalism" is a meaningful term in this context). However, the report does not proceed in that manner, but rather labels the CDLR as "fundamentalist" while applying much less loaded descriptions (such as "rigorously conservative") to the Saudi government.
189
Critique 1995
As is apparent from the Saudi government's many human rights abuses in the name of Islam (including torture, maiming, discrimination against women, abuses by the religious police (MutawwVin), discrimination against the Shi^a, executions for practicing "witchcraft" and for apostasy, use of government-sponsored religious organs to have opponents declared heretics, etc., most of which are described in this and past reports), the only meaningful difference between the respective "fundamentalisms" of the CDLR and the Saudi government is the latter's support of U.S. foreign policy initiatives in the Middle East. The strategy adopted in this year's report to discredit the CDLR violates the spirit of evenhandedness and fairness called for in the State Department's drafting instructions.
The report's kinder and gentler approach to dealing with the Saudi regime's "fundamentalism" infects its attempts to explain the application of Islamic law and precepts in Saudi Arabia. In its introduction, for example, the report notes that the Saudi government's "adherence to the precepts of a rigorously conservative form of Islam . . . enjoys near-consensus support among Saudi citizens." In addition, it states (echoing the unfortunate formulation of last year's report) that: "Most Saudis respect the legal system, which they believe is divinely inspired." It is quite obvious that neither of these statements is verifiable, especially in a country which has, as the report very competently notes, neither elections nor a free press, and where anti-government expression is stricdy prohibited by law and routinely punished by arbitrary detention and torture. As the 1994 edition of the Critique pointed out, given the immunity in practice of the royal family before Saudi courts (noted again in this year's report), it is inconceivable that Saudis consider their legal system to be "divinely inspired," though it is very likely that they consider the shari^a to be so and therefore believe it should be applied. (It hardly needs stating that Islamic law and actual Saudi legal practice cannot be assumed to be identical. The asserted adherence of the Saudi legal system to Islamic precepts is precisely what the conservative religious opposition challenges; that challenge is a fact, but the report ignores it.) Such irresponsible generalizations constitute nothing less than cheerleading on behalf of the Saudi government and should be excised from the report.
190
Saudi Arabia
This year's report contains further problems along these lines. One is the attempt to explain away the inherent discrimination of the Islamic law of inheritance, in which female heirs receive only half the share of male heirs. The statement that such discrimination reflects the fact that "men have financial obligations to their mothers and sisters" is entirely inappropriate and misleading. The report apparently means to suggest that such inherent discrimination constitutes a benevolent paternalism, ensuring that women in fact receive their full inheritance via their male relatives, a patently absurd implication. In fact. Islamic law consistently views women as only half as valuable as men, since it is also the case — as the report notes — that "the testimony of one man equals that of two women." Such inherent gender-based discrimination in the Saudi interpretation of Islamic law should be stated as a brute fact without attempts to rationalize it away. The attempted rationalization of legally sanctioned polygamy is similarly fraught with difficulties. The literal sense of the Qu'ranic passage which serves as the basis for this rule is simply that polygamy is allowed, not necessarily that four is an upper limit. The point is that this rule is equivocal, or rather that it, too, is a brute fact requiring no exegesis from the report's drafters. Finally, the characterization of the Sunna as "authenticated actions and deeds of the Prophet Muhammad" correctly states a theological proposition, not a relevant fact. It would be more accurate to say that Muslims consider the Sunna to be authentic and leave it at that.
Also, the discussion of the application of "ta'zeer" in the case of the execution of Mr. al-Hidaif could have been clearer. Ta'zeer is a punishment left to the discretion of the judge and is ordinarily less severe than the corresponding capital or corporal punishment (hadd). Ta'zeer can be as mild as a verbal reprimand; in Mr. al-Hidaifs case it was, very unusually, death. It is also the prerogative of the sovereign to apply ta'zeer (hence the intervention of the Ministry of the Interior, which demanded that Mr. al-Hidaif receive a stiffer sentence than the prison term originally imposed). Thus, ta'zeer can serve as an instrument of political coercion. The claim that ta'zeer is also applied as a deterrent is correct, as is the accompanying analysis, namely that it was designed in Mr. al-Hidaif s case to "deter others who might. . . sympathize with acts
191
Critique 1995
of political resistance that bring disunity to the community." The report could have gone one step further in its analysis and noted this as an instance in which the Saudi government cynically invoked an idiosyncratic interpretation of Islamic law as a pretext for violating binding international human rights norms to serve its domestic political interests. Moreover, inasmuch as it notes problems relating to procedural safeguards in cases of arrest, defendants' lack of legal representation in court, rules of evidence which encourage forced confessions, interference by governors, royal family members and their associates with legal proceedings, and the perception that the royal family is above the law, one wonders how the report can again sanguinely state that "The independence of the judiciary is . . . usually respected in practice."
It is not the task of the report to explain Islamic law to its audience. The fact that it does so is pernicious; it represents a subtle exercise in slanting information in such a way as to suggest that reasonable principles underlie the Saudi government's brutal practices. It is both ironic and unfortunate that such rationalizations (even assuming for the sake of argument that they are well-intentioned) appear in a report on a country which seems to view maiming, beheading, and gender-based discrimination as the very essence of Islamic law. Such a drafting tactic insults Islam and, more important, directly undermines the report's own credibility as a serious human rights document.
The above points are important; the shortcomings they outline color the entire report. It is, however, also important to give credit where credit is due, and, the foregoing criticisms aside, this year's report is generally very good when describing concrete cases and general tendencies, excluding the difficulties it has in dealing with the related problems of Islam and the religious opposition. However, the following issues represent areas in which still further improvement is possible and, indeed, desirable.
One case which the report might have mentioned, whether under the rubric of foreign labor, the arbitrary and repressive character of the Saudi legal system, or cruel and inhuman punishment, is that of Egyptian national Muhammad ICamil IChalifa, which was raised in last year's edition of the Critique. In late 1994, Mr. Khalifa accused the headmaster
192
Saudi Arabia
of his son's school of sexually assaulting the boy, a charge later reportedly confirmed by medical examination. For making this medically supported allegation, Mr. IChalifa was imprisoned and sentenced to be flogged in front of the school's students. This sentence was later commuted to 80 lashes, which Mr. IChalifa received, before the student body, in May 1995. No doubt the students learned their lesson. While the State Department's instructions discourage the report's drafters from presenting a mere laundry list of incidents, the horrific experience of Mr. Khalifa underlines both the complete vulnerability of foreign workers under Saudi law, as well as the flawed and brutal functioning of the Saudi justice system. Since this case cuts across many of the report's different topics, it would have been appropriate to include it.
Continuing the unfortunate practice of ignoring U.N. human rights investigations concerning Saudi Arabia, this year's report also failed to mention the United Nations' interest in Mr. Khalifa's case. A Special Rapporteur to the U.N. Commission on Human Rights transmitted an official expression of concern to the Saudi government concerning this case, noting in particular that corporal punishment of the type inflicted on Mr. Khalifa was inconsistent with binding international human rights norms prohibiting torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
The report also ignores important findings of the U.N. Special Rapporteur Nigel S. Rodley regarding the mistreatment and abuse of Iraqi refugees. For the last two years the drafters of the report have offered a spirited defense of Saudi treatment of Iraqi refugees displaced by the Gulf War. In 1994 this was done in response to a devastating Amnesty International report which provided details of numerous disturbing abuses committed against Iraqi refugees in the Rafha and Artawiya camps between 1991 and 1993. The 1994 report went so far as to directly refute Amnesty's findings. This year's report ignores the Special Rapporteur's conclusions regarding the mistreatment of such refugees during the same period. The Special Rapporteur outlined the specifics of a number of different cases of mistreatment, torture, collective punishment, death and other abuses violative of international norms of human rights and humanitarian law. The Special Rapporteur concluded,
193
Critique 1995
contrary to the assertions made in the last two State Department reports, "that the allegations of torture and cruel and inhuman treatment and punishment of Iraqi refugees [appeared] well founded."
Another report concerning the same camps by UNHCR is cited by the report without editorial comment in order to refute a 1993 report by Human Rights Watch that such refugees had been forcibly repatriated to Iraq. The State Department instructions to drafters of the Countty Reports requires them to "pay special attention to reports by the various UN human rights mechanisms." The self-serving and selective use of such sources made by this year's report is deplorable and violates the spirit of this instruction.
The fact that the Saudi government refused to cooperate with the Special Rapporteur regarding his inquiry into abuses against Iraqi refugees also deserved mention since it continues a pattern of disregard in practice of international human rights mechanisms. This fact would make a fitting addition to the report's otherwise adequate discussion of the Saudi government's rejection of international human rights norms as a matter of allegedly Islamic principle.
Another issue which the report continues to ignore, despite repeated urging in previous editions of the Critique, is the Saudi government's relentless efforts to stifle domestic and external criticism by acquiring or thwarting foreign broadcast and other media. The latest casualty in this campaign is a joint Saudi-BBC television venture which the Saudis forced to shut down in early 1996 after it broadcast a documentary featuring Dr. al-Mas'ari. In addition, the Egyptian Organization for Human Rights (EOHR) reported that the Saudi government had successfully pressured the Egyptian government to ban any and all books critical of the Saudi government. Also, in an article in the London Sunday Telegraph, noted author Said K. Aburish revealed that in 1993 a Saudi government advisor had offered him $600,000 to cancel publication of a book critical of the Saudi government. Aburish also recounted an incident in which the Saudi government successfully pressured the BBC to cancel an appearance by Aburish on a news program to discuss the November car-bombing in Riyadh of a National Guard training facility. The Saudi government's censorship extends abroad in order to prevent negative information about
194
Saudi Arabia
itself reaching its citizens at home. Such practices are therefore appropriate for inclusion in the report.
It is difficult to divorce the State Department's reluctance to criticize the lOngdom's censorship of media located outside Saudi Arabia from the fact that the U.S. government, through the Voice of America (VOA), now assists the Saudis in broadcasting pro-Saudi propaganda in the Middle East and North America. VOA and Middle East Broadcasting Corp. (MBC), owned by lOng Fahd's brother-in-law, jointly produce a program called "Dialogue with the West." MBC reportedly has editorial control over the program's content. The program runs in the United States over the Arab Network of America, a Saudi-owned radio network noted in last year's edition of the Critique for its censorship of reports critical of the Saudi government. Aside from the U.S. government's dubious decision to aid dissemination of propaganda by a country routinely identified by the U.S. government itself as one that "commits or tolerates serious [human rights] abuses," this partnership bodes extremely ill for the many persons in the Middle East who rely on VOA for objective news reports.
Absent from this year's report is the fact that different elements among the Saudi security forces, some of which were responsible for human rights violations {as noted in the report's introduaion), seem to represent competing constituencies within the Saudi government. Paragraph 13 of the State Department's instructions to drafters encourages them to note where security forces are not under the complete control of the government. This seems to be the case with the Mutawwi'in, who often overstep their authority and yet are only very rarely, if ever, reprimanded for doing so. In past years, the National Guard, under the command of the Crown Prince, have presented something of a counterbalance to the Mutavmi'in, as suggested by occasional incidents of conflict between the two groups. In any event, the fact that the Mutawwi'in are not entirely under the Saudi government's control should be stated more clearly. On a related note, this year's report is to be commended for correcting last year's questionable assertion that incidents involving the Mutawwi'in were on the decline, and instead noting this year a long-term increase in such incidents of abuse.
195
Critique 1995
The report could improve Its section on arbitrary detention by providing an estimate of prisoners of conscience in one place; this is admittedly difficult in a country like Saudi Arabia where information is tightly controlled. However, the report's current approach is confusing. It appears to suggest that it could only confirm the detention of 38 persons for their anti-government activity (27 from an incident in 1994, nine in connection with the execution of Mr. al-Hidaif, and two clerics.) While the report is appropriately cautious in accepting the figures given by the CDLR, it might have mentioned the figure of 200 proposed by Amnesty International.
Parts of this year's report were very well done. For example, it offers a fine discussion of capital punishment in the Kingdom, noting the alarming increase in executions, the fact that most persons executed are non-Saudis, and the expansion of capital offenses. It would have been appropriate to note that a number of women were publicly beheaded in 1995 (12 as of mid-October). The beheading of women represents a new development in Saudi penal practice; according to last year's report women were formerly executed out of public view by firing squad.
Aside from the criticisms above, the discussion of women's rights in the Kingdom is detailed and accurate. Issues appropriately raised included: domestic violence; the use of religion as a pretext for legalized discrimination; discriminatory dress codes; harassment by the Mutavmi'in-, restrictions on travel and freedom of movement; polygamy; and discrimination in the work place. Similarly complete, again subject to criticisms raised above, is the discussion of discrimination against the Shi'a. However, the report's wording ("Sunni clerics ... and one CDLR founder have made strong anti-Shi'a statements") could suggest that only the religious opposition encourages such discrimination on the basis of religion. It would be helpful to note that state-sponsored clerics have in the past engaged in virulent public tirades against the Shi'a. That would clarify that the government encourages religiously motivated public expressions of anti-Shi'a sentiment. Also, the report's discussion of worker rights is thorough, noting among other things that Saudi Arabia has been suspended from the U.S. Overseas Private Investment Corporation for its failure to adhere to internationally recognized worker
196
Saudi Arabia
rights standards. A good summary of the abuses suffered by female foreign domestic servants, a problem of epidemic proportions in Saudi Arabia, appears in the section dealing with women's rights.
197

'cilvT^yr'-

3'

o;
