Saudi Arabia
Human rights conditions remain poor in Saudi Arabia. In February 2009 King
Abdullah replaced conservatives in the religious establishment, judiciary, and
education system with more progressive-minded officials, but domestic and international
pressure to improve human rights practices is feeble.
Authorities continue to systematically suppress, or fail to protect, the rights of
fourteen million Saudi women and girls, eight million foreign workers, and some
two million Shia. Thousands of people have received unfair trials or were subject
to arbitrary detention. Curbs on freedom of association, expression, and movement,
as well as a pervasive lack of official accountability, remain serious concerns.
In May the government cancelled scheduled municipal elections.
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
The government told the United Nations Human Rights Council in June that it
would dismantle the system of male legal guardianship over women, but it continues
to treat women as legal minors by allowing male guardians to determine a
woman’s right to work, study, marry, travel, and even receive a national identification
card. Officials refused to let Heba Neguib, a 27-year-old Egyptian living with
her family in Saudi Arabia, travel back to Egypt without permission from her
father, who initially refused. Women who are victims of domestic violence face
societal and governmental obstacles in obtaining redress.
In February, Norah al-Fayez was appointed deputy minister of education, the highest
post attained by a woman in Saudi Arabia. In September the first coeducational
facility, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, was inaugurated.
Yet sex segregation is strictly enforced throughout the kingdom and impedes
women’s full participation in public life. Women are prohibited from working in
offices or entering government buildings without female sections, or pursuing
degrees in disciplines not taught in women’s colleges. Women cannot work as
judges, prosecutors, or court-accredited lawyers. In March a court in Ha’il convicted
a 75-year-old woman for “illegal mingling” with her nephew and his friend who
had delivered food to her.
The government has not yet set a minimum age for marriage, against a recommendation
by the governmental Human Rights Commission. In April a court in
‘Unaiza reaffirmed its earlier verdict, overturned on appeal, refusing to annul the
marriage of a girl age 8 to a middle-age man. In March a 70-year-old man
demanded US$130,000 to divorce his new 13-year-old bride, who had run away
from him. In May a girl age 10 in the Eastern Province was betrothed to a man 15
years her senior.
Migrant Worker Rights
An estimated eight million largely Asian and Arab foreign workers fill manual,
clerical, and service jobs. Many suffer multiple abuses and labor exploitation,
sometimes rising to slavery-like conditions. A new anti-trafficking law passed in
July set prison sentences of up to 15 years for forced labor. However, Saudi Arabia
made little progress reforming the restrictive kafala (sponsorship) system that
ties migrant workers’ residency permits to their employers, fueling abuses such
as employers confiscating passports, withholding wages, and forcing migrants to
work against their will.
In July 2009 the advisory Shura Council extended some labor protections to the
1.5 million migrant domestic workers, but excluded the right of workers to leave
the house or keep their passports, and obliges them to obey the employers.
Asian embassies report thousands of complaints each year from domestic workers
forced to work 15-20 hours a day, seven days a week, and denied their
salaries. Domestic workers frequently endure forced confinement, food deprivation,
and severe psychological, physical, and sexual abuse.
Migrants sometimes face severe delays in the immigration and justice systems,
and obstacles such as lack of access to interpreters, legal aid, or their consulates.
Few migrants successfully pursue criminal cases against abusive employers.
Following a dispute with his sponsor, officials on October 26 detained pending
deportation Usama Hijazi, an Egyptian legal adviser living in Saudi Arabia for 16
years. Hijazi had just won a court ruling in his favor against his sponsor, granting
him 155,000 riyal (US$41,000) and allowing him to transfer his sponsorship.
Authorities repatriated Keni binti Carda, an Indonesian domestic worker, in late
2008 before she could formally complain about her employers causing her severe burns and prying out her teeth. She returned to Riyadh to press charges, but as of
November 2009 criminal proceedings had yet to begin. In August Saudi morality
police raided a shelter run by a Filipino support group, though prosecutors later
dropped charges against 18 persons present.
Criminal Justice, Arbitrary Detention, Torture, and Ill-Treatment
Detainees, including children, are commonly the victims of systematic and multiple
violations of due process and fair trial rights, including arbitrary arrest and
torture and ill-treatment in detention. Saudi judges routinely sentence defendants
to thousands of lashes. The kingdom carried out some 53 executions as of
September 2009, including of one woman, slightly fewer than in 2008.
Judges can order arrest and detention of children at their discretion. Children can
be tried and sentenced as adults at any age if the defendant is determined to
have attained majority, a concept based on puberty. Shaikh Salman al-’Awda, a
prominent cleric, in September criticized death sentences for children; no executions
of children were reported in 2009.
Authorities rarely inform suspects of the crime with which they are charged, or of
the supporting evidence. Saudi Arabia has no penal code, and prosecutors and
judges largely define criminal offenses at their discretion. During interrogation
detainees are not assisted by lawyers, and they face excessive pretrial delays,
and difficulty examining witnesses or presenting evidence at trial. Secret police
(mabahith) in 2009 detained or continued to detain without trial or access to
lawyers, in many cases for years, around 2,000 persons suspected of sympathies
with or involvement in terrorism or for their peaceful political views. Muhammad
al-’Utaibi, and Khalid al-’Umair, two human rights activists arrested in January for
trying to organize a peaceful Gaza solidarity demonstration, continue to be held
in al-Ha’ir prison without trial beyond the six-month limit allowed under Saudi
law.
In July Saudi Arabia announced that a specialized criminal court had found 330
persons guilty of terrorism-related offenses, but did not provide further details.
Trials were closed and defendants did not have access to lawyers of their choosing.
A total of 991 terrorism suspects were referred to court in October 2008.
On August 28, 2009, guards in al-Ha’ir prison severely beat a Yemeni prisoner. In
another case, prosecutors began probing whether an al-Ha’ir guard beat prisoner
Abd al-Karim al-Dahamshi in July. Detainees reported beatings in Buraiman and
Malaz prisons and inhumane conditions in Jeddah’s deportation center.
Freedom of Expression
Saudi authorities brooked little public criticism of officials or government policies
in 2009. Print and broadcast media remained heavily censored and internet critics
faced arrest. The government tolerated hate speech, including by officials,
while courts criminalized free speech.
Interior Minister Prince Nayef in June criticized a reporter for Al-Watan newspaper
for asking why there are more religious than ordinary police stations in Riyadh.
Jamal Khashoggi, Al-Watan’s chief editor, published a contrite article praising
Nayef and promising reflection on its reporting. In September MBC1 television
canceled two episodes of the popular Ramadan series Tash Ma Tash, which regularly
pokes fun at conservative and liberal Saudi attitudes: one dealt with excessively
amplified calls to prayer, and the other imagined Barack Obama growing up
in the kingdom. Authorities in August closed local LBC television offices after a
Saudi man spoke about his sexual conquests on one show in July; he received a
five-year prison sentence with 1,000 lashes for advocating vice. A judge in May
filed a libel case that can carry a prison sentence against Hayat al-Ghamdi of Arab
News for reporting that at a conference on domestic violence the judge had spoken
approvingly of a husband slapping his wife for lavish spending. An Abha
court accepted the case, although only the Ministry of Information has jurisdiction
over the content of publications.
Saudi domestic intelligence on July 29 arrested Syrian blogger Ra’fat al-Ghanim,
who had signed a petition calling for the release of al-’Utaibi and al-’Umair, the
two human rights activists arrested in January.
In early 2009 Saudi authorities lifted bans on foreign travel on Muhammad Sa’id
Tayyib, Abd al-Rahman al-Lahim, and Najib al-Khunaizi, imposed in 2003 after
they advocated constitutional reform, but maintained bans on Ali al-Dumaini,
Matrook al-Faleh, Abdullah al-Hamid and Muhammad Bajadi, fellow advocates.
Freedom of Religion
Saudi Arabia systematically discriminates against its religious minorities—in particular,
Shia in the Eastern Province and around Medina, and Ismailis (a distinct
branch of Shiism) in Najran. Official discrimination against Shia encompasses
religious practices, education, and the justice system. Government officials
exclude Shia from employment and decision making, and publicly disparage their
faith.
Clashes between Shia pilgrims and security guards in Medina in February 2009
led to the worst sectarian tensions in years. Authorities arrested scores of pilgrims
and protestors demonstrating in solidarity with them, releasing most without
charge by July. That month, authorities in Khobar arrested Shia who hosted
communal prayers in their homes, and on September 4 sealed shut the city’s only
Ismaili mosque. In al-Ahsa’, authorities by September had arrested at least 42
Shia religious and community leaders in 2009.
In Najran, new governor Prince Mish’al, the king’s son, in June announced land
distribution to local residents, and, in August, pardons for the remaining 17 prisoners
sentenced after sectarian clashes in April 2000. In September King
Abdullah released Ismaili leader Shaikh Ahmad bin Turki Al Sa’b, detained without
charge since May 2008 for complaining about discrimination against his community.
However, a court in August 2009 sentenced Hadi Al Mutif, an Ismaili on
death row since 1994 for allegedly insulting the Prophet Muhammad, to an additional
five years in prison for criticizing his imprisonment in a videotaped message
broadcast on Al-Hurra television in January 2007.
Key International Actors
Saudi Arabia is a key ally of the United States and the United Kingdom. US pressure
for human rights improvements was imperceptible. UK efforts through the
Two Kingdoms Dialogue to protect human rights had no tangible effect, if such
efforts were made at all.