Saudi Arabia
Saudi Arabia in 2012 stepped up arrests and trials of peaceful dissidents, and
responded with force to demonstrations by citizens. Authorities continue to
suppress or fail to protect the rights of 9 million Saudi women and girls and 9
million foreign workers. As in past years, thousands of people have received
unfair trials or been subject to arbitrary detention. The year has seen trials
against half-a-dozen human rights defenders and several others for their peaceful
expression or assembly demanding political and human rights reforms.
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
Under the discriminatory Saudi guardianship system, girls and women are forbidden
from traveling, conducting official business, or undergoing certain medical
procedures without permission from their male guardians. In July, after a car
chase by religious police left the driver dead and his wife and daughter in critical
condition, King Fahd hospital in Baha postponed amputating the wife’s hand
because she had no male legal guardian to authorize the procedure, Okaz newspaper
reported.
In July 2012, the Ministry of Labor issued four decrees regulating women’s work
in clothing stores, amusement parks, food preparation, and as cashiers, for
which guardian permission was no longer required. However, the decrees reinforced
strict sex segregation in the workplace, mandating that female workers
not interact with men. Women remain barred from certain professions. On
October 8, Al-Watan newspaper published a directive from the Ministry of
Justice that approved granting Saudi female lawyers the right to obtain practice
licenses. Prior to the announcement, women who graduated from law schools
were allowed to work as consultants but could not officially represent clients in
court. The new directive will apply to all women who have a law degree and at
least three years of experience.
At the London 2012 summer Olympic Games, Saudi women for the first time participated
in an official sporting event: Sarah Attar competed in the 800 meters,
and Wujdan Shahrkhani in judo. Women and girls remain effectively banned
from sports within the kingdom.
Women remain banned from driving. In November 2011, lawyer Abd al-Rahman
al-Lahim sued the traffic department on behalf of Manal al-Sharif, who led a
women’s driving protest in May 2011, for gender discrimination after the department
refused to issue her a driving license. The case remained pending at this
writing.
Strict clothing requirements for women were publicly enforced. In July, the
Mecca public prosecution department detained three women for taking off their
full-body cloaks and headscarves in a shopping mall, sabq.org news website
reported.
Al-Sharq al-Awsat newspaper in March reported that the first women-staffed
police stations had opened in Jeddah and Riyadh in order to facilitate women’s
access to police. However, punishment for domestic violence remained lax. The
government failed to enact a 2011 draft law to combat violence against women
and children. In May, Jeddah’s Summary Court convicted a man for physically
abusing his wife to the point of hospitalization, but sentenced him to learning
by heart five parts of the Quran and 100 sayings of the Prophet Muhammad.
Migrant Workers’ Rights
Over 9 million migrant workers fill manual, clerical, and service jobs, constituting
more than half the workforce. Many suffer multiple abuses and labor
exploitation, sometimes amounting to slavery-like conditions.
The kafala (sponsorship) system ties migrant workers’ residency permits to
“sponsoring” employers, whose written consent is required for workers to
change employers or exit the country. Employers abuse this power to confiscate
passports, withhold wages, and force migrants to work against their will,
against Saudi law.
In April, the Labor Ministry proposed to abolish the kafala system by transferring
immigration sponsorship to newly created recruitment and placement agencies,
but the change had not taken effect at this writing. To tackle kafala-related
abuses, Saudi Arabia would also need to amend its Residency Law so that a
migrant worker no longer would require a sponsor’s consent to change jobs or
leave the country.
Some 1.5 million migrant domestic workers remain excluded from the 2005
Labor Law. In years past, Asian embassies reported thousands of complaints
from domestic workers forced to work 15 to 20 hours a day, seven days a week,
and denied their salaries. Domestic workers, most of them women, frequently
endure forced confinement, food deprivation, and severe psychological, physical,
and sexual abuse.
In 2011 and 2012, the rampant abuse led the Philippines, Indonesia, Nepal, and
Kenya to impose restrictions on their citizens from migrating to Saudi Arabia for
domestic work. In October 2012, the Philippines and Saudi Arabia approved
resuming migration after agreeing upon a US$400 minimum wage but few other
rights.
In April, Saudi Arabia pardoned 22 Indonesian domestic workers on death row.
Many migrant domestic workers still face the death penalty, often after having
limited access to legal advice and translators during court proceedings. These
include 32 Indonesian domestic workers whose convictions include witchcraft
and “sexual offenses,” and Rizana Nafeek, a Sri Lankan domestic worker who
was under 18 years old when a baby died in her care.
Criminal Justice and Torture
Detainees, including children, commonly face systematic violations of due
process and fair trial rights, including arbitrary arrest and torture and ill-treatment
in detention. Saudi judges routinely sentence defendants to thousands of
lashes.
Judges can order arrest and detention, including of children, at their discretion.
Children can be tried and sentenced as adults if physical signs of puberty exist.
Authorities do not always inform suspects of the crime with which they are
charged, nor of supporting evidence. Saudi Arabia has no penal code, so prosecutors
and judges largely define criminal offenses at their discretion. Lawyers
are not generally allowed to assist suspects during interrogation and face difficulty
examining witnesses or presenting evidence at trial.
From January to September 2012, Saudi Arabia executed at least 69 persons,
mostly for murder or drug offenses, but also, in the case of one Saudi man,
Muri’ al-‘Asiri, for “sorcery.”
By October 2012, The Saudi Association for Civil and Political Rights (ACPRA), an
unlicensed Saudi rights organization, had filed over 60 cases over two years
against the secret police for long-term detention without trial and, in some
cases, torture. The court typically ruled it did not have jurisdiction, ACPRA said.
Saudi Arabia continued to sentence children to death. In March, Okaz reported
that authorities had sentenced to death eight persons aged 16 to 19.
Freedom of Expression, Belief, and Assembly
Authorities in 2012 arrested persons for peaceful criticism or human rights
activism. Muhammad al-Bajadi, a businessman and rights activist, was convicted
for setting up ACPRA and Yusuf al-Ahmad, a cleric, for disobeying senior clerics
by calling for release or trial of detainees. Prosecutors issued politicized
charges, including being in touch with international rights organizations,
against Abdullah al-Hamid, Muhammad al-Qahtani, Walid Abu al-Khair, and
Fadhil al-Manasif.
Saudi Arabia does not tolerate public worship by adherents of religions other
than Islam and systematically discriminates against its Muslim religious minorities,
in particular Shia and Ismailis. The chief mufti in March called for the
destruction of all churches in the Arabian Peninsula. In 2012, authorities made
arrests for expression of religious opinion, including, in February, of Hamza
Kashgari, whom Malaysia extradited to the kingdom on blasphemy charges
related to his fictitious Twitter dialogue with the Prophet Muhammad. In May,
authorities in the northern town of ‘Ar’ar arrested two persons for apostasy
because they adopted the Ahmadi interpretation of Islam.
In June, prosecutors arrested Ra’if Badawi on the charge of operating the Saudi
Liberals website, deemed insulting to Islam. By August, all 35 Christian
Ethiopian men and women arrested in December for “illicit mingling” during a
religious service had been deported. Official discrimination against Shia encompasses
religious practices, education, and the justice system. Shia protests revived in October 2011 and escalated in January and again in July 2012, when
the authorities arrested Shaikh Nimr al-Nimr, a prominent cleric. Security forces
have killed at least 11 Shia in protests since 2011. Protesters demanded the
release of Shia prisoners and an end to discrimination.
In July, activists reported that 100 Saudis in Buraida and about a dozen in a
Riyadh shopping mall demonstrated for the release of long-term detainees without
trial. University and public security forces in March intervened to quell a
protest by female students in King Khaled University, leaving at least one
woman dead. She reportedly suffered from an epileptic fit that was triggered
after security guards attempted to force the students to disperse.
Saudi Arabia does not allow political or human rights associations. In December
2011, the authorities denied the Justice Center for Human Rights a license, and
did not reply to requests for a license by the Saudi Human Rights Monitor,
which registered in Canada in May.
In July, authorities released Nadhir al-Majid, detained since April 2011 for critical
writings, and a court released Khalid al-Juhani, detained since demonstrating,
alone, on the Saudi day of rage, March 11, 2011. In February, Hadi Al Mutif
was freed after 18 years in prison, most of them on death row, convicted of
apostasy for insulting the prophet. The chief mufti had accepted his repentance.
Key International Actors
Saudi Arabia is a key ally of the United States and European countries. The US
did not publicly criticize any Saudi human rights violations except through
annual reports. Some members of the US Congress have expressed skepticism
about Saudi’s policy priorities. The US concluded a $60 billion arms sale to
Saudi Arabia, its largest anywhere to date.
The European Union also failed to publicly criticize human rights abuses in the
kingdom, although the Subcommittee on Human Rights of the European
Parliament in May held a rare hearing on human rights in Saudi Arabia.
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay in January
voiced alarm over the use of the death penalty and cruel sentences such as
“cross-amputation” of both the right hand and left foot.