Saudi Arabia
Human rights conditions remain poor in Saudi Arabia. International and domestic
pressure to improve human rights practices remained feeble, and the government
undertook no major reforms in 2008. The government systematically suppressed
the rights of 14 million Saudi women and an estimated 2 to 3 million members of
minority Shia communities, and failed to protect the rights of foreign workers.
Thousands of people received unfair trials or were subject to arbitrary detention.
Curbs on freedom of association, expression, and movement, as well as a lack of
official accountability, remain serious concerns.
The government-approved National Society for Human Rights failed to issue its
second annual report in 2008. The governmental Human Rights Commission
opened a women’s branch, but its board remained all-male.
Women’s Rights
The government continues to treat women as legal minors, denying them a host
of fundamental human rights. The government requires women to obtain permission
from a male guardian to work, study, marry, travel, and even receive a
national identification card. The Ministry of Interior did not implement a cabinet
recommendation from July to abolish the requirement for a guardian’s permission
to issue IDs to women.
In addition, the government neither set a minimum age for marriage nor adopted
any comprehensive policies to combat forced and early marriages. Marriages of
Saudi girls as young as 10 to much older men were reported in 2008, although
the Human Rights Commission intervened in one such case to delay the marriage
for five years.
Strictly enforced sex segregation hinders a Saudi woman’s ability to participate
fully in public life. Women are prohibited from working in offices or entering government
buildings that lack female sections, or pursuing degrees in disciplines
not taught in women’s colleges. The Ministry of Labor replaced its prohibition on
mixed workplaces with vaguely worded obligations to respect Islamic law on the
matter, and so the current workplace environment remains highly segregated. The Ministry of Justice denies women the right to be judges or prosecutors, or to practice
law. In February 2008 religious police arrested a 36-year-old Saudi businesswoman
for “illegal mingling” while meeting with a male colleague in a Starbucks
in Riyadh.
Migrant Worker Rights
An estimated 8 million foreign workers, primarily from India, Indonesia, the
Philippines, and Sri Lanka, fill jobs in the construction, domestic service, health,
and business sectors. Many suffer a range of abuses and labor exploitation,
sometimes rising to slavery-like conditions.
Despite renewed announcements in July, the Ministry of Labor did not implement
its commitment to end the restrictive kafala (sponsorship) system. This policy ties
migrant workers’ residency permits to their employers, fueling abuses such as
employers confiscating passports, withholding wages, and forcing migrants to
work for months or years against their will.
The government also failed to enact an amendment, first proposed in 2005, to
extend labor law protections to the 1.5 million migrant domestic workers in the
country. Asian embassies report thousands of complaints each year from domestic
workers who are forced to work 15-20 hours a day, seven days a week, and
denied their wages. Many endure a range of abuses including forced confinement
in the workplace, food deprivation, and psychological, physical, and sexual
abuse.
Migrants encountering the criminal justice system sometimes face severe delays
and lack access to interpreters, legal aid, or their consulates. Migrants pursuing
criminal cases against abusive employers have little hope of redress. In May
2008 a Riyadh court dropped charges against the Saudi employer who abused
Indonesian domestic worker Nour Miyati so severely she needed her toes and fingers
amputated.
Arbitrary Detention and Unfair Trials
Detainees, including children, are commonly the victims of systematic and multiple
violations of due process and fair trial rights, including arbitrary arrest and
torture and ill-treatment in detention. Saudi judges routinely sentence defendants
to thousands of lashes, often carried out in public. In 2008 the kingdom
carried out 88 executions as of mid-November (compared to 150 over the equivalent
period in 2007), including for drug offenses.
Saudi Arabia has no law setting an age below which a child should not be tried
as an adult, and judges have discretion regarding the bases for arrest and length
of detention for children. In July 2008 an appeals court ordered the retrial in adult
court of Sultan Kohail, whom a juvenile court had earlier sentenced to one year in
prison and 200 lashes for his involvement when he was 16 in a schoolyard brawl
that resulted in a young man’s death. If convicted, Kohail faces the death penalty.
A 2006 announcement raising the age of criminal responsibility for boys—there is
none for girls—from seven to 12 years is not fully observed.
Saudi Arabia has made no progress in implementing the Judiciary Law adopted in
October 2007 that sets up specialized courts, and has yet to write a penal code or
ensure that law enforcement officials adhere to its criminal procedure code.
Authorities rarely inform suspects of the crime with which they are charged, or the
evidence supporting the accusation. In the absence of a penal code, prosecutors
and judges have discretion to decide what constitutes a criminal offense.
Detainees do not have access to a lawyer during interrogation, face excessive pretrial
delays, and at trial often cannot examine witnesses or evidence or present a
defense.
The Human Rights Commission was unable to resolve the arbitrary detention of
Yondje Obed, a Cameroonian arrested in 2006 on frivolous charges whose trial
has yet to begin. At this writing, Falih remains on death row.
Secret police (mabahith) in 2008 detained or continued to detain without trial or
access to lawyers—in many cases for years—around 2,000 persons suspected of
sympathies with or involvement in terrorism. In October the government
announced it would bring 991 domestic terrorism suspects to trial for the first
time. The United States in late 2007 returned more Saudis from Guantanamo Bay, leaving only about a dozen Saudi detainees in US military custody there (out of a
group originally comprising more than 130). The returnees faced detention without
charge, usually for several months, and involuntary participation in rehabilitation
programs.
Freedom of Expression
Freedom of expression in Saudi Arabia deteriorated in 2008. The government did
not respond publicly when chief judge Salih al-Luhaidan in September endorsed
the idea that owners of TV stations that broadcast allegedly lewd shows during
Ramadan deserved to be killed. Nor did the government sanction prominent cleric
Abd al-Rahman al-Barrak in March after he called for the killing of journalists
Abdullah Bajad Utaibi and Yusif Aba al-Khair for articles criticizing extremist interpretations
of Islam.
Official tolerance for incitement to violence contrasted with intolerance toward
dissident opinions. Intelligence officials detained blogger Fu’ad Farhan without
charge from December 2007 until April 2008 after he criticized the arbitrary arrest
of other peaceful critics. Prosecutors in May charged Ra’if al-Badawi, a self-proclaimed
“liberal” who challenges the views of the religious establishment, with
“setting up an electronic [web]site that insults Islam,” a charge that carries a fiveyear
prison sentence under a 2007 Law to Combat Crimes of Information; the trial
was set to begin in November. Also in May, secret police arrested Matrook al-
Faleh, a prominent reform activist and university professor. As of November, he
remained in solitary confinement without charge. The Human Rights Commission
secured visitation rights for al-Faleh’s wife, but did not address the underlying
issue of his arbitrary detention.
Freedom of Religion and Religious Discrimination
Saudi Arabia systematically discriminates against its religious minorities—in particular,
the Twelver Shia in the Eastern Province and around Medina, and the
Ismailis, a distinct branch of Shiism, in Najran, in the southwest of the country.
Official discrimination against Shia (including Ismailis) encompasses government
employment, religious practices, education, and the justice system. Government
officials exclude Ismailis from decision making and publicly disparage their faith.
In 2006 and 2007, Judge al-Luhaidan and the Senior Council for Religious
Scholars called Ismailis “infidels,” a position reflected in official textbooks stating
that the Ismaili faith constitutes the sin of “major polytheism.”
In Najran, only one of the 35 department heads of local government is Ismaili;
there are almost no Ismailis in senior security jobs or working as teachers of religion.
Ismailis face difficulties obtaining building permits for their privately
financed mosques, while the state funds Sunni mosques and pays the imams.
After Ismaili leader Shaikh Ahmad bin Turki Al Sa’b met with King Abdullah in
April 2008 to complain against official treatment of Ismailis, Saudi intelligence
arrested him, and continued to detain him as of November. On November 4, the
king accepted the resignation of Prince Mish’al, the governor of Najran.
Key International Actors
Saudi Arabia is a key ally of the United States and the United Kingdom. US pressure
for human rights improvements was imperceptible in a year that saw visits
by President Bush, Vice-President Cheney, and Secretary of State Rice. UK efforts
through the Two Kingdoms Dialogue to promote human rights had no tangible
effect, if such efforts were made at all.
Saudi Arabia is due to be reviewed under the Universal Periodic Review mechanism
of the UN Human Rights Council in February 2009.