 SAUDI ARABIA
 Saudi Arabia is a monarchy ruled by the descendants of its
 founder, King Abd Al-Aziz (known in the West as "Ibn Saud"),
 who unified the country in the early part of the 20th
 century. The concept of separation of religion and state is
 foreign to Saudi society, and the legitimacy of the regime
 rests to a large degree on its perceived adherence to the
 defense of a conservative form of Islam. The legal system is
 based on the Shari'a, the codified Islamic religious law.
 There is no written national constitution. Most Saudis share
 a respect for this legal system, which they believe to be
 divinely inspired, as well as for ancient customs which call
 for consensus in government, internal social cohesion, and
 privdte economic enterprise. Since the death of King Abd
 Al-Aziz, the King and Crown Prince have been chosen from among
 his sons, who themselves have preponderant influence in the
 choice. Senior religious scholars and other princes also have
 a voice. There are no elected assemblies or political
 parties. All forms of political expression (except those
 favorable to the regime) are forbidden.
 Saudi Arabia's security rests with three entities: the
 Ministry of Defense and Aviation, which controls the Army, Air
 Force, and Navy; the National Guard, which is responsible for
 guarding vital internal installations and providing additional
 land forces in case of war; and the Ministry of Interior,
 which is responsible for internal security (including police)
 and border forces.
 During the past 40 years, massive oil revenues have transformed
 Saudi Arabia's centuries-old pastoral, agricultural, and
 commercial economy. This transformation has been marked by
 rapid urbanization, large-scale infrastructural development,
 the emergence of a technocratic middle class, and the
 importation of millions of foreign workers to do menial and
 high-skill jobs. It has also been marked by widespread
 expenditure of public funds in ways which have enriched the
 royal family and their associates. With some important
 exceptions, the economy remains largely in private hands.
 No major new developments affected human rights in 1989.
 As in previous years, there were continuing reports of
 mistreatment of prisoners and incommunicado detention. Civil
 liberties--particularly the freedoms of speech and press,
 peaceful assembly and association, religion, and the right of
 citizens to change their government--were still significantly
 restricted.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no reports of political killings, but there was one
 reported death by torture of a person in official custody (see
 Section l.c.).
 b. Disappearance
 There were no known disappearances.
 
 
 1550
 SAUDI ARABIA
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment gr Punishment
 Under the Saudi interpretation-of Islamic law, punishment for
 some crimes may include amputation, administered under
 anesthetic, or execution by beheading, firing squad, or
 stoning (with the convicted person in a drugged state). In
 the absence of iwo witnesses (four witnesses in the case of
 adultery), confessions before a judge are usually required for
 convIction. There.were unconfirmed reports in 1989 that the
 police beat some detainees to elicit confessions. One
 prispner is known to have been forced to stand for long
 periods of time with h4s hands above his head as a means of
 inducing him to confes.' In an August 10 press release,
 Amnesty International (AI) alleged that Zaharal Habib Mansur
 al Nasser died in July while in police custody, reportedly as
 a result of torture.
 In accordance with its interpretation of Islamic law, Saudi
 Arabia imposes capital punishment for a wide variety of
 crimes. Beheading is the usual method of execution, and all
 executions in 1989 were by this method. In some cases in
 1989, beheading was followed by public crucifixion. Death by
 firing squad or stoning may be imposed for adultery. There
 were reliable reports of public nonjudicial stonings for
 adultery during 1989. In the first 10 months of 1989, at
 least 13 recidivist thieves had their hands severed, including
 11 non-Saudis.
 For less severe crimes, such as drunkenness or publicly
 flouting Islamic precepts, flogging with a cane is often
 imposed. Flogging is intended to degrade rather than cripple
 the criminal and to serve as a deterrent to others. The skin
 is not broken, and the flogging, though it is painful and
 leaves welts, is administered with a bent elbow. One of the
 Kuwaitis sentenced to prison for the bombings in Mecca in 1989
 will receive a total of 1,500 lashes'in 30 installments over
 his 20-year'sentence. Two Americans were flogged for
 alcohol-related offenses in 1989.
 In its 1989 Report, covering 1988, Al noted that it had
 received new information about the torture and ill-treatment
 of detainees in previouS, years. Among the practices described
 were "falaqa"- (beating on the soles'of the feet) with the
 ankles secured by rope to a ra�led pole; partial submersion in
 water; sleep deprivation; and extended solitary confinement.
 It said reports from detainees indicated torture is commonly
 practiced at the General Directorate of Investigations (GDI)
 prison in Dammam.
 Members of the Committee for the Propagation of Virtue and
 Prevention of Vice (the "religious police," commofily called
 Mutawwi'in), enforce laws concerning prayer time closings and
 appropriate dress in public. They have the legal right to
 detain suspects for up to 24 hours before turning them over to
 the regular authorities. Mutawwi'in have flogged detainees
 while seeking to elicit a confession and often use switch-like
 sticks in harassing those who violate the law. Some incidents
 of harassment were attributable to self-appointed vigilantes
 who function outside the Mutawwi'in hierarchy. Expatriates
 were often the targets of harassment.  In several instances
 involving Americans, the U.S. Government protested to the
 Saudi Government. The Government has occasionally disciplined
 overzealous Mutawwi'in, and in a year-end speech the King
 
 
 1551
 SAUDI ARABIA
 cautioned the religious police to carry out their duties in a
 civil fashion.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Saudi security forces are divided into several branches,
 including the regular police and the special investigative
 police. Since criminal procedure is generally determined at
 the discretion of the arresting officer, arbitrary arrest
 occurs. There is no automatic, prompt procedure for
 contacting a detainee's family or employer; however, in cases
 involving foreigners, Saudi authorities acknowledge that they
 have the obligation to do so. When asked, the police will
 almost always confirm an arrest. Embassies usually hear about
 arrests of their nationals informally within a few days.
 Although in the past consular officials were usually given
 prompt access to prisoners, a new policy requiring Foreign
 Ministry approval has caused delays in consular visits.
 Official notification almost always takes several months, if
 it is given at all.
 Problems may arise when persons are arrested by the GDI, the
 security service commonly called the "Mubahith" or
 investigative police. GDI prisoners are regularly held
 incommunicado during the initial phase of an investigation,
 which may last weeks or months. Following the bombings in
 Mecca in July 1989, a number of suspects were arrested and
 held for weeks without official charges while their cases were
 being investigated.
 Saudi law makes no provision for bail or habeas corpus;
 prisoners are sometimes released on the recognizance of a
 patron or employer. Prisoners may be held for long periods
 while investigations proceed before being charged or
 released. Regulations issued by the Interior Ministry in 1983
 to eliminate lengthy pretrial detentions or detentions without
 charges are frequently not enforced. However, under normal
 circumstances most arrestees are held no longer than
 approximately 3 days before being formally charged.
 In a July 1989 newsletter, AI expressed concern over the
 detention since April 1988 of over 40 Shila activists in
 prison in Riyadh.
 The Government does not formally use exile as a form of
 punishment. However, in the past, dissident members of the
 royal family have been barred from reentering the country.
 Denial of exit visas is a more common punishment.
 AI charged in a report issued in January 1990 that there is
 evidence of a "clear pattern of suspected political opponents
 being arrested without warrant and held for long periods
 without trial." The detainees cited in the report are members
 or suspected members of several Shi'ite fundamentalist groups
 banned in Saudi Arabia. The report alleges that detainees are
 routinely tortured or. otherwise abused in the first days or
 weeks of detention and are denied access to counsel and
 family. AI states that the Saudi Government has not responded
 to its contention that at least 66 individuals are being held
 without charge or trial. AI has specifically cited the case
 of Shi'ite scholar Sayyid Tahir Al Shimimy, saying there are
 fears that he has been tortured during his detention since
 June 1989.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 
 
 1552
 SAUDI ARABIA
 e. -Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The judicial system is founded upon the Shari'a. Regular
 Sharila Courts exercise jurisdiction over common criminal
 cases and civil suits regarding marriage, divorce, child
 custody, and inheritance of real or personal property. Trials
 are generally closed and are normally held without counsel,
 though the advice of lawyers is available before trial. In a
 Saudi court the defendant appears before a judge who
 determines guilt or innocence and, if warranted, imposes the
 appropriate punishment. Counsel is not permitted in the court
 itself, but lawyers may act as interpreters for those
 unfamiliar with Arabic. With rare exceptions, there is no
 consular access to the trials of foreign nationals.
 Sentdncing is not uniform and may be changed at any of the
 stages of review. Appeals against judges, decisions are
 automatically reviewed by the Justice Ministry or, in more
 serious cases, by the Court of Cassation and the Supreme
 Judicial Council, to ensure that court procedure was correct
 and that the judge applied appropriate legal principles and
 punishments. Cases involving capital punishment must also be
 reviewed by the King.
 Shi'a arefree to adjudicate exclusively noncriminal
 intra-Shi'a disputes within their own legal tradition.
 The independence of the judiciary is prescribed by law and
 usually respected in practice, although jurists are
 nevertheless aware of (and reportedly have often acceded to)
 the power and influence of the royal family and their
 associates..- The Justice. Ministry is responsible for the
 appointment, transfer, and promotion of judges. Judges may be
 disciplined or removed only by the Supreme Judicial Council,
 an independent body of senior jurists. The Supreme Judicial
 Council in the past has investigated and removed corrupt
 judges to allow-prosecution and imprisonment.
 Specialized labor and commercial courts decide cases on the
 basis of decrees issued by the Council-of Ministers and
 regulations issued pursuant to those decrees. The labor and
 commercial courts, effectiveness is frequently-vitiated by
 long delays ih reaching decisions and practical difficulties
 in enforcing judgments reached. In addition, it is often
 impossible to obtain texts of laws or decrees, and the
 decisions of the commercial and labor courts are reportedly
 often influenced by the relative Tank or influence of the
 parties involved. The military justice system has
 jurisdiction ove.uni.formed personnel and civilian government
 employees charged with violations of military regulations.
 Court-martial decisions are reviewed by the Minister of
 Defense and Aviation and the King.
 TheBoard of Grievances arbitrates claims against the State.
 Although the Board has a staff of experienced jurists and is
 guaranteed considerable independence, it lacks the power to
 enforce 'judgments, and the collection of debts owed by the
 Government to contractors remains difficult.'
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Among the most fundamental of Islamic precepts are the
 sanctity of family life and the inviolability of the home.
 Saudi police must generally demonstrate reasonable cause and
 obtain special permission from the provincial governor before
 
 
 1553
 SAUDI ARABIA
 searching a private home, but warrants are not required. The
 Mutawwi'in may enter homes to search for evidence of
 un-Islamic behavior when they have grounds for suspicion, but
 instances of this appear to be rare. Wiretaps and mail
 surveillance can be carried out on the authority of officials
 of the Interior Ministry or the Directorate of Intelligence.
 Informants are reliably reported to be widely employed in
 internal security matters. An American citizen was detained
 and deported in 1989 for political statements made in private
 correspondence which was opened by Saudi authorities.
 Most social and Islamic religious norms and strictures
 affecting personal life are matters of law and are enforced by
 the Government. Saudi women may not marry non-Saudis without
 government permission, which is rarely given. Saudi men must
 obtain approval to marry women from countries other than the
 six members of the Gulf Cooperation Council. During the
 Muslim holy month of Ramadan, the prohibition against public
 eating, drinking, or smoking during daylight hours is enforced
 on Muslims and non-Muslims alike. Prohibitions against
 alcohol and materizl deemed pornographic are strictly enforced
 and apply as well to foreign residents. Decorum in dress and
 demeanor, as well as the closing of shops for a half-hour
 period during the five daily prayers, are enforced by the
 Mutawwilin.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The freedom of speech and press is significantly limited.
 Criticism of Islam or of the ruling family is not allowed.
 The potential presence of informers renders public criticism
 of the regime rare. In private, complaints are expressed
 relatively freely. Saudis are able to voice complaints and to
 seek redress of grievances through the open door audiences
 which are held regularly by even the highest officials, but
 such grievances are generally personal rather than political
 or social.
 Saudi television and radio are state owned and operated.
 Foreign programs and songs are heavily censored, with
 references to politics, religions other than Islam, pork or
 pigs, and alcohol removed. Although foreign news is generally
 presented in an objective manner, news about subjects
 affecting Saudi Arabia is tightly controlled and conflicting
 viewpoints are not offered.
 The press is privately owned. It is effectively controlled by
 a 1982 media policy statement and the firm understanding that
 nothing embarrassing to the Government, ruling family, or
 religious leadership may be published. The media policy
 statement enjoins the press to uphold Islam, oppose atheism,
 promote Arab interests, and preserve the cultural heritage of
 Saudi Arabia. Newspapers receive guidelines issued by the
 Information Ministry on government positions on controversial
 issues, and the government-owned Saudi Press Agency(SPA)
 expresses the official viewpoint on such issues. Most foreign
 news that does not directly concern Saudi Arabia is presented
 objectively. Domestic news concerning sensitive subjects,
 such as crime or terrorism, is not published.
 Editors-in-chief are appointed with the tacit approval of the
 Information Minister, and the Government has the power to have
 them removed. Foreign publications circulate but can be
 
 
 1554
 SAUDI ARABIA
 censored for-materials deemed immoral or explicitly or
 implicitly critical of Saudi policies and actions. For
 example, international publications such as Time or the
 International Herald Tribune are received by subscribers or
 appear on newsstands with advertisements for alcoholic
 beverages, pictures of female celebrities, and beach scenes
 torn out or obscured with black ink, and entire publications
 have sometimes been withheld from distribution. Crossword
 puzzles and comic strips in English-language newspapers are
 sometimes censored.
 Academic freedom is constrained by similar guidelines; for
 example, the study of Freud, Marx, and Western philosophy is
 forbidden. Professors commonly believe that classroom
 comntents which would be taken as antiregime will be reported
 to the authorities. There is also an injunction against the
 study of music in educational institutions, including
 universities. Nevertheless, there has been an increase in
 artistic activities'in schools and universities, and in
 society in general, as evidenced by classes sponsored by the
 Saudi Arabian Society for Culture and Arts, ah association
 whose head holds ministerial rank. There are also private art
 galleries, and some members of the royal family patronize the
 arts. Abstract and reptesentational artists as well as
 photographers are allowed to work. Cinemas and most public
 musical or theatrical performances are, however, still
 prohibited.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Public demonstrations as a means of political expression or to
 present grievances are prohibited. Tribal, familial, and-
 economic interest groups informally aggregate public opinion,
 which their leaders express to high officials. Nonpolitical
 clubs and professional groups may be organized with the
 permission of the authorities. The few existing professional
 bodies are permitted but not encouraged to maintain contacts
 with their recognized international counterparts. Public
 meetings are generally segregated by sex. Unless they are
 sponsored by diplomatic missions, members of groups seeking to
 hold unsegregated meetings face arrest, imprisonment, and
 deportation.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is strictly circumscribed. Islam is the
 official religion, and all Saudi citizens must be Muslims.
 Conversion to another religion is a crime punishable by
 death. The Saudis allow all Muslims who wish to visit Mecca
 and Medina to do-so. However, in conjunction with the
 Organization of-the Islamic Conference, they have established
 a system of national quotas for the yearly pilgrimage, or
 hajj,-which is seen as discriminatory by some nationalities,
 particularly the Iranians. Travel to the holy places by
 non-Muslims is illegal. Political activities by pilgrims are
 banned. Islamic practice in Saudi Arabia is limited to that
 sanctioned by the "Wahhabi" interpretation of the Hanbali
 jurisprudential school. Practices contrary to this
 interpretation, such as the visiting of graves by pilgrims to
 Mecca or Medina, or the use of the Shi'ite call to prayer, are
 prohibited.-
 
 
 1555
 SAUDI ARABIA
 The Shi'a Muslims of the eastern province, usually estimated
 at up to 400,000 persons, constitute a religious minority
 subject to officially sanctioned forms of social and ecofiomic
 discrimination. Any form of public Shilite practice that
 deviates from Sunni Islam is generally prohibited.
 Historically, the Government has prohibited Shi'ite public
 processions during the holy month of Muharram and restricted
 public celebrations to specially designated areas within the
 major Shia cities, but there were reports that authorities
 permitted marches in 1989 without banners or public self-
 flagellation. In addition, Shi'ite banners were allowed to be
 hung from a public building in at least one Eastern province
 town.
 The Government offers to provide financial support for the
 Shila religious establishment, which is generally refused.
 The Government seldom permits private construction of Shi'ite
 mosques, and the Shila have refused government offers to build
 state-supported mosques, in which Shi'ite motifs would be
 prohibited.
 Public or private non-Muslim religious activities are not
 permitted, and importation of non-Islamic religious materials,
 including Christmas cards or trees, is illegal. Persons
 wearing non-Islamic religious symbols in public may be
 arrested or publicly harassed by the Mutawwi'in. There are no
 non-Muslim places of worship, and foreign nationals may
 practice their religions only in secret. Proselytizing, large
 gatherings, or elaborate organizational structures are.likely
 to attract official attention and lead to the imprisonment or
 expulsion of those responsible.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Male Saudis may travel freely anywhere within the country.
 Most male Saudis may also travel abroad freely. In the case
 of government officials, the permission of the royal court is
 required, but apparently is normally perfunctory. Saudi and
 non-Saudi women must obtain written permission from their
 closest male relative before being allowed to leave the
 country, or to travel on public transportation between
 different parts of the country. The passports of suspected
 subversives have occasionally been seized. Shi'a known to
 have pro-Khomeini sympathies may not be allowed to travel
 abroad. Saudis are permitted to emigrate and assume foreign
 nationality, which results in the loss of Saudi nationality.
 Citizenship is not revoked for political reasons.
 There is no explicit formal policy regarding refugees or
 granting asylum. Refugees and displaced persons are in most
 cases dealt with like other foreign workers. With some
 exceptions, persons seeking residence in the country must meet
 strictly enforced requirements of sponsorship and employment.
 There are over 250,000 resident foreigners who fled their
 native countries, primarily Palestinians, Lebanese, Eritreans,
 $omalis, Afghans, and South Yemenis. These persons generally
 receive no special treatment, privileges, or services.
 Individual Saudis (frequently members of the ruling family)
 permanently sponsor such individuals to enable them to remain
 in Saudi Arabia, permitting them to find work where they may.
 In a small number of cases, sponsors reportedly have charged
 fees to such persons for providing documentation required by
 the Government. There are few Saudi refugees outside the
 country. Saudi Arabia is not a signatory of the International
 
 
 1556
 SAUDI ARABIA
 Convention on Refugees, but Saudi authorities have reportedly
 been responsive in cases where deportation of refugees to
 their home country would jeopardize their safety.
 Foreigners living in Saudi Arabia, except for North Yemenis,
 are required to carry identification cards. They are not
 permitted to travel outside the city of their employment or to
 change their workplace without their sponsor's permission.
 Foreign diplomats may not travel outside of the major cities
 without notifying the Government. Foreign national employees
 are not permitted to travel abroad without their sponsor's
 permission, since sponsors hold their passports and are
 responsible for obtaining exit visas for them. Foreignets
 involved in commercial disputes are often not allowed to leave
 the country until the dispute has been resolved. Sponsors
 have taken advantage of this arrangement at times to exert
 unfair pressure to resolve 'commercial disputes in their favor.
 Occasionally Saudi sponsors or business partners have been
 able to prevent foreign nationals from departing Saudi Arabia
 for years or to have them arrested or deported. In criminal
 cases, Saudi regulations require that the passports of all
 potential suspects and witnesses be seized. This has
 sometimes forced innocent foreign nationals to remain in Saudi
 Arabia for lengthy periods against their will.-
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Citizens do not have the ability peacefully to change their
 government. There are no formal democratic institutions, and
 most Saudi citizens have no voice in the choice of leaders or
 in changing the political system. The King rules the country
 in matters secular and religious, within limits established by
 religious law, tradition, and the need to maintain consensus
 among the ruling family and religious leaders. The King's
 legitimacy is based upon his descent, his selection by
 consensus of the royal family, his adherence to the tenets of
 Islam, his ability to govern, and his perceived concern for
 the welfare and security of the nation. The King is also the
 Prime Minister, and the Crown Prince serves as First Deputy
 Prime Minister. -The King appoints all other Ministers, who in
 turn appoint subordinate officials with cabinet concurrence.
 There are no popularly elected officials in Saudi Arabia.
 Political parties are not permitted, and there are no public
 organized opposition groups.
 Traditionally, public opinion has been expressed through
 client-patron relationships and interest groups such as
 tribes, families, and professional hierarchies. The open-door
 audience (majlis) remains the primary forum for expression of
 opinion or grievance. Any male citizen or expatriate may
 attend these sessions, which the King, Princes, and all
 important officials, national and local, hold'regularly and
 openly. Since the assassination of King Faisal during a
 majlis.in 1975, however, kings have reduced the frequency of
 their personal contacts with the public. Access to King Fahd,
 to whom decisions on some even relatively minor matters are
 referred, is considered to be quite difficult. Typical topics
 raised in a majlis are complaints about bureaucratic delay or
 insensitivity, requests for redress or assistance, and
 criticism of particular acts of government affecting personal
 or family welfare. Broader-"political" concerns--Saudi
 social, economic,.or foreign policy--are raised only
 occasionally. Either the King or the Crown Prince meets with
 Sunni religious leaders at least once a week.
 
 
 1557
 SAUDI ARABIA
 This institutionalized but relaxed means of ascertaining
 public opinion through consultation has limitations.
 Participation by women in the process is severely restricted,
 although there are reports that women may seek redress through
 female members of the royal family. As governmental functions
 have become increasingly complex, time consuming, and
 centralized in Riyadh, direct access to senior officials has
 become more difficult.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There are no human rights groups in Saudi Arabia, and none
 critical of Saudi policies would be permitted. AI, in its
 1989 Report, states that the Foreign Minister wrote to the
 organization in January 1988 indicating Saudi willingness to
 discuss with AT officials "the origins of human rights in
 Islam and the principles of the Shari'a and its implementation
 in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia."
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Although racial discrimination is illegal in Saudi Arabia,
 substantial societal prejudice based on race still exists.
 Foreign workers from Africa and Asia are subject to various
 forms of discrimination, as are Saudis from the Yemeni-
 influenced areas of southwest Saudi Arabia.
 Women in Saudi Arabia have few substantive political and
 social rights, and they are not equal members of society.
 Women (including foreigners) may not drive motor vehicles (or
 bicycles), and there are restrictions on their use of public
 facilities when men are present. By law and custom, women
 cannot travel alone; they may travel abroad, or within the
 country, only with the written permission of their nearest
 male relative. They are restricted to specially designated
 sections in the rear of urban buses with separate entrances.
 In public, women are expected to wear black garments covering
 their entire bodies, including, in many cases, their faces.
 Female circumcision or other mutilation is not practiced in
 most parts of Saudi Arabia, although there are indications
 that it may persist in the southwestern Tihama region.
 Although no figures are available, it is likely that physical
 abuse of women by their husbands or male relatives is not
 uncommon. "Islamic advice" columns in the Saudi press
 frequently recommend beating of women as a form of
 discipline.
 In addition to these customary and legal restrictions, Saudi
 women are subject to discrimination inherent in the Islamic
 legal system. Under Islamic law a daughter's share of an
 inheritance is less than that of her brother, although the
 brother has financial obligations to his mother and sisters.
 Women must demonstrate legally specified grounds for divorce,
 but men may divorce without grounds. If divorced or widowed,
 a woman normally may keep her children until they attain the
 age of 7 years, but then they revert to the husband's family,
 to whom they belong under Islamic law. American women married
 to Saudis have frequently been barred from visiting their
 children after divorce. In a Shari-a court, the testimony of
 one man equals that of two women. Although Islamic law
 permits polygamy, it is becoming .less common, especially in
 cities and among younger Saudis. Islamic law limits the
 
 
 1558
 SAUDI ARABIA
 number of wives to four, and requires a husband who has more
 than one wife to treat each of his wives equally.
 Employment opportunities for Saudi women are extremely
 limited, although there has been some slight improvement in
 recent years. In practice their employment is largely
 restricted to the media and to the teaching and health care
 professions. Free but segregated education through the
 university level is available to Saudi women, and the number
 of women enrolled in the educational system now totals more
 than a million, up about 50 percent in the past 5 years.
 Saudi men are able to study overseas; Saudi women cannot.
 The large expatriate work force does not, for the most part,
 receive the same economic and social benefits available to
 native Saudis and must conform to restrictive Saudi social
 standards. Only a few highly skilled or high-ranking foreign
 workers are allowed to bring their families to live with them.
 Visits by relatives of foreigners working in Saudi Arabia,
 including foreign diplomats, are difficult to arrange.
 Employment opportunities for non-Muslims are circumscribed.
 Foreign embassies have received numerous reports of sexual
 abuse of female domestics by Saudi employers. It is almost
 impossible for these women to obtain redress in the courts,
 although a few employers have reportedly been punished for
 such abuses.
 Saudi Shi'a face discrimination in government and industrial
 employment, especially in jobs with national security
 implications, which is broadly defined. The government
 petroleum company, Saudi Aramco, which traditionally provided
 large numbers of jobs to Shi'a, reportedly has been instructed
 to cease all further hiring of Shi'a and to phase out
 gradually all Shila working in responsible positions. Shila
 also face some limitations on their access to social services,
 despite efforts by the Government to improve the social
 service infrastructure in predominantly Shila areas of the
 country. -Since the Iranian revolution, some Shi'a have been
 subjected periodically to surveillance and limitations on
 travel abroad.
 Members of the royal family, and of other powerful families,
 are not subject to the same legal constraints as other Saudis.
 Princes and other influential persons may not be subject to
 customs inspection on entering the country and cannot be
 arrested. Government contracts are allegedly often awarded on
 the basis of influence, and foreign companies doing business
 in Saudi Arabia are said to need an influential "sponsor,"
 often a member of the royal family, to be successful.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The-Right of Association
 Government decrees prohibit the formation of labor unions and
 strike activity. Saudi Arabia has been a member of the
 International Labor Organization (ILO) since 1976 but has
 ratified neither ILO Convention 87 regarding freedom of
 association, nor Convention 98 on collective bargaining.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Collective bargaining is not recognized. There are no export
 processing zones in the country.
 
 
 1559
 SAUDI ARABIA
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced or compulsory labor, in the usual sense, is not known
 to exist in Saudi Arabia. However, since employers generally
 exercise control over the movements of foreign employees,
 situations that could be described as forced labor can occur,
 especially in remote areas where workers are unable to leave
 their place of work. There are also reports that female
 workers are sometimes prevented from leaving the homes of
 their employers and forced to work 12 to 16 hours per day, 7
 days a week. In addition, there are.reports of workers whose
 employers have refused to pay several months' or even years'
 of accumulated salary, or other promised benefits, although in
 such cases workers have recourse to the labor courts.
 Workmen's wages are considered "first-class privileged debts,"
 secured by a lien on all of the employer's property, and
 enforceable for collection before all other debts.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 There is no minimum age for workers employed in
 family-operated businesses or in other situations that are
 construed as extensions of the household (e.g., farmers,
 herdsmen, and domestic servants) since they are not covered by
 Saudi Arabia's labor regulations. In other cases, the labor
 regulations provide for a minimum age of 13, which may be
 waived by the Ministry of Labor with the consent of the
 juvenile's guardian. Women and children under age 18 may not
 be employed in hazardous or harmful industries, such as mines
 or industries employing power-operated machinery.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 There is no legal minimum wage. The effective minimum wage is
 the amount required to induce laborers to come to work in
 Saudi Arabia. In some companies and institutions, wages are
 effectively set in accordance with nationality. As a result,
 workers from some countries may find themselves paid far less
 than workers-from other countries who have equal seniority and
 are doing the same job. Saudi labor regulations establish a
 maximum 48-hour workweek at regular pay, and allow employers
 to require up to 12 additional hours of overtime at
 time-and-a-half pay.
 Saudi labor regulations require employers to protect most
 workers from job-related hazards and disease, but workers
 employed in family-operated businesses, farmers, herdsmen, and
 domestic servants are not covered by these regulations. The
 law specifically prohibits employers from requiring workers to
 work outside when the temperature exceeds 122 degrees
 Fahrenheit. Labor Ministry inspectors and the labor courts
 are seeking, with some success, to enforce the labor code, but
 foreign nationals report frequent failures to enforce health
 and safety standards.
 Saudi Arabia has a generous social security program. Most
 foreign workers were formerly eligible to participate in this
 program on the same basis as Saudis, but were excluded from
 participation in 1987. Saudi Arabia is now refunding all
 previous contributions by foreign laborers to these programs,
 with interest.
 Foreign workers reside in Saudi Arabia in an explicitly
 temporary status comparable to workers who enter the United
 States under temporary labor contracts. As a consequence,
 
 
 1560
 SAUDI ARABIA
 they are officially barred from seeking employment with anyone
 but their sponsor, although in practice many do change jobs
 during the course of their stay in Saudi Arabia. If
 dismissed, foreign workers are officially obliged to leave the
 country by a date set by their employers, although many do
 stay on in alternate employment. In some cases, foreigners,
 who have worked in Saudi Arabia for many decades and who may
 have no country to which they can return, find themselves
 required to leave the country immediately if demanded by their
 employers or upon retirement.
 There are numerous reports of domestic servants being victims
 of overwork-and sexual and physical abuse. Saudi relations
 with a country supplying large numbers of foreign domestics
 were; in fact, strained in 1988 due to that country's concern
 with the treatment of its citizens in such positions. This
 problem was later settled--at least to the satisfaction of
 both governments--through bilateral negotiations. As noted
 above, domestic positions, such as maid, nanny, and cook, are
 not covered by Saudi labor regulations. This fact, plus
 ignorance of the labor regulations, inability to understand
 Arabic, and fear of retribution from their employers, have
 generally militated against maids pressing charges in court.
 The Government, in general, considers cases involving domestic
 servants to be private family matters and will not get
 involved unless clear-cut charges of severe abuse are brought
 to its attention.
 
 
 1561
