 SAUDI ARABIA
 Saudi Arabia is a traditional, Arab, and Islamic monarchy
 ruled by the sons of its founder, the late King Abd Al Aziz
 (known in the West as "Ibn Saud"). There is no written
 national constitution.
 By convention, the King is chosen from among the sons of
 Abd Al Aziz, who themselves have preponderant influence in the
 choice. Senior religious scholars and other princes also have
 a voice. The King serves as Prime Minister. Officials from
 the highest levels on down maintain contact with citizens by
 holding open door audiences regularly. There are no elected
 assemblies or political parties, and nonreligious public
 assembly and demonstrations are not permitted. Non-Muslim
 public worship is banned. The legitimacy of the regime rests
 upon its perceived adherence to the defense of Islam,
 particularly the austere Hanbali School of Islamic
 jurisprudence. Rulers and ruled share a respect for laws
 believed to be divinely inspired and ancient customs which
 call for authority based on consensus in government, internal
 social cohesion, and economic private enterprise. Social
 custom mandates strict separation of the sexes outside the
 home, greatly limiting job or career possibilities for women.
 During the past 30 years, massive oil revenues have
 transformed Saudi Arabia's centuries-old pastoral,
 agricultural, and commercial economy. This transformation has
 been marked by rapid urbanization, large-scale infrastructure
 development, government subsidies to entrepreneurs and
 consumers, the emergence of a technocratic middle class, and
 the presence of almost 3.5 million foreign workers. Economic
 activity and resources (except oil) have largely remained in
 private hands.
 No major new developments affected human rights during 1985.
 Due to unsettled conditions in the Middle East, the Iran-Iraq
 war, the basic ideological enmity of the Iranian revolution
 toward Saudi Arabia, the lingering memory of antiregime
 disturbances in 1979-80, terrorist incidents and discoveries
 of foreign-supported subversive activities in the Gulf States,
 as well as two terrorist bomb explosions in Riyadh last May,
 Saudi authorities remain deeply concerned about internal
 security. There have been several reports of mistreatment of
 prisoners in 1985.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no known political killings in 1985.
 b. Disappearance
 Disappearances at the hands of official agents are unknown.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Government policy prohibits torture, but some punishments
 meted out under Islamic Shari'a law involve amputation. There
 
 
 1369
 SAUDI ARABIA
 have been reports during 1985 of police beatings of detainees
 to elicit confessions, which in the absence of witnesses are
 usually required for conviction in Shari'a courts. One
 American citizen was detained and flogged by the so-called
 Mutawwi'in (enforcers), or members of the Committee for
 Propagation of Virtue and Prevention of Vice. These are
 government employees who assert the right to detain suspects
 for up to 48 hours before turning them over to police, and to
 administer floggings to encourage confessions. The American's
 accusation is being investigated by the authorities. Prison
 conditions are apparently not unusually harsh or intentionally
 degrading. There were reports during 1985 of mistreatment of
 foreign national prisoners in a Riyadh jail and of routine
 beatings of Saudi prisoners in the Qatif traffic jail. There
 was one documented instance in 1985 of abuse of an American
 inmate at Dammam Central Prison. These appear to involve
 abuses by lower-level officials, and not expressions of
 policy. The Interior Ministry investigated reports that
 surfaced in 1983 alleging that foreign national prisoners had
 been subjected to beatings, sleep deprivation, and high
 frequency noise in order to extract confessions. In cases
 where the reports were found accurate, the Government took
 disciplinary action.
 In accordance with Shari'a law, Saudi Arabia imposes capital
 punishment for the crimes of premeditated murder, adultery,
 apostasy from Islam, and, depending upon the circumstances,
 rape and armed robbery. The Interior Minister and Cassation
 Courts review all cases in which capital punishment has been
 imposed. During 1985, the number of death sentences increased
 sharply (34 executions in the first 9 months of the year) from
 the low levels (5 or fewer) in most recent years.
 Furthermore, death sentences have been handed down for crimes
 that are not normally considered capital. Four Saudis were
 beheaded for crimes in which no one was hurt: two for armed
 robbery and two policemen for burglary, drug dealing, and
 other offenses. Beheading is the usual method of execution.
 Execution by firing squad or stoning may be imposed for
 adultery. Severe social.disapproval discourages adultery, and
 the requirement of confession or testimony by four
 eyewitnesses renders conviction for adultery rare. A
 recidivist thief may suffer severance of a hand. For less
 severe crimes, such as drunkenness, or publicly infringing
 Islamic precepts, flogging with a cane is often imposed.
 Public flogging is intended to humiliate the criminal and
 serve as a deterrent to others. The skin is not to be broken,
 but floggings are painful and leave welts.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 There were several dozen arbitrary arrests and imprisonments
 of Shi'a in the Eastern Province during 1985. There is no
 automatic procedure for contacting a detainee's family or
 employer. If asked, however, the police will usually confirm
 an arrest. Shari'a law makes no provision for bail or habeas
 corpus. Prisoners may be held for months while an
 investigation proceeds before being either charged or
 released. Regulations issued by the Interior Ministry in 1983
 to eliminate lengthy pretrial detentions or detentions without
 charge have not been vigorously applied. On the other hand,
 the Board of Grievances, an independent judicial body
 empowered to investigate citizens' complaints against official
 abuse, has used authority granted to it in 1983 and has become
 an effective if slow avenue of redress for citizens and
 
 
 1370
 SAUDI ARABIA
 private corporations against state institutions, public sector
 companies, and government officials accused of malfeasance,
 nonfeasance, bias, or corruption.
 Normal consular notification of arrests of foreign nationals
 is almost unheard of, and police authorities frequently deny
 consular access during the investigative phase. It is
 impossible to estimate accurately the number of individuals
 affected. There have been credible allegations of
 incommunicado detention and solitary confinement. Forced
 labor and exile as a form of punishment are unknown.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The judicial system is founded upon the Shari'a. The Shari'a
 courts exercise jurisdiction over common criminal cases and
 civil suits regarding marriage, divorce, child custody, and
 inheritance of real or personal property. Trials are
 generally closed and are normally held without counsel, though
 the advice of Islamic lawyers is available before trial. In
 the Shari'a court the defendant appears before a judge, who
 determines guilt or innocence and, if warranted, imposes the
 appropriate punishment. Appeals against judges' decisions are
 automatically reviewed by the Justice Ministry or, in more
 serious cases, by the Supreme Judicial Council to ensure that
 court procedure was correct and that the judge applied
 appropriate Shari'a principles and punishments. Counsel is
 not permitted in the court itself, but lawyers may act as
 interpreters for those unfamiliar with Arabic. With rare
 exceptions, there is no consular access to foreign nationals'
 trials. The independence of the judiciary is ensured by law
 and respected in practice. The Justice Ministry is
 responsible for the appointment, transfer, and promotion of
 judges. Judges may be disciplined or removed only by the
 Supreme Judicial Council, an independent body of senior
 jurists. The Supreme Judicial Council has investigated and
 removed corrupt judges so that they might be prosecuted and
 jailed.
 Specialized labor and commercial courts decide cases on the
 basis of decrees issued by the Council of Ministers and
 regulations issued pursuant to those decrees. The Commercial
 Courts' effectiveness is vitiated by frequent serious delays
 in reaching decisions and practical difficulties in enforcing
 judgments reached. The military justice system has
 jurisdiction over uniformed personnel and civilian government
 employees charged with violations of military regulations.
 Decisions of courts martial are reviewed by the Minister of
 Defense and Aviation and by the King.
 The Board of Grievances arbitrates claims against the State.
 The President and Vice President of the Board are experienced
 jurists. They are aided by board members expert in
 administrative, contract, corruption, civil service, and
 forgery legislation. The President is responsible directly to
 the King, and the members of the board are guaranteed
 considerable independence. The board has vigorously wielded
 new powers, granted by a 1983 decree, to call erring officials
 to account.
 There were no reports of prisoners formally sentenced for
 political offenses. Detention for a few weeks or months
 followed by a warning and release has reportedly been
 
 
 1371
 SAUDI ARABIA
 used to intimidate the few Saudis who have publicly criticized
 the regime.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Among the most fundamental of Islamic precepts are the
 sanctity of family life and the inviolability of the home.
 The police generally must demonstrate reasonable cause and
 obtain permission from the provincial governor before
 searching a private home, but warrants are not required. The
 Mutawwi'in assert the right to enter homes to search for
 evidence of un-Islamic behavior when they have "grounds for
 suspicion," but instances of this appear to be exceedingly
 rare. Wiretapping and mail surveillance can be carried out on
 the authority of officials of the Interior Ministry or the
 Directorate of Intelligence. A wide network of informants is
 believed to be employed.
 Some social norms and strictures affecting personal life are
 matters of law and are enforced by the Government. Saudi
 women may not marry non-Saudis without government permission.
 Saudi men must seek approval to marry women from countries
 other than the six members of the Gulf Cooperation Council.
 During Ramadan, the prohibition against public eating,
 drinking, or smoking during daylight hours is enforced on
 Muslims and non-Muslims alike. Prohibitions against alcohol
 and pornography are strictly enforced. Members of the
 officially supported Committee for the Propagation of Virtue
 and the Supression of Vice patrol the streets and markets to
 assure Islamic decorum in dress and demeanor and the closing
 of shops during the daily prayer periods.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Criticism of Islam and the ruling family is not allowed. The
 potential presence of informers renders open criticism of the
 regime rare except among trusted friends. Saudis are,
 however, able to voice complaints and to seek redress of
 grievances through the open-door audiences which are held
 regularly by even the highest officials.
 The press is privately owned. It is effectively controlled by
 both the 1982 media policy statement and the firm
 understanding that nothing embarrassing to the Government,
 ruling family, or religious leadership may be published. The
 media policy statement enjoins the press to uphold Islam,
 oppose atheism, promote Arab interests, preserve the cultural
 heritage of Saudi Arabia, and combat human rights violations.
 Guidelines issued by the Information Ministry instruct the
 press on the position to take on controversial political
 issues. Editors are appointed with the approval of the
 Information Minister, and he may have them removed.
 Saudi television and radio are state-owned and operated.
 Besides entertainment, their basic aim is to project and gain
 public support for official policies and views, with the
 corollary that conflicting viewpoints are not presented.
 Increasingly, foreign news is presented objectively, as for
 example in television coverage of the Israeli elections.
 Foreign publications circulate but are rigorously censored for
 materials deemed immoral or critical of Sa.di policies and
 
 
 1372
 SAUDI ARABIA
 actions. These criteria are sometimes interpreted broadly or
 capriciously. Time magazine was temporarily banned because of
 an article it carried about a dispute among Turkish Muslims
 that was deemed insulting to Islam. A recent article on a
 Saudi-U.K. arms deal in the International Herald Tribune was
 censored, and a survey of Israel was excised from a recent
 edition of the Economist.
 Academic freedom is constrained by similar guidelines; the
 study of Freud and Marx, for example, is taboo. Professors
 commonly believe that classroom comments which would be taken
 as antiregime will be reported to the authorities.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Assembly as a means of political expression or to present
 grievances is prohibited. Tribal, familial, and economic
 interest groups informally aggregate public opinion, which
 their leaders express to high officials. Nonpolitical clubs
 and professional groups may be organized with the permission
 of the authorities. The few existing professional bodies are
 permitted but not encouraged to maintain contacts with their
 recognized international counterparts. Labor unions are
 prohibited, and strikes are forbidden. Collective bargaining
 is unknown.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Islam is the official religion. All Saudis must be Muslim.
 Apostasy is a crime, and proselytizing by non-Muslims is
 prohibited. The Saudis scrupulously uphold the Islamic
 injunction that all Muslims have a responsibility to make a
 pilgrimage, or Hajj, to Mecca, and all Muslims are welcome to
 visit the holy places. Travel to these places by non-Muslims
 is prohibited. Political activities by pilgrims are banned.
 The Shi'ite Muslims of the Eastern Province, usually estimated
 at 500,000 persons, constitute a religious minority subject to
 social and economic discrimination. In the wake of the
 Iranian revolution, they have been periodically subjected to
 surveillance and limitations on travel abroad. Certain of
 their members have been arrested without charge and detained,
 sometimes for many months. For security reasons, the
 Government does not permit Shi'a public processions to mark
 Ashura, the holiest of the exclusively Shi'a holidays. The
 Shi'a are free to adjudicate exclusively intra-Shi'ite
 disputes within their own legal tradition, but Shi'ite judges
 receive no stipend or salary from the Government. Likewise,
 the Government provides no financial support for the Shi'ite
 religious establishment and does not permit the construction
 of Shi'ite mosques. In recent years the authorities have made
 efforts to redress the Shi'a's complaints about the economic
 underdevelopment of their areas. Nevertheless, most Shi'a
 continue to live under conditions notably poorer than those of
 their Sunni compatriots.
 Non-Muslim religious services are not permitted. Saudi
 customs officials prevent the importation of non-Islamic
 religious materials. Foreign nationals practice their
 religions only in discreet, private gatherings. Large
 gatherings or elaborate organizational structures are likely
 to attract official attention and may lead to the deportation
 of leaders. There have been instances in which small private
 services, discovered and brought to the attention of the
 
 
 1373
 SAUDI ARABIA
 authorities, have been broken up and those conducting them
 arrested, interrogated, and deported.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Immigration, and Repatriation
 Saudis may travel freely anywhere within the country.
 Passports are issued by the Interior Ministry. Male Saudis
 may travel abroad freely. In the case of government
 officials, the permission of the Royal Diw-n is required but
 apparently is normally perfunctory. Women must obtain prior
 permission from their closest male relative before being
 allowed to leave the country. The passports of suspected
 subversives have occasionally been seized. Shi'a are
 generally prohibited from traveling to Iran. Detection of
 such travel by Saudi authorities is followed by
 interrogation. Shi'a known to have pro-Khomeini sympathies
 may not be allowed to travel abroad. Saudis are permitted to
 emigrate and assume foreign nationality. This results in the
 loss of Saudi nationality. Citizenship is not revoked for
 political reasons.
 There is no formal policy regarding refugees or granting
 asylum. Refugees and displaced persons are in most cases
 dealt with like all other foreign workers. Anyone seeking
 residence in the Kingdom, except Yemenis, must meet strictly
 enforced requirements of sponsorship and employment. There
 are over 250,000 foreigners who fled their native countries,
 primarily Palestinians, Lebanese, Eritreans, Afghans, and
 South Yemenis. For the most part, these individuals receive
 no special treatment, privileges, or services. Reportedly,
 individual Saudis (frequently members of the ruling family)
 permanently sponsor such individuals to enable them to remain
 in Saudi Arabia, permitting them to find work where they may.
 In a small number of cases, sponsors reportedly have charged
 fees to such persons for providing documentation required by
 the Government. There have been no reports of forced
 repatriation of persons fleeing persecutions. There are
 hardly any Saudi refugees outside of the country. A few Shi'a
 are thought to have fled the country to avoid arrest.
 Foreigners living in Saudi Arabia, except for Yemenis, are
 required to carry identification cards. They are not
 permitted to travel outside the city of their employment or to
 change their workplace without their sponsor's permission, nor
 are they permitted to travel abroad without their sponsor's
 permission since sponsors hold foreign national employees'
 passports and are responsible for obtaining exit visas for
 them. Foreigners involved in or often merely incidental to
 commercial disputes or criminal investigations are usually not
 allowed to leave the country until the problem has been
 resolved. Sponsors have taken advantage of this arrangement
 at times to exert unfair pressure to resolve commercial
 disputes in their favor and occasionally have been able to
 prevent foreign nationals from departing Saudi Arabia for long
 periods. The official Saudi practice of seizing passports of
 all potential suspects and witnesses in criminal cases has
 sometimes forced foreign nationals to remain in Saudi Arabia
 for lengthy periods.
 
 
 1374
 SAUDI ARABIA
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The King rules the country in matters secular and religious,
 within limits established by religious law, tradition, and the
 need to maintain consensus among the ruling family and
 religious leaders. The King's legitimacy is based upon his
 descent, his selection by consensus, his adherence to the
 tenets of Islam, and his perceived concern for the welfare of
 the nation. With the consent of other senior princes, the
 King, who is also the Prime Minister, appoints the Crown
 Prince, who is the First Deputy Prime Minister. All other
 ministers are appointed by the King. They, in turn, appoint
 subordinate officials with cabinet concurrence. There are no
 elected officials in Saudi Arabia. (The only elections in
 Saudi Arabia appear to be businessmen's elections of
 two-thirds or more of the board members of the quasi-official
 Saudi Chambers of Commerce and Industry.) Likewise, political
 parties are not permitted, and there are no known organized
 opposition groups.
 Traditionally, public opinion has been expressed through
 client-patron relationships and interest groups such as
 tribes, families, and professional hierarchies. The open-door
 audience (majlis) remains the primary forum for expression of
 opinion or grievance. Subjects typically raised at a majlis
 are complaints about bureaucratic dilatoriness or.
 insensitivity, requests for redress or.as.sistance, or
 criticism of particular acts of government affecting personal
 or family welfare. Broader "political" concerns--Saudi
 social, security, economic, or foreign policy--are not
 considered appropriate and are seldom raised. The King meets
 on a weekly basis with religious leaders.
 This informal consultative means of ascertaining public
 opinion has limitations. Participation by women in the
 process is severely restricted. Rural-urban migration has
 weakened tribal and familial links. Citizens are not directly
 able to change policies or officials through the majlis
 system, which is largely a forum in which grievances are aired
 and favors sought. As governmental functions have become
 increasingly complex, time-consuming, and centralized in
 Riyadh, direct access to senior officials has decreased. The
 creation of a system of national consultation between rulers
 and ruled has been under consideration for many years. No
 steps toward its implementation were taken in 1985.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There have been no reports that international or
 nongovernmental organizations have sought to investigate
 alleged violations of human rights during 1985. There are no
 human rights groups in Saudi Arabia. In international forums,
 Saudi representatives regularly protest violations of human
 rights of Palestinians, Afghans, Eritreans, and Muslim
 minorities in several countries.
 In its 1985 report, Amnesty International expressed concern
 about the reported detention of possible prisoners of
 conscience, inadequate detention and trial procedures in
 political cases, allegations of torture and ill-treatment of
 
 
 1375
 SAUDI ARABIA
 detainees, and the use of amputations, flogging, and the death
 penalty. Freedom House rates Saudi Arabia as "not free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION:
 Petroleum revenues have permitted the Government to improve
 the living standards of most Saudis, whose annual per capita
 gross domestic product was $13,000 in 1984. Its population of
 11,152,000, including approximately 3.4 million foreign
 nationals, is growing at a rate of 3.2 percent annually.
 The Government has promoted public welfare through massive
 development projects, consumer subsidies, interest-free
 housing loans, and concessions to entrepreneurs. The economy
 is still adjusting to the fall in national income caused by
 declining oil prices and production in the past 3 years. The
 Government has used its huge foreign reserves to complete
 major infrastructure projects while promoting private agricul-
 tural and industrial development and maintaining consumer
 purchasing power through subsidized loans and welfare payments.
 According to the World Bank, 91 percent of the Saudi
 population had access to safe water in 1980, and in 1977,
 calorie intake was 91.2 percent of the total requirements.
 Life expectancy is 56.9 years. Health care and-education
 through the university level are available to all Saudis
 without cost. The development of a modern education system is
 a major government objective. Appropriations made for
 education in the current budget amounted to 11 percent of the
 total. Over the past year 880 schools and colleges were
 opened, raising the total to approximately 10,000. During the
 same period the number of students enrolled at all levels rose
 by 7.6 percent, and the number of teachers increased by 9.5
 percent. In recent years primary schools have been
 constructed in even the most remote villages and a massive
 expansion of the university system was begun in the late
 1970's with .the objective of accommodating all undergraduate
 applicants within the country. Literacy among adult Saudis
 has risen rapidly; Saudi Government statistics suggest an
 adult literacy rate of about 33 percent (45 percent of men and
 20 percent of women). Approximately 65 percent of Saudi
 children (77 percent of boys and 53 percent of girls) are
 enrolled in primary schools.
 Despite these efforts, poverty has not been eliminated. Some
 of the remaining Bedouin prefer a traditional lifestyle and
 only selectively take advantage of available opportunities to
 improve their standard of living. Other Saudis have only
 limited opportunities to improve their economic position due
 to lack of education or ignorance of government assistance
 programs. In the cities, poor Saudis are likely to have
 recently migrated from rural areas. In the rural areas, the
 poor are mostly small farmers in provinces where government
 resources have not yet been so generously applied to
 infrastructure development as in cities. The Bedouin, who
 comprise perhaps 5 to 7 percent of the population, cling to a
 nomadic way of life which frequently precludes the
 accumulation of substantial wealth.
 The large expatriate work force does not, for the most part,
 receive the same economic and social benefits available to
 native Saudis and must abide by considerable restrictions on
 its lifestyle. The poorest of these foreign nationals, almost
 3,000,000 Yemenis, Africans, and Asians, live under conditions
 significantly worse than those of the Saudi urban classes.
 
 
 1376
 SAUDI ARABIA
 The 1969 Saudi Labor and Workmen Law requires the employer to
 take necessary precautions for the protection of workmen from
 hazards and diseases resulting from the work and the machinery
 used, and for the protection and safety of the work. Labor
 Ministry inspectors and the labor courts seek with some
 success to enforce the labor code, but foreign nationals
 report frequent failures to enforce health and safety
 standards. Saudi authorities have reportedly enjoyed greater
 success in enforcing contract terms and working hours. There
 have been press reports that some foreign workers are living
 and working under poor conditions, and there are indications
 that the authorities may take corrective measures. Saudi
 labor law establishes maximum hours at regular pay at 48 per
 week and allows employers to require up to 12 additional hours
 of overtime at time-and-a-half. Employees may volunteer for
 additional overtime. There is no legal minimum wage. The
 labor law provides, however, that minimum wages may be set by
 the Council of Ministers on the recommendation of the Minister
 of Labor. The market minimum is in effect the amount required
 to induce foreign laborers to work in Saudi Arabia.
 There is no minimum age for those employed in agriculture,
 family enterprises, private homes, or repair of agricultural
 machinery. Adolescents (ages 15-18), juveniles (under 15),
 and women may not be employed in hazardous or harmful
 industries, such as mines or industries employing
 power-operated machinery. In other cases the labor law
 provides for a minimum age of 13, which may be waived by the
 Ministry of Labor in certain areas and with the consent of the
 juvenile's guardian. Child labor does not appear to be a
 significant problem in Saudi Arabia.
 Saudi Arabia has a generous social security program for which
 most foreign workers are eligible on the same basis as
 Saudis. Some foreign workers, particularly those in unskilled
 positions such as lower-level construction workers and
 housemaids, are exploited due to their ignorance of the labor
 code, inability to understand Arabic, lack of written
 contracts, or need for income. The labor courts have the
 reputation of being reasonably fast and fair.
 Due to orthodox religious beliefs and traditional social
 practices, women do not enjoy equality with men. By Koranic
 precept, a daughter's share of an inheritance is less than
 that of a male offspring. Women are obliged to demonstrate
 legally specified grounds for divorce, whereas men may divorce
 without such grounds. In Shari'a court the testimony of one
 man equates to that of two women. Women may not drive motor
 vehicles, and there are restrictions on their use of public
 facilities when men are present. They do not by custom travel
 alone. They are restricted to reserved women's sections on
 urban buses. Women may travel abroad only with the written
 permission of their nearest male relative. Employment
 opportunities for Saudi women either in the civil service or
 with public corporations are extremely limited. In practice
 their employment is largely restricted to the teaching and
 health care professions. In public, women are required to
 dress with extreme modesty. Free but segregated education
 through the university level is now available to Saudi women
 locally. The number of civil service jobs available to women
 (in segregated offices) has increased somewhat. Polygamy is
 becoming less common, particularly among younger Saudis. This
 may be due in part to economic factors.
 
 
 1377
