 SUDAN
 Sudan is nominally ruled by Lt. General Omar Hassan al-Bashir and a goup of
 officers in the Sudanese People's Armed Forces (SPAF) who overthreow  udan's
 democratically elected government in 1989. The coup leaders formed the National
 Salvation Revolution Command Council (RCC) of 15 military officers (reduced to 10
 in 1992), imposed a strict curfew, suspended Sudan's 1985 transitional constitution,
 abrogated press licenses, and dissolved all political parties and trade unions. The
 
 
 255
 RCC Government is inspired by and closely identified with the National Islamic
 Front (NIF), one of the parties banned in 1989. NIP members and supporters hold
 important positions throughout the Government, police, security services, judiciary,
 academia, media, commerce, and banking. They form a government within the Gov-
 ernment. The regime controls most of Sudan, excluding some areas of the south
 which are controlled by the increasingly fragmented Sudanese People's Liberation
 Army (SPLA), its moat prominent faction led by Colonel John Garang.
 Numbering about 100,000, the SPAF is responsible for Sudan's internal and exter.
 nal security. Sudan's total military expenditures for 1989, the last year for which
 the USg. Arms Control and Disarmament Agncy conducted a detailed analysis,
 were $339 million. In view of the ongoing civil war, it is doubtful that any effort
 will be made to reduce these expenditures in the near future. The armed forces ar
 augmented by formations of lightly armed, poorly trained but ideologically moti-
 vated militia, the Popular Defense Force (PDF). Martial law remain in effect in
 1992, as did a state of emergency, permitting various arbitrary government actions,
 including indefinite detention of suspected opponents. The Sudanese civil war sig-
 nificantly intenumfied in 1992, with government forces increasingly successful and
 with many attendant human rights a uses by all sides. Military operations by both
 the Government and rebels have left areas of Sudan largely depopulated and devoid
 of effectivegoverment, especially along the borders with Uganda, Chad, Kena,
 and Zanire. The S A  was dent ified wit numerous human  ghts abuses, includng
 many civilian deaths, deaths of relief workers, extrajudicial executions, forced con-
 scription, rape, and pillage. Government security services operated with no re-
 straint, often mistreating and harassing both citizens and foreilgners and torturing
 civilians suspected of opposing the regime.
 Sudan's primarily acultural economy has been devastated by the long and cost-
 ly civil war, hyperinflation, high unemployment, some 4.5 million internally dis-
 laced e on, and an influx of refugees from neighboring countries. There is a long
 istoryof pervasive government control of the economy. Recent government eco-
 nomic reforms to privatize inefficient state-owned firms and stimulate private sector
 investment have had littl effect in energizing a moribund economy saddled with
 large and wing military expenditures which consume an estimated one-third of
 the countrcvs budget.
 The human rights situation in Sudan deteriorated further in 1992, marked par-
 ticularly by the Government's inhuman treatment of displaced Sudanese; its con-
 tinuing efforts, driven by religious extremism, to impose total authority over Suda-
 nese institutions and society; and its frequent use of arbitrary detention and torture.
 Many of the civil war violations took place in the fighting around the southern city
 of Juba which involved abuses by all sides. There, government troops, including the
 PDF, killed, tortured, and detained incommunicado a large number of civilians. The
 Sudanese authorities summarily executed at least two US. Government local em-
 ployees, one European Community local worker, and probably one U.N. local em-
 l       on wholly unsubstantiated charges of allegedly spying for the SPLA. The
 SPAshelling of Juba killed over 200 civilians. Fur~ther south, SPLA elements
 killed three international relief workers and a journalist. There were also significant
 violations in the Nuba mountains in Kordofan state connected with the forced relo-
 cation of the population.
 Throughout the year, outright hostility by the Government and by the SPLA to-
 wards relief operations continued, threatening large segments of the southern and
 western Sudanese populations with starvation. In its Arabization and Islamization
 drive, the RCC continued to repress freedoms of speech, press, assembly, associa-
 tion, and political choice, and it accelerated religious persecution of non-Muslims.
 In 1992 numerous Sudanese were arbitrarily detained, although for shorter periods
 than in past years. Many were subject to torture and incommunicado detention. The
 regime continued forcibly to relocate hundreds of thousands of persons displaced by
 war and famine to distant, inhospitable sites lacking basic services and far from em-
 ployment opportunities. Te Criminal Act of 1991 instituted harsh Islamic (hudeod)
 ,unishments nationwide, such as amputation and stoning, but only two notable
 ME      sentences were carried out in 1992. Fear of the imposition of the Shari'a (Is-
 lamic law) and the Arabization and Islamization of society are among the major
 causes of southern disaffection.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extra judicial Killing.-Official and unofficial government
 forces were involved or implicat     il   eaed extrjudicial killing and other
 abuses of civilians, which resulted in hundreds of deaths. Following the June and
 
 
 256
 
 July SPLA infiltrations into the government-controlled town of Juba in southern
 Sudan, there were numerous credible reports that government forces, including the
 PDF, killed large numbers of civilians-over 300--suspected of cooperating with the
 SPLA. The SPLA forces were also involved in extrajudicial killings (see Section 1.g.).
 In Juba in early Augut, Sudanese authorities seized the U. Agency for Inter-
 national Dvelopment (U&MLI) compound, arresting the entire US. Government
 staff and summarily executing at least two U.S. local employees. The whereabouts
 of two other U.S. Government local employees were unknown at year's end. The Su-
 danese Government admitted executing one of the US. employees and also a local
 employee of the European Communit7s office. Reports indicated that a U.N. local
 employee was executed and that another employee was missing. The U.S. Govern-
 ment strongly protested these executions.
 b. Disappearance.-Approxinmately 40 civilian residents in the Jebel Tabaq region
 in southern Kordofan, mostly Nubans, disappeared in 1992 following operations by
 PDF forces. They are believed, to have been executed by these forces on suspicion
 of collaborating with the SPLA. Routine disappearances of persons suspected of col-
 laborating or supporting the SPLA occurred in other war zones as well.
 The case of Father David Tombe, a parish priest arreted in Juba in August, ex-
 emplified the regime's disrespect for fundamental human rights. He subsequently
 disappeared into the prison system. Only in November, after repeated church en-
 treaties, did the Government permit the Vatican envoy to see him. Father Tombe
 had been tortured and confined first in Juba, then in Khartoum, where at the end
 of the year he remained in prison without charge. Other cases of arrest and dis-
 appearance involved the employees of the USAID office in Juba, Dominic Morris and
 Chaplain Lako, and Michael Mutto of the U.N.'s Juba office. All these men dis-
 appeared without a trace after their arrest.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Formerly uncommon in Sudan under the civilian al-Mahdi administration (at least
 outside the war zone), torture and other forms of physical mistreatment by official
 and unofficial security forces were widespread in 1992. Various security organiza-
 tions continued to use commandeered safe houses (known as "ghost houses") in
 which to hold incommunicado persons suspected of activity against the Government,
 including trade unionists, politicians, and students. Persons released from ghost
 houses reported harsh conditions and treatment at the hands of Sudan security.
 One ex-journalist, for example, reported being confined for several days in a box-
 like cage in a ghost house in downtown Khartoum
 Security forces subjected detainees in ghost houses to varying forms of torture and
 mistreatment. These included: whipping and clubbingshackling and suspension by
 the wrists; electric shocks; the kicking of ribs or kidneys; rapid rotation in chairs;
 blindfolding for days at a time; deprivation of food, water, sleep, and access to toilet
 facilities; confinement in overcrowdd and unsanitary quarters; deprivation of medi-
 cal care; and pschological torture, such as mock executions.
 Prison conditions were also harsh, especially in Shala prison in Darfur, where,
 according to prisoners released during 1992. political detainees and suspected SPLA
 sympathizers were subjected to inhuman treatment, including deprivation of water
 under conditions of extreme heat and denial of access to family and friends.
 Sudan's 1991 Criminal Act based on the Shari'a prscribes specific hudood pun-
 ishments for certain offenses. These punishments include amputation  stoning, and
 lashing. While sentences of amputation were handed down during the year, none
 had been carried out by year's end. Two convicted criminalS, both convicted of
 armed robbery and mudr were hanged and crucified in Darfur, according to local
 news reports. Lashings were routinely carried out in the north, especially for con-
 sumption of alcohol
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detentiown, or Exile.-The 1991 Criminal Code does not deal
 with periods of detention and security arrests. Several other laws give the Govern-
 ment a free hand in detaining persons without charge and without reference to the
 judiciary. In particular, thestate of emergency permits the Government to detain
 opponents indefiitely without charge or trial. Under the National Security Act, de-
 tentions are permitted for up to 72 hours, extendable for 1 month with "justifica-
 tion" which is not defined.
 A ditionally, precautionary detention "t preserve the general security may be
 authorized by the RCC for 3 months. A person thus detained should be notified in
 suitable time"--which is interpreted as within these 3 months--of the reasons for
 detention. The RCC may extend this precautionary detention for .another 3 months
 with proper notification, but the judge or the prosecutor may reject the extension
 and release the detainee. Bail is permitted except in cases of murder. Indigent de-
 fendants are provided with legal counsel by the Government.
 
 
 257
 
 Despite these formal protections, an arrested Sudanese citizen, particularly in the
 hands of one of the security organs, faces essentially arbitrary treatment, including,
 in many cases, incommunicado detention.
 Because of the regime's secrecy and arbitrary detention practices, it was difficult
 to know the precise number of political detainees and prisoners held at the end of
 1992. At the beginning of the year, there were hundreds of persons held without
 charge or trial. In July the Government released 54 political detainees, mostly mem-
 bers of the military. But the regime continued to arrest others. At year's end, one
 credible report said there were 30 to 40 political detainees and prisoners in Sudan.
 Other outside observers would set a significantly higher figure, as high as several
 hundred. The best estimate would be at least 100.
 e. Denial of Fair Public TriaL-The present Government has made the judiciary
 increasingly subservient. An RCC decree of June 30, 1989 transferred all power
 over Sudan's constitution and laws to the RCC. Control of tie judiciary was trans-
 ferred to the Ministry of Justice. The position of Chief Justice, formerly elected by
 sitting judges, is now an aprinted office. According to credible reports, more than
 300 judges onsidered ideoogically unacceptable were replaced, many with ap-
 pointees affiliated with the National Islamic Front. The new judges favor a strict
 application of the Shari'a, and many have little or no legal training.
 Under the November 1989 Special Courts Act, a special security court may try
 persons accused of a wide range of violations e g  of constitutional decrees, emer-
 gency regulations, some sections of the Penal Code, and drug and currency viola-
 tions. The special security courts may be composed of three military officers or any
 three competent persons; those created thus far have had both military and civilian
 tudges. Attorneys ma sit with defendants as "friends of the court" and advise them
 ut may not normally address the court. Sentences are usually severe and imple-
 mented immediately, except that death sentences must be referred to the Chief Jus-
 tice and the Head of State.
 Defendants may file appeal briefs with the Chief Justice. Most security-related
 cases continue to be tried in these courts.
 Sudan's present judicial system involves the regular courts, both criminal and
 civil, the parallel special security courts, military courts intended mainly for mili-
 tary personnel, and tribal courts which continue to be important in rural areas
 where disputes often involve land and water rights and family matters. The 1991
 Criminal Act governs criminal cases; civil cases continue to be handled largely ac-
 cording to the Civil Transactions Act of 1983. Testimony by women in court cases,
 while not discounted in theory, still suffers from the traditional interpretation of the
 Shari'a, whereby a woman's testimony is worth half that of a man.
 Military trials in particular do not meet international standards. Human rights
 observers note that, as in the case of 53 officers tried in 1991 for alleged participa-
 tion in a coup attempt, the proceedings are in secret and brief; the 1991 trial lasting
 only a few minutes. None of the 53 had legal representation.
 The southern states are currently exempted from parts of the 1991 Criminal Act.
 But the Act permits the possible future application of the Shari'a in the South, if
 the local legislative bodies, envisioned in the RCC's projected political system, so de-
 cide. There were no reports In 1992 that hudood punishments were being carried
 out by the courts in government-controlled areas of the South. The Shari'a, however,
 continues to be one of the key issues in the rebellion.
 Portions of the South are outside effective judicial procedures, as well as govern-
 mental functions in general. Credible reports indicate that army units summarily
 try and punish those accused of crimes, especially offenses against civil order. In
 SPLA-controlled areas of the South there appeared to be some reliance on tradi-
 tional justice by village elders, but the SPLA ultimately ruled by summary methods
 that included beatings, torture, and arbitrary execution.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Arbi-
 trary interference with citizen privacy by government authorities outside the combat
 zones was rare in the previous al-Mahdi administration. However, in 1992 searches
 without warrants continued, often in nighttime raids particularly in cases of per-
 sons suspected of political or economic crimes. Surveillance was pervasive and con-
 strained only by resources and manpower. Former Prime Minister Sadi al-Mahdi
 and former Communist Party chief Mohammad Ibrahim Nugud, as well as other
 prominent former political figures, remained under nearly constant surveillance.
 The University of Khartoum, with its history of student political activism, became
 a special target for surveillance.
 Mail, including that delivered by courier service, is sometimes opened and read,
 and registered mail is examined by government officials before being sent.
 The Government instituted neighborhood "popular committees' as a means of
 monitoring households. These committees, tasked with reporting neighborhood ac-
 
 
 258
 tivities, cornprise an informer system. They induce fear in Sudanese citizens of their
 neighbors wh~o, for whatever reasons, may report them for 'suspicious activities,
 such as speaking with fofeigners. Seuri. officers have investigated Sudanese citi-
 zens suspected of 'exessiveM contact with foreigners. The committees also furnish
 or withhold documents essential for obtaining an exit visa from Sudan. They have
 harassed and questioned Sudanese employees of foreign embassies, as well as for-
 eign citizens working in Sudan. Some foreign NGO staff in the field were forced to
 report daily to securty to give their 'movement schedules." Other local NGO staff
 members were threatened with arrest and beaten.
 g. Use of Erxessive Force and VIolations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-The civil war intensified in 1992 as the SPAF won important victories, in-
 cluding the capture of the SPLA headquarters town, Torit. Government forces, gov-
 ernment-affliated tribal militias, the PDF, and the several factions of the SPLA
 which also fought each other, fequently used excessive force and constantly violated
 humanitarian norms by attacig civilian targets. Neither side in the civil war
 made any attempt to investigate or punish those responsible. The Sudanese Air
 Force (SAF) continued to bomb indiscriminately killing civilians. The SAF, having
 no capability for close air support of ground torces resorted to crude tactics of
 dumping bombs from transport aircraft on targets in the SPLA-held areas.
 Much of the fighting was centered around Juba, the principal city in the South.
 During the height of the fighting at Juba in the summer months, SPAF soldiers pre-
 vente  civilians from leaving the besieged town. Land mines planted indiscrimi-
 nately by both government and rebel forces caused civilian deaths and limited agri-
 cultural cultivation. Some houses were summarily destroyed to clear fields of fire
 for Sudanese army units. The population was concentrated into the center of the
 town, severely straining sanitation facilities. The SPLAs continued indiscriminate
 shelling of the town over many months caused deaths and injuries among the civil-
 ian population.
 ThePopular Defense Forces (PDF) Act of 1989 placed tribal militias under gov-
 ernment control through incorporation into the PDF. While tribal militias are small
 in number in comparison with the main PDF core of Islamic Front supporters, they
 have been responsible for human rights abuses in attacking their longstanding trib-
 al opponents, particularly the Dinka, who have been the most important source of
 support for the SPLA.
 The Nubans, a tribal population of hill-dwellers in an isolated region bordering
 on the rebellious South, were displaced in sizable numbers during 1992. For numer-
 ous reasons, including pressure from government militias and the SPLA, as well as
 an increased level of fighting, the Nubans left their native hills in southern
 Kordofan state. Using harsh methods, the Government uprooted thousands of
 Nubans without their consent, and it was reliably reported that serious human
 rights abuses occurred. Many of the Nuban people were resettled as farm laborers
 in northern Kordofan, but others were left essentially homeless, ending up in camps
 for the displaced after being moved around for months. During the summer, the
 Government relocated at least 25,000 Nubans, some sick and malnourished, from
 relatively well-run camps in Kadugli to unsatisfactory sites in northern Kordofan.
 This cruel and unnecessary action led to speculation that a systematic attempt was
 underway to eradicate the identity of the Nuban people. The Government's news
 blackout and refusal to grant access to the area lent credence to this view.
 The SPLA shelling o73Juba in the spring and summer resulted in an unknown
 number of civilian deaths. This violence and SPLA attempts to forcibly conscript
 southern males caused a continuing heavy exodus of refugees, numbering in the
 thousands, to neighboring countries. Many southerners also fled to the north of
 Sudan to escape the fighting. There were persistent reports that the SPLA forcibly
 conscripted male minors.
 The treatment of prisoners  of war (POW's) remained unclear in 1992. and there
 were no reliable estimates of the number of POW's. According to human rights crit-
 ics, the Government rarely took POW's in the civil conflict, instead executing SPLA
 members or suspected sympathizers. There were credible reports of the SPLA maim-
 ing POW's captured in the fighting at Juba. No progress was made by humanitarian
 organizations, including the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), in
 seeking access to detainees held by the various factions.
 The intensification of the war in the South in 1992 greatly interfered with the
 delivery of relief supplies. Both the Government and the SPLA withheld their ap-
 proval for international donor relief flights in the war zones, putting the flights at
 risk. In Malakal in June, the Government arbitrarily confiscated a World Food Pro-
 gram (WFP) barge carrying food to displacees. in August the SPLA warned that all
 aircraft flying into Juba, including Uf. planes bringing critically needed food,
 risked being shot dwn.The Government had, in fact, used an aircraft with U.N.
 
 
 259
 
 markings to cary military cargo. After the U.N. protested, the authorities admitted
 their error and  to        A gust the U.. temporaril suspended these relief
 fli0hts after the SPLA fired shells near a WFP plane off-loadin at Juba airport.
 Mining on some southern roads by government forces and the rebels also obstrected
 movement of relief convoys.
 Both the Government and the SPIA remained suspicious of relief efforts, each be-
 lieving that relief supplies benefited the other side, and continued to interfere with
 them. International NGO's were consistently denied access to towns where large
 numbers of displaced persons had fled to avoid the fighting. Movement of food sup-
 plies by land to Juba ontinued to be blocked by the SPLA, forcing the 300 000 resi-
 rely on the uncertainties of an extremely expensive and at times dangerous
 donor-funded airli. NGO's engaged in relief efforts suffered mistreatment by the
 Government far more than in the-past. At years end, agreements between the SPLA
 fationsthe Government, and the U.N. to reopen Operation Lifeline Sudan a food
 supply line from KenyaUganda into southern Sudan, offered some hope ihat the
 rele in the southern war zone could again enjoy a reasonably secure supply of
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of S   h and Press.-Since the 1989 coup, freedom of speech has been
 severely restricted, and a climate of intimidation and surveillance inhibited open,
 public discussion of political issues. All private publications were banned. Three gov-
 ernment-controlled Arabic language daily newspapers, Modern Sudan, The Armed
 Forces, and National Salvation, as well as the weekly English-language newspaper
 New Horizon and the English monthly Sudanow, strongly advocated government
 policies. They occasionally went beyond stated government positions in their anti-
 Western attitudes.
 Radio, television, and the Sudanese News Agency (SUNA) were under government
 control and reflected government policies. Opposition figures were rarely mentioned
 in the media.
 Chief editors of the print media are appointed by the Government, alleviating the
 need for formal daily censorship. Sudan television news has a permanent military
 censor to ensure that only government-approved news is aired. The Minister of In-
 formation in late 1992 was an army brigaier.
 The regime complained of an anti-Sudan bias among the international, espcially
 Western, media. While foreign journalists visited and reported on Sudan, their ac-
 cess to areas outside Khartoum was extremely limited. One American journalist was
 forcibly detained and had his notes confiscated before diplomatic intervention se-
 cured his release. Another was prevented from entering the home of an opposition
 leader.
 Foreign publications entering Sudan were routinely confiscated by the Govern.
 ment before they reached newsstands if they contained any material judged
 antiregime. Time and Newsweek magazines were banned during 1992 fgr stones
 deemed offensive by the Government. Many respected Sudanese journalists who
 worked in the media before 1989 have taken up nonmedia jobs or left the country.
 Academic freedom has declined. The Islamic-fundamentalist orientation of the re-
 gime made many professors, students and intellectuals reluctant to expound their
 views freely. Appointments of teachin, staff are based on political and ideological
 criteria, not just professional qualifictions. The Government viewed with particular
 suspicion the faculty at the University of Khartoum, undertaking recurring purges
 of professors.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Assciation.-These freedoms were severely
 restricted. The declaration of the state of emergency and of martial law on June 30,
 1989 effectively eliminated the right to protest. The police and, at times, security
 farces routinely broke up nongovernent-sponsored demonstrations.
 On June 30, 1989, the RCC dissolved all political parties and effectively disbanded
 all politically active groups. Blamed by the Government for most of Sudan's prob-
 lems, political parties remained banned in 1992, and RCC officials vowed Sudan
 would never return to a multipary system.
 The Government of Sudan favors members and supporters of the National Islamic
 Front (NIF), a party ostensibly banned in 1989 with all other political parties but
 increasingly identified with the Government. NIF members and supporters were
 well placed throughout government, the security forces, academia, the media, busi-
 ness, and commerce. They formed the core of a new ruling elite.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Sudan is a multireligious country and so recognized in
 law, but official tolerance of non-Muslims sharply deteriorated in 1991-1992. Islam
 and Christianity are formally recognized as religions of Sudan, and adherents of
 other beliefs are not leallv nrevented from worshiping. Muslims are a maiority in
 
 
 260
 
 the North, although there are at least 1 to 2 million displaced persons from the
 South now in Khartoum and other northern towns. The displaced southerners are
 mostly Christians and Animists, not Muslims.
 Proselytizi  by Muslims is allowed, but proselytizing of Muslims is not allowed.
 Apostasy for Muslims under the 1991 Criminal Act is punishable by death. In 1992
 government harassment and suppression, such as the increased attempts to exert
 control over curriculum and staff in the religious schools, indicated growing official
 interest in preventing proselytizing by Christians of non-Muslims.
 The Foreign Missionary Society Act of 1962 subjected public Christian religious
 activity to close government supervision. Among other provisions, the Act forbade
 the construction of churches with out government permits, and none was issued for
 more than 10 years. The Sudan Catholic Bishops' Conference (SCBC) and the Sudan
 Council of Churches (SCC) as well as the Coptic Church regularly encountered re-
 strictions based on the Act, which was often capriciously interpreted by local offi-
 cials. It was also used against individuals in religious vocations.
 re        tolerance deteriorated steadily in 1991-1992, non-Muslim religious
 leaders o several denominations charged 'open persecution." In 1992 the authori-
 ties expelled without explanation four missionary nuns of Mother Teresa's Sisters
 of Charity in Khartoum and one expatriate priest. In En Nahud, the authorities
 closed the local Catholic school and convent and evicted the priests and nuns from
 the town. Increasingly, Christians were anxious about government interference with
 church-based schools. In particular, the Government began suppressing schooling
 sponsored by non-Muslim religious bodies for the many displaced persons in reloca-
 tion camps around Khartoum.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Freedom of movement in Sudan continued to be hampered by the civil
 war, a poor transportation infrastructure, and government restrictions. Authorities
 maintained lists of political figures and other Sudanese citizens not permitted to
 travel, and security officials sometimes made arbitrary decisions on issuance or
 cancelation of exit visas. After the 1989 coup, the RCC Government imposed a cur-
 few in much of Sudan, and suspected curfew violators were subject to detention and
 the payment of fines.
 For internal travel, foreigners are required to obtain permits well in advance for
 all travel outside Khartoum (except diplomats for whom travel in much of the coun-
 try is now allowed on a 3-day notice, not a permission basis). These were difficult
 to obtain and frequently refused in 1992. Foreigners had to register with the police
 on entering the country, obtain permission to move from one location to another,
 and register again at each new location within 3 days of arrival. In particular, per-
 sonnel of foreign NGO's faced numerous instances of bureaucratic harassment, e.g.,
 in trying to obtain work or travel permits. Entry visas for new or replacement NGO
 star also became increasingly difficult to obtain. Some NGO workers hesitated to
 leave the country for fear that the Government would not grant them reentry visas.
 Most Sudanese with money to travel experienced little difficulty in leaving the
 country during 1992, but numerous individual citizens and some categories of per-
 sons (such as journalists or security suspects) were often refused exit visas. Some
 former political detainees were also forbidden to travel outside Khartoum. Sudanese
 not in this category were able to move about the country, although they were re-
 quired to carry identity cards, and those found without them at one of the numerous
 checkpoints naked being beaten. This regulation appeared to be applied especially
 rigorously to southerners in northern urban areas.
 A new conscription law prevented young men of applicable age from obtaining
 permits to leave the country without first obtaining an exemption from authorities.
 A married Sudanese woman had to have the permission of her husband or another
 male relative to travel abroad, and regulations specified that unmarried Sudanese
 women must travel with a family member or other sponsor. The travel restrictions
 for women, generally ignored before the June 1989 coup, have since been increas-
 ingly enforced.
 Almost 2 million persons, largely southerners and westerners displaced by famine
 and civil war, have been living in squalid squatter camps in the Khartoum area.
 In 1992 the Government continued to forcibly resettle more than 400,000 people
 from several sites in Khartoum to desolate and barren locations far outside the city
 and devoid of water and other basic necessities. Some of these people had lived in
 Khartoum for years and in some cases occupied government or privately owned
 lands.
 Government plans to move more displaced persons to desolate expanses of desert
 are premised, according to the statement of one official directly involved, on a fear
 of large numbers of isaffected non-Muslim citizens crowding into the capital.
 
 
 NGO's attempting to distribute food or establish clinics in the remote camps fre-
 quently experienced difficulty with the Government in gaiinng access.
 In contrast, Sudan has accorded refugees good treatment. At the end of the year,
 the refugee population (largely composed of Ethiopians and Eritreans) was about
 700,000, of whom about ha  were assisted by the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees (UNHCR). There were reports of two instances of forcible repa-
 triation of refugees from Sudan: 2 Eritreans and 22 Ethiopians. Resettlement of ref-
 ugees by the UNHCR to third countries proceeded smoothly except for a 2-month
 delay in the flow of Ethiopians for resettlement in the United States. (The US. Gov-
 ernment suspended registrations of Ethiopians for resettlement in the U.S. after No-
 vember 21 1991.) Refugees may not become resident aliens or citizens of Sudan, re-
 gardless of the length of their stay. However, large numbers of refugees have been
 tolerated in the cities, especially in the capital area.
 There are about 2.25 million Sudanese in refugee status in neighboring countries.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The people of Sudan had neither the right nor the ability to change their govern-
 ment peacefully. In September 1989, the RCC's "Third Constitutional Decree estab-
 lished a new governmental system for Sudan, giving the Head of State sovereign
 powers. The all-military RCC continued as thelesative and ultimate authority
 although the regime in early 1992 instituted an appointed "Transitional National
 Assembly" (TNA) with no independent powers. The RCC entrusts day-to-day super-
 vision to a Cabinet headed by a Prime Minister. The courts are specifically forbid-
 den to review acts of the RCC or the Head of State.
 Claiming sectarian bickering was harmful to Sudan, the regime in 1989 abolished
 all political parties, seized (and later distributed) the parties' assets, and detained
 (albeit in relatively mild conditions) the leaders of the major precoup parties. They
 have since been released.
 In October 1990, the RCC concluded a national dialog conference which rejected
 both multiparty and one-party systems in favor of a poitical structure based on as-
 cending levels of nonpartisan consultative assemblies. The recommendations par-
 alleled ideas of the National Islamic Front. The establishment of the new political
 system was said to have begun in 1992 with the installation of the TNA.
 The Government publicly assigned a high priority to ending the civil war. How-
 ever, by the end of 1992, despiteNigerian mediation and a meeting at Abuja to dis-
 cuss peace terms, there had been little movement on the issues. Government mili-
 tary initiatives in 1992 appeared to represent an RCC determination to resolve the
 long-standing dispute on the battlefield. The challenge to Colonel John Garang's
 leadership of the SPLA by two groups of his commanders weakened the southerners.
 The two commanders controlled sizable areas in the South and called for an interim
 eriod of separation of the South from the North. This represented a break from
 arang's prior consistent advocacy of a united Sudan. Major differences between the
 SPLA and the Government also revolved around the extent to which the Shari'a will
 be enforced. Late in the year, another of Garang's lieutenants broke away from what
 had been the major faction of the SPLA. With the organization so fragmented, pros-
 pects for negotiation were dim at year's end.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 -The Government acted decisively to stamp out any domestic criticism on human
 rights issues. It frequently and vehemently denied any human rights abuses in
 Sudan. Almost all of-the relatively few local human rights monitors have been ar-
 rested and detained, often under very harsh conditions.
 Before the coup, several organizations monitored human rights in the country, in-
 cluding the Sudan Human Rights Organization (SHRO), the Sudan Bar Association
 (SBA) the Sudan Catholic Bishops Conference (SCBC), and the Sudan Council of
 Churches (SCC). The SHRO and SBA were dissolved by the Government after the
 coup, and the Bar Association was brought under the control of a government steer-
 ing committee. In 1991 the Government created a new organization also called the
 Sudan Human Rights Organization, with the goal of defending the Government
 from attacks. It has issued no statements critical of the Government. The SCBC and
 the SCC still existed in 1992 and continued, when possible, to monitor and pub-
 licized human rights violations, especially those involving religious discrimination.
 The Government has also been defensive about foreign criticism of its human
 rights performance. It permitted no international human rights groups to enter the
 country in 1992. However, an expert of the U.N. Human Rights Commission, which
 is investigating Sudan's human rights situation, was allowed to travel to Sudan and
 
 
 262
 make his inquiries. The U.N General Assembly passed a resolution in December ex-
 pressing serious concern about the human rights situation in Sudan.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Language, or Social Status
 Sudan's population of 24.5 million (1989 estimate) is a multiethnic mix of over 500
 Arab and African tribes, with scores of languages and dialects. Sudan is composed
 primarily of two cultures-Arab in the North and central areas and black African
 in the South. The West has a relatively smaller population composed of black Afri-
 can but Muslim people. Sudanese governments have historically been dominated by
 northern Muslims who form a majority of about 16 million. Some southern tribal
 groups especially non-Arabs and non-Muslims, have demanded greater economic
 and political power and greater recognition of Sudan's cultural diversity.
 The present military Government, influenced heavily by the National Islamic
 Front, has pursued religiously extremist policies, much more so than in the past.
 As a result it has heightened religious, ethnic, and ideological discrimination in al-
 most every aspect of society. Dismmination in the north by the Muslim Arab major-
 ity against several million displaed non-Arabs from the South is common and grow-
 ing. Residents of Arabic -speaking areas who do not themselves speak Arabic are dis-
 criminated against in education, jobs, and other opportunities.
 Arabization of instruction in higher education (including at the University of
 Juba, currently located in Khartum) continued to discriminate against non-Arabs.
 In order to be considered for higher education, students had to pass examinations
 in four subjects-English, mathematics, Arabic, and religious studies. Widespread
 popular attitudes in northern areas also stereotyped darker skinned non-Arabs as
 inferior and lazy.
 In government-controlled areas of the South, there was convincing evidence of a
 policy of Islamization; civil servants and other officials were replaced by supporters
 of the National Islamic Front. Forced retirement of non-Muslims and non-N  sup-
 porters became widespread. In the North, some non-Muslims lost their jobs in the
 civil service, the judiciary, banking, and other professions. Recurring "thinning out"
 of police and army ranks purged professionals to make room for NIF supporters.
 Businesses owned and operated by non-Muslims experienced overt discrimination,
 such as denial of trading licenses or petty harassment.
 Sudanese laws and traditions continued to favor men over women, and women
 traditionally have had segregated roles. Islamic laws of inheritance award addi-
 tional property to men, while concurrently assigning them the duty of caring for
 their extendedfamilies. Under traditional Shari'a family law, a woman received half
 of what a man with the same degree of kinship receivedin an inheritance. Discrimi-
 nation against women in professional positions also reportedly increased in 1992.
 Although there are no women in the highest ranks of government (e.g., the Cabi-
 net), women in lesser positions do play important roles in day-to-day government
 operations. The appointed Transitional National Assembly includes some women
 members, but the NIF has not encouraged women's involvement in politics, viewing
 this as opposed to their traditional role.
 Education has been open to both sexes, and many women obtained university
 training, but women traditionally receive less education and have fewer opportuni-
 ties than men. Although not numerous, women can be found in the professions and
 in both the police and the military. They were also increasingly visible in the PDF,
 in sexually segregated formations.
 In inveighing against Western fashion and behavior, the Government in 1991 is-
 sued directives to prevent dancing between the sexes and to require women working
 in government offices and female students and teachers to conform to Islamic dress.
 Islamic or Shari'a dress was defined as nondecorative, "modest" clothing covering
 the entire body except for the face, hands, and feet. The Government strictly en-
 forced the new regulations, most notably in the schools and other public institutions.
 Female genital mutilation (circumcision) remained prevalent in Sudan. Reports
 indicated that this practice, although illegal, was widespread, especially in the
 North. Some reports suggested that over 90 percent of northern Sudanese women
 have undergone this mutilation, with consequences that included severe urinary
 problems, infections, and even death.
 The so-called pharaonic (infibulation) mutilation, the severest of the three types,
 was the most common and was usually performed on girls between the ages of 4
 and 7 years. Because few physicians will perform the operation, it was most often
 done by paramedical personnel in improvised, unsanitary conditions, with severe
 pain and trauma to the child. The operation was expensive, costing approximately
 100 for the 10-minute procedure. Southern women displaced to the North report-
 edly were increasingly imposing circumcision upon their daughters, even if they
 themselves had not been subjected to it.
 
 
 263
 Among certain southern tribes, forcible sexual intercourse was common. No blame
 attached-to the practice, although the man involved had to pay a price (often in live-
 stock) to the woman's family if she became pregnant. Among some tribes, wives are
 received on a trial basis lasting up to 4 years.The husband may dissolve the mar-
 riage during this time by returning the wife to her family, although he must pay
 a price for each child born during this time. Such wives were reportedly able to con-
 tract further marriages and were not stigmatized by having been returned.
 Except for genital mutilation, the extent to which violence against women, espe-
 cially wife beating, occurs is difficult to document. Wife beating reportedly is com-
 mon in Sudan, especially in polygamous families, and the Government has not ad-
 dressed the issue of violence against women. Nor was it discussed publicly. The po-
 lice do not normally intervene in domestic disputes and there were no reports of
 court cases involving either genital mutilation or other violence against women in
 1992. For a variety of cultural reasons, many women are reluctant to file a formal
 complaint of such abuse. Women refugees were particularly vulnerable to harass-
 ment and sexual abuse.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Although Sudan had a strong labor union movement
 during the   vernment of Sadiq al-Maihdi, the RCC's constitutional decree of June
 30, 1989, ablished labor unions and forbade strikes. Stiff punishments, including
 the death penalty, were prescribed for violations of labor decrees. Union offices were
 closed, and union assets frozen. Government officials condemned union activists as
 "Communists," although most Sudanese unions were resolutely anti-Communist.
 Many labor leaders were dismissed from their jobs or detained. Most unionists were
 later freed. No labor officials were known to have been detained in 1992.
 In September 1989, the Government announced the establishment of preliminary
 steering committees to manage union affairs, pending the drafting of new laws on
 union organization. Under this rubric, the Sudan Workers Trade Unions Federation
 (SWTUF), the leading blue-collar labor organization, with about 800,000 members,
 was restored with itsleadership unchanged and its assets returned, but under tight
 government control through the steering committee. Apart from SWTUF, there is
 a professional and employees' trade union federation, which has replaced four pre-
 viously existing white-collar labor organizations.
 Other steering committees were established in 1990, often including many of the
 precoup leaders. These committees remained under control of the Government,
 which could and did dismiss their members from time to time. For unknown rea-
 sons, a proposed new labor law did not go into effect in 1992, and unions continued
 to operate solely on government sufferance. Union elections at the local level finally
 took place in 1992, but only after a delay to permit the steering committees to ar-
 range the outcomes. The elections resulted in government-approved slates of can-
 didates voted into office by prearranged acclamation.
 The Government continued to forbid strikes, and there were none in 1992. Unions
 remained free to form federations and affiliate with international bodies. The U.S.
 Government in 1991 suspended Sudan's eligibility for trade benefits under the gen-
 eralized system of preferences because of its violations of worker rights. In Novem-
 ber the International Labor Organization (ILO) expressed its deep concern regard-
 ing "very serious" violations of freedom of association which persisted in Sudan in
 1992.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The constitutional decree of
 June 30, 1989, also suspended the right to organize and bargain collectively. These
 rights were restored to organizing committees in September 1989. Government con-
 trol of the steering committees and continued absence of labor legislation allowing
 union meetings, filing of grievances and other union activity, however, reduced the
 value of these rights. Although local union officials raised some grievances with em-
 ployers, few carried them to the Government.
 There are no export processing zones currently functioning in Sudan.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsor' Labor.-Sudanese law prohibits forced or
 compulsory labor, and there was no evidence of organized or officially sanctioned
 slavery. However, slavery has persisted into modern Sudan, notably in those remote
 areas where government control is weak and where displaced persons fleeing the
 war zones came into contact with armed groups. Informed sources indicated that
 there are unknown numbers of people in Sudan, largely women and children, who
 are forced to do agricultural and domestic work. Some women are made to serve
 as concubines. The ILO Conference in June criticized Sudan in a "special para-
 paph" of its report, its highest form of condemnation, for failing to take action to
 investigate and end the reported capture and trade in slaves, including the forced
 use of children as domestic servants.
 
 
 The SPLA often forced southern men to work as laborers or porters or forcibly
 conscripted them into SPLA ranks. In disputed territories this practice was imple-
 mented through raids, while in areas firmly under SPLA control it was done
 through the SPLA-appointed village leaders.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The legal minimum age for work-
 ers is 16, but this law is loosely enforced by inspectors from the Ministry of Labor
 in the official or wage economy. In addition, gross poverty in Sudan has produced
 widespread child labor in the informal, unregulated economy. In rural areas, chil-
 dren traditionally assist their families with agricultural work from a very young
 age.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The legislated minimum wage, enforced by the
 Ministry of Labor, is barely sufficient for subsistence in urban areas. The minimum
 wage is respected by employers. While most workers are given allowances for trans-
 portation, and some receive housing allowances, workers usually have to rely on
 farng, second jobs, or help from the extended family. In particular, public service
 employees often must rely on these means to feed their families. Salaries in private
 industry are generally higher than those in the public sector.
 The workweek is currently limited by law to 6 days and 48 hours, with a day of
 rest on Friday. Although Sudanese laws prescribe health and safety standards,
 working conditions are generally poor, and enforcement by the Ministry of Labor
 minimal.
