SUDAN
The 1991 State Department report on Sudan is a generally accurate and complete description of the human rights situation in the country, covering objectively and in detail all areas required by the State Department's instructions for the preparation of the reports. Nevertheless, there is still a need for more complete and candid reporting in some areas, especially to recognize some human rights violations in Sudan as long-standing and to acknowledge and address more fully the famine problem.
Last year we made three observations to put the analysis of the State Department's report in context which continue to be relevant for this year's critique: 1) there has been a profound change in U.S. policy toward Sudan in recent years, especially since the 1991 Gulf War when the government of Omar Hassan Ahmed al-Bashir supported Saddam Hussein; 2) this shift in policy has contributed to significant delays in famine relief; and 3) because of the parallel institutions being developed in many areas of the government and in Sudanese society, human rights violations under the current regime in Sudan are systemic.
The shift in U.S. policy may help to account for the somewhat misleading statement in both the 1990 and 1991 reports that torture and other forms of physical mistreatment were "formerly uncommon in Sudan" although widespread in 1990 and 1991. While the incidence of torture committed by Sudanese civilian authorities outside of war zones was not extensive prior to the 1989 coup, this was not the case where the military was concerned. Since the civil war began in 1983, the treatment of civilian populations in the south has been indiscriminately brutal, with massive human rights violations committed by the armed forces and government-affiliated militias. Also, the deliberate killings of prisoners and the use of torture have been frequent in areas held by the opposition Sudanese People's Liberation Army/Movement (SPLA/M) during the war. The report describes accurately and in significant detail the use of torture and other harsh treatment by the government's security forces during 1991. Amnesty International has been able to confirm the torture in detention of more than 100 people arrested since November 1989.
353
Sudan
The report would be more complete and accurate if it stated its estimate of the number of those tortured and acknowledged that serious human rights violations, including torture and mistreatment of prisoners, are not recent phenomena in Sudan.
Civil war was responsible for many of the human rights abuses and disruptions in famine relief efforts in Sudan during 1991, as repeatedly emphasized by the report. It gives the impression that the civil war and disputes within the SPLA/M are the fundamental reasons for Sudan's poor human rights record. Given the poor human rights records of both the current government and the SPLA/M, however, it seems relatively clear that abuses are likely to continue even if the civil war ends, regardless of how it is settled. In this respect, the Sudanese conflict is unlike the Ethiopian civil war which ended last year with the fall of the Mengistu government, resulting in a dramatic improvement in human rights for many Ethiopians. Given this grim prospect for Sudan, international focus on the systemic human rights problems in Sudan should increase dramatically. To some degree this appears to already be happening. For example, as the report notes, the UN Conmiission on Human Rights recently singled out Sudan, along with a handful of other countries, for strong criticism and imposed stricter monitoring of the situation.
A theme common to most of the violations in Sudan is ideological, religious and cultural intolerance. This is evidenced by both written law {e.g., Shari'a or Islamic law) and the manner of enforcement of the various laws and executive decrees. Such pervasive intolerance has severely undermined respect for individual rights and freedoms in Sudan and may be found throughout Sudanese society. Examples may be found in the legal and judicial systems, in the area of civil liberties, in immigration policy, in the treatment of the internally displaced, in regard to famine relief, in regard to worker rights and elsewhere. Each of these areas is discussed below.
The Sudanese legal system, which should be an essential safeguard to the protection of fundamental rights of citizens, suffers greatly from the lack of an independent judiciary. With few exceptions
354
Sudan
since its independence from Britain in 1956, successive governments of Sudan have consistently undermined the independence of the courts. For example, beginning in 1969, former President Numeiri presided over the appointment and dismissal of judges, effectively denying them security of tenure. And in 1983 he began a transformation of the secular judiciary into an Islamic system by promulgating the "September Laws," a version of Shari'a. By the time President Numeiri was overthrown in 1985, he was exercising complete control over the Judiciary. A Transitional Military Council, which ruled the country for one year (1985-1986), announced that it would restore an independent judiciary but it was not in power long enough to affect the judiciary in any appreciable manner. Although the judiciary began to assert its independence during the subsequent tenure of Prime Minister Saddiq al Mahdi (1986-1989), this brief period of independence ended with the June 30, 1989 coup by the military government of Lieutenant General Omar Hassan Ahmed al-Bashir and the governing National Salvation Revolution Command Council (RCC). The report accurately describes the various steps the al-Bashir government has taken to further undermine the independence of the judiciary and to inhibit fair trials in many cases {e.g., no effective right to counsel in the parallel Revolutionary Security Courts). The theme of ideological and religious intolerance in Sudan is demonstrated by the reference to the removal of judges considered "ideologically unacceptable." However, the report understates the number of judges removed; since the 1989 coup, approximately 300 judges have been dismissed and nearly 50 other judges have resigned as the result of government pressure. As it correctly states, the judges were replaced with RCC appointees closely affiliated with the National Islamic Front who favor a strict application of Shari'a. Many of the replacement judges have little or no legal training.
Considering the troubled history of the court system briefly outlined above, the statement in the report that "[u]nder the previous government, the Sudanese legal system involved extensive guarantees of due process . ..." is somewhat disingenuous. While this may be technically true by reference exclusively to the immediately preceding al Mahdi administration (1986-1989), the statement can easily be read as
355
Sudan
implying that the problems in the legal system first began with the June 30, 1989 coup. If references to past governments are made in the report, a brief but more complete description should be given to avoid this possible misinterpretation.
In last year's critique we noted that the unrelenting assault by the government on the legal profession was mentioned only briefly. It should be reported that scores of lawyers have been detained without charge since Lieutenant General al-Bashir and the RCC came to power. More than 20 lawyers were in detention in 1990, and although they were released on May 1, 1991 following a partial amnesty, some of them were rearrested and tortured. These lawyers are being held without charge or trial and have generally not been permitted access to legal counsel or their families. As we commented last year, the report should describe how the widespread attacks on the private bar (along with the undermining of judicial independence described above) are having a devastating effect on the administration of justice in Sudan.
In describing the rights of those taken to trial, the report states that "indigent defendants are provided with legal counsel by the Government." It should have been noted that this right exists only in the case of "serious crimes" which has traditionally included only offenses punishable by death or life imprisonment. The report should also have explained that the courts generally do not inform defendants of their right to a lawyer, thus making the right illusory in many cases. Furthermore, in some cases the lawyer is not allowed to address the court, but may only sit with the client and whisper advice.
The report contains a thorough description of the lack of respect for civil liberties in Sudan. Consistent with the current regime's intolerance for non-Islamic values, all independent publications have been banned, leaving the reporting of news to government-controlled newspapers, radio and television and a few other publications which reflect "Islamic fundamentalism and anti-Western attitudes." As discussed below, the impact of a controlled press on the persistent famine situation should have been discussed.
356
Sudan
Academic freedom is curtailed for non-Arab citizens through scrutiny of professors' political opinions, university entrance exams which favor Arabic speakers and, as expressed in the report, the "impending Arabization of instruction in higher education." Political diversity was virtually eliminated when all political parties were banned except the National Islamic Front (NIF), and the report correctly states that security organizations began questioning some academics at the University of Khartoum about their political opinions. However, more extreme examples of infringement on academic freedom exist and should have been provided to give a more accurate picture of the extent of the problem. For example. Dr. Farouk Ibrahim al-Nour, a lecturer in the Faculty of Science at the University of Khartoum, was arrested and questioned in 1989 about his teaching of the Darwinian theory of evolution, which fundamentalist security officials considered incompatible with their version of Islam. He was severely tortured to force him to recant his views, which he refused to do, and he remained in detention as of late 1991.
Although Sudan is a multi-religious country, the report correctly states that "religious tolerance deteriorated steadily in 1991." Several examples are given of religious intolerance and persecution. The State Department restates reports that "PDF units dispatched to the South are urged by government officials to fight a 'jihad' or holy war against unbelievers." An explanation of what this means and how the jihad is being conducted would have been helpful.
The report gives a balanced and fairly extensive description of freedom of movement, foreign travel, emigration and repatriation in Sudan. It is correct in pointing out that while it is relatively easy for refugees to enter Sudan, their rights are very limited once inside the country. Examples of the various types of police harassment are given. There have also been reliable reports of sexual abuse of women refugees and ill-treatment of refugees without appropriate identification documents, which should have been included in thé report.
The last paragraph of the 1990 report commented on the lack of legal employment opportunities for refugees, forcing many into illegal
357
Sudan
activities. This discussion was dropped from the 1991 report without explanation, despite the fact that the poor employment possibilities for refugees continued during the year.
Compared to the relatively "open" policy toward refugees, Sudan is not as generous toward its own "internally displaced." The report correctly states that the Sudanese government continues to forcibly resettle persons displaced by famine and civil war to "desolate and barren locations" outside Khartoum or to "equally squalid transient camps" within the city. It gives several examples of forced resettlement and hostile actions taken by the government towards the displaced, including threats to nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) attempting to distribute food or establish clinics. In describing a December relocation of residents of displaced camps, the report states that "at least 12" people were killed by government forces; Amnesty International has reported that at least 21 people are known to have been killed.
While the report describes accurately the actual plight of the internally displaced, the magnitude of the problem is not fully acknowledged. There are estimates of 3.5 million to over 4.5 million internally displaced people in Sudan, which comprises about 18% of the overall population. Furthermore, there are estimated to be more than one million displaced persons living in shanty towns and slum areas of Khartoum alone. While the estimated number of the displaced is mentioned at the beginning of the report and in the discussion of freedom of religion, inclusion of the relevant statistics in the discussion of freedom of movement as well would more appropriately emphasize the enormity of the problem.
The famine situation in Sudan continues to be a tremendous problem. The report correctly describes how relief efforts have been severely hampered by the civil war, but seriously underestimates the magnitude of the famine problem. It states that "thousands" of civilians were dependent for relief on intermittent cooperation by the civil war combatants, that "thousands" may have perished, and that "thousands" in the west remained at risk of starvation at the end of 1991. However, other sources estimate that between eight and nine million are at risk of
358
Sudan
starvation in Sudan. The report should acknowledge the magnitude of the famine problem by accumulating, analyzing and reporting the relevant data rather than referring to the "thousands" being affected.
The Sudanese government continues to downplay the famine, referring instead to a "food gap" and implying that once the harvest is in all problems will be solved. Unfortunately, this is not the case. The famine coincides with active repression on the part of the government to remove attention or access to the drought-stricken areas. For example, the press has been unable to report freely on this issue. Relief organizations argue that a free press is an essential prerequisite for the prevention of famine and for efficient and timely relief operations. Without the widespread reporting of the famine, as took place during the famine of the mid-1980s, the public outcry for relief from citizens of western countries has been reduced. Moreover, the Sudanese government refuses to cooperate with relief organizations and western donor countries, reportedly on the basis of its suspicions that such groups sympathize with the southern Sudanese Christians. It has sought to hinder such groups' access by advocating that Islamic-based relief organizations replace them.
The al-Bashir government has been accused of using the famine as a political weapon, as most of the famine exists in the south and west where the opposition SPLA/M is the strongest. The report should have commented more fully on how press censorship and the government's political agenda have interfered with famine prevention and relief. As we acknowledged last year, however, we recognize that the reporting of human rights violations in Sudan and maintaining sufficient relations with the Sudan government to allow U.S. involvement in relief operations makes dealing with the al-Bashir government a continuing balancing act.
Evidence of ideological and cultural intolerance also persists in the workplace. The report confirms that there is "evidence of a policy of Islamicization" in the government-controlled areas of the south, where civil servants and other officials have been replaced by ideological supporters of the NIF. Discrimination against non-Muslim owned and operated businesses is also reported.
359
Sudan
Last year we commented on the mild tone of the report in the area of worker rights. This year's report is even milder in that it merely states that a few unionists remained in detention without charge at the end of 1991. It should have described in greater detail the continued detention and suspected torture of union leaders as well as reports of additional detentions with risk of torture during 1991.
The section on use of excessive force and violations of humanitarian law notes the strife in the Darfur region in western Sudan, but understates the government's involvement. While the situation in this region is undeniably complicated, with intercommunal strife, anti-government activity and frequent armed robberies contributing to violent conflicts, the report should have examined more carefully the government's claim that its military operations in the area were aimed only at criminal activity. Amnesty International has stated that there have been persistent reports of indiscriminate attacks on villages and the extrajudicial execution of civilians as early as April 1991.
In describing the factional split within the SPLA/M, the report correctly notes that the Nasir faction accused the SPLA/M leader John Garang of various human rights abuses. However, the report later attributes abuses and ambivalence toward relief operations to the Nasir faction as well: ". . .the two factions of SPLA/M frequently used excessive force and violated humanitarian law by attacking civilian targets." Independent human rights groups have in the past reported on abuses committed by the SPLA/M. Yet the State Department failed to indicate its sources of information for its contention that the Nasir faction has violated humanitarian law.
Last year the report stated that both sides in the civil war took prisoners; the critique commented that the government rarely takes prisoners, instead executing members of the opposition forces that it captures. This year's report corrects the record with the preface "[a]ccording to human rights critics . . . The correction is commendable, but the report should go further and either draw its own conclusions or comment on the reliability of reference sources.
360
