South Africa
Emerging from a history of institutionalized racial inequality, South Africa has
made admirable progress in transforming the state and society to ensure respect
for fundamental rights, including freedom of expression, an independent judiciary,
and free and fair elections. Nevertheless, widespread poverty, unemployment,
persistently high levels of violent crime, and gender inequality continue to
inhibit the full enjoyment of human rights.
Poverty in South Africa has a strong rural dimension: the rural poor suffer from
higher unemployment rates, lower educational attainment, and lower access to
essential services. South Africa’s Bill of Rights provides for binding and justiciable
rights for all South Africans to education, housing, health care, food, water,
and social security. A priority concern for the nongovernmental human rights sector
in South Africa is to ensure that the government continues to address the progressive
realization of socioeconomic rights and to hold the government accountable
to fulfill these rights as binding obligations rather than programmatic aspirations.
Socioeconomic Rights
Under South Africa’s constitution, every child has the right to basic education.
Serious concerns persist regarding the quality of rural education: many farm
schools are staffed by unqualified teachers, and lack resources and infrastructure.
State schools are required to waive fees for families that are unable to afford
them, yet some local administrators refuse to do so. This contributes to de facto
discrimination against very poor children and those from families affected by
HIV/AIDS, who may consequently be excluded from attending school.
South Africa has undertaken commendable housing and land initiatives, including
national housing subsidy schemes. However, many people continue to live in
poor conditions in informal settlements, without access to basic services. In 2007
urban evictions were carried out without due warning or provision for relocation
or compensation. Commercial farm workers remain particularly vulnerable to eviction.
In September the South African Human Rights Commission conducted public
hearings to assess land tenure security for farm workers on commercial farms.
Access to public healthcare services and the quality of care provided remain inadequate,
despite policy and legislation governing this sector. Many provincial hospitals
in South Africa are dilapidated and lack sufficient trained staff, drugs, and
supplies. In September Dr. Nokuzolo Ntshona, superintendant of Cecilia
Makewane hospital in the Eastern Cape, was dismissed by the Eastern Cape
Department of Health for “breaching protocol” after her investigation into, subsequent
public criticism of, and letter to the president about appalling conditions
and high infant mortality rates in Frere hospital. Her actions were followed by
national media investigation and widespread publicity. The South African Medical
Association affirmed that her whistleblowing about hospital conditions was an
ethical and responsible intervention. South Africa’s Protected Disclosures Act,
2000, is intended to protect whistleblowers from retaliation in both the public
and private sectors.
Inequitable access to antiretroviral treatment (ART) and lack of support services
for people with HIV/AIDS, particularly for prisoners and people in rural areas,
remain inadequately addressed by the government. The majority of prisons are
unauthorized to distribute ART on-site. In 2006, after a protracted legal struggle
and a hunger strike by hundreds of HIV-positive inmates, Westville Prison authorities
were ordered by a High Court judgment to provide HIV testing and ART to prisoners
in need. The prison was subsequently accredited by the Department of
Health as an ART distribution site.
Refugees and Migrants
Many asylum seekers in South Africa continue to encounter procedural obstacles
and administrative delays throughout the refugee status determination process
and face arbitrary arrest, detention, mistreatment, and extortion by immigration
and police officers. In August 2007 South Africa’s parliamentary committee on
home affairs condemned conditions in the country’s largest refugee reception
centre, Marabastad, in Pretoria, reporting that the center was filthy, overcrowded,
and understaffed. The government subsequently agreed to upgrade this center,
and has recognized the need to address corruption and expedite the administrative
process for asylum applications.
Political repression and the economic crisis in Zimbabwe continue to cause a significant
number of Zimbabwean nationals to seek entry into South Africa. Officials
at the Lindela repatriation centre, situated near a South Africa-Zimbabwe border
post in Limpopo province, are detaining illegal immigrants in overcrowded detention
facilities and deporting large numbers of Zimbabweans without screening for
refugee status. South Africa’s Department of Home Affairs maintains that most
Zimbabweans entering South Africa are economic migrants and cannot be classified
as refugees as they are not facing persecution in their own country. Human
rights groups dispute this.
Large numbers of Zimbabwean and Mozambican migrants continue to seek seasonal
work in South Africa’s commercial agricultural sector. Although South
Africa’s employment law affords rights to foreign migrant workers, many farmers
openly disregard the minimum wage, do not pay overtime, and make unlawful
deductions from workers’ wages. Undocumented migrants are also frequently
harassed by police and immigration officials and are subject to assault and extortion
during farm raids.
Women’s Rights
Strong women’s organizations in South Africa continue to challenge the patriarchal
attitudes that persist in society and to pressure the government to address
gender-based abuses and discrimination. At the 2007 Women’s Parliament,
South Africa’s deputy president acknowledged the need for government to create
partnerships with civil society to expedite the implementation of the country’s
progressive legislation.
Rape and other forms of gender-based violence continue to be under-reported
and complaints often receive inadequate response by police officials. The government
has established 52 specialized sexual offenses courts throughout the country,
which have had relative success in improving conviction rates. In close proximity
to these courts, the government has also established Thuthuzela Care
Centers where survivors of rape are able to report the crime, access specialist
investigators and prosecutors, and obtain medical care and counseling.
On May 22, Parliament passed the Sexual Offences and Related Matters
Amendment Bill, which acknowledges the high incidence of sexual offenses committed
in South Africa, broadens the definition of rape, and acknowledges the
link between rape and HIV infection. The bill provides for victim-initiated compulsory
HIV testing for rape perpetrators; compels test results to be made available
to the victims; and entitles victims to receive, at state expense, post-exposure
prophylaxis (PEP), a course of antiretroviral drugs that can reduce the risk of contracting
HIV by up to 80 percent if taken within 72 hours of exposure. However,
although the bill mandates designated public health facilities to provide rape survivors
with PEP, it does not mention other treatment or counseling services and
makes access to PEP dependent on the survivor laying criminal charges.
Important recommendations by the South African Law Reform Commission that
would have improved conviction rates by improving the court experiences of
claimants have not been included in the bill.
Children’s Rights
The Children’s Act (2005) remains to be enacted, although certain parts of the Act
came into effect in July 2007, including provisions that grant children from age 12
the right to access medical services for HIV testing and treatment and that allow
children to acquire contraceptives without parental consent. The Act prohibits
child trafficking, for which South Africa continues to be a source and destination
country, and makes the UN Protocol to Prevent Trafficking in Persons applicable
as part of South African law. Delays in passing the Act have been caused by parliamentary
debate over the complementary Children’s Amendment Bill (2007),
which was passed on November 6 and is currently being reviewed by the National
Council of Provinces. The bill scales up delivery of social welfare services for children,
provides for well resourced strategies to facilitate child protection in
instances of abuse and neglect, and provides greater integrated support to childheaded
households, as determined by a vulnerability criterion.
Sexual violence, corporal punishment, bullying, gang-related activities, and occasional
murders continue to occur in some South African schools. In September
Parliament proposed that legislation to curb violence in schools be included in
the Education Laws Amendment Bill, currently under consideration.
Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Rights
Although South Africa’s constitution outlaws discrimination based on sexual orientation,
and same-sex marriage has been legalized, gay and lesbian people
remain vulnerable. In 2007 a spate of homophobia-induced murders of lesbians
prompted the South African Human Rights Commission to develop a program of
action to combat escalating hate crimes and determine whether South Africa
needs legislation in this regard. The commission recommended concerted action
from the criminal justice system. Nongovernmental organizations have recommended
that diversity sensitization should be part of a preventative curriculum in
schools.
International Role
South Africa continues to play a prominent role in international affairs. It actively
supported the establishment of the African Court on Human and Peoples’ Rights,
which began its first session in September 2007, and has been involved in conflict
mediation in the DRC, Western Sahara, Côte d’Ivoire, and other countries. In
March the Southern African Development Community mandated South Africa to
mediate in the Zimbabwean crisis, where it has focused on encouraging dialogue
between the Zimbabwean government and the main opposition party. South
Africa continues to contribute to peacekeeping efforts in the DRC, Burundi,
Sudan, and along the Ethiopian-Eritrean border.
South Africa’s voting record during its first year as a non-permanent member of
the United Nations Security Council has been criticized. In January it opposed a
resolution condemning human rights abuses by the military junta in Burma, on
the grounds that domestic human rights violations in Burma do not constitute a
threat to international peace and security and, therefore, that the matter does not
fall within Security Council jurisdiction. In the UN Human Rights Council South
Africa has been criticized by Council members and the international media for
attempting to block discussion of human rights abuses in Zimbabwe and for voting
to end monitoring of rights abuses in Iran and Uzbekistan.
Court’s (ICC) Pre-Trial Chamber issued arrest warrants for Sudan’s state minister
for humanitarian affairs Ahmed Haroun and the Janjaweed militia leader “Ali
Kosheib.” The Sudanese government publicly refused to cooperate with the ICC,
and instead of handing Haroun over to the court, in September 2007 it appointed
him co-chair of a committee authorized to respond to human rights complaints,
including on Darfur. Kosheib, who had been arrested in connection with other
crimes was, according to Sudan’s Foreign Minister, released from custody in
October.
In late 2006 the government renewed bombing, striking areas under rebel control
in North Darfur on an almost daily basis. Government-backed militias also
attacked the civilian population throughout Darfur, even in camps for internally
displaced persons. Prior to peace talks in October 2007 there was once again an
increase in violence, including major attacks on the towns of Haskanita and
Muhajariya.
In May 2006 Sudan Liberation Army (SLA)-Minawi rebel leader Minni Minawi
signed the Darfur Peace Agreement with the government and was subsequently
appointed Special Assistant to the President, but residents of North Darfur
increasingly complain about abuses carried out by his forces. These abuses—and
clashes between rebel groups and SLA-Minawi fighters—caused thousands to flee
from the Korma and Tawila areas of North Darfur to displaced persons camps.
Since January 2007 fighting among Arab groups has also left more than 200 people
dead and forced thousands more to flee. More than 250,000 civilians were
newly displaced in the first nine months of 2007 alone, bringing the total displaced
population in Darfur to more than 2.2 million.
While large scale attacks drive people into IDP camps, ongoing violence keeps
them there. The camps themselves are becoming increasingly violent with no
guarantee of safety. Sexual violence in particular continues to be a feature of
everyday life for women and girls.
The African Union Mission to Sudan (AMIS) has also come under attack. On
September 30, 2007 unidentified forces attacked an African Union base in
Haskanita, South Darfur, killing 10 AMIS peacekeepers.
After almost five years of conflict, more than four million people—two thirds of
the population of Darfur—depend on humanitarian assistance. However, humanitarian
operations continue to be hampered by insecurity. The UN estimated that
in June 2007 one in every six relief convoys that left provincial capitals was
attacked, either by Janjaweed, rebels, or bandits. Twelve humanitarian workers
were killed in the first nine months of 2007.
South Sudan and Political Reforms
Implementation of the CPA continues to fall behind schedule as key deadlines,
such as the start of a national census and the establishment of the National Civil
Service Commission, pass without progress.
The government’s handling of the Darfur conflict is one source of contention
between the NCP and the SPLM. The SPLM has become more involved in attempts
to resolve the conflict and supports UN deployment to the region, contrary to the
policy of the NCP. Other issues include the refusal of the NCP to make information
available to enable the SPLM to calculate the oil revenue to which they were entitled;
failure to withdraw Sudanese Armed Forces from southern Sudan by the
agreed deadline of 9 July 2007; and ongoing disagreement over the status of the
border area of Abyei. Matters came to a head in October 2007 when the SPLM
suspended its participation in the Government of National Unity (GNU), highlighting
the vulnerability of the CPA.
With national elections due in 2009, the development of a legislative framework
to support them is well behind schedule. Several key pieces of legislation are yet
to be tabled at the National Assembly, including the Elections Act as well as the
National Land Commission and the National Security Act.
Security is essential to enable refugees and other displaced persons to return to
their homes in southern Sudan. However, there has been only limited progress on
disarmament and violent inter-tribal clashes left hundreds dead in 2007. In May
54 people were killed following clashes over cattle between Didinga and Toposa
community members in Eastern Equatoria. In July 56 people were killed following
violent inter-tribal clashes between Nuer and Murle in Jonglei State.
Merowe and Kajbar Dams
In northern Sudan the government moved forward with construction of two major
dams in Merowe (also known as Hamadab) and Kajbar, despite protests from
local communities and human rights campaigners. Currently scheduled to be
completed in 2008, the Merowe dam is expected to displace more than 50,000
people, while Kajbar will affect more than 10,000.
In April 2006 security forces killed three people and injured and arrested dozens
of others when community leaders organized a peaceful protest against the construction
of Merowe dam. Local community protests against Kajbar dam were also
violently dispersed by police and security in June 2007. Four people were killed at
the scene and more than eight people were injured when security forces used
tear gas and live ammunition to scatter the protesters.
Some journalists attempting to report on the dam protests were arrested without
charge and allegedly tortured. In Dongola, capital of Northern State, four journalists
and three lawyers, along with their driver were arrested on their way to the
Kajbar dam site. More than ten more people were arrested in Khartoum and
Dongola in the following days; all were later released.
Arbitrary Arrests and Detentions
There has been a notable increase in cases of arrest and incommunicado detention
of journalists and political activists in Khartoum, often without charge.
Articles 31 and 33 of Sudan’s National Security Act allow for detention without
charge for up to nine months, in violation of international standards.
In July 17 people were arrested in Khartoum on suspicion of plotting to overthrow
the government. Most remain in detention without charge, including retired army
generals and members of the Umma Party Reform and Renewal splinter group,
including its leader Mubarak al-Mahdi.
Freedom of Expression and Human Rights Defenders
Journalists in Sudan use the term “red line” to describe issues they cannot report
on for fear of reprisals by the government authorities. “Red line” issues include Darfur, the ICC, and the July detention of the 17 alleged “coup plotters,” including
Mubarak al-Mahdi, leader of the Umma Party (Reform and Renewal). Newspapers
risk confiscation of their publications or closure if they report on these issues,
and journalists risk harassment and arrest.
Following passage of the Voluntary Work Act in 2006, several organizations, especially
human rights groups, have been harassed and intimidated, for instance by
being summoned to national security for questioning. Lengthy new registration
procedures connected to the Voluntary Work Act have forced some to suspend
their activities for months.
Key International Actors
In 2007 international efforts on Darfur focused mainly on the deployment of
peacekeepers. In July the Sudanese government consented to the deployment of
a new peacekeeping force for Darfur, and the UN Security Council passed resolution
1769 authorizing a “hybrid” AU-UN force of up to 26,000 troops and police.
However, there was no sign that Sudan was prepared to change its policy of supporting
the Janjaweed militia or its refusal to cooperate with the ICC. Resolution
1769 does not mention Sudan’s obligation to turn over the two suspects wanted
by the ICC.
The UN, EU, US, UK, and France have consistently decried the violence in Darfur.
However, such condemnations have largely failed to translate into concrete political
action. It is clear that the government of Sudan has consistently failed to fulfill
its obligations under international law, including those imposed by various
Security Council resolutions. It continues to carry out attacks on civilians, has
failed to take action to reign in the Janjaweed militia, and has refused to cooperate
with the ICC. However, to date, the United Nations has imposed targeted
sanctions on only four low-level individuals, none of whom are senior government
policymakers.
Draft language that would have threatened additional sanctions in the event of
Sudanese government obstruction of UNAMID was deleted from resolution 1769
prior to its adoption, apparently at the insistence of China and other Council members. Divisions among Security Council members appear to make additional
targeted sanctions unlikely.
On May 29, 2007, the United States unilaterally placed targeted economic sanctions
on two Sudanese government officials, a rebel leader, 30 companies owned
or controlled by the Sudanese government, and one company alleged to have violated
the UN arms embargo on Darfur.
Although the European Union and individual EU leaders have also indicated willingness
to adopt targeted sanctions, and have even threatened to do so, they
have not done so as of yet. European contributions to peacekeeping in the region
have mainly focused on the EU force in Chad (see Chad); offers of support to
UNAMID from Scandinavian countries were rejected by the Sudanese government.
China continues to have an important partnership with the Sudanese government
and is believed to have played a key role in influencing Khartoum to consent to
the hybrid force. Sudan was among the African countries visited by Chinese
President Hu Jintao on his first visit to the continent in February, and in May a
new Chinese Special Envoy was appointed, with a special focus on Darfur.
In December 2007 the Human Rights Council is due to receive the final report of
the Group of Experts on Darfur. Many of the recommendations compiled by the
Group of Experts, which provide a framework of indicators that the Government of
Sudan should account for, have not been implemented by the Sudanese authorities.
In the same month the Human Rights Council is due to debate the future of
the mandates of both the Group of Experts on Darfur and the Special Rapporteur
on Sudan.