Sudan
With war continuing in the west and a fragile peace in the south, the dynamics of
respect for human rights remain complex and the challenges severe. In Darfur
hundreds of thousands remain internally displaced as the Sudanese government
uses indiscriminate bombings and attacks on civilians by ground forces and
allied Janjaweed militias in counterinsurgency. Throughout Sudan delay in implementing
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA), signed in 2005 by the
National Congress Party (NCP) government and the Sudan Peoples’ Liberation
Movement (SPLM), is straining relations between the parties, threatening the CPA
itself.
On January 1, 2008, the hybrid United Nations-African Union Mission in Darfur,
(UNAMID), formally took over peacekeeping in Darfur. However, in large part due
to obstruction by the government, by late 2008 barely 10,000 of the authorized
26,000 peacekeepers were on the ground, and UNAMID was unable to provide
effective protection for civilians or humanitarian operations.
In May 2008 rebels from the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM) attacked
Khartoum. Government security forces arbitrarily detained hundreds of suspected
rebels, severely mistreating many.
In July the International Criminal Court (ICC) prosecutor requested an arrest warrant
for President Omar al-Bashir on 10 counts of war crimes, crimes against
humanity, and genocide relating to Darfur. Khartoum threatened that this would
lead to violence in Darfur; and, according to many observers, aiming to secure
diplomatic support for suspension of the ICC investigation, Khartoum made minor
concessions to UNAMID and ostensible overtures towards peace. Meanwhile,
Sudan continued to refuse to hand over Ahmed Haroun, minister of state for
humanitarian affairs, and Ali Kosheib, who have been subject to ICC warrants
since 2007.
A national census, an important milestone in the CPA, was conducted in April, but
not in much of Darfur, and it was marred by violence in parts of the south where
in the weeks beforehand armed militias affiliated with the central government
attacked civilians near the north-south boundary.
Also in the border area, the inability of northern and southern leaders to resolve
differences over the status of oil-rich Abyei led to violent clashes between northern
and southern forces in May. National elections are scheduled for 2009, but
the Government of National Unity (GNU)—created under the terms of the CPA—
has yet to establish an elections commission or enact critical reforms, including
revised national security and press acts that would facilitate free and fair elections.
Sudan continues to sentence children to death. Sudan’s 2005 Interim
Constitution allows for persons under age 18 at the time of the crime to be executed
for hadd and qisas (categories of crimes under Sharia law). One child was
sentenced to death in 2008 and at least two other child cases are under appeal.
Darfur
Government and government-backed militias continue to attack civilian populations
ethnically associated with rebel movements, both deliberately and in the
course of indiscriminate bombings. Rebel factions have proliferated and criminal
banditry has increased. The 2006 Darfur Peace Agreement is now widely acknowledged
to be defunct.
In February, following an offensive by JEM in West Darfur, the government conducted
some of the worst attacks on civilians since 2003-2005. Government
forces and Janjaweed carried out a series of attacks on villages, killing and injuring
hundreds of civilians, and carrying out widespread looting in violation of international
humanitarian law. An estimated 40,000 people fled, 13,000 of them to
Chad.
The ICC prosecutor’s request for an arrest warrant for President Bashir did not,
despite Khartoum’s threats, appear to increase violence on the ground, but neither
did it decrease. Continuing its pattern of attacks on rebel-held areas, in July
government forces bombed 21 civilian locations, killing at least two civilians. In
August and September government forces and militia attacked rebel positions
and villages in North and West Darfur, killing an unknown number of civilians,
looting property, and displacing thousands. In October militia supported by government forces attacked villages in South Darfur, killing scores of civilians,
destroying homes, and looting animals.
In other incidents it was not clear who was responsible. Armed elements targeted
both peacekeepers and humanitarian operations, usually to steal vehicles, supplies,
and weapons. On July 8, armed men attacked a UNAMID convoy in North
Darfur, killing five peacekeepers and two police. In September gunmen shot at
UNAMID helicopters on three occasions, killing four passengers in one incident in
South Darfur. A Nigerian peacekeeper was killed in an ambush in October. From
January to August 2008, armed assailants hijacked 224 vehicles, attacked 139
humanitarian facilities, and killed 11 humanitarian workers. The continued insecurity
has limited humanitarian operations in many areas and prompted UNAMID to
tighten security restrictions.
Internally displaced populations were vulnerable to violence and attacks by a
host of actors, including rebels, former rebels, and government forces. In South
Darfur, government security forces conducted a raid on Kalma camp, reportedly to
disarm civilians, killing 33 civilians including women and children. In September
government forces entered Zamzam camp and shot indiscriminately at civilians,
and looted buildings and structures, causing civilians to flee. Internally displaced
women and girls were victims of sexual violence by government forces, allied militia,
rebels, and criminals. The majority of victims did not seek redress or were prevented
from doing so by legal and practical obstacles in the justice system.
The Darfur conflict reached the capital for the first time on May 10-12 when JEM
forces attacked Omdurman, a western suburb of Khartoum. Following the attack,
Sudanese National Intelligence and Security Services (NISS) arrested at least 300
individuals, including children, in public places and house-to-house searches targeting
those who appeared Darfuri. Released detainees reported torture, mistreatment,
and inhumane conditions in prisons and secret detention centers.
Many of those arrested remain unaccounted for.
In June the government established special courts under Sudan’s 2001 Anti-
Terrorism Law to try those accused of participating in the attack. In trials that fell
below international standards, the courts tried and sentenced to death 50 people
in July and August. Their appeal is pending.
Following the ICC prosecutor’s request for an arrest warrant for President Bashir in
July, Khartoum responded with a dual strategy of threats of further violence and
promises of progress on the ground. The government made a series of minor concessions
to UNAMID and ostensible overtures towards peace, aimed at securing
diplomatic support for suspension of the investigation. In August President
Bashir announced a “Sudan People’s Initiative” to draw up a proposal for resolving
the conflict, and in October expressed willingness to attend talks slated to
take place in Qatar at the end of the year. On November 12, Khartoum also
announced a unilateral ceasefire in advance of those talks. However, rebels
refused to engage in either the People’s Initiative or the Qatar talks, arguing that
the government is not serious about either the peace process or the ceasefire,
but only interested in securing a deferral of the ICC investigation.
Also in response to the threat of a warrant, Khartoum appointed another special
prosecutor to try crimes committed in Darfur. However, at the time of writing,
Sudan has made no significant progress toward domestic accountability for serious
crimes.
Press Freedom
The government resumed pre-print censorship on newspapers in 2008, in the
wake of a Chadian rebel coup attempt at N’Djamena on February 2-3—which the
Chad government said was supported by Khartoum—and again after the JEM
attack on Omdurman. Between May and September, NISS media censors removed
or partly removed more than 150 articles, 50 of which covered the Darfur conflict.
Southern Sudan
Delays in implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement continued to
strain relations between the NCP and the SPLM. In October 2007, the SPLM temporarily
suspended participation in the Government of National Unity, accusing
the NCP of failing to share oil revenues, not withdrawing its troops from the
south, failing to take steps to demarcate the North-South border, and, crucially,
failing to implement the Abyei Protocol, an accord to resolve the status of oil-rich
Abyei.
The SPLM rejoined the GNU in late 2007, but the parties did not resolve the dispute
over Abyei, which led to fighting in May 2008, in which scores of civilians
were killed and at least 60,000 fled their homes. The parties reached agreement
to restore security to Abyei, enabling displaced residents to return. However, the
underlying dispute over Abyei and other issues, including withdrawal of troops
and border demarcation, continued to threaten the CPA.
In southern Sudan, the proliferation of small arms among the civilians contributed
to violent communal disputes over land, cattle and resources. The semiautonomous
Government of Southern Sudan (GOSS) conducted civilian disarmament,
involving human rights violations by poorly trained and sometimes undisciplined
soldiers. Weak rule of law institutions were not able to provide civilian
security and contributed to an environment of impunity. Human rights violations
in the administration of justice—the responsibility of GOSS in the south—included
arbitrary arrests and detentions, prolonged pretrial detention, and poor conditions
in detention facilities.
Key International Actors
In 2008 international attention mainly focused on two issues: the deployment of
UNAMID and the ICC arrest warrant request for President Bashir.
Diplomatic support for UNAMID, including at the UN Security Council, did not
translate into effective pressure on Khartoum to facilitate deployment, nor the
provision of critical equipment, including helicopters that the force still seeks. In
early 2008 a group of governments, including the United States and Canada,
formed “Friends of UNAMID,” which provided additional resources to troop-contributing
countries, but by late 2008 the force remained severely understaffed
and ill-equipped.
In July international focus shifted when the ICC prosecutor applied for a warrant
for the arrest of President Bashir, and Khartoum and its allies launched their
diplomatic campaign to secure the suspension of the investigation, (which the
UN Security Council can order under article 16 of the Rome Statute.)
Although both the African Union and the League of Arab States supported calls
for suspending the warrant, the Security Council remains divided. Several countries, including the US, United Kingdom and France, have rejected suspension.
The ICC pretrial chamber is expected to consider the prosecutor’s request in early
2009.