 SUDAN
 Sudan is ruled by Omar Hassan Ahmed al-Bashir and a group of
 officers in the Sudanese People's Armed Forces (SPAF), who
 overthrew Sudan's democratic government in 1989. The coup
 leaders formed a National Salvation Revolution Command Council
 (RCC) of 15 military officers (reduced to 12 in 1991), imposed
 a strict curfew, suspended Sudan's 1985 transitional
 constitution, abrogated press licenses, and dissolved all
 political and trade union institutions. The Omar Government
 controls most of Sudan, excluding large areas of the South
 controlled by the Sudanese People's Liberation Army/Movement
 (SPLA/M), led by John Garang. The RCC Government has since
 become closely identified with the National Islamic Front
 (NIF), a political party ostensibly banned in 1989 with other
 political parties. NIF members and supporters hold important
 positions throughout the Government, police, security forces,
 the judiciary, academia, the media, business, and banking.
 Numbering about 100,000, the SPAF is responsible for Sudan's
 internal and external security, assisted by a large
 multiorganizational security apparatus and police force.
 Martial law remained in effect in 1991, as did a State of
 Emergency (SOE), permitting various arbitrary government
 actions. The Omar Government greatly increased the size of the
 paramilitary force, the Popular Defense Force (PDF), which is
 closely linked to the NIF. A small number of these units were
 deployed in the civil war zone.
 The civil war continued unabated in 1991, with many civilian
 casualties. Military operations by both sides have left large
 areas of Sudan largely unpopulated and plagued by banditry,
 especially along the Ugandan, Chadian, and Zairean borders.
 Government forces, sometimes assisted by PDF units, continued
 to attack and kill civilians. In August a faction within the
 SPLA in Nasir, in southeastern Sudan, split with SPLA/M leader
 John Garang. The Nasir group accused Garang of committing
 human rights abuses, including forced conscription of children,
 arbitrary detentions, torture, and execution of opponents. In
 November the war became more violent as serious fighting broke
 out around Bor/Mongolla between the Nasir group and Garang's
 SPLA faction. Thousands, mostly civilians, died as a result of
 this fighting, which was marked by tribalism. Between 100,000
 and 200,000 people, primarily women and children, were
 displaced by the violence to areas south. In November the SPLA
 resumed shelling of Juba, resulting in approximately 70
 civilian deaths. The SPLA split delayed government-SPLA/M
 talks scheduled for October in Abuja, Nigeria. The Nasir
 group, in contrast to Garang, publicly advocates the separation
 of the South.
 Sudan's primarily agricultural economy has been devastated by
 the costly civil war, hyperinflation, high unemployment, up to
 780,000 refugees from neighboring countries, and 4.5 million
 displaced Sudanese. Although people are largely free to pursue
 private interests and hold private property, there is a long
 history in Sudan of pervasive government control of the
 economy. New government economic policies to privatize
 inefficient state-owned firms and stimulate private sector
 investment have had little effect.
 The human rights situation in Sudan remained grave in 1991
 because of the civil war and RCC efforts to strengthen
 government authority. The RCC repressed speech, press,
 assembly, association, and political choice, engaged in
 arbitrary arrest and detention without charge, and tried
 
 
 SUDAN
 civilians in unfair trials by military courts. Government
 security services operated with little restraint, often
 mistreating and harassing citizens and torturing civilians
 suspected of opposing the regime.* The Government did release
 300 political detainees in June, but its NIF-inspired drive to
 Islamicize Sudanese society and institutions markedly increased
 religious intolerance and discrimination against non-Muslim
 citizens.
 In March a new penal code, the Criminal Act of 1991, instituted
 harsh punishments nationwide, including amputation and
 stoning. Although the southern states are currently exempt
 from these Islamic prohibitions and penalties, the 1991 Act
 provides for a possible future application of Islamic law
 (Shari'a) in the South. The Shari'a and the Arabization and
 Islamicization of society are major causes of southern
 disaffection. Critics have long pointed to the parallel
 institutions established by the RCC to ensure fundamentalist
 control of such important groups as the military (formation of
 more ideologically motivated PDF units), the judiciary (special
 security courts), and labor (steering committees). Abuses
 relating to the civil war included indiscriminate bombings,
 forced conscriptions, confiscation of relief supplies, rape,
 and pillage.
 During the year, there were important instances of improved
 cooperation with international food relief efforts by the
 Government and the SPLA/M. However, these instances of
 cooperation coincided with many more instances of mutual
 hostility and interference. At year's end, the continuation of
 the war and the ambivalence of the Government and the two SPLA
 factions toward relief operations continued to threaten large
 segments of the southern and western populations with
 starvation.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 Government and SPLA/M forces were involved or, implicated in
 numerous instances of extrajudicial killing, and other abuses
 of civilians in the civil war (see Section l.g.). There were
 credible reports of politically and religiously motivated
 killings of several persons by a PDF-related group operating in
 Juba.
 In July a southern resident of a displaced camp in Khartoum
 reportedly died as a result of a beating by security personnel
 who entered the camp late at night.
 Following the August split within the SPLA/M, the SPLA/Nasir
 group accuged John Garang of summarily executing without due
 process several of his political rivals. The Nasir group
 specifically cited three such killings and charged that two
 SPLA members, among others, died under torture.
 In January the Government released five members of the Abu
 Nidal organization who had been convicted of killing seven
 persons in a 1988 terrorist attack on the Acropole Hotel in
 Khartoum, after they had served a minimal sentence. This
 leniency is in marked cohtrast to sentences being decreed under
 Sudan's judicial system. Throughout the year reports persisted
 
 
 378
 SUDAN
 that several camps exist in Sudan in which people are trained
 in the use of weapons and explosives. These camps and
 individuals have reputedly been linked to specific known
 terrorist organizations.
 In July security forces fired upon unarmed students and killed
 one student in antigovernment demonstrations at the University
 of Khartoum. Although the university administration called for
 an investigation into this incident, no such investigation was
 carried out.
 b. Disappearance
 Approximately 25 civilian residents of Kadugli, in southern
 Kordofan, mostly Nubans, disappeared in 1991. They were
 believed to have been executed by military forces on suspicion
 of collaborating with the- SPLA/M. Routine disappearances of
 people suspected of collaborating or supporting the SPLA/M
 occurred in the civil war zones. The SPAF or government-
 sponsored militias were believed to be responsible for these
 disappearances.
 In May an Ethiopian national, an employee of the U.S. Agency
 for International Development (USAID), was arrested in the
 USAID building in downtown Khartoum. Despite repeated
 diplomatic protests and a belated government response that he
 had escaped from custody the day after detention, the
 employee's whereabouts remained unknown.
 Following the split in the SPLA in August, a medical official
 from southern Sudan was kidnaped on Kenyan soil and taken to
 Kapoeta in Sudan by a group loyal to John Garang.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Formerly uncommon in Sudan, torture and other forms of physical
 mistreatment by official and unofficial security forces were
 widespread in 1991. Various security organizations used
 commandeered safe houses (known as ghost houses) to hold
 incommunicado persons suspected of activity against the
 Government, including journalists, businessmen, and students.
 Following demonstrations at the University of Khartoum in July
 and September, suspected student ringleaders were badly beaten.
 Detainees in ghost houses were subjected to varying forms of
 torture, including whipping and clubbing; electric shock; the
 kicking of ribs or kidneys; binding of hands for long periods;
 blindfolding for days at a time; immersion of hands in boiling
 water; suspension from ceiling fans; and psychological torture,
 such as mock executions.
 Prison conditions are harsh, especially in Shalla prison in
 Darfur. Political detainees and suspected SPLA/M sympathizers
 held there early in 1991 were confined with criminals and the
 mentally ill and subjected to overcrowding, deprivation of
 water under conditions of extreme heat, unsanitary living
 conditions causing typhus and other diseases, lack of medical
 treatment, and denial of access to family and friends. In late
 1991, Osman Siraj and other prominent political prisoners were
 moved to Shalla. Detainees were also held on the roof of
 security headquarters in Khartoum in overcrowded conditions and
 in searing heat with limited food and inadequate toilet
 facilities. Others were forced to remain spread-eagled or on
 
 
 379
 SUDAN
 their knees with hands on their heads along the outside walls
 of security buildings for extended periods.
 The new 1991 Criminal Act based oh Shari'a law prescribes
 corporal punishments, called "Hudud," for certain offenses.
 Hudud punishments include amputation, stoning, and lashings.
 While sentences were handed down during the year applying each
 of these punishments, none had been carried out by year's end
 except for lashing-which was routinely carried out in the
 North. The penalty for drinking alcohol, for example, is 40
 lashes.
 In August the'SPLA/Nasir breakaway group, without citing
 numbers, accused John Garang of torturing some SPLA officers to
 silence dissent.
 d. Arbitrary arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Neither the 1991 Criminal Act nor the superseded 1983 Penal
 Code deal with periods of detention and security arrests. On
 April 29, General Omar declared that all detentions would
 henceforth be subject to judicial review. However, in June the
 National Security Act was amended to permit detention for up to
 72 hours, extendable for 1 month with justification, which is
 not defined in the Act. It also states that precautionary
 detention "to preserve the general security" may be authorized
 by the RCC for 3 months. A person thus detained should be
 notified "in suitable time"--interpreted as within these 3
 months-of the reasons for his detention. The RCC may extend
 precautionary detention for another 3 months with proper
 notification, but the judge or prosecution may reject this
 extension and release the detainee. Bail is permitted except
 in murder and in checking infraction cases. Indigent
 defendants are provided with legal counsel by the Government.
 After the coup on June 30, 1989, the Omar Government arrested
 many prominent persons from many fields and declared a
 nationwide State of Emergency (SOE), which continues in effect
 and gives the Government wide-ranging arbitrary powers. The
 number of detainees reached several htndred by 1990, especially
 after the alleged coup attempt of April 1990. On April 29,
 General Omar announced the release of 300 political detainees,
 claiming they represented all political detainees held in Sudan.
 Although the 300 political detainees were eventually freed by
 June, approximately 70 persons remained imprisoned without
 charge after the April 29 amnesty. Most had been in jail for
 over a year. At least one of those freed by General Omar's
 amnesty was rearrested shortly thereafter. By the end of 1991,
 about 65 political detainees remained in prison in Sudan. This
 number does not include the many who were arrested, kept in
 ghost houses or security offices, and then released, a large
 number which varied at any one time. Military authorities in
 southern, central, and western areas also incarcerated numerous
 persons without charge on suspicion of cooperation or sympathy
 with the SPLA/M.
 The SPLA/Nasir group accused John Garang of arbitrarily
 detaining, without consulting the SPLA high command, many SPLA
 members solely because they differed with him or challenged his
 authority. According to the SPLA/Nasir group, some of these
 persons have been detained for more than 6 years; one senior
 SPLA officer reportedly died while in custody.
 
 
 SUDAN
 There were no known cases of involuntary exile from Sudan in
 1991.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Under the previous government, the Sudanese legal system
 involved extensive guarantees of due process, including public
 trials before a three-judge panel and appeals to higher courts.
 The Omar Government made the judiciary subservient to the
 executive. One of the RCC's first decrees on June 30, 1989,
 transferred all power over Sudan's Constitution and laws to the
 RCC. The judiciary was transferred to the Ministry of Justice,
 and the Chief Justice, formerly elected by sitting judges, was
 appointed by General Omar. The RCC removed over 20a judges
 considered ideologically unacceptable and replaced them with
 RCC appointees closely affiliated with the National Islamic
 Front. The new judges favor a strict application of Shari'a.
 In November 1989, the RCC also passed the Special Courts Act,
 which provided for special security courts to try persons
 accused of a wide range of violations, e.g., of constitutional
 decrees, emergency regulations, some sections of the penal
 code, and drug and currency violations. The special security
 courts may be composed of three military officers or any three
 competent persons; those created thus far have had both
 military and civilian judges. Attorneys may sit with
 defendants as "friends of the court" and advise them; but may
 not normally address the court. Sentences are usually severe
 and implemented immediately, except that death sentences must
 be referred to the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court and the
 Head of State. Defendants may file appeal briefs with the
 Chief Justice. In 1991 most security cases were tried in these
 courts.
 Thus, at the end of 1991 the RCC court system involved the
 regular courts, both criminal and civil, the parallel special
 security courts, military courts intended mainly for military
 personnel, and tribal courts which continue to be important in
 rural areas where disputes largely involve land, water, and
 family matters. On March 22, courts were instructed to apply
 the new 1991 Criminal Act; civil cases continued to be handled
 largely according to the Civil Transactions Act of 1983.
 While the southern states are currently exempted from sections
 in the 1991 Criminal Act, the Act permits the possible future
 application of Shari'a to the South, if the legislative body so
 decides. There were no reports in 1991 that Islamic
 punishments were being carried out by the courts in
 government-controlled areas of the South. The SPLA/M has
 continued to call for a secular Sudan and the repeal of Shari'a.
 The Attorney General's office allegedly monitors trials of
 political prisoners, but its influence over the process is
 limited. In September approximately 56 persons, members of the
 military, retired military, and a number of civilians were
 tried in a military court for alleged coup plotting in August.
 These unfair trials were held in secret, at night, and none of
 the defendants had legal counsel. In November sentences were
 handed down for 52 of these alleged coup plotters. Eleven
 persons were sentenced to death although General Omar commuted
 10 of these sentences to life imprisonment and 1 death sentence
 to 10 years' imprisonment. Sentences for the other defendants
 ranged from 20 years' imprisonment 'to suspended sentences
 predicated on good behavior.
 
 
 381
 SUDAN
 Portions of the South are outside effective judicial
 procedures. Some reports suggest that army units summarily try
 and punish those accused of crimes, especially offenses against
 civil order.
 The SPLA/M controls large areas of the South. Reports
 indicated that a rudimentary system of justice based on village
 leaders was being used in some of these areas. A trusted
 village elder is appointed to adjudicate disputes, as well as
 to collect taxes and recruit soldiers and labor for the
 SPLA/M. SPLA/M officials can be tried and reportedly have been
 punished for criminal offenses.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy,-Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Government surveillance in Sudan, outside the combat zones, was
 rare before the coup. By 1991 surveillance was pervasive and
 constrained only by resources and manpower. Despite their
 release from house arrest in April, former prime minister Sadiq
 al-Mahdi and former Communist Party chief Mohammad Ibrahim
 Nugud, as well as other prominent former political detainees,
 remained under constant surveillance. The University of
 Khartoum and even some Christian church services were targeted
 for surveillance. Mail, including that delivered by courier
 service, was sometimes opened and read, and registered mail was
 examined by government officials before being sent.
 The Government has instituted neighborhood "popular committees"
 to control the rationing system for subsidized basic
 commodities and to monitor household size and composition.
 They also furnish documents essential for obtaining an exit
 visa from Sudan. These committees, tasked with reporting
 suspicious neighborhood activities, amount to a government
 informer system. InOctober a Khartoum state official
 announced that the popular committees would begin to assist the
 police in maintaining law and order to "safeguard the internal
 front."
 Searches without warrants continued in 1991 often in nighttime
 raids, particularly in cases of suspected political or economic
 crimes. Searches for alcohol in private homes, including some
 houses of foreigners, also occurred frequently.
 Security officers investigate Sudanese suspected of "excessive"
 contact with foreigners and harass and question some Sudanese
 employees of foreign embassies.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian
 Law in Internal Conflicts
 Government forces, government-affiliated militias, and the two
 factions of SPLA/M frequently used excessive force and violated
 humanitarian law by attacking civilian targets. Neither side
 in the civil war has made any attempt to investigate or punish
 those responsible.
 The Sudanese Air Force (SAF) continued to bomb indiscriminately
 several towns, killing civilians. For example, in August and
 September, the SAF bombed Kapoeta, headquarters of the SPLA/M
 and of the southern relief program, killing at least 1 civilian
 and wounding 40. In September the SAF bombed Maracha in Uganda,
 killing four civilians and wounding six, including two
 schoolchildren.
 
 
 382
 SUDAN
 SPAF soldiers prevented civilians from leaving the besieged
 town of Juba, and land mines planted indiscriminately caused
 numerous civilian deaths and limited agricultural cultivation.
 The Government has used the Popular Defense Forces (PDF) Act of
 1989 to place tribal militias under government control through
 incorporation into the PDF. Those tribal militias are small in
 number in comparison with the main PDF core of Islamic Front
 supporters, but they were responsible for many human rights
 abuses in attacking their longstanding tribal opponents,
 particularly the Dinka, who are the most important source of
 support for the SPLA/M. In 1991 the Rizeigat and Missiriya
 tribes, among the most feared of the militias, and some members
 of the Fertit tribe, concluded a cease-fire with the SPLA. As
 a result, in 1991, unlike past years, there were few reports of
 depredations by these armed militias. The SPLA's military
 successes in the South, which expanded the areas under their
 control, may have compelled these-militias to make peace with
 the SPLA/M.
 Tribal militias elsewhere, particularly in the Nuba mountain
 area of southern Kordofan, continued to pillage and rape the
 population. There were reports of widespread arrests and
 killings of civilians by government forces in September and
 October. The Nubans, perceived as hostile to the Government,
 increasingly became the targets of violence by government
 forces. The introduction of new PDF units to the civil war
 zone resulted in the razing of villages and the indiscriminate
 killing of civilians, particularly near Wau in Bahr al-Ghazal.
 In September a mine planted on the runway in Wau damaged an
 International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) aircraft and
 injured its crew.
 There were thousands of deaths and numerous human rights
 violations in the civil war in 1991, largely as a result of
 intra-SPLA fighting. Large numbers of civilians were killed
 late in the year in the fighting, marked by tribalism, between
 the two SPLA groups near Bor in southern Sudan. In November
 and December, the SPLA/M resumed shelling of Juba, resulting in
 approximately 70 civilian deaths. This violence and SPLA
 attempts to conscript southern males forcibly caused a heavy
 refugee influx, numbering in thousands, into neighboring
 countries. There was a persistent report that the SPLA
 forcibly conscripted at least 10,000 male minors.
 There was no clear picture of the prisoner of war (POW)
 situation in Sudan. According to human rights critics, the
 Government has rarely taken POW's in the civil conflict,
 instead executing SPLA members or suspected sympathizers. No
 progress has been made by humanitarian organizations seeking
 access to detainees held by the various factions.
 Darfur in western Sudan continued to be a scene of humanitarian
 abuses. Although the Government launched a much publicized
 campaign to disarm the tribes in Darfur in order to reduce
 crime, the Government reportedly exempted favored groups from
 this requirement and concentrated on the Fur and other non-Arab
 groups. According to an unconfirmed report in September,
 government forces in Darfur, targeting criminals, also
 indiscriminately bombed civilians from helicopters. There were
 no reports on numbers of casualties.
 Interference by the Government and the two SPLA factions with
 food relief efforts, the limited availability of safe land,
 river, and air corridors, government obstruction and lack of
 
 
 383
 SUDAN
 medical treatment added to the causes of death in the areas
 affected by the civil war in 1991. The relief situation
 remained precarious at year's end, and thousands of civilians
 were dependent on intermittent co6peration by the three
 combatants with each other and with donors and relief
 agencies--while fighting escalated.
 As the year unfolded, there were also important instances of
 improved cooperation by botn the Government and the SPLA/M with
 international relief operations in the South. Nevertheless,
 both the Government and the SPLA/M remained suspicious of
 relief efforts, believing that they benefited the other side.
 Active interference with relief efforts by both the Government
 and the SPLA/M continued throughout 1991. Heavy mining on some
 southern roads by government forces also greatly obstructed
 movement of relief convoys by land. Movement of food supplies
 by land to Juba, the largest town in the South, continued to be
 blocked by the SPLA/M, forcing the 300,000 residents to rely on
 the uncertainties of an extremely expensive airlift.
 In western Sudan, the Government was especially slow to
 cooperate with international efforts to provide food to the
 victims of a severe drought. Although the situation later
 improved, thousands may have perished because of government
 intransigence and lack of cooperation in the relief effort.
 Thousands in the west remained at risk of starvation at the.end
 of 1991.
 Civilians engaged in relief efforts suffered mistreatment by
 some local townspeople, attacks by armed militias, and
 occasional military harassment.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Since the 1989 coup, freedom of speech has been severely
 restricted. Debate in some government-sponsored conferences
 was occasionally open and at variance with government policies
 but was only tolerated within government-controlled confines.
 The 300 detainees released through General Omar's April amnesty
 were required to sign statements forswearing antigovernment
 activities. Sudanese abroad who made statements criticizing
 the Government were reportedly the targets of surveillance and
 threats.
 All private publications have been banned. Two government-
 controlled general daily newspapers, Modern Sudan and National
 Salvation, and the weekly English-language newspaper New
 Horizon and the English monthly Sudanow do not criticize
 government policies, but they occasionally go beyond stated
 government positions in their Islamic fundamentalist and
 anti-Western attitudes. Radio, television, and the Sudanese
 News Agency (SUNA) are under government control and reflect
 government policies.
 In November General Bashir announced that he would assume the
 Minister of Culture and Information portfolio and also pledged
 that the media, under his direction, would undergo "great
 changes" in its programming to "reflect Islamic values."
 The RCC pursued a selective policy in 1991, permitting some
 foreign journalists to visit and report, while refusing visas
 
 
 384
 SUDAN
 to others. Reporting by international news agencies within
 Sudan proceeded normally.
 Academic freedom in Sudan was generally respected in the past,
 but the Islamic-fundamentalist orientation of the Government
 has made many professors reluctant to expound their views
 freely. Following antigovernment demonstrations in July and
 September, the Government viewed the faculty at the University
 of Khartoum with particular suspicion, and security
 organizations began questioning some academics about their
 political opinions (see Section 5).
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 These freedoms are severely restricted. Declaration of the SOE
 and of martial law on June 30, 1989, effectively eliminated the
 right to protest. Most nongovernment-sponsored demonstrations
 in 1991 were forcibly broken up by police, and, in the case of
 demonstrations at the University of Khartoum in July. by
 security forces. In July residents of a destroyed shanty town
 demanding compensation were permitted to protest before a
 government building.
 On June 30, 1989, the RCC dissolved all political parties and
 effectively disbanded all nonreligious groups. Blamed by the
 Government for most of Sudan's problems, political parties
 remained banned in 1991, and RCC officials vowed Sudan would
 never return to a multiparty system. However, the RCC favored
 members and supporters of the National Islamic Front (NIF), a
 party ostensibly banned in 1989 with all other political
 parties but increasingly identified with the RCC Government.
 NIF members and supporters were well placed throughout
 government, the security forces, academia, the media, business,
 and commerce.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Sudan is a multireligious country in fact and has been so in
 law, but tolerance of non-Muslims has sharply deteriorated.
 Islam and Christianity are formally recognized as religions of
 Sudan, and adherents of other beliefs are not legally prevented
 from worshipping. Muslims are a majority in the North,
 although there are also over 4.5 million displaced persons,
 most of whom are originally from the South (an area
 predominantly animist and Christian). Proselytizing by Muslims
 is allowed, as is proselytizing by Christians of non-Muslims;
 but proselytizing of Muslims is discouraged; apostasy for
 Muslims under the 1991 Criminal Act is punishable by death.
 The Foreign Missionary Society Act of 1962 subjects public
 Christian religious activity to close government supervision.
 Among other provisions, the Act forbids the construction of
 churches without government permits, and none has been issued
 for more than 10 years. The Sudan Catholic Bishops' Conference
 (SCBC) and the Sudan Council of Churches (SCC) regularly
 protest against the Act, which is often capriciously
 interpreted by local officials.
 As religious tolerance deteriorated steadily in 1991,
 non-Muslims religious leaders spoke of "open persecution."
 Four missionary nuns in Khartoum were threatened with
 expulsion, and one expatriate priest was expelled in July, the
 first in many years. Beginning in .May, Christian activity was
 ordered halted in El Duiem and Damazin; in September a priest
 was expelled from Damazin by local authorities. In Khasm al
 
 
 385
 SUDAN
 Ghirba, authorities stopped the construction of a house for
 nuns despite the issuance of permits. In August a Catholic
 priest and four catechists were arrested in Dongola and -
 questioned about their religious activities. Homes of
 Christians and displaced persons near Dongola were searched by
 government security forces.
 Christian religious personnel have had their passports
 confiscated and were not permitted to leave the, country without
 the approval of the Ministry of Religious Affairs. Christians
 were also increasingly uneasy over reports that PDF units
 dispatched to the South are urged by government officials to
 fight a "jihad" or holy war against unbelievers. In Gedaref
 one building used for Christian services was occupied by the
 PDF, 'and church services in several cities continued to be
 monitored by security officers.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Freedom of movement in Sudan continued to be hampered in 1991
 by the. civil war, a poor transportation infrastructure, and
 government restrictions. Authorities maintain lists of
 Sudanese citizens not permitted to travel, and security
 officials sometimes make arbitrary decisions on issuance or
 cancellation of exit visas. Some personnel of foreign
 nongovernmental organizations (NGO) were reluctant to leave the
 country for fear that the Government would not grant them
 reentry visas.
 Although in practice most Sudanese have experienced little
 difficulty in leaving the country, numerous individual citizens
 and some categories of persons (such as journalists or security
 suspects) are often refused exit visas. Some former-political
 detainees are also forbidden to travel outside Khartoum
 Sudanese not in this category may move about the country
 freely, although they are required to carry identity cards and
 those found without them at one of the numerous checkpoints may
 be summarily beaten. This regulation appeared to be applied
 especially to southerners in northern urban areas. The Omar
 Government tightened internal travel restrictions on foreigners
 (especially diplomats), principally by requiring travel permits
 which can be very difficult to obtain.
 Increased enforcement of a new conscription law prevents young
 men of applicable age from obtaining domestic travel permits
 and from leaving the country without first obtaining an
 exemption from authorities. A married Sudanese woman must have
 the permission of her husband or another male relative to
 travel abroad, and regulations specify that unmarried Sudanese
 women must travel with a family member or other sponsor. The
 travel restrictions for women, generally ignored before the
 June 1989 coup, have since been increasingly enforced.
 Foreigners must register with the police on entering the
 country,.obtain permission to move from one location to
 another, and register again at the new location within 3 days
 of arrival.
 After the 1989 coup, the RCC Government imposed a curfew in
 muchoof Sudan, and suspected curfew violators are subject to
 detention or summary floggings. Regulations also strictly
 limit the amount of hard currency in cash ($50) a traveler may
 carry out of Sudan. Death sentenceshave been handed down for
 violators of currency regulations.
 
 
 386
 SUDAN
 Although information from SPLA/M-controlled areas is more
 limited, once a permit is granted by the SPLA, travel by NGO
 personnel in these areas is relatively easier than in the North.
 The Government continued forcibly to resettle persons displaced
 by famine and civil war, largely southerners and westerners,
 from several sites in Khartoum to other desolate and barren
 locations outside Khartoum proper or to equally squalid
 transient camps within the city. In June, July, and August,
 after demolishing their homes as "illegal dwellings," the
 Government moved 6,000 families from one section in Omdurman to
 another area devoid of water and other basic necessities. Late
 in the year, the Government announced another plan to move an
 estimated 104,000 dispiaced persons to a desolate expanse of
 desert. At one displaced camp where infant mortality rates
 were particularly high, the Government threatened any
 nongovernmental organization attempting to distribute food or
 establish clinics in the camp. In December government forces
 forcibly relocating residents of displaced camps outside
 Khartoum opened fire, killing at least 12.
 In late May and early June, hundreds of thousands of Sudanese
 refugees fled camps in western Ethiopia and returned to
 southern Sudan following the overthrow of Ethiopian leader
 Mengistu. The SPLA/M encouraged the wholesale return of the
 refugees, claiming it was only trying to protect their lives.
 Many suspected, however, that the SPLA/M used the refugees to
 provide protective cover for its forced egress from Ethiopia,
 since the new regime in Addis Ababa stated it would no longer
 tolerate an SPLA presence in Ethiopia (as the Mengistu regime
 had done).
 The overall refugee situation in Sudan changed little in 1991
 with the exception of an influx of about 51,000 Ethiopian
 ex-military and civilians after the fall of the Mengistu
 government. Most of these "new" refugees were successfully
 voluntarily repatriated to Ethiopia by November 22 under
 auspices of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
 (UNHCR). In addition, about 1,000 Eritrean families per day
 spontaneously repatriated to Eritrea during the second half of
 1991.
 At the end of 1991 the refugee population (largely composed of
 Ethiopians, Chadians, and Ugandans) was about 780,000, of whom
 some 370,000 were assisted by the UNHCR. There were no reports
 of forcible repatriation of refugees in Sudan in 1991. Sudan
 has generally accorded refugees good treatment although the
 Government impeded full UNHCR and NGO access to the newest
 Ethiopian refugees in the Kassala area in June. Resettlement
 of refugees by the UNHCR to third countries proceeded smoothly
 in 1991. However the U.S. refugee processing program was
 disrupted by Gulf War evacuations and the Government's desires
 to slow the program near the end of 1991. New registrations of
 Ethiopians for resettlement in the U.S. program were suspended
 after November 21, 1991.
 Refugees may not become resident aliens or citizens of Sudan,
 regardless of the length of their stay. However, large numbers
 of refugees have been tolerated in the cities, especially the
 capital area. In urban areas, reports are common of police
 harassment and petty thievery against refugees, notably against
 Ethiopians. Refugees face beatings for minor infractions of
 the law, administrative obstruction, and delays, and are forced
 to pay small bribes to obtain everything from work permits to
 
 
 387
 SUDAN
 food-ration cards. Refugees seldom have recourse to the legal
 system when attacked by policemen.
 Section 3 Respect for Political-Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The people of Sudan had neither the right nor the ability to
 change their government peacefully. In September 1989, the
 RCC's "Third Constitutional Decree" established a new
 governmental system for Sudan, featuring a head of state
 (General Omar) with sovereign powers. The all-military RCC
 continued as the legislative authority. It approved a cabinet
 consisting of a prime minister and other ministers to handle
 day-to-day administration. The courts were brought under the
 Head of State's supervision and were specifically forbidden to
 review acts of the RCC or the Head of State. Claiming
 sectarian bickering was harmful to Sudan, they abolished all
 political parties, seized (and later distributed) the parties'
 assets, and detained (albeit in relatively mild conditions) the
 leaders of the major precoup parties.
 In October 1990, the RCC concluded a national dialog conference
 which rejected both a multiparty and one-party system in favor
 of a political structure based on ascending levels of
 nonpartisan consultative assemblies. The recommendations
 parallel ideas of the National Islamic Front. Although the
 establishment of the new political system was to have begun in
 1991, this did not occur.
 The military Government publicly assigned a high priority to
 ending the civil war. However, by the end of 1991, despite
 Nigerian mediation, there had been little movement on the
 issue. John Garang's leadership of the SPLA was challenged by
 a small group of his commanders, who control sizable areas in
 the South and who have called for an interim period of
 separation of the South from the North. This represents a
 break from Garang's consistent advocacy of a united Sudan.
 Major differences between the SPLA'and the Government also
 revolve aroundthe extent of Shari'a law and what constitutes
 "legitimate political forces" to participate in peace
 negotiations. Heretofore, the Gdvernment insisted that only it
 and the SPLA should participate in negotiations; the SPLA wants
 the officially banned political parties and trade unions also
 to take part. By the end of 1991, the SPLA split had become a
 serious impediment to peace efforts.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government has tried to stamp out any domestic criticism
 and has been very defensive about foreign criticism of its
 human rights performance. In 1991 it frequently and vehemently
 denied any human rights abuses in Sudan. Almost all of the
 relatively few local human rights activists have been arrested
 and detained, often under very harsh conditions.
 Before the coup, several organizations monitored human rights
 in the country, including the Sudan Human Rights Organization
 (SHRO), the Sudan Bar Association (SBA), the Sudan Catholic
 Bishop Conference (SCBC), and the Sudan Council of Churches
 (SCC). The SBA was dissolved by the Government after the coup,
 and its assets were confiscated and leading members detained or
 placed under restriction. -Throughout 1991 the Bar Association
 was under control of a government steering committee with a
 
 
 388
 SUDAN
 government-appointed chairman. The SHRO was also dissolved by
 government decree, and a request for reinstatement was
 ignored. In 1991 the Government created a new organization
 called the Sudan Human Rights Organization, but having no
 connection to the previous group. Among the new Organization's
 purposes are defending the Government from unfounded attacks
 and protecting the reputation of Sudan. It has issued no
 statements critical of the Government. The SCBC and the SCC
 still exist and monitor and publicize human rights problems,
 especially those involving religious discrimination.
 In 1991 the RCC permitted the U.S. Lawyers Committee for Human
 Rights to visit the Sudan to examine the situation of the
 refugees and of the displaced. The U.N. Human Rights
 Commission began deliberations on the human rights situation in
 Sudan following complaints it received against the Government.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Sudan's population of 24.5 million (1989) is a multiethnic mix
 of over 500 Arab and African tribes, with scores of languages
 and dialects. In general, Sudan is composed primarily of two
 cultures--Arab in the North and central areas and black African
 in the South. Sudanese governments have historically been
 dominated by northern Muslims (about 16 million). Some
 southern tribal groups, especially non-Arabs and non-Muslims,
 have demanded greater economic and political power and greater
 recognition of Sudan's cultural diversity.
 Discrimination in the North by the Muslim Arab majority against
 displaced non-Arabs from the South is common. Residents of
 Arabic-speaking areas who do not themselves speak Arabic are
 discriminated against in education, jobs, and other
 opportunities. The University of Khartoum's entrance
 examinations also favor Arabic speakers, and impending
 Arabization of instruction in higher education (including at
 the University of Juba currently located in Khartoum) will add
 to this advantage. Government plans to impose Arabic
 examinations in Juba resulted in rioting by secondary school
 students in September. In order to be considered for higher
 education, students now must pass examinations in four
 subjects--English, mathematics, Arabic, and religious studies.
 Widespread popular attitudes in northern areas also stereotype
 dark-skinned non-Arabs as inferior and lazy, leading to much
 informal discrimination against them.
 In government-controlled areas of the South, there is evidence
 of a policy of Islamicization; civil servants and other
 officials have been replaced by ideological supporters of the
 National Islamic Front. Forced retirement of non-Muslims and
 non-NIF supporters has become widespread. In the North, some
 non-Muslims have lost their jobs in the civil service, in the
 judiciary, in banking, and other professions. Businesses owned
 and operated by non-Muslims experienced overt discrimination,
 such as denial of trading licenses or petty harassment. There
 was one credible report that a Christian was denied the right
 to testify in court because of his religion.
 Sudanese laws continue to favor men, and women traditionally
 have segregated roles. Islamic laws of inheritance award
 additional property to men, while concurrently assigning them
 the duty of caring for their extended families. Discrimination
 against women in professional positions also reportedly
 increased, and reports were received of police harassment of
 
 
 389
 SUDAN
 women workers in the informal sector. Education is open to
 both sexes, and many women obtain university training, but
 women traditionally receive less education and have fewer
 opportunities than men. Some women, however, have been active
 in the professions; some 100 women are now serving as judges.
 Although not numerous, women are found in both the police and
 the military. They are also increasingly visible in the PDF.
 On November 16, General Omar assumed the Minister of Culture
 and Information portfolio and issued directives to prevent
 dancing between the sexes and to require women working in
 government offices and female students and teachers to assume
 Shari'a dress. Subsequently, a high official defined Shari'a
 dress as nondecorative clothing covering the entire body except
 for the face and hands. In inveighing against Western fashion
 and behavior, General Omar warned the new regulations would be
 strictly enforced.
 Female genital mutilation (circumcision) is prevalent in
 Sudan. Reports indicate that this practice, although illegal,
 is widespread, especially in the North. Some reports suggest
 that over 90 percent of northern women have been circumcised,
 with consequences that include severe urinary problems,
 infections, and even death. The so-called Pharaonic
 (infibulation) circumcision, the severest of the three types,
 is the most common and is usually performed between the ages of
 4 and 7 years. Because few physicians will perform the
 operation, it is most often done by paramedical personnel in
 improvised, unsanitary conditions, with severe pain and trauma
 to the child. The operation is expensive--approximately $111
 for a 10-minute procedure. Southern women displaced to the
 North reportedly are increasingly visiting circumcision on
 their daughters, even if they themselves are not circumcised.
 Among certain southern tribes, forcible sexual intercourse is
 common. No blame attaches to the practice, although the man
 involved must pay a price (often in livestock) to the woman's
 family if she becomes pregnant. In the same area, wives are
 often received on a trial basis lasting up to 4 years.- The
 husband may dissolve the marriage during this time by returning
 the wife to her family, although he must pay a price for each
 child born during this time. Such wives are reportedly often
 able to contract further marriages and are not stigmatized by
 having been returned.
 Although the extent to which violence against women, especially
 wife beating, occurs is difficult to document, the practice
 reportedly is common in Sudan, especially in polygamous
 families. It is not, however, discussed as a public issue, and
 police do not normally intervene in domestic disputes. There
 were no court cases involving either circumcision or violence
 against women in 1991. However, for a variety of cultural
 reasons, many women-would be reluctant to file a formal
 complaint of such abuse. The Government has not addressed the
 issue of violence against women. Women refugees are
 particularly vulnerable to harassment and sexual abuse. Sexual
 favors are reportedly demanded of them by some Sudanese
 officials in exchange for performance of official duties.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Associatio
 Sudan had a strong labor union movement during the Sadiq
 government, but the RCC's Constitutional Decree Number One of
 
 
 390
 SUDAN
 June 30, 1989, abolished labor unions and forbade strikes.
 Stiff punishments, including the death penalty, were prescribed
 for violations of labor decrees. Union offices were closed,
 and union assets frozen. Government officials condemned union
 activists as "Communists," although most Sudanese'unions were
 resolutely anti-Communist. Many labor activists were dismissed
 from their jobs or detained. Although most unionists were
 later freed, a few remained in detention without charge at the
 end of 1991.
 In September 1989, General Omar announced the legalization of
 preliminary steering committees to manage union affairs,
 pending the drafting of new laws on union organization. Under
 this rubric, the Sudan Workers Trade Union Federation (SWTUF),
 the leading blue-collar labor organization with about 800,000
 members, was restored with its leadership unchanged and its
 assets returned, but under tight government controL through a
 steering committee. Apart from SWTUF, there is a professional
 and employees' trade union federation, which has replaced four
 previously existing white-collar labor organizations.
 Other steering committees were established in 1990, often
 including many of the precoup leaders. These committees
 remained under control of the Government, which could and did
 dismiss their members. No new labor law was enacted in 1991,
 and unions continued to operate solely by government sufferance.
 The Government continued to forbid strikes, and there were
 none. Unions remain free to join federations and affiliate
 with international bodies.
 In 1991, the U.S. Government suspended Sudan's receipt of trade
 benefits under the Generalized System of Preferences because of
 its violation of workers' rights.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The Constitutional Decree of June 30, 1989 also suspended the
 right to organize and bargain collectively. These rights were
 restored to organizing committees in September 1989.
 Government control of the steering committees and continued
 absence of labor legislation allowing union meetings, filing of
 grievances, and other union activity, reduced the value of
 these rights. Although local union officials raised some
 grievances with employers, few carried them to the Government.
 There are no export processing zones in Sudan.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Sudanese law prohibits forced or compulsory labor. In 1991,
 however, the Government forced approximately 60,000 displaced
 persons in Khartoum to work in the year's harvest. This
 program eventually failed from a lack of funds. As there were
 no government plans to transport these persons back to
 Khartoum, this program was seen as yet another government
 effort to resettle forcibly the displaced population.
 Slavery persisted in 1991. It exists in those remote areas
 where government control is weak and where displaced persons,
 particularly Dinka, fleeing the war zones come into contact
 with armed groups. Informed sources suggest there could be
 thousands of slaves in Sudan, largely women and children doing
 agricultural and domestic work and serving as concubines. In
 1991, as a possible result of peace agreements between the
 tribal militias and the SPLA, there were no new reports of
 
 
 SUDAN
 Dinka being taken into slavery. There were reports, however,
 that these militias were demanding payment for the return of
 each Dinka woman and child taken as slaves in years past. It
 was not clear at year's end whether the intra-SPLA fighting,
 marked by Nuer-Dinka tribal rivalries, would also result in the
 taking of slaves.
 The SPLA/M often forced southern men to work as laborers or
 porters or forcibly conscripted them into SPLA ranks. In
 disputed territories this practice was implemented through
 raids, while in SPLA/M-controlled areas it was done through the
 SPLA/M-appointed village leader.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 There is no compulsory education legislation .in Sudan. The
 legal minimum age for workers is 16. This law is enforced by
 the Ministry of Labor in the official or wage economy, but
 poverty in Sudan produces widespread child labor in the
 informal economy. In rural areas, children from a very young
 age assist their families with agricultural work.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The workweek is currently limited by law to 6 days and 48
 hours, with a day of rest on Friday. The legislated minimum
 wage, enforced by the Ministry of Labor, remains at the 1988
 level which is insufficient for subsistence in urban areas; and
 workers often must rely on farming, second jobs, or help from
 the extended family. Salaries in private industry are
 generally higher than those in the public sector. Laborers
 receive an extra month's pay for each year's labor. Most
 workers are given allowances for transportation, and some
 receive housing allowances.
 Although Sudanese laws prescribe health and safety standards,
 working conditions are generally poor and enforcement by the
 Ministry of Labor is minimal. Unemployment and underemployment
 are major problems, especially among young people. Even
 graduates of prestigious schools often have difficulty finding
 employment.
 
 
 392
