Sudan
As peace talks aimed at ending the twenty-one-year civil war in southern
Sudan were nearing completion, the crisis in the western Darfur
region intensified in 2004. The government of Sudan answered the military
challenge posed by the two rebel movements in Darfur, the Sudan
Liberation Army (SLA) and the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM),
by arming, training and deploying Arab ethnic militias known as
“Janjaweed”, who had an additional agenda of land-grabbing. The
Janjaweed and Sudanese armed forces continued a campaign begun in
earnest in 2003 of ethnic cleansing and forced displacement by bombing
and burning villages, killing civilians, and raping women. The first half
of 2004 saw a dramatic increase in these atrocities. By year’s end hundreds
of villages were destroyed, an estimated 2 million civilians were
forcibly displaced by the government of Sudan and its militias, and
70,000 died as a direct or indirect cause of this campaign.
The Crisis in Darfur
The government-sponsored death and displacement in Darfur was initially
a counterinsurgency tactic of employing ethnic proxy militias to
conduct a campaign of ethnic cleansing, as it has done in southern
Sudan for much of the last twenty years. The extent of the humanitarian
catastrophe produced by government policies in Darfur finally came
to the attention of the world as the numbers of internal displaced persons
(IDPs) mounted from one to two million.
On April 8, a Humanitarian Ceasefire Agreement was signed in
N’Djamena, Chad between the government of Sudan and the two
Darfurian rebel movements under Chadian, African Union (A.U.), U.S.
and E.U. auspices. This agreement committed the government of
Sudan to “neutralize” the Janjaweed militias and called for the A.U. to
set up a ceasefire commission (CFC) to monitor and report on ceasefire violations. It took several months, however, for the CFC to become
operational.
The government of Sudan again promised, this time signing a Joint
Communiqué on July 3 with U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan, to
disarm the Janjaweed, improve humanitarian access, human rights and
security, and to seek a political resolution to the conflict. Pressure
increased with the adoption on July 30 of U.N. Security Council
Resolution 1556 which reiterated the steps outlined in the Joint
Communiqué, called for restrictions on arms transfers to all “non-governmental
entities, including the Janjaweed,” and imposed a thirty-day
deadline on the Sudanese government to disarm the Janjaweed militias.
The continued failure on the part of the government of Sudan to rein
in the Janjaweed militias and halt all attacks by them and its other forces
on civilians led the Security Council to pass resolution 1564 on
September 18. This second resolution threatened sanctions on the government
of Sudan if it did not comply fully with this resolution and the
previous one, and authorized the establishment of an international
Commission of Inquiry “to investigate reports of violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law in Darfur by all parties,
to determine also whether or not acts of genocide have occurred, and to
identify the perpetrators of such violations with a view to ensuring that
those responsible are held accountable”. The resolution also pressed the
government of Sudan to accept a larger A.U. ceasefire monitoring force.
The Sudanese government claims that it is unable to neutralize and disarm
the Janjaweed, yet it has refused to accept international help to
achieve this. Not one Janjaweed leader has been investigated or accused
of a crime. The few prosecutions that the government of Sudan has
undertaken have turned out to be against detainees involved in crimes
unrelated to the Darfur conflict or convicted of different charges
months or years earlier. The government of Sudan set up a national
commission of inquiry to investigate crimes committed in the Darfur conflict but it has accomplished nothing to date. The Janjaweed and the
Sudanese army share several camps, and there are numerous reports of
coordinated attacks on civilians launched from these camps. Members
of the Janjaweed are quietly being incorporated into regular police
forces, the army and the popular defense forces (government Islamist
militia under army jurisdiction). Ceasefire violations are a regular
occurrence throughout Darfur and no penalties have been applied to
any party. The Security Council, although threatening sanctions if the
human rights menace of the Janjaweed was not curbed, let deadlines
come and go without imposing any further sanctions or enforcing the
sanctions already mandated.
The North-South Peace Process
The twenty-one-year conflict fought largely in the south between the
ruling Islamist military government in Khartoum and the rebel Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement/Army (SPLM/A) inched closer to resolution
in 2004. In May, the government of Sudan and the SPLM/A
signed the last of six key political protocols in Naivasha, Kenya outlining
power and wealth sharing arrangements for southern Sudan for a
six-and-a-half-year interim period, after which a self-determination referendum
in the south will decide whether the south becomes independent.
However, the agreements totally ignore human rights considerations,
such as accountability for crimes committed during the war, truth
telling, and the enforcement of international human rights and humanitarian
law in the future. The Naivasha protocols contemplate national,
state and local elections at an undetermined time between the signing of
the final agreement and the referendum on succession.
The U.S., U.K. and Norway pushed the almost three-year intensive
negotiations between the two parties, then came increasingly under fire
for deliberately excluding other rebel and political movements from the
peace process. The escalation of the crisis in Darfur highlighted the
widespread discontent with the partial resolution, and spawned at least two other rebel movements in the west in 2004. Renewed pressure from
the international community to conclude the peace talks as a necessary
precursor to addressing the conflict in Darfur brought the two parties
back to the table in October, although this peace process was definitely
in jeopardy as the Sudanese government’s good faith was questioned by
its resort to ethnic manipulation and scorched-earth tactics in the west.
The Security Council held a special meeting in Nairobi, Kenya on
November 18-19 and passed Resolution 1574 offering economic assistance
and debt relief to Sudan if the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
is signed by the end of 2004. With respect to Darfur, the Resolution did
not threaten “further measures”, only a milder warning to “take appropriate
action against any party failing to fulfill its commitments”. It left
out the explicit demand of previous resolutions for Khartoum to disarm
and prosecute the government-backed Janjaweed militias.
The Humanitarian Situation
Sudan is home to the world’s largest internally displaced persons (IDP)
population, which grew in 2004 from 4 million to almost 6 million. The
IDPs in Darfur continue to grow in number and face constant insecurity.
Those who managed to reach camps accessible to humanitarian assistance
were at physical risk, frequently of rape, when venturing outside
to collect fodder, food or firewood. Many remained in rural areas inaccessible
to aid agencies, including in rebel held zones, and were vulnerable
to attacks by the Janjaweed. The U.N.-agreed creation of “safe
areas” in Darfur, protected by the government of Sudan, raised the risk
of consolidating ethnic cleansing and caused increased clashes between
the government and the rebels, who were not consulted on the “safeareas”
plan. More than 200,000 Darfurian refugees were in Chad in
2004.
A combination of insecurity, drought, widespread looting and the
missed planting season increased the risk of famine as almost 2 million people in Darfur (estimated population of 5-6 million) were in need of
food aid. Lack of sanitation and health services in the IDP camps caused
massive outbreaks of diseases such as diarrhea and malaria which caused
thousands of deaths, especially in vulnerable groups such as infants and
the elderly.
The plans of the estimated 4 million southern war displaced persons to
return home were put on hold as the signing of the Naivasha peace
agreement was delayed.
Key International Actors
The United States eventually took the lead in the U.N. Security
Council which passed four resolutions on Sudan in 2004. The U.S. legislatures
passed a joint resolution on July 23 declaring that the Sudanese
government and the Janjaweed were guilty of genocide. Secretary of
State Colin Powell authorized a survey of Darfurian refugees in Chad
and concluded from it that “genocide has been committed and may still
be occurring in Darfur”.
Because of international resentment over the U.S. war in Iraq, however,
the U.S. had difficulty diplomatically in convincing others to take a
stronger stand on Darfur. The United Nations Security Council has
been divided over sanctions. China and Russia, both with large investments
in Sudan, threaten to veto resolutions that called for sanctions
against the Sudanese government for failing to disarm the Janjaweed
and stop attacks against civilians. Sudan’s election to the U.N.
Commission on Human Rights on May 5 was another indication of the
international community’s failure to censure the government of Sudan
for abuses in Darfur. On November 24, the UN General Assembly
voted down a resolution condemning Sudan.
The Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights sent eight
human rights monitors to Darfur in August and promised in October to double that number. Following her September mission to Sudan, U.N.
High Commissioner for Human Rights Louise Arbour recommended
the deployment of an international police force in Darfur and
denounced the total impunity enjoyed by perpetrators of atrocities in
the region. Louise Arbour was accompanied on her mission by Juan
Mendez, the U.N. Secretary General’s special advisor on the prevention
of genocide.
The recently-created African Union deployed up to 136 ceasefire monitors
to Darfur and more than 625 Rwandan and Nigerian troops as a
protection force for these A.U. monitors. Nigerian President Olusegun
Obasanjo hosted A.U. talks in Abuja between Khartoum, the SLA and
the JEM in late 2004 but these talks broke down and the ceasefire was
in tatters.
The A.U. volunteered to send a civilian protection force of up to 2,341
troops and 815 civilian police, a suggestion seconded by the Security
Council. The Sudanese government rejected the proposal but backed
down after the language was watered down to provide A.U. protection
for civilians within their eyesight.
By many assessments, at the end of 2004 the fledgling A.U. and its
member countries still lacked the funds and capacity to mount an effective
operation seven times the size of its 2004 force in Darfur, with
civilian protection needs remaining unmet.