 SUDAN
 Sudan is in transition. An era ended on April 6, 1985, when
 professional elites and senior military officers combined to
 overthrow the 16-year government of President Jaafar Nimeiri.
 The beginning of the end came with the public hanging on
 January 18 of a 76-year old religious thinker on charges of
 apostasy. Many Sudanese deemed the hanging an outrageous
 violation of Sudan's traditional tolerance. In subsequent
 months, unresolved civil war in the south, arguments over
 Shari'a law, a worsening economy, revelations about drought
 and starvation, and finally price increases on staples led to
 public demonstrations that triggered Nimeiri's fall. Military
 leaders set up a 15-member Transitional Military Council (TMC)
 chaired by Lt. General Abdel Rahman Sower el Dahab. In
 consultation with Sudan's leading political parties, unions,
 and professional associations, the TMC chose a civilian
 cabinet headed by Prime Minister Dr. el Gizouli Dafalla. The
 TMC, however, retains executive power. On October 10, the TMC
 approved a transitional Constitution providing for
 decentralization of government and observance of basic human
 rights, e.g., freedom of speech. Almost 40 political parties,
 representing all ideological and regional viewpoints, have
 emerged in anticipation of elections scheduled for April 1986,
 when the transitional period will end.
 Despite the new Government's expressed desire for national
 reconciliation and unity, it has been unable to end the
 southern insurgency that resumed in 1983 after Nimeiri
 breached southern autonomy and imposed Islamic laws
 (Shari'a). In April, the TMC called on Col. John Garang de
 Mabior, leader of the Sudan People's Liberation Army/Movement
 (SPLA/SPLM), to negotiate, but he refused, claiming distrust
 of the TMC. The SPLM has, however, maintained contacts with
 the civilian Council of Ministers (CM), southerners, and other
 Sudanese. In October, Garang declared a cease-fire and hinted
 at sending a delegation to talk with civilians. In the south,
 many innocent civilians continue to suffer from the fighting
 and breakdown in law and order.
 Despite vast agricultural potential, Sudan is in economic and
 social crisis. In 1985, drought-related famine affected
 nearly one-third of all Sudanese. Poor management,
 transportation, and communications hampered massive foreign
 relief. Strong rains started in 1985, but Sudan will suffer
 the consequences of the prolonged drought for years. Besides
 this natural disaster, overcentralization of economic policy,
 reliance on foreign aid for food and fuel, and a foreign debt
 exceeding $9 billion have contributed to falling living
 standards. Two promising projects in the south--an oil
 pipeline and the Jonglei Canal--were stopped indefinitely by
 the SPLA because southerners saw few benefits in them.
 Approximately 1.4 million refugees and displaced persons
 (mostly Ethiopians in eastern Sudan, Ugandans in the south,
 and Chadians in the west) add to Sudan's burden.
 There were positive human rights developments in 1985. Since
 Nimeiri's overthrow, Sudan's leaders have advocated democracy
 and moved cautiously toward pluralism. The TMC dismantled the
 secret police, freed about 1,000 political prisoners, repealed
 laws banning strikes, and removed press restrictions.
 However, the Government imposed a state of emergency soon
 after taking power and banned marches after ethnic clashes in
 September. The Shari'a laws introduced in 1983 remain on the
 
 
 322
 SUDAN
 books and apply to Muslims and non-Muslims alike. Since April
 6, five amputation sentences have been sustained by higher
 courts but none has been carried out. Former government
 officials currently face charges under the old security
 regulations that carry such penalties as amputation and
 posthumous crucifixion. About 264 political prisoners are
 currently in detention. Most of the detained are soldiers
 implicated in an alleged antigovernment plot in September.
 Others, perhaps 50, are former government officials.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 The execution of Taha, the 76-year old religious thinker,
 though preceded by a trial before the standing courts, was
 widely viewed as a political killing. Although the legal
 system still functions under the September 1983 laws that
 condemned Taha, no executions have taken place since January
 1985. The charges pending against former associates of
 President Nimeiri theoretically carry severe sentences,
 including capital punishment. Those accused have the right of
 defense and representation by an attorney.
 Ethnic violence that may have political overtones persists and
 has resulted in recent deaths in Khartoum, south Kordofan, and
 parts of southern Sudan. During September, an estimated seven
 Sudanese died in demonstrations in Khartoum, organized by the
 National Islamic Front with participation of TMC members. The
 riot police acted with restraint; the deaths resulted from
 clashes between northern and southern Sudanese. In the south,
 where ethnic rivalries prevail, political killings have also
 taken place. In August 1985, the SPLA announced that it had
 killed William Abdulla Chuol, leader of the insurgent Anyanya
 II forces which last year opted for cooperation with Nimeiri.
 The SPLA viewed Chuol as a traitor. In the upper Nile region
 and eastern Bahr al-Ghazal, where government forces control
 only the garrison towns, killings result more from robbery and
 cattle rustling associated with traditional ethnic rivalries
 than from politics. Nevertheless, civilian deaths caused by
 SPLA penetrations into eastern Equatoria near Lafon, Kabuyta,
 and Torit and in south Kordofan are politically related.
 Government and insurgent troops have also traded accusations
 of human rights violations.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no known abductions by Sudanese government
 agencies, but one German citizen is being held by the
 guerrillas. The possibility of disappearances from areas
 outside government control cannot be excluded; Equatorians in
 particular have accused the SPLA of abducting persons during
 raids in their region.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment
 or Punishment
 Sudan's new Government has committed itself to ending torture
 by the Government. Some state security officials were tried
 for the torture of Ba'athist politicians under the former
 regime. One of the accused was acquitted, but was
 
 
 323
 SUDAN
 subsequently rearrested (now released pending new charges).
 There have been no reported cases of torture since April 6.
 Amnesty International noted in its 1985 Report that over 65
 people had been sentenced to amputation and over 200 to
 flogging in 1984.
 The criminal code introduced as Shari'a legislation in 1983
 contains penalties based on Koranic injunctions. Public
 lashing of both men and women is prescribed for such offenses
 as drinking/possessing liquor, blasphemy, gambling, illegal
 possession of commodities, and public disturbance. A fine or
 imprisonment may supplement the sentence. Newspapers have
 reported sentences involving both fines and lashings since
 April 6. Sources suggest that lashing continues but is used
 less frequently and in a milder form than that applied by the
 former regime. In any case, no public pronouncements about it
 have been made, in contrast with the practice of the former
 government. No sentences with penalties exceeding 25 lashes
 have been made public; the maximum possible lashing sentence
 is 100 lashes. The law also mandates right-hand amputation
 for thefts exceeding $40 and cross-limb (right hand, left
 foot) amputation for more serious and repeat offenders.
 Although five amputation sentences have been confirmed by
 higher courts since April 6, none has been carried out.
 Persons injured through commission of a criminal act by
 another may invoke the right of retribution instead of
 accepting monetary compensation. Since April 6, no case of
 this type has been reported. Adultery by Muslims and
 recurrent homosexuality are capital crimes, but the stringent
 requirements for proof (four male eyewitnesses for adultery)
 have precluded such severe sentences. The new Government
 appears not to be prosecuting "moral" crimes with the zeal of
 the former regime. Indeed, HADD (Islamic) punishments
 virtually disappeared following the hanging of Taha in January.
 Conditions in Sudanese prisons are poor. Food and care meet
 minimal standards. Because of overcrowding and lax security,
 prisoners are sometimes shackled. On the other hand,
 authorities may permit prisoners to go home during the day,
 requiring them to return only at night. Sudanese authorities
 also allow relatives to bring food to detainees.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Sudanese Constitution guarantees habeas corpus and
 requires a court-issued warrant to arrest a citizen. The
 State Security Act of 1975, however, authorizes arrest without
 a warrant and preventive detention for renewable 90-day
 periods on security grounds. At the end of 1985, these
 practices remained in force, following the recent upholding of
 the Act by the Supreme Court. The Act's recent incorporation
 into the penal code extends the harsher penalties of the code
 to a variety of offenses not considered grave unless linked to
 security concerns. For example, the Act permits the State to
 charge individuals accused of economic subversion or
 corruption with treason.
 In the Taha case, the distribution of antigovernment leaflets
 would have brought a maximum penalty of 5 years imprisonment
 under the Act, but the charge under the penal code for the
 same offense, recast as waging war against the Government,
 carried the death penalty. Former presidential advisor Baha
 al-Din Muhammed Idris was recently tried by a state security
 tribunal for "high treason and espionage" on nine charges
 
 
 324
 SUDAN
 which arose from various alleged economic deals and which
 carry a possible death penalty. He was sentenced on charges
 of corruption to 10 years in prison and a fine of roughly $1.2
 million. Likewise, the Government, with prosecution led by
 the Attorney General himself, charged former Vice President
 Omar Mohamed el Tayyeb with treason for the transport of
 Falasha Jews to Israel. The 9 charges against him entailed
 violations of 18 articles of the penal code. His trial
 continued into 1986.
 Because of the state of emergency in force since April 6, the
 impact of constitutional guarantees remains questionable. The
 attorney general, magistrates, or police officials may arrest
 persons without warrants although all arrests are made
 public. Under the former government, the President appointed
 judges. Although the judicial structure remains in place, a
 panel of qualified persons now selects magistrates. This
 panel also administers preventive detention. The law still
 mandates use of tangible property as bail. Financial disputes
 require bond until settlement. Traffic injury or death cases
 may require bonds of up to $1,000. Bond may also be required
 for nonphysical charges such as defamation.
 Well-informed and reliable sources estimate the number of
 political detainees at about 264, most of them interned after
 the revelation in September of an alleged antigovernment plot
 involving mainly Nubans and southerners. Among those held
 initially were university professors and persons formerly
 alleged to have plotted coups such as Nuban priest Philip
 Abbas Ghabboush who was later released in January; Ghabboush
 was previously jailed by Nimeiri between October 1984 and
 January 1985 when he was amnestied. The other political
 detainees--former government officials, state security
 organization personnel, ex-leaders of the Sudanese Socialist
 Union (formerly the sole political party) and
 ex-governors--include those under house arrest as well as
 those in prison. There is no incommunicado detention and no
 forced labor in Sudan.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The new Government did not rush into a series of quick trials
 of former government officials. Many of those detained
 following the revolution were soon released. Lengthy
 investigations preceded the formulation of charges against
 those now being tried. Both the Idris and al Tayyeb trials
 have been televised. Cross-examination of both prosecution
 and defense witnesses has taken place. During the Idris
 trial, however, the defense was refused the opportunity of
 cross-examination of a prosecution witness on at least one
 occasion. The case is now on appeal. The other four
 potential defendants in the Tayyeb case have turned state's
 evidence in exchange for a pardon. The Government will also
 try former President Nimeiri in absentia.
 Theoretically, defendants may choose their own lawyers. In
 the Baha al Din Idris case, however, the attorney general
 called on attorneys to refuse to serve as defense counsel.
 Persons charged with minor crimes often go without counsel;
 the Government sometimes provides legal aid to those charged
 with serious crimes if they cannot afford a lawyer. Khartoum
 university students maintain a legal aid service. A new legal
 aid society, formed by practicing lawyers, has found office
 space but has not yet begun to function.
 
 
 325
 SUDAN
 In more common cases, the judicial process involves a police
 or magistrate investigation, a field report, an arrest
 warrant, the arrest, and a trial before a panel of three
 judges. Sudanese now view the judiciary in Sudan as
 independent because judges feel less subject to arbitrary
 removal. Some of the judges displaced following the
 institution of the Sharia system have regained their former
 positions. Like the country in general, judicial proceedings
 remain in a state of flux. The Islam-based penal code remains
 the law of the land under the present Government. With the
 exception of the fundamentalist National Islamic Front, all
 major political parties advocate some modification of the
 former legal system in a way that would moderate application
 of HADD punishments. The predominantly Muslim groups,
 however, favor retention of an Islamic-oriented legal system.
 No persons have been sentenced to imprisonment for political
 beliefs or acts under the new Government, and none has been
 sentenced to exile.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The only documented cases of arbitrary interference reported
 since April involved searches of homes following the
 revelation of an alleged antigovernment plot in September.
 Refugees and drought victims constitute the only population
 movements in Sudan. The Government has periodically moved
 refugees to new camps, and returned drought victims to their
 home regions. There is no solid evidence, however, that these
 people objected to the movements.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Although radio and television, as well as some magazines and
 newspapers, remain under government ownership, Sudan's new
 leaders vigorously defend the freedoms of speech and the press
 embodied in the transitional Constitution. In the aftermath
 of the coup, party newspapers, notably the Ba'ath (al-Hadaf),
 the Communist (al-Maydan), and the National Islamic Front
 (al-Rayah) rushed into print. Trade unions and other groups
 plan to publish papers soon. The press is carefully
 monitoring Sudan's progress toward democratic rule and will
 undoubtedly protest if there are delays. Criticism that was
 formerly heard only in private is now voiced openly and
 loudly. Academic freedom is not restrained. Shortly after
 the change in government, however, a number of journalists
 closely associated with the Nimeiri regime were purged.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Prior to April 6, Sudanese gathered in public to protest acts
 such as the execution of Taha. Antigovernment demonstrations
 that preceded the change of government were met with restraint
 by the authorities. In the aftermath of the coup, freedom of
 assembly prevailed until the National Islamic Front-inspired
 "security" march in September resulted in seven deaths. Since
 that time, public marches have been officially banned, but
 some have taken place without interference. There is no ban
 on meetings.
 The new transitional Constitution guarantees the right of
 workers and political parties to organize. In the past, the
 
 
 326
 SUDAN
 unionized work force was estimated at 7 percent. Among the
 Government's first acts was to abolish legislation that
 prohibited strikes. The primary labor organizations are the
 Sudanese Workers Trade Union Federation (SWTUF), the Sudanese
 Federation of Employees Trade Unions (SFETU), and the Trade
 Unions Alliance (TUA), representing respectively blue collar,.
 nonprofessional white collar, and professional white collar
 unions. The SWTUF and SFETU existed before the April change
 of government, but the TUA arose from an alliance of those
 professional unions that former President Nimeiri had
 abolished following the doctors' strike of March-April 1984.
 The TUA has joined with all major political parties (excluding
 the National Islamic Front) to form the National Alliance for
 the Salvation of the Country (NASC). Because the civilian
 Cabinet was drawn from among NASC supporters and was chosen in
 cooperation with them, the NASC maintains close ties to it.
 The SWTUF has complained periodically to the attorney general
 about his interference in trade union law, arrests of trade
 union leaders connected with the former regime, and support
 for the NASC which it views as a political rather than a labor
 organization. The National Islamic Front, excluded from the
 NASC, joined with others involved in the September "security
 march" to form a new "security alliance" to rival the NASC.
 Unlike the NASC, which favors negotiations with the SPLA, the
 new group tends to advocate a military solution if Col* Garang
 rejects present government overtures for dialogue. Trade
 unions from all parts of Sudan are represented in these
 federations.
 The Sudanese labor union movement has a long and distinguished
 history. Today, the SWTUF participates in both regional and
 international labor activities. A number of strikes have
 taken place since the coup in April, and more can be
 anticipated as trade union workers strive to improve their
 status. Thus far, the Government has conceded substantial
 wage and benefit increases in settling or forestalling strike
 action.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Islam predominates in the northern two-thirds of Sudan, while
 traditional African religions and Christianity are the major
 beliefs in the south. Small Christian (Coptic, Greek, Syrian,
 Armenian) and minuscule Jewish communities in the north exist
 primarily in Khartoum. Non-Muslim southerners have migrated
 to northern cities in search of work. The new Constitution
 retains Islamic law and custom as the main source of
 legislation, although most southerners oppose it as inherently
 discriminatory against them. Both Islam and Christianity are
 recognized as religions of Sudan. However, adherents to other
 religious beliefs are not restricted.
 The Sudanese Government supports mosques and Muslim
 educational projects; government schools include both Muslim
 and Christian religious education. Muslims, Christians, and
 Jews maintain centralized offices in Khartoum for
 administration and keeping records such as birth
 certificates. Both Muslim and Christian missionaries are
 active in Sudan. Christian education, health, and welfare
 projects operate freely, especially in the south. Christians
 are free to maintain strong ties with coreligionists outside
 Sudan. Sudanese of the major religious groups participate in
 
 
 327
 SUDAN
 all strata of government, security institutions, and private
 organizations. Religious groups do not face discrimination
 under the present Government.
 The Umma, Democratic Unionist Party, and National Islamic
 Front reflect the memberships of the Ansar, Khatmiyya, and
 conservative Muslims, respectively. Anti-Christian tensions
 which existed in parts of south Kordofan in 1984 appear to
 have abated, and no harassment of Christian institutions has
 occurred recently. That area includes adherents of all major
 religious groups in Sudan.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The new Sudanese Constitution, like that of 1973, guarantees
 freedom of movement. Internal movement of both foreigners and
 Sudanese, however, is sometimes controlled. Diplomatic
 personnel must notify the Government and obtain permission in
 advance to travel outside Khartoum although the Government has
 withheld permission only on rare occasions. Some Sudanese now
 under investigation have been restricted to their home areas
 pending the filing of charges.
 In order to travel outside Sudan, Sudanese and foreigners
 alike must obtain exit permits. Sudanese desiring to work
 outside the country for an extended period require a leave of
 absence from their employers. An active organization of
 Sudanese expatriate workers exists and held a conference in
 1985 to discuss their mutual interests. Because education in
 Sudan entails heavy government subsidies, members of certain
 professions must spend a fixed term of service in Sudan before
 obtaining permission to work abroad. Exit permits are not
 available to all Sudanese.
 Sudan currently hosts approximately 1.4 million refugees and
 other displaced persons from Ethiopia, Uganda, and Chad. The
 Government, in cooperation with the United Nations High
 Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other international
 bodies, strives to meet their needs. Private voluntary
 organizations, including American groups, have contributed
 substantially to improved health and sanitation. Refugees and
 displaced persons live in reception centers, camps, and
 settlements. Despite the burdens of hosting these people,
 Sudan has not impeded or discouraged their movement into
 Sudan. The Government prefers, however, that they remain in
 refugee centers rather than move to urban areas. The new
 Government has tried former Nimeiri officials for permitting
 Ethiopian Jewish refugees to resettle in Israel. During 1985,
 about 50,000 Tigreans returned to Ethiopia after the onset of
 rains, but their departure was more than offset by a new
 influx of Eritreans. The 120,000 displaced persons along the
 Chadian border interact with their compatriots on both sides
 of the frontier. Sudan hosts about 250,000 Ugandan displaced
 persons; this group remains generally stable. Refugees in
 Sudan must possess valid refugee documentation or risk
 detention, especially in Khartoum.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The Transitional Military Committee (TMC) currently holds all
 executive power, subject to consultations with the civilian
 Council of Ministers (CM). There is no legislative body.
 
 
 328
 SUDAN
 Sudan's leaders have repeatedly expressed their commitment to
 implement a multiparty constitutional democracy after
 elections now tentatively scheduled for April 1986. It is
 uncertain, however, if this timetable will be met. Organizing
 the election will take special efforts. Lack of government
 control in large areas of the south precludes the holding of
 elections in all parts of the country. The fundamental
 political structure of Sudan is also in question. Some
 Sudanese favor a federal structure, while others prefer
 centralized control. In the south, most residents of Upper
 Nile and Bahr al-Ghazal regions advocate southern unity as
 embodied in the 1972 Addis Ababa Accords, while most
 Equatorians want three separate southern regions. The present
 system--instituted April 6--theoretically reunites the south
 under a higher executive council but also retains features of
 decentralization. The only large group which at present
 refuses to participate in political discussion is the SPLA,
 but it remains widely heard through proxies, its own
 Ethiopia-based radio station, and almost daily discussion in
 the press, including interviews with SPLA officials, of its
 future role in Sudan.
 The present Government has affirmed its commitment to help the
 south; southerners occupy three ministries in the Council of
 Ministers, including the Deputy Prime Minister position.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The present Government welcomes human rights investigations by
 international bodies. The International Committee of the Red
 Cross (ICRC) has an office in Sudan while members of other
 international human rights bodies have made short visits.
 Both TMC and CM members have spoken frankly with visitors and
 avoided interfering with their investigations. In August
 1985, a Sudanese human rights organization was inaugurated at
 a meeting attended by 150 members. Academics, lawyers,
 judges, and students--both men and women--participated in
 formulating the organization's objectives. The group plans to
 promote Sudan's adherence to international human rights
 conventions and to affiliate with the Arab Organization for
 Human Rights based in Cairo. The new organization is
 independent of the transitional Government but includes
 members of the labor group, NASC. International human rights
 bodies continues to express their opprobrium at the
 application of HADD punishments in Sudan. Amnesty
 International, in its 1985 report (covering 1984), was
 concerned about the Nimeiri Government's incarceration of
 prisoners of conscience and political prisoners, and the
 detention without trial of suspected opponents, as well as
 about allegations of torture. Freedom House rated Sudan "not
 free" but noted the progress in 1985 in restoring civil
 liberties since the coup.
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Sudan's economic and social indicators reveal a significant
 decline in recent years. In 1985, Sudan's estimated
 population was nearly 23 million; drqught, famine, and disease
 led to a 0.2 percent negative population growth rate in 1985.
 The per capita gross national product in 1983 ($400) was 10
 percent below the 1982 ($443) level. Despite its development
 potential, especially in agriculture, the Government's overly
 
 
 329
 SUDAN
 aggressive development efforts through much of the 1970's,
 combined with poor financial management, drought, and
 insurgency, have created staggering international debt
 obligations. Development in southern Sudan remains hampered
 by the insurgency and the lack of government control in many
 areas. Along with intermittent attempts to cooperate with the
 International Monetary Fund, Sudan's present rulers continue
 to press for debt relief and concessionary arrangements for
 commodity and food supply. At present, the country's
 financial future is grim.
 Facing an infant mortality rate of 113.9 per 1,000 live
 births, the average Sudanese at birth can expect to live 48.3
 years. In 1978, only 45 percent of Sudan's population had
 access to safe water, although the Government has subsequently
 promoted water projects to improve health and sanitation. The
 only available figure for calorie supply as a percentage of
 requirements (95) dates from 1977; famine afflicted over
 one-third of Sudan's population during the past year; and only
 massive international assistance averted widespread
 starvation. Primary school enrollment figures indicate that
 39 percent of females and 55 percent of males, with a combined
 average of 47.5, attend school. These figures date from 1981
 and obscure the educational deterioration in rural Sudan,
 particularly in the south. Also, many Sudanese teachers have
 left for better paying jobs in the oil-rich Arab countries.
 Sudanese labor law and practice embrace international
 standards. The workweek is limited to 48 hours, with a full
 24-hour rest period. Sudanese labor custom grants an extra
 month's pay for each year's labor, as well as allowances for
 transportation and sometimes housing. A new salary scale
 introduced in August 1985 prescribed a minimum wage of about
 $15 per month, but particular skills are rewarded with legally
 mandated supplements. Annual raises must be a minimum of 5
 percent of annual salary. The salary scale for industries
 sets a higher minimum wage (about $16 per month) than that for
 government workers. Under Sudanese law, the minimum age for
 workers is 16. All workers, even domestic servants, enjoy
 paid annual holidays prescribed by law. Sudanese labor law
 also prescribes health and safety standards, but in a country
 where the general standards are so low, conditions are poorer
 than those found in the industrialized West. Many young
 people in Sudan are self-employed or employed in family
 enterprises.
 While men and women retain traditional roles within Sudanese
 society, women play an active role in the professions and in
 higher education. In urban areas, they drive automobiles and
 work in offices with men. Separate educational facilities for
 men and women, however, are the rule. Sudanese women dress as
 they please. In urban parts of the north, they often wear the
 Sudanese female wrapping over Western clothing. Sudanese
 women participate in both national and international forums.
 A recent example was the the women's conference held in 1985
 in Nairobi. Their writings and interviews appear in
 newspapers and periodicals. In the rural milieu, men and
 women also work side-by-side, although a division of labor
 does exist. Grandparents and other relatives often care for
 children, thus facilitating employment outside the home.
 Female circumcision, though illegal, is widely practiced
 throughout much of Sudan. Efforts to eradicate it have failed
 so far, despite significant concern among educated women.
 
 
 330
 SUDAN
 Sudanese, especially those in the periphery, recognize and
 resent the Government's emphasis on central Sudan and the
 north, where the Arab population is concentrated. Non-Arab or
 non-Muslim groups such as the Fur in the west, the Beja in the
 east, or the Nuba in the Kordofan mountains resist efforts to
 compromise their unique identities. In the south, a rich
 mixture of ethno-linguistic clan groups exists. Generally
 speaking, however, the northern part of Sudan is Muslim and
 Arabized while the south is non-Arabized African and
 non-Muslim, with adherents to African religions outnumbering
 Christians and Muslims.
 
 
 331
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: SUDAN
 1983     1984     1985
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        166.3    197.5    303.6
 LOANS ..............    ... 50.0     50.0     64.5
 GRANTS ................. 116.3     147.5     239.1
 A.AID ........................ 115.3    146.3    149.3
 LOANS ..............        0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............  ....  115.3  146.3     149.3
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSST.)...        82.3    120.0    114.0
 B.FOOD  FOR  PEACE .......      51.0     51.1    154.3
 LOANS ..............    ... 50.0     50.0     64.5
 GRANTS .......... .... 1.0            1.1     89.8
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ..........   .  50.0     50.0     64.5
 REPAY. IN $-LOANS.....         50.0     50.0     64.5
 PAY.  IN  FOR.  CURR.....      0.0       0.0      0.0
 TITLE  II-TOTAL .........        1.0      1.1     89.8
 E.RELIEF.EC.OEV & WFP.         1.0      1.1      89.4
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        0.0       0.0      0.4
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST,...        0.0       0.1      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS  .............      0.0       0.1      0.0
 PEACE CORPS ......        0.0      0.1      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0       0.0
 OTHER ...............    0.0       0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        44.3      46.5     46.4
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0       0.0
 GRANTS .............  .... 44.3     46.5      46.4
 A.MAP  GRANTS ..........      43.0      45.0     45.0
 8.CREDOT FINANCING ....        0.0      0.0       0.0
 C.INTL  MIL.ED.TRNG ....       1.3       1.5      1.4
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0       0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER  GRANTS ........       0.0       0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...       210.6     244.0    350.0
 LOANS ..............    ... 50.0     50.0     64.5
 GRANTS ................. 160.6      194.0    255.5
 ----------------------------------------------------------
 OTHER  US  LOANS ..........      27.4      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......        0.0       0.0      0.0
 ALL  OTHER ..............   ... 27.4      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1983     1984     1985     1946-85
 TOTAL ........   132.1     92.9     75.6    1347.2
 IBRD               0.0      0.0       0.0    159.2
 IFC                0.0      0.0       0.0     33.2
 IDA              130.0     91.4     37.5     909.8
 lOB                0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0
 AOB                0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0
 AFOB                0.0      0.0     38.1    116.9
 UNOP               2.1      1.5       0.0     84.2
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0       0.0     43.9
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0
 
 
 332
