 SUDAN
 
 The Nimeiri regime came to power in 1969 by military coup. In
 1971 by means of a single candidate referendum, General Nimeiri
 became President and the Revolutionary Command Council, formed
 at the time of the coup, was dissolved. Many of the Council's
 powers and its members were transferred to the General Secreta-
 riat of the Sudan Socialist Union, created in 1971 to be the sole
 political organization in Sudan. In 1977 and again in 1983, the
 Sudan Socialist Union chose Nimeiri as its presidential nominee,
 and, as the only presidential candidate, he was elected by
 popular referendum for six-year terms. His current term of
 office expires in 1989.
 The President dominates all branches .of government. In the
 executive he is de facto Prime Minister, Minister of Defense, and
 Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces. He has periodically assumed
 other ministerial portfolios as well. All judges are responsible
 to him for "proper performance" of their duties. On the legisla-
 tive side, he exercises oversight of the National Assembly
 through his powers to appoint 10 percent of its membership, to
 convene and dissolve it, to rule by provisional decree during
 recesses, and to limit legislative inquiry into executive
 affairs.
 In the 1972 Addis Ababa Accords, Nimeiri brought an end to
 Sudan's 17-year civil war between the Arab north and the non-
 Muslim south by granting "the southern region" (the southern
 third of Sudan) special regional autonomy. Establishing federal
 institutions rare in non-democratic countries, Nimeiri in 1980
 decentralized the northern five regions of Sudan to which he
 delegated considerable responsibility. On June 5, 1983, in a
 controversial action, he decentralized the southern region as
 well. The southern high executive council was dissolved and the
 south is now composed of three regions, having the same status as
 the regions in northern Sudan. While the south continues to
 enjoy a degree of autonomy, the recent changes also show its
 limits.
 Sudan is one of the poorest countries in the world, and in 1981
 the Government initiated a number of economic austerity measures
 to halt the country's economic deterioration. The brief civil
 disturbances which occurred in 1982 as a result of devaluation
 and elimination of subsidies on some basic commodities did not
 repeat themselves.
 In the summer of 1983, President Nimeiri instituted a new judi-
 ciary act with the stated purpose of eliminating drawn-out delays
 in trials and appeals and which stipulated more rigorous qualifi-
 cation standards for judges. At the same time, he fired 40
 judges shortly after he accused the judiciary of corruption and
 incompetence. This resulted in a national judicial strike which
 continued for the next two months.
 During 1983 President Nimeiri began an as yet uncompleted program
 of Islamization of Sudanese institutions. Since most of the
 south is non-Muslim, this program has been controversial. In
 September, the President promulgated a new criminal code for
 Sudan based in part on traditional forms of Koranic injunctions.
 Although, in December, the right hands of two convicted thieves,
 both Muslims, were amputated, it is unclear how the Koranic
 injunction will be enforced against non-Muslims. Testimony by
 male witnesses is accorded heavier weight than that of females.
 (349)'
 
 
 350
 Sudan's location draws it into wider issues both of the Middle
 East and of the Horn of Africa. Relations with Libya have been
 heated for several years, and Libyan leader Muammar Qadhafi has
 undertaken several plots to forcibly overthrow Nimeiri. In
 February 1983, Libyan-backed Sudanese were apprehended in Sudan
 while planning to overthrow the Government. Other Sudanese,
 financed by Libya, have also been apprehended for subversive
 activity. Sudan's relationship with Ethiopia continues to be
 complicated by the presence of Eritrean refugees in Sudan
 who oppose the government in Addis Ababa and by the presence of
 dissident Sudanese in Ethiopia, many of whom have been there
 since the end of the civil war and who frequently cross into
 Sudan. Armed attacks against the Nimeiri Government were
 mounted from Ethiopia in 1983.
 Over the year hostile acts by southern Sudanese opposing the
 Government have increased. A number of northern Sudanese have
 been killed at several locations in the south. The mutinies of
 military units consisting mainly of southerners at Bor and Pibor
 in early June caused Sudan's military to engage the mutineers.
 In late June, five Westerners were taken hostage by a group of
 dissidents at Boma in southeastern Sudan. After a period of days
 they were rescued by Sudanese military forces. There have also
 been reports of isolated attacks on government personnel and
 villages. Although dissident groups are behind many of these
 incidents, some are motivated by banditry.
 In 1977, Nimeiri negotiated a "reconciliation agreement" with,
 much of his opposition, and many who formerly opposed the regime
 now participate in the Government. However, vocal opponents and
 others critical of the regime risk being detained. A number of
 prominent southerners and leaders in the Ansar religious group
 and the "Republican Brothers" opposition group were arrested in
 1983. Nimeiri released some of the southerners in May and
 a few more in September, when he amnestied several thousand
 convicted criminals on the occasion of implementing the new
 Islamic criminal laws.
 In general, human rights in Sudan have deteriorated over the
 previous year. The Government continues to curtail the activity
 of those whom it considers capable of mounting a security
 threat. Concomitantly, 1983 saw an increase in subversive and
 dissident activities supported from Libya and Ethiopia, both in
 the south and in the north. There has been an increase both in
 the number of arrests, and at the same time an increase in the
 number released. There are probably about 300 persons in
 detention for political reasons at the end of 1983.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section I Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Unlawful or Arbitrary Deprivation of Life
 There were no known instances of politically inspired killings by
 agencies of the Government of Sudan during 1983. In the south
 several score of Sudanese have been killed by southern dissident
 groups attacking villages and government installations, however.
 Sudanese northerners and the military have been targets as have
 some southerners themselves. Some Sudanese military units
 (northern Sudanese) have at times taken harsh reactive measures
 
 
 351
 in seeking out the dissident groups responsible. Some attacks
 may be politically motivated, but most result from banditry and
 traditional internal animosities between different tribal groups.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no cases of politically inspired disappearances in
 Sudan in 1983.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 There have been no reported cases of officially sanctioned
 torture in Sudan in 1983. On September 8, President Nimeiri
 announced the implementation of a new penal code which contains a
 number of penalties based on traditional Islamic (Shari'a) laws.
 Lashing is now the punishment for Muslims found guilty of drink-
 ing alcohol and is a minimum sentence for anyone convicted of
 using narcotics, some forms of theft, robbery, blackmail, and
 several other crimes. The maximum penalty for theft/burglary is
 limb severance. Adultery by Muslims is punishable by stoning.
 Recurring homosexuality is a capital crime a's well. However, in
 accordance with the Shari'a, the code specifically states that,
 in order for a person charged with sexual crimes to be convicted,
 four male eyewitnesses to the offense are required, making
 convictions extremely rare, if not impossible.
 Under the new code, a number of persons, most convicted of
 alcohol-related offenses, have been lashed. On December 9, in
 accord with Koranic injunction as found in Sudan's new criminal
 code, the right hands of two convicted thieves, both Muslims,
 were amputated in Khartoum's Kober Prison. About 1,500 specta-
 tors crowded around the small amphitheater constructed for
 execution of Shari'a punishmentsi another 5,000 stood outside.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Constitution guarantees habeas corpus and requires a court-
 issued warrant to arrest a citizen. This legal protection does
 not apply to detentions "necessitated by the exigencies of public
 security and public welfare." The State Security Act authorizes
 detentions on security grounds for as long as six months. The
 period is renewable. Detention may be for as little as a few
 hours and is often used as the legal basis for rounding up
 migrants. Estimates of the number of such persons detained are
 unavailable. The number of those detained on more serious
 grounds and for longer periods of time is estimated at less than
 200.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Public trials by civilian courts are the rule. Defendants have
 the right to counsel at their own expense. Indigents charged
 with major crimes are assigned counsel by the state. For civil
 law cases, trial is adversarial, with a judge determining matters
 of law and fact. In cases concerning family law, Shari'a law for
 Muslims and customary/tribal law as applicable are recognized.
 Khartoum authorities continued roundups of vagrants, undocumented
 refugees, and non-resident Sudanese without respecting legal
 processes. Also, the special "price courts," over which military
 officers preside and which are empowered to render summary
 
 
 352
 justice (fines, imprisonment, or lashes), maintained their role
 of trying merchants accused of violating price controls. These
 tribunals do not apply the procedural safeguards available in the
 civil courts. Convictions can be appealed, yet trial records are
 not available.
 Special security courts have occasionally been used in cases
 involving serious political charges. They are convened at the
 request of the President if he believes that the activities of
 the accused represent a clear threat to the state. The proceed-
 ings may be open to the public but may be closed by decision of
 the presiding chief magistrate. There were two documented cases
 of security court sessions during 1983.
 The Constitution guarantees the independence of the judiciary,
 but empowers the President to appoint or remove judges at all
 levels. During the early summer of 1983 the President removed 40
 judges and thus precipitated a strike by the judicial cadre which
 lasted two months. Most were restored to their positions in
 August.
 Persons convicted in a provincial or lower court can petition to
 the regional court of appeals and to the Supreme Court. The new
 judicial code of August 1983 attempts to expedite the appellate
 procedure. Judgments of special security tribunals are subject
 to appellate review and must be approved by the President before
 they are announced.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Interference with privacy, family, home, or correspondence is
 generally not practiced in Sudan. However, authorities have
 taken persons from their homes for detention under provisions of
 the State Security Act. Such action does not require a warrant.
 More recently, "Islamization' has resulted in the prohibition of
 alcohol consumption, even among non-Muslims, although it is not
 clear how the prohibition will be enforced in the countryside
 where consumption of home-brewed alcohol is customary. There are
 reports that the southern provincial governments have refused to
 enforce the prohibition.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The media in Sudan, newspapers, radio, and television are under
 government ownership, and there is little criticism of the
 Government. Coverage of internal events is largely confined to
 reports published by the Sudan News Agency (SUNA), which is an
 office of the Presidency. The monthly English-language magazine
 Sudanow, however, often contains articles mildly critical of
 government policies and programs. Foreign publications are
 generally available in Sudan and not censored.
 Citizens openly criticize government policies in personal expres-
 sion and display little fear of retaliation. Criticism of the
 President tends to be direct. Sudanese often voice strong criti-
 cism aimed either at government policies or the advice and
 c6nduct of advisors and ministers. However, government tolerance
 of criticism does have its limits. During 1983, two university
 students were placed in detention for strident criticism of the
 regime.
 
 
 353
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Although the Constitution guarantees the "right to hold peaceful
 meetings and to take part in quiet and peaceful processions,"
 government authorities usually have broken up demonstrations on
 the ground of their potential for violence. One such demon-
 stration, protesting the general economic situation in Khartoum,
 occurred in August 1983. A demonstration in support of the
 Islamic laws also occurred without incident. Suspected opposi-
 tion leaders are watched, but there is generally no effort to
 prevent their meetings with supporters. Some opposition leaders
 must obtain government permission before speaking at public
 gatherings.
 The Constitution guarantees the freedom to organize labor
 unions. Labor is officially represented in the Sudan Socialist
 Union through two federations which are independent of government
 control--the Sudanese Workers' Trade Union Federation and the
 Sudanese Federation of Employees and Professionals Trade Unions.
 Union membership is estimated at about 10 percent of the working
 population. In both the private and public sectors unions engage
 in collective bargaining for wage increases and benefits. It is
 unclear as to what degree the leadership of the two federations
 represents opinions of their rank and file. In 1981, the Sudan
 Socialist Union ordered dissolution of the striking railroad
 workers union on the basis that the union was a subsidiary of the
 party. Although operating within guidelines of the party, unions
 often lead strikes which result in settlement of issues through
 negotiations with the Government. Two small strikes by doctors
 and university faculty of three days each occurred in 1983.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Islam predominates in the northern two-thirds of Sudan, while
 traditional African religions and Christianity constitute the
 major beliefs in the south. In the north small Christian
 communities (Coptic, Greek, Syrian) exist primarily in the
 Khartoum area. Under the 1973 Constitution, Islam, as the
 religion of the majority, and Christianity, as the religion of a
 "large number" of Sudanese, are recognized as "religions of
 Sudan." The religious rights of adherents to traditional African
 religions are not restricted. The Constitution also states that
 Islamic law and custom shall be the main sources of legislation.
 In 1983, President Nimeiri began a campaign to "Islamize'
 Sudanese institutions. In September 1983, he announced the
 Islamization of Sudanese law, specifically provisions of the
 penal code. Although enforcement of penal laws under the new
 Islamization is still in flux, it appears that Muslims will be
 punished more stringently for certain crimes (adultery and
 intoxication) than nqn-Muslims. For family law matters, Muslims
 and non-Muslims have traditionally been governed by the laws of
 their respective ethnic and religious communities. Government
 officials have made public assurances that the rights of Sudan's
 religious minorities will continue to be respected.
 As with most countries where Islam is the predominant religion,
 the Sudanese Government provides financial support to a large
 number of the country's mosques and to Muslim educational pro-
 jects. In the non-Muslim south, Christian missionaries freely
 operate educational and welfare projects. Muslim groups are
 attempting to proselytize non-Muslims in the south. Any attempt
 
 
 354
 to convert Muslims to another religion is contrary to Islam and
 would not be tolerated by the Government. The Christian commu-
 nities of Sudan maintain strong links with their coreligionists
 outside Sudan without impediment. Non-Muslim Sudanese are
 represented in all strata of Sudanese security institutions and
 government and private organizations.
 There is no discrimination in Sudan against any of the various
 Muslim groupings, except insofar as they are politically active.
 There are three major Muslim groups which have been traditionally
 organized along political lines: the Ansar, descendants of
 followers of the Mahdi; the Muslim Brotherhood; and the Khat-
 miyya, a group based on a traditional Sufi brotherhood. Their
 religious practices are unrestricted, but political activities
 considered contrary to the security of the state often result in
 imprisonment of key leaders of these groups. The Muslim Brother-
 hood now participate widely in the Government. Some Ansar are in
 the Government. However, Ansar leader Sadiq al Mahdi and several
 of his followers are currently under detention, as are leaders of
 the Republican Brothers, a very small group. The Khatmiyya are
 politically inactive.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel,
 Emigration, and Repatriation
 Although freedom of movement within the country is constitution-
 ally guaranteed, a constitutional amendment suspending internal
 movement in cases of national security is used by the Government
 to reduce the numbers of Sudanese migrants and foreign refugees
 who move to major urban centers.
 Because large numbers of Sudanese professional and technical
 cadres have left Sudan for Gulf States in search of high
 salaries, the Government has taken steps to diminish the flow.
 Certain professionals who have graduated from local universities
 (such as doctors) must spend a fixed term of service in Sudan
 before being allowed to work overseas. Other categories of
 technicians in short supply find it difficult to obtain exit
 visas. Sudanese intent on working abroad must now pay as much as
 2,000 Sudanese Pounds (approximate dollar equivalent, $3,600) to
 obtain permission to leave; those already abroad are subject to
 an expatriate income tax of 10 percent. Expatriates returning to
 Sudan must present proof of payment of this tax. However, the
 status of Sudanese citizenship is inviolate.
 Sudan currently hosts upwards of 500,000 refugees, primarily from
 Ethiopia and Uganda. Despite the tremendous burden on Sudan's
 food resources and administrative capabilities, the Government
 has received them hospitably and works closely with the United
 Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other international
 groups to accommodate refugee needs. Sudan exerts no pressure on
 refugees to repatriate, but discourages refugees from moving from
 their placement centers into Sudan's heavily populated urban
 centers. During 1983 a small number of refugees voluntarily
 repatriated to Uganda and Chad.  In late 1983 there were reports
 that several thousand southern Sudanese have moved to Ethiopia
 because of apprehensions over the application of Islamization in
 the south and because of armed clashes between Sudanese authori-
 ties and dissident groups. In the past, the Government has
 appealed to similar persons to return without recrimination, as
 long as they did not take up dissident activities.
 
 
 355
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to
 Change Their Government
 President Nimeiri and his close associates dominate all branches
 of government. The Sudan Socialist Union has been the only legal
 political party in Sudan since 1971. It selects the sole candi-
 date for the presidential elections, which occur every six years
 by popular plebiscite. One votes either yes or no. In 1977,
 Nimeiri's nomination was challenged but he won easily. In 1983,
 Nimeiri alone stood for nomination, and he received affirmative
 votes reported at more than 99 percent.
 Since 1977 Nimeiri has dissuaded several political factions
 from active opposition through his policy of *national recon-
 ciliation.' The Cabinet and Party Central Committee incorporate
 elements of most political groups. Outside the regime's umbrella
 are the Communist Party, Baathists, the Republican Brothers, the
 elements of the Ansar headed by Sadiq al Mahdi, and others.
 Because political party activity by law is confined to the Sudan
 Socialist Union, factions with members in the Government, such as
 the Muslim Brotherhood still operate informally, but openly, to
 look after their own political interests.
 The Sudan Socialist Union seeks to include all sectors of
 society. The Union must approve all candidates for both the
 National Assembly and the regional assemblies, although candi-
 dates need not belong to it. The Union rarely rejects a candi-
 dacy. All candidates must run on non-partisan platforms.
 Nimeiri has sought to encourage decentralization. In 1972,
 Nimeiri negotiated an end to the civil war by granting the south
 special regional autonomy. A southern regional government was
 established to deal with local issues such as education, culture,
 and agriculture. In 1980 decentralization was introduced to the
 north, where five regions were set up. Recently the Khartoum
 District was also granted regional status. In June 1983, Nimeiri
 extended additional decentralization to the south by abolishing
 the southern regional government and giving regional status to
 the three distinct southern areas. This move, although supported
 by some southern politicians, was opposed by many southerners as
 an abrogation of the 1972 Addis Ababa Accords which guaranteed
 the'south semi-autonomy. The Government continues to pursue a
 plan to decentralize most technical and administrative services
 from the central government to the regions.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government has been responsive to allegations of human
 rights violations and has tended to cooperate with human rights
 investigations. Most accusations of human rights violations
 involve alleged instances of detention without trial of govern-
 ment opponents. However, since the detention of any person
 without trial falls under the 1975 State Security Act, the
 Government is frequently slow to respond to human rights
 queries. The Sudanese Bar Association monitors human rights
 violations in the Sudan and often seeks information from govern-
 ment authorities (Attorney General's office, police offices)
 concerning the particulars of an alleged violation. If the
 official government response to queries does not appear to be in
 accord with the law, they often contend the detention, with some
 
 
 356
 success. In September 1983, Sudanese Christian leaders protested
 the application of Islamic laws in Sudan, particularly noting
 that sentences such as severance of limbs and lashes are punish-
 ments that "degrade the person" and "dull the morals of the
 nation."  In its 1983 report, Amnesty International expressed
 concern over detention of political opponents, unfair trials,
 and poor prison conditions. Freedom House in 1983 describes
 Sudan as "partly free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Sudan is a very poor country. Its development potential, which
 is considerable, has been interrupted by a period of inefficient
 economic policies. Gradually this situation is being corrected.
 Remedial action did not begin, however, until the country
 incurred staggering debt obligations, which brought about import
 restraints, debt rescheduling, and a carefully curtailed develop-
 ment program for many years into the future. With an area of
 just under one million square miles, Sudan has a population of
 20.5 million, growing at the rate of 2.7 percent annually. Per
 capita gross national product in 1981 was $380. Life expectancy
 is slightly over 46 years, with an infant mortality rate of
 118.9 per 1,000 live births. The adult literacy rate is about 20
 percent, with 51 percent of those eligible enrolled in primary
 school (60 percent of males and 43 percent of females). Overall
 school attendance figures obscure the sharply lower rates which
 prevail in the south, however. Sudan compares well relative to
 many other poor countries in terms of health indicators, as the
 World Bank estimates 46. percent of the population (49 percent in
 urban areas and 45 percent in rural) have access to safe water.
 The calorie supply as a percent of requirements was estimated at
 95.8 percent in 1977.
 In addition to other constraints on development, Sudan's size
 and its geographic and cultural diversity have adverse impact on
 delivery of services and income distribution. Vast distances,
 deserts, rivers, swamps, and a large underdeveloped rain forest
 and marsh area seriously impede transportation and communica-
 tions. Sudan's population includes urban groups, isolated
 riverine settlers, settlers of large organized irrigation
 schemes, nomad and semi-nomad desert dwellers, and many diverse
 tribal groups. Some cultural units are large enough to deserve
 the title of "nation"; others are little more than family
 groupings. Economic status ranges from modern to very primi-
 tive. This diversity not only hinders delivery of services but
 also limits transference of successful development experiments
 from one region to another. Excluding areas along the Nile River
 and the immediate service regions around a half-dozen cities, the
 health, sanitation, and education indicators cited above would
 drop precipitously--but only a small percentage of the population
 would then be included.
 Racial and cultural differences orginating in past centuries
 still cause some feelings of discrimination. Northern Sudan is
 larger and more populous than the south, and has in the past been
 better organized than the south and dominated it. The north is
 largely Arab and Muslim with a strong tradition of trade beyond
 its borders. The south is largely Nilotic and non-Muslim and is
 comprised of a multiplicity of tribal structures and languages.
 The north has traditionally extended trade into the south.
 Until the late 1800's slaves from the south were an important
 source of income for the Arabized north. Southerners still tend
 
 
 357
 to complain of northern discrimination. Within the south members
 of smaller tribes claim discrimination in favor of the major
 tribes. Southern Sudanese also claim discrimination in the
 development effort. The lack of roads and railways, however,
 from the north to the south, and the lack of cultural cohesive-
 ness in the south, are major factors directing limited develop-
 ment capacity toward the accessible north. The same complaints
 are heard from the less accessible but Muslim far west and far
 north. The Arabic language dominates over Fur and other
 languages traditionally used by non-Arab Muslim communities.
 In many Muslim and other cultures there is a strong distinction
 between the roles of men and women in society. While sexual
 division of labor persists, it is less distinct in Sudan than in
 much of the Arab and African world. Women are accepted in many
 professions but there are few participants. In rural areas,
 division of labor exists, but women are seen working alongside
 the men in some endeavors. In Sudan women are not veiled. But
 female circumcision is widespread among the Muslim north despite
 laws and government policy prohibiting this ancient custom.
 Present government social policy, an economic system emerging
 from a local version of socialism toward more private enterprise,
 and the Muslim cultural values emphasizing equality and
 individualism are increasing economic, social, and cultural
 opportunity. However, the size of the country, its geographic
 and ethnic diversity, and poverty and official debt problems
 restrict progress to a slow pace.
 
 
 358
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: SUDAN
 1981     1982     1983
 ..........................................................
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...       109,4     151.8    166.3
 LOANS ................    30,0     25.0     50.0
 GRANTS ............. ....  79.4    126.8    116.3
 A.AID  .. .....................  74,5  124.9    115.3
 LOANS ...... .........     0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ............. ....  74.5    124.9    115.3
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...        50.0     100.0    82.3
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......        34.9     26.9     51.0
 LOANS ................    30.0     25.0     50.0
 GRANTS ....... ........    4.9       1.9      1.0
 REPAY. IN; S-LOANS ...         30.0     25.0     50.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0       0.0      0.0
 TITLE  II-TOTAL .........        4.9      1.9      1.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.         3.2       0.5      1.0
 VOL.RELIEF  AGENCY .....        1.7      1.4      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0       0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS ......        0.0      0.0       0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0       0.0
 OTHER ............        0.0       0.0      0.0
 II.MIL.  ASSIST.-TOTAL...       32.3     101.2    44.3
 LOANS ................    30.0     50.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     2.3     51.2     44.3
 A.MAP  GRANTS ..........        1.7      0.0     43.0
 B:CREDIT FINANCING ....        30.0     50.0      0.0
 C.INTL  MIL.ED.TRNG ....        0.6      1.2      1.3
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0       0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........        0.0      50.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...       141.7    253.0    210.6
 LOANS ................... 60.0     75.0     50.0
 GRANTS ................   81.7     178.0    160.6
 OTHER  US  LOANS ..........       1.2      0.0     27.4
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......        0.0       0.0      0.0
 ALL  OTHER ........ .......      1.2      0.0     27.4
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1981     1982     1983     1946-83
 TOTAL ..........  133.4   65.2     130.0   1176.6
 IBRO               0.0      0.0      0.0     159 2
 IFC                0.0      0.3      0.0     3312
 IDA               73.0     56.0     130.0   780.9
 IDB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADB                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 AFDB               19.7     8.6      0.0      78.8
 UNDP               14.6     0.3      0.0      80.6
 OTHER-UN          26.1      0.0       0.0     43J9
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0
 
 
