 SUDAN
 After the 1989 coup that overthrew Sudan's democratically elected government,
 thi military assumed power under Lt. General Omar Hassan al-Bashir and his Na-
 tional Salvation Revolution Command Council (RCC). Bashir and the RCC sus-
 pended the 1985 Constitution, abrogated press freedoms, and banned all political
 parties and trade unions. In 1993 the RCC dissolved itself and appointed Lt. Gen-
 eral Bashir President. However, since 1989 real power has rested with Hassan al-
 Turabi and his National Islamic Front (NIF). NIF control over government oper-
 ations was further solidified with the end of the RCC, and NIF members and sup-
 porters held most key positions in the Government, security forces, judiciary, aca-
 emia, and the media. The NIF continued to consolidate its power in 1994. Although
 legislative authority theoretically rests with the government-appointed Transitional
 National Assembly (TNA), the new Government maintained the RCC's suspension
 of the 1985 Constitution and continued to restrict most civil liberties.
 The civil war in Sudan continued, despite efforts by Kenya, Uganda, Ethiopia,
 Eritrea, and Sudan, under the auspices of the Intergovernmental Authority on
 Drought and Development (IGADD), to seek a peaceful solution to the conflict. Gov-
 ernment forces launched a major offensive against the Sudanese People's Liberation
 Army (SPLA), gaining some ground, displacing thousands of civilians, and causing
 new outflows of refugees.
 In the second half of the year, however, the SPLA took the offensive, overrunning
 Amadi, besieging Kapoeta, and attacking other government-held positions. By year's
 end, the Government had suffered heavy casualties, its hold on Kapoeta had become
 precarious, and it had been forced, because of SPLA pressure, to postpone its
 planned dry-season offensive. Despite SPLA successes, divisions between the SPLA
 (mainstream faction), led by John Garang, and the South Sudan Independence
 
 
 245
 Movement (SSIM), formerly the United faction of the SPLA, led by Risk Machar,
 continued to hamper the insurgencys effectiveness in battling the Government.
 In addition to the regular police and Sudan People's Armed Forces (SPAF), the
 Government maintains an Islamic militia, the Popular Defense Forces (PDF), and
 an Islamic police force, the Popular Police, whose mission includes enforcing proper
 social behavior, including restrictions on alcohol and "immodest dress.*
 Civil war, economic mismanagement, high inflation, over 2.5 million internally
 displaced persons, and a refugee influx from neighboring countries have devastated
 Sudan's mostly agricultural economy. Exports of gum arabic, livestock, and meat ac-
 counted for over 50 percent of Sudan's 1994 export earnings. Reforms aimed at
 privatizing state-run firms and stimulating private investment have failed to revive
 a moribund economy saddled with massive military expenditures.
 The dismal human rights situation showed no improvement in 1994. Both the
 Government and insurgents committed serious human rights abuses, including mas-
 sacres and extrajudicial killing, kidnaping, and forced conscription. A myriad of offi-
 cial and secret government security forces routinely harassed, detained, and tor-
 tured opponents or suspected opponents of the Government with impunity. Despite
 some improvement in overall cooperation with U.N.-sponsored relief operations, both
 the SPAFIPDF and SPLA/SSIM periodically obstructed the flow of humanitarian as-
 sistance to affected populations.
 The Government and rebels continued to restrict most civil rights, including the
 rights to free speech and association. In the context of the Islamization and
 Arabization drive, pressure-including forced Islamization-on non-Muslims re-
 mained strong. Fears of Arabization and Islamization and the imposition of Shari'a
 (Islamic law) have fueled support for the southern insurgency. Serious abuses
 against women and children continued.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extra/udicial Killing.-Official and unofficial government
 forces committed an undetermined number of plitical killings of persons suspected
 of belonging to or collaborating with the insurgent SPLA. There were also credible
 reports that government forces executed over 20 Chadian dissidents in western
 Sudan in January and killed at least 3 students while putting down an
 antigovernment riot in El Obeid in February.
 There are credible reports that security forces beat and tortured to death detain-
 ees. For example, police beat to death Mustafa Azraq, a street vendor, who had been
 in police custody in Khartoum for less than 24 hours. Similarly, in September secu-
 rity forces tortured to death opposition activist Abdel Meneim  Rahma in Wad
 Medani. The Government routinely denied any wrongdoing and has yet to discipline
 publicly any official guilty of political or extrajudicial killing since it came to power
 in 1989.
 In an incident highiighting intra-Islamic divisions, in February gunmen linked to
 al Muslimin, a small extremist Islamic sect, murdered 16 worshipers and wounded
 over 20 more at a mosque in Omdurman because theyhad "betrayed" Islam. The
 attackers also allegedly planned to kill leading Saudi Islamist Bin Laden and NIF
 leader Hassan al-Turabi. Police killed two of the gunmen following a shoot-out, and
 captured a third, along with an accomplice who did not participate in the shootings.
 Their trial, conducted by a special court presided overby a goverment-appinted
 judge linked to the National Islamic Front, lasted from July to September. Credible
 government sources conducting the pretrial investigation complained that the Gov-
 ernment was suppressing evidence, downplayng, in particular, the gunmen's ties to
 senior members of the Government and the NIP. In September the court sentenced
 the surviving gunman to death and his accomplice to 10 years in prison. The death
 sentence was carried out immediatel.
 There were also credible reports tyat bth the SPLA and SSIM carried out egre-
 gious political and extrajudicial killings and massacred civilians during combat op-
 erations. In October the SSIA (the armed wing of the SSIM) was responsible for the
 massacre of more than 100 residents in the town of Akot, many of whom were killed
 in their beds at the Akot hospital. The Akot massacre waspart of the endemic fight-
 ing between the rival southern insurgent movements (SPLA/Mainstream and the
 SSIM).
 b. Disappearance.-The Government was responsible for continued arrests and
 subsequent disappearances of persons suspected of supporting the rebels in govern-
 ment-controlled areas in the South and Nuba Mountains. Scores of persons arrested
 by government forces in Juba in 1992, including two local U.S. Agency for Inter-
 national Development employees, Dominic Morris and Chaplain IAko, remained un-
 
 
 246
 accounted for, and most are believed dead. However there were reliable reports that
 at least a few of those arrested then were being held in a Khartoum prison; the Gov-
 ernment has stated it has no knowledge of their whereabouts.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Government's official and unofficial security forces continued routinely to beat
 and torture suspected opponents. In May security personnel arrested and badly beat
 elderly southern politician Eliaba Surur for having contacts with the U.S. Embassy.
 He later required brain surgery to remove a blood clot, suffered as a result of his
 beating. Security forces arrested and beat scores of students after antiregime dem-
 onstrations in El Obeid and Wad Medani in February and April. Eyewitnesses in
 Wad Medani reported that the police had deliberately broken limbs of some of the
 arrested student demonstrators. During the January trial of a group accused of con-
 spiringto commit sabotage (see Section i.e.), the defendants stated that they had
 been lirutally tortured. Court-appointed medical examiners confirmed that at least
 seven had been tortured; sme h~ad been badly burned.
 Throughout the year the security forces detained government opponents incommu-
 nicad, often for months, in unofficial prisons known as "ghost houses." Some in-
 mates released in 1994 commented that conditions had improved compared topre-
 vious years. However inmates in ghost houses were still subject to torture, includ-
 ing whipping and clubbin;, suspension by the wrists; application of electric shocks;
 burning with hot irons; submersion in hot and cold water; deprivation of food, water,
 sleep, and access to toilet facilities; confinement in overcrowded and unsanitary
 quarters; deprivation of medical care; and psychological torture.
 There were however, fewer reports of torture in ghost houses in 1994 than inpre-
 vious years. The Government has never publicly disciplined any security official for
 torture, although its use is widely known.
 There were credible and recurrent reports that _both government and insurgent
 forces in the field periodically raped women and that police personnel sometimes
 raped female detainees. There were also credible reports that SPLA and SSIM
 forces tortured some of their prisoners.
 Conditions in official prisons were harsh but generally not life-threatening. Al-
 most all prisons were built before independence in 1956 and are poorly maintained.
 Many lak basic facilities like toilets or showers. Health care is primitive and food
 inadequate. Minors are often held with adults. Female prisoners are kept sparately
 from men, and rape in prison (as opposed to police stations) does not appear to be
 a major piblem.
 Sudan a 1991 Criminal Act, based on the Shaii'a, mandates specific "hudd" pun-
 ishments, including amputation, stoning, and lashing, for some offenses. The courts
 handed down several sentences involving amputations in 1994. of which at least one
 was carried out. The Government routinely meted out lashings, most often to per-
 sons convicted of brewing or consuming alcohol, following trials that did not meet
 internationally accepted standards of fairness (see Section i.e.). In July the authori-
 ties lashed Abdoullahi Yusif and his brother Mohanna Mohammed of Wad Medani
 for alleged apostasy; Mohanna had to be hospitalized as a result.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The 1991 Criminal Code does not inciude
 provisions concerning the length of detention of security and other detainees, and
 the Government routinely detained persons without charge and without reference
 to the judiciary. The state of emergency introduced following the 1989 coup author-
 izes the Government to arrest people without using warrants and to detain them
 indefinitely without charge or trial. Under the National Scurity Act, the Govern-
 ment may detain a suspct for interrogation for up to 72 hours. This is renewable
 for up tolmonth witjustification," wich is not defined.
 Alounder the 1992 National Security Act, the President has the power to author-
 ie "precautionary detention" for up to 3 months "to preserve the general security,3
 but in practice this authority rests with subordinate officials. A person detained
 under this provision theoretically must be notified of the reasons for detention with-
 in these 3 months, and the President may extend detention for 3 more months if
 a magistrate approves the extension. In practice, these legal provisions are routinely
 ignored as the authorities often detain opponents in ghost houses indefinitely.
 The law allows for bail, except for those accused of crimes punishable by death
 or life imprisonment. In theory, the Government provides legal counsel for indgents
 in the case of crimes punishable by death or life imprisonment. However, courts
 sometimes fail to inform defendants of this right. Moreover, in some cases counsel
 is only allowed to advise the defendant and may not address the court. Thus, de-
 spite some legal protections, detainees have few rights and are often subject to arbi-
 trary, and in many cases, incommunicado detention.
 The Government's secrecy and arbitrary detention practices made it impossible to
 know the exact number of political detainees and prisoners. Although the Govern-
 
 
 ment continued to pick up and detain suspected opponents across the country, the
 number of new arrests decreased compared to previous years.
 After brief detentions in April 1993 and A pril 1994 in which he was questioned
 about his opposition activities, Sadiq al Mahdi was again arrested and held for 12
 days. The Government alleged that al Mahdi and his two supporters, Hamad Bagadi
 and Abdul Rahman Farah, were involved in a conspiracy to overthrow the Govern-
 ment that included assassinations and bombings. Although both al Mahdi and
 Bagadi made statements upon their release admitting that Bagadi had passed infor-
 mation to a foreign intelligence service, the Government never pressed formal
 charges against any of the three. It released Bagadi and Farah in early July. The
 authorities detained Sid'Ahmed Hussein without charge on two occasions in 1994.
 In November 1993, they arrested Hussein and held him in a ghost house until Feb-
 ruary 1994. In mid-April they rearrested him and released him in late May.
 The authorities picked up numerous other lower ranking opposition figures and
 others throughout the year and held some for several months. Reasonable estimates
 of the number of political detainees ranged between several score and a few hun-
 dred. The Government also continued its practice of de facto arrest of suspected op-
 ponents by requiring them to report to security offices in the morning and wait all
 day for several days in a row. Those targeted for such harassment were unable to
 earn a livelihood.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judiciary is not independent and is largely
 subservient to the Government. The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, formerly
 elected by sitting judges, is now appointed (as the senior judge in the Sudanese judi-
 cial service, he also controls the judiciary). Since 1989 the authorities have replaced
 hundreds of judges considered ideologically unsuitable. Mostnew judges have ties to
 the NIF and favor strict a  lication of Islamic law (the Shari'a); many have little
 or no legal training. The ECC banned the respected Sudanese Bar Association in
 1989 and replaced it with a government-appointed committee. Human rights mon-
 itors have pointed out that the Government continued to harass, detain, and torture
 members of the legal profession it views as political opponents.
 Sudan's judicial system includes four types of courts: regular courts, both criminal
 and civil; special mixed security courts; military courts; and tribal courts in rural
 areas to resolve disputes over land and water rights and family matters. The 1991
 Criminal Act governs criminal cases, whereas the 1983 Civil Transactions Act still
 applies to most civil cases. Military trials, whose proceedings are secret and brief,
 do not meet international standards.
 Trials in the regular courts nominally meet international standards of legal pro-
 tections. For instance, the accused normally have the right to counsel, and the
 courts should provide free legal counsel for indigent defendants accused of crimes
 punishable by death or life imprisonment. In practice, however, these legal protec-
 tions are unevenly applied.
 In 1989 the Special Courts Act created special three-person security courts to deal
 with a wide range of offenses, including violations of constitutional decrees, emer-
 gency regulations, and some sections of the Penal Code, as well as drug and cur-
 rency offenses. Special courts, on which both military and civilian judges sit, handle
 most security related cases. Attorneys may advise defendants as frends of the
 court" but normally may not address the court. Lawyers complain that they are
 sometimes granted access to court documents too late to prepare an effective de-
 fense. Sentences are usually severe and implemented at once. Death sentences, how-
 ever, are referred to the Chief Justice and the Head of State. Defendants may file
 appeal briefs with the Chief Justice.
 In a case with political undertones, the trial of 2 suspects charged with killing
 16 persons at Omdurman's Thawara Mosque began in July. The majority of the vic-
 tims were members of the pro-Saudi branch of the Ansar el Sunna sect which is
 opposed to the NIF. Opposition figures charge that the Government or NIF orga-
 nized the massacre, and their assertions were fueled by the appointment of a judge
 closely linked to the NIF to preside over the case. In September the court sentenced
 the surviving gunman to death and his accomplice to 10 years in prison. The death
 sentence was carried out immediately.
 In April, despite the court's acknowledgment that confessions were elicited
 through the use of torture, the court found guilty 21 of 29 defendants accused of
 plotting bombings and sentenced them to prison terms ranging from 2 to 10 years.
 the court found the confessions admissible evidence because the defendants could
 not prove they were actually being tortured at the time they confessed (see Section
 1.c.). The court also claimed that slamic law allows torture, despite the bulk of Is-
 lamic jurisprudence to dispute this assertion.
 In late 1994, the authorities released half a dozen former officers who had been
 sentenced for alleged coup plotting in 1990 and 1991.
 
 
 248
 The Government officially exempts the 10 southern states, whose population is
 mostly non-Muslim, from parts of the 1991 Criminal Act. But the Act permits the
 possible future application of Shari'a in the south if the local state assemblies, envi-
 sioned in Sudani new plitical system, so decide. Moreover, in 1993 the Govern-
 ment transferred all non-Muslim judges from the south to the north, replacing them
 with Muslim judges. However, there were no reports that hudud punishments, other
 than lashings were carried out by the courts in government-controlled areas of the
 south. Fear o? the imposition of Shar'a remained a key issue in the rebellion.
 Parts of the south and the Nuba mountains fell outside of effective judicial proce-
 dures and other governmental functions. According to credible reports, government
 units summarily tried and punished those accused of crimes, especially offenses
 against civil order. In SPLA-held areas there was some reliance on traditional jus-
 tice by village elders. However, the SPLA ultimately ruled by summary methods,
 includ   beatings, torture, and arbitrary execution.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Government routinely interferes with its citizens privacy. Throughout 1994 security
 forces frequently conducted night searches without warrants. They targeted persons
 suspected of political crimes or also, in northern Sudan, of distillingor consuming
 illegal alcoholic beverages. For example, in March security forces broke up a family
 ceremony in a private home in memory of 28 officers executed in 1991 for coup plot-
 ting. They arrested and beat 30 participants at the memorial service.
 A wide network of government informants conducted pervasive surveillance in
 schools, universities, markets, workplaces, and neighborhoods. The authorities kept
 key opposition figures under frequent surveillance. The Government also continued
 its practice of summarily dismissin military personnel and other government em-
 ployees whose loyalty it suspected. Dozens lost their jobs throughout the year. Secu-
 rity personnel routinely opened and read mail and tapped telephones.
 Government-instituted neighborhood "popular committees," ostensibly a mecha-
 nism for political mobilization, served as a means for monitoring households. These
 committees caused many Sudanese to be wary of neighbors who could report them
 for 'suspicious" activities, including "excessive contact with foreigners. The commit-
 tees also furnished or withheld documents essential for obtaining an exit visa from
 Sudan. In high schools, students were sometimes pressured to join proregime youth
 groups-
 g. U of Excessive Force and Vwlations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-Since the civil war began in 1983, at least 1.5 million people have been
 killed as the result of fighting between the Islamic Government in the north and
 insurgents in southern Sudan. The civil war continued unabated in 1994, and all
 sides involved in the fighting were responsible for abuses in violation of humani-
 tarian norms. At year's end, the Government controlled most of Sudan, except for
 parts of the south and the Nuba Mountains. All efforts undertaken by Sudan's
 neighbors (Kenya, Uganda, Ethiopia, and Eritrea) to seek a peaceful resolution to
 the civil war under the auspices of IGADD were unsuccessful (see Section 3).
 Government forces launched a major offensive against the SPLA, gaining some
 ground, displacing thousands of civilians, and causing new outflows of refugees.
 However, Government forces suffered heavy casualties and were put on the defen-
 sive late in the year when the SPLA took the offensive. SPAF units bombed civilian
 targets indiscriminately, forcing thousands of southern Sudanese to flee to neighbor-
 ing Uganda and Kenya. Government forces were also responsible for the massacre
 of civilians, and throughout the year PDF forces regularly lootedand burned villages
 and killed civilians in "pacification" and other military operations, particularly
 around Aweil, Warrap, Thiet, and Tonj.
 By year's end the lnternational Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) access to war-
 wounded had improved, but the evacuation of wounded from certain localities in the
 south continued to be subject to authorization which was not systematically granted.
 The former Chief of Security in Kordofan Province, Khalid Abd El Karim Salih, told
 the Arabic-language London-based periodical A1-Majallah in March that government
 forces systematically targeted civilian populations in the Nuba Mountains, killing
 thousands.
 The SPLA and SSIM were also responsible for egregious abuses and attacks on
 civilians, exemplified by the massacre of more than 100 residents of the southern
 town of Akot by SSIA forces in October (see Section L.a.). Approximately 300 mem-
 bers of the armed wing of the SSIM entered Akot on October 24 and killed and
 wounded town residents, including several patients at the Akot hospital who were
 killed in their beds. Several thousand families fled Akot following the incident.
 In October police killed at least five people and wounded dozens of others at the
 Khuddeir Squatters Settlement in Omdurman when the Government forcibly reset-
 tled its residents and demolished the slum (see Section 2.d.).
 
 
 249
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Government severely curtails freedom of
 speech and press. Government intimidation and surveillance, fostered in part by the
 informer network, continued to inhibit open, public discussion of political issues.
 Radio, television, and the bulk of the print media are controlled entirely by the Gov-
 ernment and required to reflect government and NIF policies. Sudan television had
 a ermanent military censor to ensure that the news reflected government views.
 In mid-1993, the Government adopted a new Press Code that called for turning
 the existing state-owned print media into publicly held companies. The Code also
 allowed the formation of new, private newspapers. Implementation of the Code has
 been slow. The few publications that issued shares were purchased by government
 ministries and state-owned corporations, thus keeping them under government con-
 trol.
 In 1994 two privately owned dailies began publishing in accordance with the new
 Code. After several months of harassment, in April the Government shut down per-
 manently the Sudan al-Duwali, published by NIF supporter Mahijoub Irwa. Articles
 in the Sudan al-Duwali had been critical of government actions, including corrup-
 tion, prompting the Government to accuse the paper of circulating false information
 and serving "foreign circles and countries. Police also arrested and briefly detained
 Majoub Irwa and two key journalists, Abmad Al Bagadi and Mutawakel Abd El
 Daafich, but did not charge the three men with any crime. The other newly opened,
 privately owned daily, Al Ahbar Al Yaum, has followed a progovernment line and
 has not encountered any problems.
 The Government often charged that the international, and particularly Western,
 media have an anti-Sudan bias, and it routinely confiscated issues of foreign publi-
 cations that were judged hostile to the Government. Although the Government peri-
 odically granted foreign journalists entry and access to war zones and a variety of
 political leaders security forces closely monitored their activities. In one instance
 in 1994, police briefly detained a journalist and confiscated his film. In June the
 Government closed the Khartoum office of Egyptian-published opposition newspaper
 Al-Khartum and detained in a ghost house its local correspondent, Abdul Saeed for
 3 months. As a result of the Government's hostile attitude, many respected journal-
 ist who worked in the local media before 1989 have quit their jobs and left Sudan.
 After the coup, the Government harassed and dismissed many academics consid-
 ered antiregime, and its practice of repressing opposition has had a chilling effect
 on academic debate. Government security forces continued to arrest and detain aca-
 demics linked with opposition parties. The Government continued to use political
 and ideological criteria in appointing new faculty.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The authorities severely re-
 stricted these freedoms, permitting only government-sponsored gatherings. The dec-
 laration of the state of emergenc and of martial law on June 30, 1989, effectively
 eliminated the right to assembly. Security forces repeatedly used excessive force in
 breaking up nongovernment-sponsored demonstrations (see Section L.a.).
 Apart from a few indigenous NGO's involved in relief work and sports and social
 clubs all private associations were controlled by the Government or the NF.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Although the Government has stated that all religions
 should be respected and freedom of worship guaranteed, in practice the Government
 treats Islam as the de facto state religion and has declared that Islam must inspire
 the country's laws, institutions, and policies. Various restrictions under the Mission-
 ary Societies Act of 1962 limited the ability of non-Muslims to practice their religion
 freely, and the 1991 Criminal Act made apostasy by Muslims punishable by death.
 There were credible reports that security forces harassed, intimidated, and, in at
 least one confirmed instance, physically abused Christian converts in 1994. In July
 authorities lashed and threatened with death Christian clan leader Sheikh
 Abdoullahi Yusuf and Mohanna Mohammed for apostasy. In April the police ar-
 rested and detained without charge three Catholic Church volunteers from Egypt
 and a Catholic clergyman for alleged threats to the security of the State. In May
 the authorities released the Sudanese clergyman and expelled the three Egyptians
 from the country at the same time.
 Authorities continued to restrict the activities of Christians in 1994. The law for-
 bids proselytizing of Muslims, but Muslims are allowed to proselytize freely. The
 Government required missionary groups to apply for special licenses, and work per-
 mits for foreign missionaries remained difficult to obtain. The Government contin-
 ued to deny permission to build churches, and in the north, no new churches have
 been built since the early 1970's. There were also reliable reports that in some war
 zones, government forces closed churches and restricted movements of Christian
 clergy. The Sudan Catholic Bishops' Conference (SCCB), the Sudan Council of
 Churches (SCC), and the Coptic Church all faced restrictions on their activities,
 
 
 250
 which local officials often interpreted capriciously. Among these restrictions were
 the repeated difficulties experienced by Christian clergymen in obtaining travel per-
 mits to attend Christian Church conferences abroad. In October the Government an-
 nounced that the Missionary Act had been abrogated and replaced by a new law.
 However, the details of the new law had not been made public by year's end.
 Non-Muslims continued to criticize the Government's favoritism of Islam over
 other religions. As the basis of Sudan's Arab culture, all citizens are exposed to Is-
 lamic ideas set forth in the Koran. In the Popular Defense Forces, all trainees, in-
 cluding non-Muslims, are indoctrinated in the Islamic faith. In prisons, government-
 supported Islamic NGO's offer inducements to, and exert pressure on, non-Muslim
 inmates to convert. There were also reliable reports that, in some war zones, Islamic
 NGO's withheld food and other key services from the needy unless they converted
 to Islam.
 In SPLA/SSIM-controlled areas, Christians and Muslims were generally allowed
 to worship freel.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Government restricted freedom of movement by denying exit visas
 to some categories of persons (such as policemen and doctors). The Government also
 kept lists of political figures and others not permitted to travel abroad. Because of
 tensions with Egypt, the authorities denied many requests for travel to that coun-
 try.
 Women may not travel outside of Sudan without the permission of their husbands
 or male guardians. Some former political detainees were forbidden to travel outside
 of Khartoum. Movement was generally free for other Sudanese outside of the war
 zones, but those who failed to produce an identity card at checkpoints risked arrest.
 Foreigners needed permits, which were hard to obtain and often refused, for domes-
 tic travel outside of Khartoum. (Diplomats, however, could travel freely to many lo-
 cations.) Foreigners had to register with the police on entering the country, seek
 permission to move from one location to another, and reregister at each new location
 within 3 days of arrival. Foreign NGO staff sometimes had problems obtaining entry
 visas to Sudan or work or travel permits once they were in country.
 The SPLA/M and SSIM require NGO personnel to obtain permission before they
 travel to areas they control. Such permission is granted regularly. However, the
 SPLA/SSIM would not give such permission to most Islamic NGO's (many of which
 have ties to the Government or the NIF). There were reports of SPLA/SSIM abuse
 and mistreatment of NGO personnel.
 Tens of thousands of persons, largely southerners and westerners displaced by
 famine and civil war, continued to live in squatter slums in the Khartoum area.
 Throughout 1994 the Government razed thousands of squatter dwellings in this
 area. As in the case of the destruction of the Khuddeir squatters settlement in Octo-
 ber (see below), inhabitants of these dwellings knew that their homes were slated
 for destruction, but they were not told precisely when it would occur. Bulldozers
 would typically arrive unannounced in a neighborhood and carry out the razings the
 same day. Tens of thousands were made homeless and often forcibly moved to reset-
 tlement sites outside the city, where conditions were harsh and distances from em-
 ployment opportunities great.
 In October the Khartoum state government used excessive force in meeting apro-
 test demonstration by squatters from the Khuddeir settlement of Omdurman, killing
 at least five persons and wounding dozens (see Section 1.g.). The protest demonstra-
 tion took place after the Khartoum state government had reneged on its promise
 to resettle them in nearby areas and had determined to move them to a distant
 camp. The Khuddeir residents had filed a legal case against the state government,
 but the latter set its bulldozers in action before the courts had a chance to rule on
 the case.
 Sudan accorded refugees relatively good treatment. At the end of the year, the
 population of officially registered refugees (largely composed of Ethiopians and Eri-
 treans) was about 600,000, about half of whom received assistance from the United
 Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), and UNHCR resettlement of
 refugees to third countries proceeded smoothly. There were no reports of forcible re-
 patriation of refugees, regardless of their status, in 1994. Refugees could not become
 resident aliens or citizens of Sudan, regardless of their length of stay. However, the
 Government tolerated a large number of refugees and allowed them to work, al-
 though typically in menial occupations in the cities. Thousands of Sudanese refugees
 fled to Uganda in 1994, as a result of the fighting between the Government and the
 insurgency and SPLA/SSIM infighting. There were also refugee flows from Sudan
 to Ethiopia and Kenya as well.
 
 
 251
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens had neither the right nor the ability to chang their government peace-
 fully. Political power remained solely in the hands of a small group of unelected
 military officers and the NIP leadership. The NIF continued to increase its power
 at the provincial and state level.
 In 1989 the RCC abolished all political parties and detained temporarily the
 major party leaders, and in 1990 rejected both multiparty and one- arty systems.
 In 1992 the RCC instituted the Transitional National            A based on a
 Libyan-style political structure with ascending levels of nonpartisan assemblies. The
 Government appointed its members, largely progovernment deputies. Although indi-
 vidual members occasionally criticized government policies, the TNA remained a
 rubber-stamp body, whose main function was to ratify legislation proposed by the
 Executive.
 In April the General Elections Act, promulgated by provisional decree by the
 President and pending ratification by the TNA, specified that an undefined govern-
 ment-appointed body, the General Elections Corporation, will select all canidates
 who will be permitted to run in the general elections. The Government plans to hold
 elections in March 1995 for state assemblies. It will appoint 10 percent of the as-
 sembly members, each state's popular committees will elect 45 percent of the mem-
 bers, and the people will elect the remaining 45 percent. The Government plans to
 have the elections for the Transitional National Assembly shortly after the state as-
 sembly elections.
 Although government rhetoric supported ending the civil war, the Government
 launched major military offensives in the south throughout the year. Rival rebel fac-
 tions continued to fight intermittently among themselves. In a bid to mediate the
 conflict, the Intergovernmental Authority on Drought and Development (IGADD), a
 regional body that comprises Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kenya, Uganda, and
 Sudan, sponsored several negotiating rounds between the Government and the
 rebels. By year's end, the negotiations were stalemated due to the intransigence of
 the various warring parties, whose commitment to peace was questionable. Pros-
 pects for a negotiated settlement remained slim.
 Although there were no women in the highest ranks of government, women in
 lesser positions played a modest role in day-to-day government operations. One of
 the governors of Sudan's 26 states was a woman, and there were a few female TNA
 members. The NIF did not, however, encourage female involvement in politics.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government tried to stamp out any domestic criticism on human rights issues
 by frequently and vehemently denying any responsibility for human rights abuses.
 Since the 1989 coup, the Government has banned local, independent human rights
 organizations. However, the Christian church organizations, SCCB and the 1CC,
 continued to seek to monitor and publicize human rights abuses, especially religious
 discrimination.
 In 1991 the Government created the Sudan Human Rights Organization
 (SHRO)-not to be confused with the previous SHRO, which it dissolved after the
 1989 coup-to defend its human rights record. This organization has yet to criticize
 the Government. In an attempt to demonstrate the regime's concern for human
 rights, the TNA adopted in 1993 the "Sudan Document of Human Rights" and cre-
 ated a human rights committee. After the latter began quietly investigating cases
 of disappearances, however, the Government dismissed its members in July and ap-
 pointed new members. The new members have shown no inclination to criticize or
 investigate the Government's human rights record.
 The Government was highly defensive about foreign criticism of its human rights
 record. It bitterly denounced the February report on Sudan by the U.N. Special
 Rapporteur on Human Rights in Sudan, Gaspar Biro and bitterly attacked him per-
 sonally. Much of the Government's response to the detailed and documented report
 consisted of denunciations of the rapporteur's age, qualifications, and integrity, and
 of accusations that he was hostile to Islam. The Government declared that because
 of the rapporteur's alleged bias against Islam, he was no longer welcome to visit
 Sudan.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Women.-Some aspects of Sudanese law and many traditional practices discrimi-
 nate against women. Gender segregation is commonplace. In keeping with Islamic
 law, Muslim women are not accorded the same property, inheritance, and family
 
 
 252
 rights as Muslim men. Women typically inherit half as much of the estate of a man
 with the same degree of kinship, and only men may initiate legal divorce proceed-
 ings. These rules apply only to Sudanese Muslims and not to those of other faiths.
 Women are discriminated against in employment, and only a small number of
 women worked in the professions, the police, and the military.
 Government directives require women in government offices and female students
 and teachers to conform to Islamic dress codes. Enforcement of the dress code regu-
 lations was uneven, but at times severe. On New Year's Eve of 1993, security forces
 raided many of Khartoum's private clubs and arrested several Muslim women for
 allegedly wearing clothes that did not conform with the Government's version of
 modest dress. The authorities punished several of these women by lashing.
 Violence against women appears to be common, especially wife beating, although
 accurate statistics do not exist. The Government has not addressed the issue of vio-
 lence against women; nor was it discussed publicly. The police do not normally in-
 tervene in domestic disputes, and there were no reports of court cases involving vio-
 lence against women in 1994. For cultural reasons, many women are reluctant to
 file formal complaints against such abuse. Women refugees from the south were
 particularly vulnerable to harassment and sexual abuse.
 Among some southern tribes, rape is common. No blame is attached to the prac-
 tice, although the man involved must pay the woman's family if she becomes preg-
 nant. Among some ethnic groups, wives are taken on a trial basis lasting up to 4
 years. The husband may dissolve the marriage during this period by returning the
 wife to her family, although he must pay a price for each child born during this
 time. Such wives reportedly may contract further marriages and are not stigmatized
 by having been returned.
 Children.-Government practice, as opposed to government rhetoric, dem-
 onstrated no significant concern for the rights and welfare of children. A consider-
 able number of children suffered serious abuses, including occasional enslavement,
 in the war zones. There were recurrent reports that the SPLA held thousands of
 children in camps against their will and used them as a reservoir of recruits for its
 military forces.
 There continued to be credible but unconfirmed reports of the existence of special
 camps where people from the north or from abroad come to purchase women and
 children. In his report to the U.N. Commission on Human Rights, the U.N. Special
 Rapporteur noted eyewitness accounts which revealed consistent reports of the loca-
 tions of camps. Young girls and women are reportedly purchased for housekeepers
 and in some cases wives. The boys are reportedly kept as servants (see Section 6.c.).
 The Government runs several camps for vagrant children. Police periodically
 sweep the streets of Khartoum and other major cities, taking children whom police
 personnel deem homeless to the camps, where they are detained for indefinite peri-
 ods. These children may not leave the camps and are subjected to strict discipline
 and physical and military training. Health care and schooling at the camps are gen-
 erally poor, basic living conditions are also often primitive. All the children, includ-
 ing non-Muslims, must study the Koran, and there is pressure on non-Muslims to
 convert to Islam. Children in the camps are often incorporated into the PDF.
 Female genital mutilation (FGM), although illegal, is widespread, especially in
 northern Sudan. As many as 90 percent or more of females in the north have been
 so mutilated, with consequences that sometimes have included severe urinary prob-
 lems, infections, and even death. Pharaonic mutilation (infibulation), the severest of
 the three types, is the most common and is usually performed on girls between 4
 and 7. Because few physicians will perform the operation, it is most often done by
 paramedical personnel in improvised, unsanitary conditions, causing severe pain
 and trauma to the child. Women displaced from the south to the north reportedly
 are increasingly imposing FGM upon their daughters, even if they themselves have
 not been subjected to it.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Sudan's population of 24.9 million is a
 multiethnic mix of over 500 Arab and African tribes with scores of languages and
 dialects. The Arab, Muslim culture in the north and central areas and the non-Mus-
 lim, black African culture in the south are the two dominate cultures. The west has
 a smaller population of Muslim black Africans. Northern Muslims, who form a ma-
 jority of about 16 million, have traditionally dominated the Government. In re-
 sponse, the southern ethnic groups fighting the civil war want independence, or, at
 a minimum, the right to self-determination.
 The Muslim Arab majority and the NIF-dominated Government continued to dis-
 criminate against ethnic minorities in almost every aspect of society. Residents in
 Arabic-speaking areas who do not themselves speak Arabic are discriminated
 against in education, jobs, and other opportunities.
 
 
 253
 The Arabization of instruction in higher education discriminated against non-
 Arabs. To compete for a university slot, students completing high school had to pass
 examinations m four subjects-English, mathematics, Arabic, and religious studes.
 Even at the university level, exams for all subjects except English were in Arabic,
 disadvantaging nonnative Arabic speakers.
 Religious Minorities.-Although the law recognizes Sudan as a multireligious
 country, in practice, the Government treats Islam, the religion of the majority, as
 the state religion. Muslims are the majority and predominate in the north, but are
 in the minority in the mostly Christian or animist south. There are also 1 to 2 mil-
 lion Christian or animist displaced southerners, and about 500,000 Copts, in the
 north.
 In government-controlled areas of the south, there was credible evidence of a pol-
 icy of-Islamization, as NEF supporters often replaced non-Muslim civil servants. All
 non-Muslim judges have been transferred to the north, where they are relegated to
 low-level tasks such as adjudicating traffic disputes. In the north, some non-Mus-
 lims lost their jobs in the civil service, the judiciary, and other professions. Few non-
 Muslim university graduates found government jobs at all. Frequent dismissals in
 the army and police purged professionals to make room for NIF supporters. Some
 non-Muslim businessmen complained of petty harassment and discrimination in the
 awarding of government contracts and trade licenses.
 People With Disabilities.-The Government does not discriminate against handi-
 capped persons, but it has not enacted any special legislation or taken other steps,
 suchas mandating accessibility to public buildings and transportation for the dis-
 abled.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right ofAssociation-Although Sudan had a strong labor union movement
 during the government of Sadiq al-Mahdi, the HOC abolished the precoup labor
 unions, closed union offices, froze union assets, forade strikes, and prescribed stiff
 punishments, including the death penalty, for violations of ROC labor decrees. The
 Government dismissed many labor leaders from their jobs or detained them, al-
 though most of those arrested were later freed. In 1994, however, the Government
 detained without charge a number of union activists suspected of antiregime activi-
 ties. In March the International Labor Organization (ILO) Committee on Freedom
 of Association deplored the detention of two trade unionists and expressed con-
 sternation at the death sentence pronounced against a third (even though he was
 later pardoned) for calling a strike.
 Prior to the new Labor Law instituted in 1992, the Government had established
 preliminary, government-controlled steering committees in 1989 and 1990 to man-
 age union affairs. Under tight control of these committees, the Sudan Workers
 Trade Unions Federation (SWTUF), the leading blue-collar labor organization with
 about 800,000 members, was restored with its leadership unchanged and its assets
 returned. In 1992 local union elections were held, after a delay to permit the steer-
 ing committees to arrange the outcomes. The elections resulted in government-ap-
 proved slates of candidates voted into office by prearranged acclamation.
 Although the Government continued to forbid strikes, some 70 employees of the
 state-owned telephone company struck in August. In September the company fired
 the 70, and the authorities detained 18 of them for periods as long as 2 weeks. The
 U.S. Government in 1991 suspended Sudan's eligibility for trade benefits under the
 Generalized System of Preferences because of its violations of worker rights.
 Unions remained free to form federations and affiliate with international bodies,
 such as the African Workers' Union and the Arab Workers' Union.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-An RCC constitutional decree
 of June 30, 1989, temporarily suspended the right to organize and bargain collec-
 tively. Although these rights were restored to organizing committees in September
 of the same year, government control of the steering committees meant in practice
 that the Government dominates the process of setting wages and working condi-
 tions. The continued absence of labor legislation allowing for union meetings, filing
 of grievanes, and other union activity, greatly redued the value of these formal
 rights. Although local union officials raised some grievances with employers, few
 carried them to the Government. Wages are set by a tripartite committee compris-
 ing representatives of the Government, the labor unions, and business. Specialized
 labor courts adjudicate standard labor disputes.
 In 1993 the Govement created two export processing zones. By the end of 1994,
 however, they existed only on paper, and the Government had not yet made clear
 whether or not Sudanese labor laws would apply fully in these zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labr-Although the law prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor, slavery persists. The taking of slaves, particularly in war
 
 
 254
 zones, and their export to parts of central and northern Sudan continued in 1994.
 Captives were forced to do agricultural and domestic work, and some women were
 forced to serve as concubines. Although in some instances local authorities took ac-
 tion to stop instances of slavery, in other cases the authorities did nothing. There
 were also several unconfirmed reports that some captives were exported to Libya.
 In its 1993 World Labor Report, the ILO noted that traditional slavery survived and
 is increasing in modern-day Sudan in the context of the ongoing civil war (see Sec-
 tion 5).
 The SPLA and SSIM continued to force southern men to work as laborers or por-
 ters or forcibly conscripted them into their fighting forces.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The legal minimum age for work-
 ers was 16, but the law was loosely enforced by inspectors from the M.inistry of
 Labor in the official or wage economy. Children as young as 11 or 12 worked in a
 number of factories, particularly outside of the capital, including the oil mills at Um
 Ruwaba. In addition, gross poverty in Sudan has produced widespread child labor
 in the informal, unregulated economy. In rural areas, children traditionally assist
 their families with aicultural work from a very young age.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The legislated minimum wage is enforced by
 the Ministry of Labor, which maintains fielc[ offices in most major Sudanese cities.
 Employers generally respect the minimum wage. Workers who are denied the mini-
 mum wage may file a grievance with the local Ministry of Labor field office, which
 is then supposed to investigate and take appropriate action if there has been a vio-
 lation of the law. In July the Government increased the minimum wage to $23 (ap-
 proximately 9,000 Sudanese pounds) per month. Given Sudan's soaring inflation,
 however, this wage is insufficient to support the average Sudanese worker and his
 family.
 The workweek is limited b law to 6 days and 48 hours, with a day of rest on
 Friday. Although Sudanese aws prescribe health and safety standards, working
 conditions were generally poor, and enforcement by the Ministry of Labor minimal:
 The law does not address the right of workers to remove themselves from dangerous
 work situations without loss of employment.
