 SUDAN
 Sudan's young parliamentary government faced a series of
 problems in 1987, including civil war, a deteriorating
 economy, and the necessity to maintain the fragile governing
 coalition. Despite mounting problems, Sudan's democratic
 system operated with openness. National issues were aired,
 contested, and debated in a variety of public forums,
 including the media. -Individual rights of Sudan's citizens
 were generally respected by the Government in areas firmly
 under its control,'but the record was severely blemished in
 the contested areas and towns of the south and west.
 Prime Minister Sadig al-Mahdi's majority coalition of the Umma
 and-the Democratic Unionist (DUP). parties was dissolved by
 interpbrty. squabbling in May and again in August, only to be
 reconstituted essentially intact each time. A five-man
 Council of State, selected by the ruling parties, and approved
 by the Constituent Assembly, shares executive power with the
 Council of Ministers. Underrepresentedlin the'Assembly because
 conflict precluded elections in 37 of the 68. constituencies,
 Southerners are nonetheless an active part of the political
 scene in the capital. The goal of holding a national-'
 constitutional conference to redress Southern grievances and
 end the civil war remained unmhet at the end of 1987.
 The Sudanese People's Armed Forces (SPAF) a 60',000 member army
 supported by a 'small air fo'rce bhnd navy, is responsible for
 both external and internal security. To, supblement regular
 troops, the Government has armed several' tribal militias in
 contested areas. These forces confront the Sudanese People's
 Liberation Army (SPLA), led by John Garang, throughout the
 vast territory of the three southern provinces. Martial law
 is in-effect in the s6uthern part of the country controlled by
 the Government, but much of the territory in the south
 experiences no effective rule.
 Against _the background of civil strife, with a burden of about
 1 million refugeei from neighboring countries and another
 estimated 2 millibn intefially displaced'persQns, -the economy
 continued to deteriorate'in 1987, with a further drop in
 export earnings, high inflation., high unemployment, and
 growing foreign debt ($11 billion). Severe pockets of hunger
 arose, attribntable to civil-war,.inadequate rainfall,
 dislocations of pe6ple, and plagues of locusts and rats. With
 assistance from the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the
 Government introduced a politically unpopular but vital
 economic reform program in October 1987. The program includes
 austerity measures such as a currency devaluation, import
 restrictions, and subsidy reductions which bave caused general
 economic hardship and spawned demonstrations and riots. The
 Government is likely to face continued popular opposition to
 the program as further reforms are enacted. Although it is
 too early to judge the success of the reforms, the
 international donor community has strongly supported the
 reforms, since they are a critical element for revitalizing
 the econorhy.
 Overall, the human rights situation deteriorated in the south,
 where the civil war continued unabated. The SPLA expanded
 operations during the June-October rainy season, then further
 extended operations north along the Ethiopian border in
 December. Fighting was occasionally fierce. As evidenced by
 dislocations, massacres, and attacks on civilian targets,
 innocent people were caught in the crossfire and turmoil of
 
 
 294
 SUDAN
 war. In particular, government-armed militias were involved
 in several massacres. Humanitarian food relief efforts for
 the south were frustrated by both sides. The SPLA attacked
 food relief convoys, and the Government was reluctant to move
 relief supplies due to security concerns and fears that the
 supplies would go to the insurgents.
 Sudan's overarching legal debate centered on whether to
 maintain Shari'a law--a Koranic legal system which provides
 for harsh corporal punishments--as a national legal system
 applicable to all persons regardless of religious persuasion.
 The Shari'a law issue has been the major obstacle to peace in
 Sudan's civil war.   In 1983 former President Gaafar Nimeiri
 imposed a stiff version of Shari'a law kncwn as the "September
 laws." Nearly all Sudanese agree that the "September laws"
 should be replaced. The Government, dominated by northern
 Muslims has insisted that the "September laws" are a
 misapplication of Shari'a law and should be replaced with a
 Shari'a code faithful to the Koran. A very large majority of
 southerners, who are nearly all either Christians or animists,
 strongly oppose any form of Shari'a law. At the end of 1987,
 the Government. was considering an alternative code to replace
 the "September laws" with stiffer evidentiary requirements.
 The new code would also reportedly reduce, though not
 eliminate, corporal punishments. Fifteen out of 168 elements
 of Shari'a law were eliminated in December. They involved
 minor offenses. The repeal of some additional elements of
 Shari'a law are expected in early 1988.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There have been few reported cases of political killing. One
 reported case concerned a Southerner, Nuka Ngor Baak, Director
 of the Forestry Department in Bahr el Ghazal Province, who was
 abducted from his home on May 14, 1987, allegedly by men in
 military uniform. His body was later found nearby.
 Northerners claim that the SPLA engages in political killings,
 although lack of access to the SPLA-controlled areas prevents
 investigation.
 b. Disappearance
 As as result of movements of people because of war and
 intertribal conflict, many people have lost touch with friends
 and families. However, these problems appear to be mostly due
 to inadequate communications rather than to arbitrary or
 deliberate actions by security forces. There have been no
 reports of disappearance as a result of deliberate government
 policy.
 In July in the southern town of Mundri, the SPLA abducted four
 foreigners (three Americans, one British), who were connected
 with missionary organizations. They were released in August,
 unharmed but in poor health. Three Catholic priests similarly
 held in captivity for 3 months were released on October 13. A
 fourth priest remains captive. The SPLA apparently holds
 several government soldiers and pilots as prisoners of war.
 
 
 295
 SUDAN
 C. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 While still officially-in-effect,'"hadd" punishments of the
 Islamic "Septembe laws", including amputations and hanging,
 have not been applied since April 1985 when Nimeiri was
 overthrown. Flogging does occur, but less frequently and less
 severely'than prior t6 the 1985 change of government.
 According to the bhairman of the Sudan Human Rights
 Organization, there are over 400 convicted prisoners in Kober
 and Offidufman prisons awaiting'd6nfirmation of amputation
 sentences'by-the high courts. All such sentences'are
 currently in abeyance. In 'a-well-publicized case, two
 convicted armed robbers were sentenced to cross amputation
 (hand and f6ot) in May 1987. Amnesty International sponsored
 a letter-writing campaign appealing to Prime Minister Sadiq,
 asking for clemency. The Prime Minister appointed a commission
 to look into the case." The review had not been completed at
 the end of 1987.
 Outside the combat zones, reports of torture are rare, but
 police treatment'of persong under arrest is sometimes brutal.
 Amnesty.Ineirnatiofal has received reports of ill-treatmentof
 prisoners, including the use of leg irons On prisoners
 awaiting amputations. In general, prison conditions are poor,
 but local treatment of prisoners varies'-considerably, from
 shackling prisoners to allowing them to go home at night.
 There have been reports of torture and execution of prisoners
 by military forces on both sides in the southern conflict.'
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, Exile, or Forced Labor
 Sudan's code of criminal procedure, modeled after British law,
 requires a wariant by-a'magistkate for arrest. Akrests'made
 at the-Acene 4f a crime must be followed'by a statement of
 charges within a specific period of time. The accused must be
 informed of the charges against him and permitted legal
 counsel. Only certain capital offenses do not permit bail.
 However, Sudan's legal system includes measures under the
 state of emergency which gives the'Government wide powers of
 arrest and preventive deention, which technically could be
 invoked at any time.
 On September 3, the Government ordered the release of 38
 political detainees. They were members of the former regime
 who had been detained without charge or trial under the 1985
 state of emergency regulations. Among the prominent persons
 released were Rashid el Tahir and Bedr el Din Suleiman, both
 of whom had held senior posts under Nimeiri.
 In southern and western areas, military authorities are
 empowered to detain people without charge if suspected of
 cooperatiQn or sympathy with the rebellion. There are no
 reliable reports of how many persons are so detained. In
 September, however, members of the Sudanese National Party,
 the dominant party in the Nuba Mountains, reportedly were
 arrested following SPLA attacks on government forces in the
 area.
 In April Sudanese police arrested the Chairman and Secretary
 of the Sudan Railway Workers Union in Darfur on unspecified
 grounds. According to a Union memorandum, the two were still
 in detention in late 1987, with no indication when they would
 be brought to trial.
 
 
 296
 SUDAN
 There were no known cases of involuntary exile or forced
 labor. However, slavery arose as a major political issue in
 1987. Observers allege that no Sudanese government has ever
 been strong enough to completely eradicate the centuries-old
 practice of slavery and that traces of it still exist in parts
 of western Sudan.
 Ushari Ahmad Mahmoud and Suleiman Ali Baldo of the University
 of Khartoum maintain that 3,000 Dinka tribespeople are held in
 slavery by the Rizeiqat Arabs. They interviewed escaped
 slaves and witnesses to the enslavement of others. Following
 denials that slavery exists in the Sudan by the Prime Minister
 and the Foreign Ministry, the southern-run English language
 newspapers, Sudan Times and Heritage, began carrying
 interviews with, and pictures of, escaped slaves. The
 National Islamic Front (NIF) party, the largest opposition
 party in the Parliament, also attacked the Government on the
 slavery issue, questioning its denials and calling for
 independent investigations. At his press conference in
 September, the Prime Minister characterized reports of slavery
 as defamatory, politically motivated, and slanderous.
 The Sudan Human Rights Association decided in September to
 investigate charges of slavery, with the assistance of the
 Sudan Bar Association. A law faculty member of the University
 of Khartoum was sent to Al Daein to investigate, but his
 report had not been released as of the end of 1987.
 A Sudan Catholic Bishops' Conference document, sent in August
 to the Prime Minister, referred to the existence of a slave
 market in Abyei, Southern Kordofan.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 In 1986 Parliament abolished the executive power to form
 special State Security Courts, thus ensuring that trials of
 political prisoners would take place henceforth in the regular
 criminal courts.
 The judicial process involves a police or magistrate
 investigation, a field report, an arrest warrant, the arrest,
 and a trial before a panel of three judges. The appointment
 of judges is made by a committee within the judiciary,
 generally considered independent of political forces. Trials
 are public except in rare cases where the accused requests a
 closed trial. Defendants have the right to present evidence,
 speak on their own behalf, and to obtain legal representation.
 There are legal aid services for the poor, but their resources
 are limited. The Attorney General's office tries to apportion
 legal aid to those facing serious charges and to those most in
 need. A case may be appealed through the full series of courts
 from the magistrate level to the High Court of Appeals.
 In rural areas, it is customary tribal law which is usually
 observed and enforced, even though most cases in the provinces
 are heard by judges from Khartoum who may be generally
 unfamiliar with specific tribal laws. Rural disputes most
 often concern land, water, or women.
 On April 11, the Appeals Court, after reviewing the case of
 ex-Vice President Omar el Tayeb, reduced his life sentence to
 less than 13 years. Tayeb had been convicted for bribery,
 treason, and violations of immigration and civil aviation
 laws. Tayeb is rumored to be in poor health and was
 transferred from a provincial prison to a hospital ward in the
 capital.
 
 
 297
 SUDAN
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Outside the combat zones, there were few complaints of
 governmental interference with the privacy of ordinary
 Sudanese citizens. Displaced Southerners and non-Sudanese
 refugees in the Khartoum area, however, have been rounded up
 and either detained or fined for not having their documents
 with them.
 In March and April 1987, Khartoum authorities carried out a
 campaign known locally as *kasha" or forced expulsion of
 refugees-back to camps. Many refugees had their legal
 documents and possessions confiscated or destroyed, and were
 physicilly abused, sometimes raped, and, in a few cases,
 killed. After a domestic and international outcry, the
 campaign was dropped. The Prime Minister publicly denied that
 "kasha" was practiced. Other members of the Government,
 including the Commissioner of Khartoum, expressed the view
 that refugees were responsible for many of Sudan's economic
 ills. There is also a widely held perception among
 Northerners that the large number of displaced Southerners in
 Khartoum is a potential security threat. Furthermore,
 representatives of pro-Islamic political groups hold the view
 that refugees, most of whom are non-Muslim, dilute the
 "religious purity" of Khartoum and other northern regions.
 According to government critics, a second "kasha" campaign
 started in late 1987, when the Khartoum police randomly began
 to destroy shelters of displaced Southerners in the Khartoum
 area in an effort to force them to leave. While there is no
 known centrally directed policy, the Government has taken no
 preventive actions and, according to critics, tacitly condones
 the practice.
 g. Violations of Humanitarian Law in Armed Conflicts
 The most serious violations of humanitarian law in 1987
 involved charges of massacres and slavery and are directly
 related to the 4-year-old civil war between the Government and
 the SPLA. The SPLA draws much of its support from the Dinka
 tribe, some of whom traditionally inhabit the Bahr el Ghazal
 region. To their north live Arabic-speaking Muslim tribes
 such as the Rizeiqat and Missiriyyah. In 1986 the Government
 began a policy of arming militias from the latter tribes for
 the stated purpose of protecting them against the SPLA. The
 addition of these improved weapons exacerbated age-old tribal
 conflicts over water holes and grazing areas. Critics charge
 that, instead of using their weapons to fight the SPLA, the
 militias-have used them to raid Dinka areas, steal cattle and
 other possessions, and take some Dinka children into slavery.
 Government officials, conversely, explain that traditional
 relations between the tribes had been good until SPLA attacks
 on the Muslim tribes north of the traditional dividing line,
 the Bahr el Arab River, began. Such an attack, they say,
 occurred last March near Al Daein in Southern Darfur. In
 response, the Rizeiqat massacred a group of Dinka civilians
 who had been rounded up by the local police and taken to the
 Al Daein train station.
 At the end of 1987, there had been no fully objective and
 impartial investigation of the Al Daein massacre. The
 Governor of Darfur's initial investigation involved three
 senior government officials, two of whom reportedly are from
 
 
 298
 SUDAN
 the Rizeiqat tribe. They spent a single day in Al Daein and
 returned, reporting that there had been 228 casualties. In a
 press conference, the Prime Minister, reporting the team's
 conclusions, said that only 182 Dinka had been killed in the
 incident and that the Rizeiqat had not been responsible. In
 their report on the Al Daein massacre, University of Khartoum
 lecturers Ushari Ahmad Mahmoud and Suleyman Ali Baldo maintain
 that more than 1,000 Dinka were killed by Rizeiqat Arabs.
 Because of the controversy over the Al Daein massacre, the
 Prime Minister on September 15 issued a decree setting up a
 national committee to look into the Governor of Darfur's
 report on the Al Daein events. The committee is charged with
 defining the responsibilities of regional officials, assessing
 losses on both sides, and proposing means for preventing a
 recurrence of such incidents. The committee's report has not
 been circulated publicly, and the committee has not made any
 statements.
 Another massacre occurred in Wau, the capital of Bahr el
 Ghazal in September. Wau is inhabited primarily by Dinka and
 Fertit tribesmen, the latter of whom also formed a government-
 armed militia. According to many reports, starting in May
 there were repeated incidents in which the army and the Fertit
 militia killed persons from the Dinka tribe. One incident
 occurred August 11-12, following the firing of a missile by
 SPLA forces at a military aircraft. The army rounded up a
 number of civilians from the town, who, as reported by most
 accounts, were killed by Fertit militiamen. A member of
 Parliament from Bahr el Ghazal, Joseph Modistu, said in
 Parliament that travelers from Wau had told him 2,000 were
 killed by the army. Other sources have put the number between
 100 and 250.
 The second incident in Wau was sparked when, in an argument, a
 government soldier shot an old woman and a Dinka policeman. A
 major battle resulted, with the army and the Fertit militia on
 one side and mostly Dinka police and game wardens on the other.
 Accounts also vary as to the number of persons killed, but
 most claim that over 100 persons died. On September 14, Abdul
 Rahman Ali Taha, the majority party's leader in Parliament,
 agreed to a select parliamentary committee to investigate
 massacre reports from Wau, but the committee had not been set
 up by the end of 1987.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The print media are free and freewheeling. Each political
 party has its own newspaper. In addition, other newspapers
 present a full range of opinions from the Islamic right to the
 Communist left. There are three English-language newspapers,
 including one daily, which tend to be pro-south and
 antigovernment. These newspapers reported extensively on
 human rights abuses in Sudan including the massacres in the
 south.
 There are signs, however, that the Government is considering
 placing limits on press freedom. Since the election campaign
 of 1986, which was characterized by widespread and unrestrained
 freedom of expression by Sudan's numerous political parties
 and newspapers, the Government has expressed concern with
 abuses of freedom of speech and press. The Prime Minister and
 other government officials made a nimber of statements in 1987
 critical of the press for allegedly publishing inciteful
 
 
 299
 SUDAN
 material, rumors, lies, and comments on sensitive national
 security matters. The Prime Minister told Parliament in June
 that he would introduce tough press controls. After his
 authority to ban-newspapers was removed in October, he
 submitted new press legislation to the Assembly, but the terms
 of the new proposal had not- been made public at the end of the
 year.
 Radio and television are state owned and operated in Sudan,
 and tend to. support government policies.
 In October: Ushari Ahmed Mahmoud, co-author of the report on
 the Al Daein massacre and the slavery issue, was, arrested for
 calling the Prime Minister a liar, after the Prime Minister
 bad strbngly castigated Ushari's report on slavery. Ushari
 was rearrested on -December 26 under Sudan's sedition law for
 allegedly writing a leaflet denouncing the Government and
 supporting the SPLA. He was released on bail December 30 and
 awaits trial.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Government limits assembly and association on security
 grounds. Khartoum and other provincial cities were the scenes
 of numerous public demonstrations in 1987, often by students
 in protest against economic-related conditions. There have
 been, however, occasions when violence erupted and security
 forces fired on demonstrators and property was destroyed.
 This happened in September during demonstrations in Blue Nile
 Province and in Northern Kordofan Province and again in
 October, during demonstrations in Khartoum against a
 government agreement with the IMF.
 In 1987 police and military reinforcements, reacting to
 student demonstrations protesting lack of school supplies and
 teachers, sometimes opened fire. Fourteen students were
 killed in one demonstration at a secondary school in Northern
 Kordofan.
 The Government cracked down on student unrest at the University
 of Juba, the only national university in the south, following
 student protests against the chancellor's appropriation of
 student facilities for other purposes. Protesters were
 arrested, released by a judge, then rearrested by order of the
 governor. The incident escalated, leading to the closing of
 the university for a year. The Southern Sudan Political
 Association, one of the southern political parties, protested
 and called for the Vice Chancellor's removal. The Prime
 Minister spoke in support of the Vice Chancellor and the
 closure of the university, claiming it was affected by the
 violence characteristic of life in the south;
 Averring opposition to demonstrations that transfer the
 decisionmaking power from the Constituent Assembly to the
 street, the Government prohibited public marches on October
 18. It also cited the civil war, an increase in violent
 crime, and the large number of refugees in the country as
 reasons for the prohibition. The order, which will remain in
 effect until the civil war is ended, exempted two categories
 of marches: those expressing the will of the whole nation and
 those of a ceremonial nature.
 The Sudanese labor movement played an active role in the
 overthrow of Nimeiri in 1985 and the formation of the
 Transitional Military Government leading to restoration of
 
 
 300
 SUDAN
 democracy in 1986. The 1985 transitional Constitution,
 amended in March 1987, provides for the right of workers to
 organize and bargain collectively. The primary labor
 organizations are the Sudanese Workers Trade Union Federation
 (SWTUF) and the Sudanese Employees and Clerks Federation
 (SFETU). The SWTUF represents blue-collar workers and has
 been a stable organization since 1985. Its white-collar
 counterpart, the SFETU, however, is undergoing major changes.
 In December 1987, the Government passed an ordinance which
 split the SFETU into three separate federations: employees,
 professionals, and teachers. There is also a trade union
 alliance, which is an informal lobbying group comprised mostly
 of white-collar workers and professionals.
 Strikes are legal, except in the judiciary, armed forces, and
 police. The law stipulates, however, that the process of
 negotiations and arbitration must run its course before a
 union may strike. Strikes in September 1987 by such unions as
 the farm workers and veterinarians were considered "illegal"
 by the Government because the unions had not first submitted
 their grievances to arbitration.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Sudan is a multireligious country. Both Islam and
 Christianity are formally recognized as religions of Sudan,
 but adherents to other religious beliefs are not legally
 restricted. The people of five northern provinces and the
 capital are predominantly Muslim, while those from the three
 southern provinces are animist and Christian. Religious
 differences have been a source of friction among the various
 groups, and the civil war has strong religious overtones.
 The Government is concerned that the war not be seen by the
 outside world solely as a Muslim-Christian conflict and often
 describes it as Ethiopian-sponsored Communist aggression. The
 Government sometimes portrays it differently to Sudanese,
 however. In one document, the Government described five
 northern regions as "Dar el Islam," or the land of Islam, and
 the southern regions "Dar el Harb," which means both war zone
 and enemy territory and, in Islamic law, non-Muslim country.
 Government officials have also made statements accusing some
 Christian churches and church personnel of cooperation with
 the rebels.
 The Christian Sudan Council of Churches (SCC) is involved in
 efforts to end the war and backed a trip in September by
 representatives of southern political parties to Addis Ababa,
 Kampala, and Nairobi, to meet with leaders of the SPLA to
 discuss peace. The prosouthern press reported that the
 Government was angry at the SCC for supporting the trip and
 thus indirectly the SPLA.
 In August the Sudan Catholic Bishops' Conference submitted to
 the Prime Minister a long list of discriminatory actions
 against Christians which the Conference believed were threats
 to peace. These included: the continuance of Islamic laws;
 the refusal by various government bodies in several parts of
 the country to allow Christian organizations to use,
 construct, improve, or buy land for buildings for religious
 purposes; the harassment of southerners, especially the Dinka;
 and the looting and burning of the Catholic church of Al Daein
 and the killing of the priest's assistant in March 1987.
 
 
</pre>
<pre>
 301
 SUDAN
 In August there were reports that militiamen from Arab tribes
 in Southern Kordofan, belonging to a group known as the
 General Union of the Arabs, burned down a number of churches
 in El Karkariya and El Katmur, and killed Pastor Mathew el Nur
 and family after setting his house ablaze.
 With the exception of the Communist Party, political parties
 in Sudan tend to'be based on either a religious sect or tribal
 group. Non-Muslims sometimes reach high. levels in the military
 and the civil service. There are 3 Christians in the 20-member
 Cabinet, and 1 on the 5-man Council of State. The current
 coalition parthers of the Government, the Umma Party and the
 DemocratiU Unionist Party (DUP), are based in the Ansar and
 Khatmiyya Islamic orders, respectively. The opposition
 National Islamic Front (NIF) is composed of fundamentalist
 Muslims. The transitional. Constitution now in effect retains
 Islamic law and custom as the main sources of legislation, and
 most Southerners- oppose it -as inherently discriminatory
 against them." A perennial-major issue of debate in the
 Constituent Assembly remains proposed amendments to the
 Constitution which redefine but retain Islamic law as its
 basis. The NIF advocates'retaining strict Islamic law, while
 the Umma and DUP may accept some recognition of Christianity
 and other religions as sources of legislation in addition to
 Islam. Southern deputies and the SPLA advocate return to a
 secular constitution.
 Christian law graduates are required to take a proficiency
 examinatioh in Islamic Shari'a law in order to practice law in
 Sudan.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Freedom of movement within the country is impeded by the civil
 war and the.inadequate transportation infrastructure, as well
 as by government restrictions. Sudan continues to require
 exit visas for anyone leaving the country, a requirement that
 can be used to restrict individuals from foreign travel.
 Unmarried women cannot travel alone but must be accompanied by
 a family member or other sponsor.
 Foreigners must register with the police upon entering the-
 country, obtain permission to move from one location to
 another, and register again upon arriving at the new location.
 Sudan's foreign refugee population, which consists largely of
 Ethiopians, Ugandans, and Chadians, is estimated to fluctuate
 between 800,000 and 1 million. The Government seeks to settle
 refugees in the countryside, where they. can receive assistance
 from foreign.private and multilateral relief agencies.
 However, large numbers also come to the cities; especially the
 capital area, in search of jobs, shelter, and food.
 Section 3 .Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 In Sudan's multiparty parliamentary system, the principal
 institutions are the 301-member Constituent Assembly, the
 20-person Council of Ministers, and the 5-member Council of
 State. Government is based on a transitional Constitution.
 The current Assembly was elected in 1986 to a 4 year term in a
 free and fair election.  Since then, a coalition government,
 consisting.-of the two largest parties in the Constituent
 Assembly, the Umma and the Democratic Unionist (DUP) Parties,
 
 
 302
 SUDAN
 has ruled the country. There are two women in the Assembly
 and one in the Cabinet. Women and men have equal voting
 rights.
 The goal of holding a national conference to draw up a new
 constitution remains unmet, and a special ministry, created in
 19B6 to oversee its convening, remains without a minister.
 Many Sudanese consider that convening of this conference is
 necessary to bring an end to the civil war.
 Regional government for many parts of Sudan is ineffective.
 In some areas, most notably in the south and far west, basic
 responsibilities, such as providing security, are beyond the
 rneach of local officials. The Government is considering
 restoration of tribal administration in the provinces, a
 practice begun by the British but discontinued under President
 Nimeiri. While criticized by secular intellectuals and
 nationalists during and after the colonial period, the system
 of tribal administration is seen in retrospect to have been an
 effective way to keep the peace.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government is sensitive to criticism of its human rights
 performance at home or from abroad, most recently on the issue
 of slavery. As noted, the Government sharply criticized Dr.
 Ushari Ahmad Mahmoud, the author of the report on the Al Daein
 massacre and slavery, and detained him briefly in October
 without charge.
 The Ministry of Foreign Affairs, in a public statement
 September 1, denied slavery was practiced in Sudan and
 threatened to take action against "the enemies who are
 attempting to smear the good name of the country abroad."
 Some government officials apparently believed that personnel
 of Western relief agencies were the sources for reports of
 human rights events from rural areas. The Government's action
 (currently in abeyance) in September 1987 to expel three
 relief agencies-from Sudan may be related -to this issue.
 With government permission, Amnesty International has formed
 local chapters in the cities of Wad Medani and Khartoum.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Sudan's population of 21.1 million (1984) is composed
 primarily of two distinct cultures--Arab and black African.
 Sudanese, especially those on the periphery, resent the
 Government's emphasis on central and northern Sudan, where the
 population is most fully arabized. Historically, all of
 Sudan's governments have featured political and economic
 domination by northern Muslims (approximately 13 million).
 Non-Arab and non-Muslim groups in the ethnically diverse south
 and among the Nuba of the Kordofan Mountains, and partially
 arabized Muslim groups, such as the Fur in the west and the
 Beja in the east, have begun mobilizing to demand a greater
 share of the nation's economic development and political power.
 Southerners coming north looking for work or to escape the war
 face social discrimination by the Muslim Arab majority. Rents
 may be artificially raised to keep southerners or refugees
 from residing in certain areas. Southern students, unable to
 
 
 303
 SUDAN
 attend schools in the war zones, have had difficulty finding
 places in the northern schools. In 1987 many displaced
 Southerners were subjected to police harassment or imprisonment
 for failure to have the proper identity documents, and some
 were caught'up in the "kasha" campaign.
 Men and women retain traditionally segregated roles, and
 Sudanese laws favor men. For example, under the Islamic law
 of inheritance, women receive only half as much property as
 men. The incidence of female circumcision, although illegal,
 remains high and is ingrained in the culture of many groups.
 Owing to-tradition and social circumstances, women receive
 less education than men, although legally they are entitled to
 equal opporttinities. They also have fewer employment
 opporttnities, but some women play an active role in
 government, the profe!; ions, the media, and higher education.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR'
 Sudanese labor laws and practices, by and large, embrace
 international standards. The workweek is limited to 6 days
 and 48 hours, with 6 1-;Yay rest period on Friday. Laborers
 are given an extra month's pay for each year's labor. Most
 workers receive allowances for-transportation and some for
 housing. However, with the recent devaluation of the Sudanese
 pound, mgny unions are seeking better employment terms.
 Presently, the Prescribed monthly minimum wage is approximately
 $30 for blue-cblar workers, and $96 for white-collar
 employees. 'Annual raises must be at least 5"percent of the
 annual salary.  Salaries in private industry are generally
 higher thanthose in the public sector. The minimum age for -
 workers is 16.
 Sudanese laws prescribe health and safety standards but, in
 general; factory conditions-are poor. Enforcement of
 environmental standards "S minimal. Unemployment and
 underemployment dre major problems in Sudan, particularly
 among youth. ' Griduatis, even of such prestigious schools as
 Khartoum University, face severe difficulties in finding any
 type of employnent after completing their education.
 
 
 304
