Sudan
' I ^he Sudanese government's apparent involvement in a failed J- attempt to assassinate the president of Egypt on Ethiopian soil in June 1995, together with allegations that Sudanese officials were, involved in assisting those who bombed the World Trade Center in 1993, have raised considerable international interest in Sudan's involvement in terrorist activities outside its borders. Much less attention has been paid, however, to the Sudanese government's responsibility for myriad and systematic human rights abuses within Sudan. By 1995, the government headed by Lt.-Gen. Omar Hassan al-Bashir had established sufficient hold over the country to be able to reduce the extent of outright torture, especially in northern Sudan, where abuses are more visible than in the war zones of the south. However, its frequent resort to violence and its general hostility to civil liberties were evident throughout the year, and were exemplified by a rise in reports of slavery and by the killing of at least 15 demonstrators in the capital, IGiartoum, in September.
The 1995 State Department report is more sharply focused than in previous years. Its forthrightness, accuracy and attention to detail are welcome and timely in shifting attention to the Sudanese government's domestic human rights practices. Nevertheless, the report takes a piecemeal approach which fails to provide an integrated picture or convey the enormity of the problem of human rights violations in Sudan. In adhering to point-by-point legal categories, the report still shies away from addressing the intrinsic incompatibility of the government's ideological drive — heavily influenced by the ostensibly illegal National Islamic Front (NIF) — with respect for basic human rights, including those theoretically afforded by Islam to Muslims and non-Muslims under the jurisdiction of Islamic rulers. (Khartoum continues to claim that it is being victimized by Western antagonism to "Sudan's Islamic orientation," but this assertion is becoming less convincing to non-Sudanese Muslims and is already ridiculed by many ordinary Sudanese.) The report refers to the "Arabization and Islamization drive" on non-Muslims, but does not tackle the government's double-talk about Islam. The NIF asserts that, since the Qu'ran says there can be no compulsion in Islam, then forced Islamization is a contradiction in terms and therefore cannot exist. In
219
Critique 1995
practice, of course, it does exist, and many abuses are carried out in the name of the religion. The background to this and many similar issues is tackled in depth by Human Rights Watch/Africa in its 260-page report, Behind the Red Line: Political Repression in Sudan, released in May 1996. Human Rights Watch and the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights were the only international human rights NGOs to gain official access to Sudan in 1995.
The U.N. Special Rapporteur on Human Rights in Sudan, Dr. Caspar Biro, has felt able to criticize the 1991 Penal Code in terms of its incompatibility with international law while rebutting the regime's claim that he is anti-Islamic. Cruel and inhuman penalties have been enshrined in the 1991 law. The State Department, however, appears to accept the conventional wisdom (and the Sudanese government's claim) that the 1991 Penal Code, which includes some traditional huddud punishments, is based on the Islamic shari'a. This implies acceptance of the assertion by absolutists that the religion demands the penalties. Many Sudanese Muslims would argue that the Bashir government has used such concepts solely for its owtì political advantage, and has degraded Islam in the process. Meanwhile, elements within the NIF and the government dismiss human rights as a "Western" invention of no validity to Muslims, and is building what Amnesty International calls "a culture of impunity." This is, of course, sensitive territory for any non-Muslim observer, but its implications cannot continue to be avoided as fastidiously as they are in this report.
Where the State Department report does succeed is in combining brevity with information content. Presumably because of the restrictions on the report's format and size, pertinent questions are left unasked concerning the ability of a religious state to serve the needs of a multi-ethnic, multi-cultural and multi-religious society. From a scattering of references to the "uneven" application of the law, one can infer that some of the Sudanese government's many-layered security organizations operate beyond its control with impunity. However, it lacks a statement as clear as the one put forward by the Islamist intellectual and former London embassy cultural attaché Abd al-Wahab al-Effendi, that one
220
Sudan
function of the civil state machinery is to put a public relations gloss on the excesses of the security apparatus that effectively runs the country.
No mention is made of the NIF's patronage system, which permeates Sudan's "reforms aimed at privatizing state-run firms and stimulating private investment" and turns them into cut-price opportunities for friends of the government to enrich themselves. It is not made clear that opponents of the regime and members of minority groups are deliberately targeted by the selective use of the law, ranging from arrests for alcohol consumption to conscription into militia service. (The proportion of alcohol drinkers to abstainers is not necessarily any different from that in the United States during the Prohibition era, and the opportunities for abuse of the law are similar. Any NIF insider wishing to drink alcohol can do so without fear of punishment.)
However, the report does establish from the outset that "NIF members and supporters hold most key positions in the Government, security forces, judiciary, academia and the media." It also points out that the government-appointed Transitional National Assembly, which "theoretically" had legislative authority, did nothing in 1995 to lift restrictions on civil liberties — including the state of emergency — imposed by the military Revolutionary Command Council which first seized power in 1989.
Describing a "dismal human rights situation" in which "little improvement" is apparent (apart firom a limited ceasefire in the civil war, brokered by former U.S. President Jimmy Carter in mid-1995), the report catalogues serious abuses by the IChartoum government and also by the insurgent Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA) and smaller rebel factions. All sides share responsibility for massaaes, other extrajudicial killings, forced labor and almost total restriction of civil liberties, although, as the report notes, these have been carried out "on a broader scale" by the government. Hundreds of political detainees were held incommunicado without charge or trial, and detainees continued to be tortured and ill-treated. Civilians in the war zones have been deliberately attacked; thousands have been driven from their homes and hundreds — including many women and children — have been killed or kidnapped.
221
Critique 1995
Almost seven years since the Revolutionary Command Council seized power, these events have a recurrent nature which threatens to exhaust the descriptive vocabulary, and it is perhaps not surprising that the phrase "dismal human rights situation" is repeated from the 1994 report. Other repetitions are less understandable, however, and suggest that this is a revision of last year's report rather than a complete overhaul. Although the revised State Department instructions to drafters of the Country Reports encourage the repetition of stock language where conditions remain unchanged, the danger here is that such language is no substitute for fresh consideration. Thus, the State Department report must be the only publication outside Sudan to continue referring to the governmental human rights body as the Sudan Human Rights Organization (SHRO), when that title properly belongs to the original banned SHRO which now operates in exile in Cairo and London.
Other repetitions from the previous report include the assertion that "among some southern ethnic groups rape is common. No blame is attached to the process." This contentious, inaccurate and implicitly racist remark is at best a gross over-simplification of both social relations and customary law. It employs the word "rape" with no indication as to the degree of force employed, and overlooks the cultural context in which adultery may be called rape in order to preserve the illusion of marital dignity. In no way is this comparable with the use of mass rape as a weapon of war elsewhere in Sudan, or with the rapes that occur in police stations.
The report's section on freedom of movement needs some clarification. The climate of intimidation and harassment faced by educated and professional Sudanese has prompted many of them to flee the country, creating a disempowered diaspora and isolating the few intellectual activists who remain. There is every sign of a deliberate policy at work here, in which opponents of the government are classified into two groups. Those with the highest profile and sufficient international contacts to be useful outside the country are not allowed to leave. Former Prime Minister Sadiq al-Mahdi has been denied an exit visa despite repeated requests, as has human rights activist Dr. Ushari
222
Sudan
Mahmoud, co-author of the 1987 report on slavery and the massacre at Ad-Daein under civilian rule.
Travel inside the country is not only restricted for non-Sudanese, as the report suggests. Known opponents of the regime cannot make in-country journeys without permission. Individuals who are regarded as troublesome inside the country but who are less influential abroad are continuously harassed until they leave, and no obstacle is then put in their way. Once driven abroad, their energies are often absorbed by the everyday difficulties presented by immigration controls, asylum appeals and making a living in a foreign country. In this way they are both demoralized and disconnected from developments inside Sudan. In the longer term, as the period of exile extends and educated Sudanese settle into life in the diaspora, the likelihood of their returning to assist in the reconstruction of their country diminishes with every year that the present Sudanese government remains in power.
The "pervasive surveillance" described in the section dealing with arbitrary interference with privacy, home or correspondence, also has an international dimension. Expert witness submissions to British asylum tribunals have confirmed that the Sudanese government has a network of informers among the exiled and expatriate Sudanese population, NIF members who liaise with security officers operating out of Sudanese embassies. According to SHRO, lists of people wanted for interrogation are circulated to officers at principal points of entry to Sudan. NIF supporters are also being sent for training in information technology, according to SHRO sources, and the security forces are relatively well supplied with computer systems, including the best database in the country. Meanwhile, the University of Khartoum has been obliged to launch an appeal for equipment of its own.
The report gives insufficient attention to the government's deployment of NIF "mass organizations" — for which the government can disclaim responsibility — in putting down the unrest that spread through lOiartoum and other main northern towns in September 1995, involving thousands of people. Responding to accusations by the German Ambassador that detained demonstrators had been killed, Khartoum said three people were killed in the demonstrations, but maintained that
223
Critique 1995
counter-demonstrators, not security forces, were responsible for their deaths. In fact, armed plain-clothes security men fired into the crowds, and the government incited the "mass organizations" through its use of the media.
The report's illustration of the draconian treatment meted out to anti-government demonstrators in late 1995 might have been more complete if it had made reference to Majdoline Haj al-Tahir and Shihab Yousif Ali. Ms. Haj-al-Tahir, a student of agriculture at the University of IChartoum and a part-time translator at the British Embassy, was a member of the small group whose arrest sparked the huge public demonstrations in September. She was maltreated in detention for two days until a relative, none other than Army Chief of Staff Lt.-Gen. Ibrahim Suliman, located her. After her personal beating was halted, she was reportedly forced to watch while those arrested with her were tortured. The British Embassy made no official mention of her treatment — and her case is overlooked by the State Department report, too.
Shihab Yousif, a student at Omdurman's private Ahliya University, was accused of tearing a copy of the Qu'ran in public. The NIF has targeted Ahliya University because of its resistance to government purges of opponents in education and the official Arabization program. While in detention Shihab Yousif was subjected to severe torture, to the extent that he was repeatedly hospitalized in between beatings. After his release four months later he detailed his treatment in a handwritten statement. This treatment was in part an attempt to extract a confession from him, since the government had no other material or witnesses to support its case. Indeed, the Sudanese Ambassador in Lx)ndon wrote to the Chairman of the British Parliamentary Committee on Human Rights, Lord Avebury, inadvertently contradicting lOiartoum by saying there was no evidence against Shihab and that the student was being held in custody for his own protection. Shihab was also subjected to media vilification for his allegedly "anti-Islamic" act, and was warned on his release not to appear in public, since he might be eliminated by an extremist group — an act for which the government would disclaim responsibility. Shihab Yousif is effectively a marked man.
224
Sudan
The detention of three students and nine others which prompted the protests of September 9-15 immediately followed the government's much-publicized "amnesty" of political and criminal detainees and prisoners, timed to coincide with the visit of a European Parliament delegation and under which former Prime Minister Sadiq al-Mahdi was also released. (Dozens of detainees are known to have remained in jail or in the detention places known as "ghost houses" after the amnesty. One not released and whose fate was already causing particular concern was Brigadier Muhammad Ahmad al-Rayah, who had taken the unprecedented step of suing the government,'alleging torture and rape.)
The insurgent forces in southern Sudan — above all the SPLA and the splinter groups led by defecting SPLA commanders, principally the Southern Sudan Independence Movement (SSIM) — have been responsible for many deaths and abuses of southern Sudanese civilians, which have often alienated the very people they claim to be liberating. Despite an announcement in 1994 that it would establish civilian control over its military and humanitarian wings, the SPLA has taken no action to lend credence to its promises. Regional military commanders continue to hold what the report calls "secret and basically political" trials, and are not accountable to the civilian population. Western Equatoria is the only region under rebel control which appears to be attempting to implement civilian rule.
The momentum of inter-factional fighting continues. On July 30, SPLA soldiers took part in a massacre of over 200 Nuer villagers in the Ganyliel area of south Sudan. Pressure from the international community and NGOs prompted the SPLA leadership to announce in August that it would investigate the massacre, but by the end of the year no such investigation had begun. In addition to the killing of civilians and the abduction and rape of women, acts of torture by the SPLA and SSIM are frequently reported.
The State Department report blames the absence of monitors in the south for the difficulty in verifying such allegations. Although the international relief agencies often have staff in the area, they are frequently vWthdrawn when clashes start, not least because of the risk of
225
Critique 1995
hostage-taking by the antagonists. The hostages are then exchanged for relief supplies.
The report regards the treatment of refugees as "relatively good," without further elaboration. It does not specify which refugee groups it has in mind, so the assumption must be that it refers to Ethiopians and Eritreans, who constitute the majority. The report does not clearly state whether the comparison is with the government's treatment of its own citizens, with the treatment of refugees by prior governments, or with the treatment of refugees in neighboring countries. Certainly, most refugees in Sudan enjoy greater protection and provision of more generous assistance than internally displaced Sudanese, and the government sees political advantage in their well-being.
The 600,000 Eritreans and Ethiopians who have not returned to their countries since the fall of the Mengistu regime in Addis Ababa are often those who do not trust their new governments, and as such are potentially useful to Khartoum, which has fallen out with both Eritrea and Ethiopia. Muslim recruits to the Eritrean Islamic Jihad, which attempted an incursion into Eritrea in 1994, have been encouraged by the NIF.
The question of discrimination against disabled people should not merely be seen in terms of "disability awareness" and access to buildings and transport, which, as the report notes, are non-existent. Organizations set up to assist the victims of amputation — mostly from former President Numeiri's experiment with huddud punishments in 1983-1985 — have been harassed, obstructed, deprived of funds or closed down. The amputees were mostly southerners and impoverished before they were mutilated, in what constituted a grotesque parody of Islamic practice notable for its display of social prejudice. Now they are being denied practical help on the apparent grounds that any alleviation of their suffering will undermine the punishment.
In its discussion of female genital mutilation (FGM), the report says that the practice is illegal. This is disingenuous, given that 90% of females in the north undergo the operation. (The report correctly notes that "women displaced from the south to the north reportedly are increasingly imposing [FGM] on their daughters, even if they themselves have not been subjected to it.") The severest form of FGM, infibulation,
226
Sudan
is certainly illegal, but no one has been arrested for performing it in recent years. The commonest form, known as Sunna ("Tradition"), is not, in practice, treated as unlawful. Enforcement of the law is non-existent, in contrast with the enforcement of laws concerning dress, female behavior in public or the consumption of alcohol.
The routine use of harassment, detention and torture to retain the government's monopoly of power is devastating Sudanese society, just as the relentless pursuit of an impossible victory in the civil war is destroying the economy. In the same way, the damage to the fragile social fabric of Sudan v^ill persist long after the oft-predicted downfall of the regime that has caused it.
It may be argued that the Bashir government has sown the seeds of its own destruction by arousing unprecedented levels of international hostility, with neighbors such as Eritrea and Ethiopia calling openly for its overthrow. If and when it falls, dominant international concerns such as the detention of prominent politicians and Sudan's destabilization of its neighbors through support for dissident Islamist groups — or terrorism — might be ended. At the domestic level, however, the corrosion of attitudes toward human rights — and not only among the security and police forces — will not be healed overnight.
The NIF-dominated Sudanese government has certainly pushed human rights violations to extreme levels, but its behavior often has more historical precedent than the party politicians now in opposition care to admit. It should not be forgotten that ex-Prime Minister Sadiq al-Mahdi's civilian government in the mid-1980s began arming tribal militias with automatic weapons, and detained Ushari Mahmud and Suliman Baldo, the authors of a revealing, almost premonitory report on child slavery and the massacre of southern Sudanese in the towT\ of Ad-Daein in 1987. The National Democratic Alliance (NDA), an umbrella group for those now waiting to resume their places in government, has not closely examined its own policy toward Sudan's diverse peoples. In its discussions with Sudanese opp>osition elements — chiefly the SPLA and the NDA — the State Department should make clear that its insistence on human rights does not apply only to the present government, and that those now seeking power must also accept
227
Critique 1995
responsibility for their share of past abuses and set out their plans for guaranteeing full respect for human rights in the future.
228
t:
