 SUDAN
 After the 1989 coup that overthrew Sudan's democratically elected government,
 the military assumed power under Lt. General Omar Hassan Al-Bashir and his Na-
 tional Salvation Revolution Command Council (RCC). Bashir and the RCC sus-
 pended the 1985 Constitution, abrogated press freedoms, and disbanded all political
 
 
 parties and trade unions. In 1993 the RCC dissolved itself and appointed Lt. Gen-
 eral Bashir President. However, since 1989 real power has rested with Hassan Al-
 Turabi and his National Islamic Front (NIF). NIF control over government oper-
 ations was further solidified with the end of the RCC, and NIF members and sup-
 porters held most key positions in the Government, security forces, judiciary aca-
 demia, and the media. Although legislative authority theoretically rests with the
 government-appointed Transitional National Assembly (TNA), the new Government
 maintained the RCC's suspension of the 1985 Constitution and continued to restrict
 most civil liberties.
 In addition to the regular police and the Sudan People's Armed Forces (SPAF),
 the Government maintains an external security organ, an internal security organ,
 an Islamic militia, known as the Popular Defense Forces (PDF), and an Islamic po-
 lice force, the Popular Police, whose mission includes enforcing proper social behav-
 ior, including restrictions on alcohol and "immodest dress." Members of the security
 forces committed numerous human rights abuses.
 Civil war, economic mismanagement, over 3 million internally displaced persons,
 and a refugee influx from neigh~oring countries have devastatedSudan's mostly ag-
 ricultural economy. Exports of gum arabic, livestock, and meat accounted for over
 50 percent of Sudan's 1995 export earnings. Reforms aimed at privatizing state-run
 firms and stimulating private investment failed to revive a moribund economy sad-
 dled with massive military expenditures.
 The civil war in Sudan continued into its 12th year, resulting in the deaths of
 more than a million and a half Sudanese. Neither side has the ability to win the
 war on the battlefield. The number of human rights violations decreased in mid-
 1995 following a limited 4-month cease-fire in the South brokered by former US.
 President Jimmy Carter and a reduction in fighting between southern rebel factions
 prior to the fall of 1995. However, efforts to seek a peaceful solution to the conflict
 by Kenya, Uganda, Ethiopia, and Eritrea under the auspices of the Intergovern-
 mental Authority on Drought and Development (IGADD), aided by a newly created
 Dutch-led Friends of IGADD, remained stalemated.
 The dismal human rights situation showed little improvement. Both the Govern-
 ment and insurgents committed serious human rights abuses. Government forces
 carried out massacres, extrajudicial killings, kidnapings, forced labor, slavery, and
 forced conscription, on a broader scale than opposition forces. A myriad of official
 and secret government security forces routinely harassed, detained, and tortured op-
 ponents or suspected opponents of the Government with impunity. Prison conditions
 are harsh, and the judiciary is largely subservient to the Government. The Govern-
 ment continued to restrict most human rights, including the rights to free speech,
 press, assembly, association, religion, privacy, and movement. Citizens do not have
 the right or the ability peacefully to change their government. In the context of the
 Islam'zation and Arabization drive, pressure-including forced Islamization-on
 non-Muslims remained strong. Fears of Arabization and Islamization and the impo-
 sition of Shari'a (Islamic law) fueled support for the southern insurgency. Discrimi-
 nation and violence against women and abuse of children continued, and govern-
 ment restrictions on worker rights persisted.
 Levels of overall cooperation with U.N.-sponsored relief operations deteriorated
 during the year. Both the SPAF/PDF and rebel factions periodically obstructed the
 flow of humanitarian assistance to affected populations, and there were problems
 with relief flights in the south.
 The rebels continued to restrict most human rights in the areas under their con-
 trol and were responsible for a massacre, extrajudicial killings, kidnapings, and
 forced conscription. The Sudanese People's Liberation Army (SPLA) did not take ac-
 tion to implement its 1994 decision to create civilian control over its military and
 humanitarian wings and to institute rule of law in areas it controls.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Official and unofficial government
 forces committed an undetermined number of political killings of persons suspected
 of belonging to or collaborating with the insur ent SPLA. In May there were
 unconfirmed reports that Government forces in Juga rounded up and summarily ex-
 ecuted approximately 40 soldiers loyal to former SPLA commander William Nyuon,
 after Nyuon defected back to the SPLA.
 Credible and independent sources indicate that soldiers of the SPLA participated
 in a massacre of more than 200 Nuer villagers in the Ganyliel area of southern
 Sudan on July 30. In response to pressure from the international community and
 nongovernmental organizations (NGO's), the SPLA announced in August that it
 
 
 250
 would investigate the incident; at year's end, the SPLA had not yet begun an inves-
 tigation. There were no other substantiated reports of extrajudicial or political
 killings, possibly due to the limited access to the war zones by outside observers.
 b. Disappearance.-The Government was responsible for continued arrests and
 subsequent disappearances of persons suspected of supporting the rebels in govern-
 ment-controlled areas in the south and Nuba Mountains. Awad Al-Karim Gharbawi,
 a retired military officer, was arrested in September trying to cross the Sudanese
 border, after having been refused an exit visa to join his wife in Namibia. He re-
 mains unaccounted for, along with two other military officers arrested at about the
 same time.
 Scores of persons arrested by government forces in Juba in 1992, including two
 local U.S. Agency for International Development Employees, Dominic Morris and
 Cha lain Lako, remained unaccounted for, and most are believed dead. However, re-
 liab e reports indicated that at least a few of those arrested in Juba in 1992 were
 being he d in a Khartoum prison; the Government has stated it has no knowledge
 of t eir whereabouts. The whereabouts of Sudanese medical personnel Samuel
 Garang, Mohamed Nowar Aso, and Mirghani Kafi, last seen in police custody in
 1990-91, remained unknown at year's end.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Government's official and unofficial security forces continued routinely to beat
 and torture suspected opponents. For example, in one case, four detainees were
 made to lift heavy chairs over their heads for hours on end. They were whipped if
 their pace slackened. Similarly, when former Prime Minister Sadiq Al-Mahdi was
 arrested in May, he was reportedly forced to sit in the sun in temperatures reaching-
 110 degrees Fahrenheit for refusing to answer questions (see Section 1.d.). There
 were credible reports that security officials tortured some detainees following large
 demonstrations in September in Khartoum (see Section 1.d.).
 In mid-September armed security elements raided the home of Mohamed Ali
 Hamid Omer and beat a group of former government officials who were visiting with
 sticks and water hoses (see Section 1.d.). They were then taken to security offices
 where they were beaten again and interrogated. After being detained for 36 hours,
 the men were released with an apology. No reason was given for their detention.
 In February NIF security officials beat relatives of executed coup plotters at a dem-
 onstration (see Section 2.b.).
 The number of reports and perhaps incidents of torture in "ghost houses," places
 where security forces detained government opponents incommunicado often for
 months, decreased perhaps because the tightened hold of the NIF regime meant less
 need to intimidate opposition groups. However, reliable sources report that most
 ghost house inmates have been transferred to the normal prison system, particu-
 larly Khartoum's main Kober Prison. The Government has removed the west wing
 of Kober Prison from the jurisdiction of the Prison Service and placed it under the
 supervision of the security services. Persons detained in the west wing of Kober
 Prison are held incommunicado. While ordinary prison wardens are theoretically ac-
 countable to courts of law for the abuses they perpetrate, security forces are not.
 Despite the widespread use of torture, the Government has never publicly dis-
 ciplined any security official for torture.
 Sudan's 1991 Criminal Act, based on Shari'a law, prescribes specific "hudud" pun-
 ishments, including amputation, stoning, and lashing, for some offenses. The courts
 did not impose sentences involving amputation in 1995. The Government routinely
 meted out lashings, most often to persons convicted of brewing or consuming alco-
 hol, following trials that did not meet internationally accepted standards of fairness
 (see Section i.e.). In August five Nuban young women were sentenced to death for
 apostasy, because they had converted to Christianity. At year's end, it was not clear
 if the sentences had been carried out.
 Credible and recurrent reports state that police personnel sometimes raped female
 detainees and that both government and insurgent forces in the field raped women.
 It is widely believed that the SPLA and the Southern Sudan Independence Move-
 ment (SSIM) also tortured prisoners in their custody, although the lack of access
 to rebel-controlled areas made it difficult to verify these allegations.
 Conditions in official prisons were harsh but generally not life threatening. Al-
 most all prisons were built before independence in 1956 and are poorly maintained.
 Many lack basic facilities like toilets or showers. Health care is primitive and food
 inadequate. Minors are often held with adults. Female prisoners are kept separately
 from men, and rape in prison (as opposed to police stations) does not appear to be
 a major problem. Prison officials arbitrarily denied visits by family members.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The 1991 Criminal Code does not include
 provisions concerning the length of detention of security and other detainees, and
 the Government routinely detained persons without charge and without reference
 
 
 to the judiciary. Under the 1992 National Security Act, the Government may detain
 a suspect for interrogation for up to 72 hours. This is renewable for up to 1 month
 with "justification," a term not further defined.
 Also under the 1992 National Security Act, the President has the power to author-
 ize "precautionary detention" for up to 3 months "to preserve the general security,"
 but n practice this authority rests with subordinate officials. A person detained
 under this provision theoretically must be notified of the reasons for detention with-
 in these 3 months. The President may extend detention for 3 more mnths if a mag-
 istrate approves the extension. In practice, thes legal provisions are routinely ig-
 nored, andthe authorities continuedto detain opponents indefinitely.
 The law allows for bail, except for those accused of crimes punishable by death
 or life imprisonment. In theory, the Government provides legal counsel for indigents
 in the case of crimes punishable by death or life imprisonment. However, courts
 sometimes fail to inform defendants of this right. Moreover, in some cases counsel
 is only allowed to advise the defendant and may not address the court. Thus, de-
 spite some legal protections, detainees have few rights and are often subject to arbi-
 trary, and in many cases, incommunicado detention.
 The Governments secrecy and arbitrary detention practices made it impossible to
 know the exact number of political detainees and prisoners. Although the Govern-
 ment continued to pick up and detain suspected opponents across the country, the
 number of new arrests decreased corprd to previous years. In May former Prime
 Minister Sadiq AI-Mahdi was arrested after giving a speech critical of the Govern-
 ment and detained incommunicado without charge for 3 months. In August the Gov-
 ernment released A1-Mahdi along with 31 other political detainees. Other detainees
 may have been released throughout the year. The Goveent claimed that there
 were no remaining political detainees. Estimates of the present number of political
 detainees ranged from several score to a few hundred.
 The authorities picked up numerous other lower ranking opposition figures and
 others throughout the year and held some for several months.For example, in  a
 and June government security forces arrested over 100 members of the Sudanese
 opposition and a handful of underground Communist Party leaders. In mid-Septem-
 ber, security forces beat men gathered at the house of Mohamed Ai Haroid Omer,
 took them to security offices, beat and interrogated them there, and detained them
 for 36 hours. They were released with an apology but without an explanation for
 their detention (see Section l.a.). During 3 days of antigovernment demonstrations
 in September, which were sparked by the detention of four students who had heck-
 led the President during a July 29 speech at Khartoum University, the Government
 detained and interro ated an estimated 3,000 persons, including precup-era labor
 leaders; most of the etainees were released after a short time. predible reports in-
 dicate that torture was used during the interrogations.
 In another incident in September, a group of worshipers in a mosque in a Khar-
 toum suburb were arrested by security persnnel and detained because the mosque's
 imam had delivered a sermon critical of NIt leader Hassan A-Turabi.
 The Government also continued its practice of de facto arrest of suspected oppo-
 nents by requiring them to report to security offices in the morning and wait all
 day for several days in a row. Those targeted for such harassment were unable to
 earn a livelihood. The Government also detained emporarily international relief
 workers (see Sections 1.g. and 2.d.).
 e. Denial of Fair Pubtic Trial.-he judiciary is not independent and is largely
 subservient to the Government. The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, formersy
 elected by sitting judges, is now appointed (as the senior judge in the Sudanese judi-
 cial service, he as centrls the judiciary). Since 1989 the authorities have replaced
 hundreds of judges considered ideologically unsuitable. Most new judges have ties
 to the NIt and favor strict application of Islamic (Shari'a) law; many have little or
 no legal training. The RCC banned the respected Sudanese Bar Association in 1989
 and replaced it with a ge vernment-appointed committee. Human rights monitors
 have pointed out that the Government continued to harass, detain, and torture
 members of the legal profession it viewed as political opponents.
 Sudan's judicial system includes four types of courts: regular courts, beth crimina
 and civil; spcial mixed security courts; military courts; and tribal courts in rural
 areas to resolve disputes over land and water rights and family matters. The 1991
 Criminal Act governs criminal cases, whereas the 1983 Civil Transactions Act still
 applies to most civil cases. Military trials, whose proceedings are secret and brief,
 do not meet international standards.
 Trials in regular courts nominally meet international standards of legal protec-
 tions. For instance, the accused normally have the right to counsel, and the courts
 should provide free legal counsel for indigent defendants accused of crimes punish-
 
 
 252
 
 able by death or life imprisonment. In practice, however, these legal protections are
 unevenly applied.
 In 1989 the Special Courts Act created special three-person security courts to deal
 with a wide range of offenses, including violations of constitutional decrees, emer-
 gency regulations, some sections of the Penal Code, as well as drug and currency
 offenses. Special courts, on which both military and civilian Judges sit, handle most
 security related cases. Attorneys may advise defendants as "friends of the court" but
 normally may not address the court. Lawyers complain that they are sometimes
 granted access to court documents too late to prepare an effective defense. Sentences
 are usually severe and implemented at once. Death sentences, however, are referred
 to the Chief Justice and the Head of State. Defendants may fie appellate briefs
 with the Chief Justice.
 The Government officially exempts the 10 southern states, whose population is
 mostly non-Muslim from parts of the 1991 Criminal Act. But the Act permits the
 possible future application of Shari'a law in the south, if the local state assemblies
 (see Section 3) so decide. Moreover, in 1993 the Government transferred all non-
 Muslim judges from the south to the north, replacing them with Muslim judges.
 However, there were no reports that hudud punishments, other than lashings, were
 carried out by the courts in government-controlled areas of the south. Fear of the
 imposition of Shari'a law remained a key issue in the rebellion.
 Parts of the south and the Nuba mountains fell outside of effective judicial proce-
 dures and other governmental functions. According to credible reports, government
 units summarily tried and punished those accused of crimes, especially of offenses
 against civil order. SPLA-held areas sometimes relied on traditional justice by vil-
 lage elders. The SPLA proclaimed a civilian structure to eliminate the secret and
 basically political trials by military commanders of previous years, but at year's end
 there was no evidence to indicate that such civilian trials had been held.
 In August the authorities released 18 former officers who had been sentenced for
 alleged coup plotting in 1990 and 1991 and a 1994 bombing. According to inter-
 national human rights NGO's, 7 persons were not included in the amnesty. There
 was no information available regarding possible political prisoners in the south.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Government routinely interferes with its citizens' privacy. Security forces frequently
 conducted night searches without warrants. They targeted persons suspected of po-
 litical crimes or, in northern Sudan, of distilling or consuming illegal alcoholic bev-
 erages.
 A wide network of government informants conducted pervasive surveillance in
 schools, universities, markets, workplaces, and neighborhoods. The Government dis-
 banded political parties and prevented citizens from forming new political
 groupings. The authorities kept key opposition figures under frequent surveillance.
 The Government also continue~d its practice of summarily dismissing military per-
 sonnel and other government employees whose loyalty was suspect. Dozens lost
 their jobs throughout the year. In August the Government set up a committee to
 review the cases of persons who had been summarily dismissed since the 1989 coup.
 However, the review eligibility criteria were such that only 20 percent of the cases
 of those summarily dismissed were eligible. At year's end, little progress had been
 made in the review process.
 Security personnel routinely opened and read mail and monitored telephones.
 During the first half of the year, the Government enforced a ban on unlicensed sat-
 ellite dishes, but enforcement tapered off later in the year. On July 16, Ahmed
 Abdalla Akood, a former government official, was detained and interrogated for
 owning a fax machine.
 Government-instituted neighborhood "popular committees"--ostensibly a mecha-
 nism for political mobilization-served as a means for monitoring households. These
 committees caused many citizens to be wary of neighbors who could report them for
 "suspicious" activities, including "excessive" contact with foreigners. The committees
 also furnished or withheld documents essential for obtaining an exit visa from
 Sudan. In high schools, students were sometimes pressured to join pro-regime youth
 3ups.
 A Muslim man can marry a non-Muslim, but a Muslim woman cannot marry a
 non-Muslim, unless he converts to Islam. Only Muslims are allowed to adopt chil-
 dren (see Section 2.c.).
 In March the home of the family of Umma Party Secretary General Omar Nur
 El Dayem was confiscated without prior notice; the eviction may have been due, in
 part, to Nur El Dayem's testimony before the U.S. Congress.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 fiicts.-Since the civil war began in 1983, more than 1.5 million people have been
 killed as the result of fighting between the Islamic Government in the north and
 
 
 253
 insurgents in southern Sudan. The civil war continued unabated, and all sides in-
 volved in the fighting were responsible for abuses in violation of humanitarian
 norms. At year's end, the Government controlled most of Sudan, except for parts of
 the south and the Nuba mountains. Efforts to seek a peaceful resolution to the civil
 war were unsuccessful. According to the report of the U.N. Special Rapporteur on
 Human Rights in Sudan, on June 21, 1995, an Antanov aircraft of the Sudanese
 forces dropped 22 bombs on Regifi and surrounding areas in the Nuba Mountains,
 killing 6 civilians and injuring 12. Eyewitnesses reported that the bombardment
 was concentrated on a densely populated area, indicating the Government's intent
 to terrorize the civilian population and to force the population to flee the area.
 Government forces routinely killed rebel soldiers taken prisoner in the civil war
 and no rebels were reported being held as prisoners of war in government-controlled
 areas. The SPLA took prisoners of war. An international humanitarian organization
 was able to visit some of them. Government restrictions on flights into southern
 Sudan during the second half of the year, as well as other problems, prevented vis-
 its to some SPLA held prisoners of war.
 There were also instances in which the Government arrested or detained inter-
 national NGO workers. For example, in May in Pariang a government military unit
 detained two doctors working with the Italian NGO, Comitato Collaborazione Med-
 ica. Following several months of negotiations with the Government and local mili-
 tary leaders the two doctors were released into U.N. custody. At approximately the
 same time the SPLA released three United Nations workers it had held prisoner
 in Chukudum during the same period.
 Both sides routinely displaced and often killed civilians, and committed numerous
 violations of humanitarian law, during their offensive operations, most of which
 were carried out by the Government this year.
 The Government also commonly and deliberately targeted aerial bombing and mi-
 litia raids to disperse civilians in displaced persons camps and in areas w here they
 had congregated to receive relief supplies. In September the towns of Bideet and
 Ombassi were bombed resulting in f6 deaths and 11 wounded. Also in September
 a military barge fired indiscrimnately on villages in the Yomcir area, displacing ad-
 ditional people; aerial bombing accompanied thebarrage. In November government
 bombers attacked several towns in Western Equatoria in what appeared to be
 stepped-u p efforts to terrorize the populace.
 Although government rhetoric supported ending the civil war, the Government
 launched military offensives in the south throughout the year. In March former
 President Carter negotiated a 2-month cease-fire to allow guinea worm eradication
 activities in the south. The cease-fire was extended for an additional 2 months, but
 the sides would not agree to further extensions, and there were violations by both
 sides during the cease-fires. Other peace initiatives remained stalemated due to the
 intransigence of the various warring parties, whose commitment to peace was ques-
 tionable. Prospects for a negotiated settlement remained slim. The 1995 dry season
 offensive campaign began with an initial success by Government forces on the
 southern border, and by an SPLA drive in the south toward Juba, the main south-
 ern city. Over all, however, the war remains unwinnable by either side.
 The SPLA reportedly detained thousands of children as a reservoir of recruits (see
 Sections 5 and 6.c.).
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Government severely curtails freedom of
 speech and press. Government intimidation and surveillance, fostered in part by an
 informer network, continued to inhibit open, public discussion of political issues.
 Radio, television, and much of the print media are controlled directly by the Govern-
 ment and required to reflect government and NIF policies. However, lively discus-
 sions take place in the press on domestic issues, especially economic failures. All
 journalists, even in the privately owned Arabic dailies, practice self-censorship.
 Sudan television had a permanent military censor to ensure that the news reflected
 official views.
 In mid-1993, the Government adopted a new Press Code that called for turning
 the existing state-owned print media into publicly held companies. The Code also
 allowed the formation of private newspapers. Implementation of the Code was slow.
 The few publications that issued shares were purchased by government ministries
 and state-owned corporations, thus keeping them under government control.
 Of the two privately owned dailies, Akhbar Al-Youm followed a progovernment
 line and did not encounter any problems. The Government suspended publication
 of the other, Al-Rai Al-Akher, for 2 weeks in September after its September 20 edi-
 tion in which two editorials questioned government policy and discussed Western
 Christians' support for Sudanese southerners. Earlier, Al-Ra Al-Akher had pub-
 
 
 254
 lished a report on police treatment of student protesters during President Bashir's
 July 29 speech at Khartoum University. The report prompted the progovernment
 Khartoum University Student Union to publicly warn Al-Rai A1-Akher of the "con-
 sequences" of being biased. The day the Government announced of Al-Rai AI-Akher's
 suspension, it also announced that two previously closed newspapers would be al-
 lowed to resume publishing.
 The Government often charged that the international, and particularly Western,
 media have an anti-Sudan and anti-Islam bias, and it routinely confiscated issues
 of foreign publications judged hostile to the Government. Although the Government
 periodically granted foreign journalists entry and access to war zones and to a vari-
 ety of political leaders, security forces closely monitored their activities. All journal-
 ists, including foreigners, who wish to work in Sudan as correspondents are re-
 quired by law to register with the Government. The Government rejected the appli-
 cations of some journalists who had previously worked for newspapers associated
 with political parties, claiming that the did not have enough experience. As a re-
 sult of the Government's hostile attitude, many respected journalists who worked
 in the local media before 1989 have quit their jobs and left Sudan.
 After the coup, the Government harassed and dismissed many academics consid-
 ered antiregine, and its practice of repressing opposition has had a chilling effect
 on academic debate. Government security forces continued to arrest and detain aca-
 demics linked with opposition parties. The Goveent continued to use political
 and ideological criteria whenever possible in appointing new faculty. In the lan-
 guage of a government press release, there is an educational revolution occurring
 aimed at "authenticating" knowledge and Arabizising all educational institutions. To
 link educational objectives to Islamic values, all educational institutions were di-
 rected to oblige female students to wear Islamic dress.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The authorities severely re-
 stricted these freedoms, permitting only government-sponsored gatherings. The dec-
 laration of the state of emergency and of martial law on June 30, 1989, effectively
 eliminated the right to    assembly. During    3  days of largely   nonviolent,
 antigovernment demonstrations in Khartoum in September at least five persons
 were killed by the security forces who indiscriminately opened fire. The Government
 arrested approximately 3,000 people, mostly students, including demonstration lead-
 ers or potential leaders (see Section 1.d.). Plainclothes security forces beat students,
 male and female, although many of them had taken no part in the demonstration.
 The Government let it be known that it would disperse any future demonstrations
 by force. The Government backed up its threats by stationing plainclothes members
 of the NIF security apparatus with AK-47's in pickup trucks on the main streets
 of downtown Khartoum. These security forces prevented groups of three or more
 persons from traveling to the downtown area. Although the Government released
 most of the detained demonstrators after a short time the Minister of Justice an-
 nounced on September 18 that 'more than 15 persons suspected of sabotage oper-
 ations carried out during the demonstrations would be criminally prosecuted.
 In February NIF security officials broke up a small demonstration in Khartoum
 by the Martyr's Association, a group of relatives of 28 officers executed for coup plot-
 ting in 1990. Security forces beat, threatened, and verbally abused the leaders of
 the group; those taken into custody were later released.
 Northern Muslim opposition groups, which have taken no part in the fighting and
 southern opposition groups formed an umbrella structure in 1995 the  ationa De-
 fense Alliance, to coordinate and improve their efforts to confront the NIF regime.
 One major southern faction, the SSIM, did notparticipate.
 Apart from a few indigenous NGO's involvedin relief work and sports and social
 clubs, all private associations were controlled by the Government or the NIF.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Although the Government has stated that all religions
 should be respected and that freedom of worship is guaranteed, in practice the Gov-
 ernment treats Islam as the de facto state religion and has declared that Islam
 must inspire the country's laws institutions, and policies. Various restrictions under
 the Missionary Societies Act o? 1962 limited the ability of non-Muslims to practice
 their religion freely, and the 1991 Criminal Act made apostasy by Muslims punish-
 able by death. In August five Nuban young women were sentenced to death for
 apostasy (see Section 1.c.). At the end of September, the police in Port Sudan ar-
 rested 10 persons, including 2 women, for converting to Christianity. These persons
 were still in detention at year's end. On November 30, a Catholic priest was de-
 tained while conducting a pastoral visit. At least eight uniformed and plainclothes
 security officers took him to four police stations for questioning about his activities
 before he was released. He was not told why he was detained nor were charges
 brought against him.
 
 
 255
 Authorities continued to restrict the activities of non-Muslims, and there contin-
 ued to be reports of harassment and arrest for religious beliefs and activities. The
 law forbids proselytizing of Muslims, but Muslims are allowed to proselytize freely.
 The Government required missionary groups to apply for special -licenses and con-
 tinued to deny or delay work permits for foreign missionaries. In April longtime
 resident and Catholic missionary Father Ottorino Sina was denied a reentry visa
 to return to Sudan; three other religious leaders were threatened with expulsion.
 The Government continued to deny permission to build churches, and in the north
 no new churches have been built since the early 1970's. Reliable reports stated that
 in some war zones, government forces closed or burned churches and mosques and
 restricted movements of Christian clergy. At the local level, NIF officials restricted
 normal activities of the Sudan Catholic Bishops' Conference, the Sudan Council of
 Churches, and the Coptic Church. In October 1994, the Government replaced the
 controversial Misazonary Act with the Societies Registration Act. Although this act
 allows churches to engage in a wider range of activities than the Missionary Act,
 churches are subject to the restrictions placed on nonreligious corporations.
 Non-Muslims continued to criticize privately the Government's favoritism of Islam
 over other religions. Only Muslims are allowed to adopt children (see Section 1.f.).
 As the basis of Sudan's Arab culture, all citizens are exposed to Islamic ideas set
 forth in the Koran. All Popular Defense Force trainees, including non-Muslims, are
 indoctrinated in the Islamic faith. In prisons, government supported Islamic NGO's
 offer inducements to, and exert pressure on, non-Muslim inmates to convert. Reli-
 able reports stated that, in some war zones, Islamic NGO's withheld food and other
 key services from the needy unless they converted to Islam.
 The U.N. Special Rapporteur in his 1995 Interim Report to the U.N. General As-
 sembly reported that in rebel-contrlled areas, Christians, Muslims, and followers
 of traditional African faiths were generally allowed to worship freely.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Government restricted freedom of movement by denying exit visas
 to some categories of persons (such as poicemen and doctors ). The Government also
 kept lists of political figures and others not permitted to travel abroad. Because of
 tensions with Egypt, the authorities denied many requests for travel to that coun-
 try.
 Women may not travel abroad without the permission of their husbands or male
 guardians. Some former political detainees were forbidden to travel outside of Khar-
 toum. Movement was generally free for other citizens outside of the war zones, but
 those who failed to produce an identity card at checkpoints risked arrest. Foreigners
 needed permits, which were hard to obtain and often refused, for domestic travel
 outside of Khartoum. Diplomats, however, could travel freely to many locations. For-
 eigners had to register with the police on entering the country, seek permission to
 move from one location to another, and reregister at each new location within 3
 days of arrival. Foreign NGO staff sometimes had problems obtaining entry visas
 to Sudan or work or travel permits once they were in the country. The SPLA and
 SSIM also required NGO personnel to obtain permission before traveling to areas
 they control, although such permission was granted regularly. Rebel factions also
 abused and mistreated NGO personnel.
 Tens of thousands of persons, largely southerners and westerners displaced by
 famine and civil war, continued to live in squatter slums in the Khartoum area.
 Throughout 1995 the Government razed thousands of squatter dwellings in this
 area: inhabitants knew that their homes were slated for destruction but not when
 it would occur. Bulldozers would typically arrive unannounced in a neighborhood
 and carry out the razings the same day. Although the Government promised to sell
 the inhabitants a plot of land for approximately $145 (100,000 Sudanese pounds),
 tens of thousands were made homeless temporarily. Usually, the inhabitants estab-
 lished temporary shelters on the site of their razed dwellings until they could gain
 title to a plot ofland. Muslims who did not have sufficient money to purchase the
 land and construct a dwelling could obtain assistance from Islamic charities. Others
 could not.
 Sudan accorded refugees relatively good treatment. At year's end, the population
 of officially registered refugees (largely composed of Ethiopians and Eritreans) was
 about 353,765, with an estimated 240,000 additional unregistered refugees not in
 camps. In November, however, the Government detained up to 300 Ethiopian and
 Eritrean refugees in camps in eastern Sudan for alleged crimes committed in the
 camps. Those detained included three employees of a U.S.-based NGO which pro-
 vides medical services. The arrests prompted the United Nations High Comnis-
 sioner fur Refugees (UNHCR) to postpone a Iong-awaited cam p census. About half
 the refugee population receives assistance from the UNHCR. There were no reports
 of forcible repatriation of refugees, regardless of their status. Refugees could not be-
 
 
 256
 come resident aliens or citizens, regardless of their length of stay. However, the
 Government tolerated a large number of refugees and allowed them to work, al-
 though typically in menial occupations in the cities. An estimated 330,000 Sudanese
 refugees remained in Uganda, as a result of the fighting between the Government
 and the insurgents and rebel factional infighting. Refugees flowed from Sudan to
 Ethiopia and Kenya as well.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens had neither the right nor the ability to change their government peace-
 fully. Political power remained solely in the hands of a small group of unelected
 military officers and the NW leadership. The NF continued to increase its control
 at the provincial and state levels and removed or retired half of the armed forces
 officers.
 In 1989 the RCC abolished all political parties and detained temporarily the
 major party leaders, and in 1990 rejected both multiparty and one-party systems.
 In 1992 the RCC instituted the Transitional National Assembly (TNA) based on a
 Libyan-style political structure with ascending levels of nonpartisan assemblies. The
 membership, largely progovernment, is entirely government appointed. Although in-
 dividual members occasionally criticized government policies, the TNA remained a
 rubberstamp body, whose main function was to ratify legislation proposed by the ex-
 ecutive.
 In August the Government instituted a federal system of government, which it
 claimed would involve local people in decisionmaking. In reality there is little popu-
 lar participation in government. A General Elections Commission selects all can-
 didates permitted to run in general elections. In the March elections for state as-
 semblies, each state's popular committees elected 45 percent of the members, and
 the Government appointed 10 percent. The remaining 45 percent were chosen in
 elections in which, by the Government's own admission, less than 10 percent of the
 electorate voted. However, in August the Government announced "open, free, and
 fair" presidential and parlidmentary elections would be held in 1996.
 Few women were in the highest ranks of government. However, these women and
 women in lesser positions played a significant role in government operations. A dep-
 uty Minister for Social Planning, one of the governors of Sudan's 26 states, and 10
 percent of the TNA members are women.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government tried to stamp out any domestic criticism on human rights issues
 by frequently and vehemently denying any responsibility for human rights abuses.
 Since the 1989 coup, the Government has banned local, independent human rights
 organizations. However, the Christian church organizations, Sudan Catholic Bish-
 ops' Conference, and the Sudan Council of Churches, continued to seek to monitor
 and publicize human rights abuses, especially religious discrimination.
 In 1991 the Government created the Sudan Human Rights Organization
 (SHRO)-not to be confused with the previous SHRO, which it dissolved after the
 1989 coup-to defend its human rights record. This organization has yet to criticize
 the Government. This year, the Popular Arab and Islamic Conference (PAIC), led
 by Hassan Turabi, established the International Islamic Human Rights Organiza-
 tion (IHRO). The IIHRO is designed to be the Islamic answer to Western human
 rights organizations, which the PAIC deems prejudiced against Islam. The IIHRO
 issued a statement praising the Government's August release of political detainees
 but has yet to criticize the Government.
 In an attempt to demonstrate the regime's concern for human rights, the TNA
 adopted in 1993 the "Sudan Document of Human Rights" and created a Human
 Rights Committee. After the latter began quietly investigating cases of disappear-
 ances, however, the Government dismissed its members in July and appointed new
 members. The new members have shown no inclination to criticize or investigate the
 Government's human rights record.
 The Government remained hostile toward investigation of its human rights record
 and was highiy defensive about foreign criticism. It bitterly denounced the 1994 re-
 port on Sudan by the U.N. Special Rapprteur, Gaspar Biro, and again denied per-
 mission for Biro to visit Sudan. Biro wrote his 1995 Report, which the Government
 also condemned, and his 1995 Interim Report to the Up. General Assembly based
 on sources outside Sudan. In February the Government revoked the permission it
 had granted to Amnesty International to send observers to Sudan. However, the
 Government allowed two other international human rights NGO's, Human Rights
 Watch and the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights to visit.
 
 
 257
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disabiliy, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Women.-Violence against women appears to be common, especially wife beating,
 although accurate statistics do not exist. The Government did not address the issue
 of violence against women; nor was it discussed publicly. The police do not normally
 intervene in domestic disputes, and no court cases involved violence against women.
 Many women are reluctant to file formal complaints against such abuse. Displaced
 women from the south were particularly vulnerable to harassment, rape and sexual
 abuse. Among some southern ethnic groups rape is common. No blame is attached
 to the practice, although the man involves must pay the woman's family if she be-
 comes pregnant.
 Some aspects of Sudanese law and many traditional practices discriminate
 against women. Gender segregation is commonplace. In keeping with Islamic law,
 Muslim women are not accorded the same property, inheritance, and family rights
 as Muslim men. Women typically inherit half as much of the estate as a man with
 the same dee of kinship, and it is much easier for men to initiate legal divorce
 proceedings, Women are also discriminated against in their ability to marry. Al-
 though a Muslim man can marry a non-Muslim, a Muslim woman cannot marry a
 non-Muslm unless he converts to Islam. These rules apply only to Muslims and not
 to those of other faiths, for whom religious or tribal law applies. Among some ethnic
 us, wives are taken on a trial basis lasting up to 4 years. The husband ma
 dissolve the marriage during this period by returning the wife to her family, al-
 though he must pay a price for each child born during this time. In most cases, the
 husband gets custody of the children. The wife reportedly may contract further mar-
 ri ages.
 Government directives required women in government offices and female students
 and teachers to conform to what it deemed an Islamic dress code, which, at the
 least, entailed wearing a head covering. For example, the Passport Office would not
 issue passports to women, Muslim or Christian, who did not have their heads cov-
 ered in their passport pictures, and government employees often would not wait on
 women who did not have their heads covered. However, enforcement of the dress
 code regulations was uneven.
 Children.-The Government demonstrated no significant concern for the rights
 and welfare of children. A considerable number of children suffered serious abuse,
 including enslavement and forced conscription in the war zones.
 There continued to be credible but unconfirmed reports of the existence of special
 camps in the south in which people from the north or from abroad came to purchase
 women and children to work as domestics (see Section 6.c.). Recurrent reports stated
 that the SPLA held thousands of children in camps against their will and used them
 as a reservoir of recruits for its military forces (see Sections 1.g. and 6.c.).
 The Government runs several camps for vagrant children. Police periodically
 sweep the streets of Khartoum and other major cities, taking children whom police
 personnel deem homeless to the camps, where they are detained for indefinite peri-
 ods. These children may not leave the camps and are subjected to strict discipline
 and physical and military training. Health care and schooling at the camps are gen-
 erally poor; basic living conditions are also often primitive. All the children, includ-
 ing non-Muslims, must study the Koran, and there is pressure on non-Muslims to
 convert to Islam. Children in the camps are often incorporated into the PDF.
 Female genital mutilation (FGM) is widely condemned by international health ex-
 perts as damaging to both physical and psychological health. Although illegal, FGM
 is widespread, especially in northern Sudan. As many as 90 percent or more of fe-
 males in the'north have been mutilated by FGM, with consequences that sometimes
 have included severe urinary problems, infections, and even death. Pharaonic muti-
 lation (infibulation), the severest of the three types, is the most common and is usu-
 ally performed on girls between ages 4 and 7. Because few physicians will perform
 the operation, it is most often done by paramedical personnel in improvised, unsani-
 tary conditions, causing severe pain and trauma to the child. Women displaced from
 the south to the north reportedly are increasingly imposing FGM upon their daugh-
 ters, even if they themselves have not been subjected to it.
 People With Disabilities.-The Government does not discriminate against handi-
 capped persons but has not enacted any special legislation or taken other steps,
 such as mandating accessibility to public buildings and transportation for the dis-
 abled.
 Religious Minorities.-Although the law recognizes Sudan as a multireligious
 country, in practice, the Government treats Islam, the religion of the majority, as
 the state religion. Muslims are the majority and predominate in the north, but are
 in the minority in the south where most of the people practice Christianity or tradi-
 tional African religions. One to two million displaced southerners, who practice
 
 
 258
 Christianity or traditional African religions, and about 500,000 Coptic Christians
 live in the north.
 In government-controlled areas of the south, there continued to be credible evi-
 dence of a policy of Islamization. For example, NIF supporters often replaced non-
 Muslim civil servants, and all non-Muslim judges have been transferred to the north
 where they are relegated to low-level tasks such as adjudicating traffic disputes. In
 the north, some non-Muslims lost their jobs in the civil service, the judiciary and
 other professions. Few non-Muslim university graduates found government jobs at
 alL Frequent dismissals in the army and poice purged professionals to make room
 for NWF supporters. Some noa-Muslim businessmen omplained of petty harassment
 and discrimination in the awarding of government contracts and trade licenses.
 There were also credible reports that Muslims receive preferential treatment for the
 limited services provided by the Government, including access to medical care.
 National/RacidlEthnic Minorities.--Sudan's population of 21.5 million is a
 multiethnic mix of over 500 Arab and African tribes with scores of languages and
 dialects. The Arab, Muslim culture in the north and central areas and the non-Mus-
 lim, African culture in the south ame the two dominant cultures. Northern Muslims,
 who form a majority of about 16 million, have traditionally dominated the Govern-
 ment. The southern ethnic grups fighting the civil war (largely followers of tradi-
 tional African religions or Christians) want some form of regional self-determination
 or even independence from the North.
 The Muslim majority and the NI-dominated Government continued to discrimi-
 nate against ethnic minorities in almost every aspect of society. Residents in Arabic-
 speaking areas who d not themselves speak Arabic were discriminated against in
 education, jobs, and other opportunities.
 The Arabization of instruction in higher education discriminated against non-
 Arabs. To compet for a university slot, students completing high school had to p ass
 examinations in four subjects--English, mathematics, Arabic, and religious studies.
 Even at the university level, exams for all subjects except English were in Arabic,
 placing nonnative Arabic speakers at a disadvantage.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Although Sudan had a strong labor union movement
 during the Government of Sadiq A1-Madi, the RCC abolished the precup labor
 unions, closed union offices, froze union assets, forbade strikes, and prescribed stiff
 punishments, including the death penalty, for violations of 2.CC labor dcrees. The
 Gove    nt dismissed many labor leaders from their jobs or detained them, al-
 though most of those arrested were later freed.
 During the 3 days of antigovernment demonstrations in September, the Govern-
 ment preemptively detained precoup labor union officials. Most were released when
 the demonstrations ended (see Section 1.d.).
 The Sudan Workers Trade Unions Federation (SWTUF) is the leading blue-collar
 labor organization with about 800,000 members. In 1992 local union elections were
 held, atr a delay to permit the government-controlled steering committees to ar-
 range the outcomes. The elections resulted in government-approved slates of can-
 didates voted into office by prearranged acclamation.
 The U.S. Government in 1991 suspended Sudan's eligibility for trade benefits
 under the Generalized System of Preferences because of its violations of worker
 ons remained free to form federations and affiliate with international bodies,
 such as the African Workers' Union and the Arab Workers' Union.
 b. The Right to  rganize and Bargain Colletively.-An RCC constitutional decree
 of June 30, 1989, temporarily suspended the right to organize and bargain collec-
 tively. Although these rights were restored to organizing committees in September
 of the same year, government ontrol of the steering ommittees meant in practice
 that the Government dominates the process of setting wages and working condi-
 tions. The continued absence of labor legislation allowing for union meetings, filing
 of grievances, and other union activity, greatly reducd the value of these forma
 rights. Although local union officials raised some grievances with employers, few
 carried them to the Government. Wages am set by a tripartite committee compris-
 ing representatives of the Government, labor unions, and business. Specialized labor
 courts adjudicate standard labor disputes.
 In 1993 the Government created two export processing zones (EPZ's); it later es-
 tablished a third at Khartoum International Airport At year's end, only the EPZ
 at Khartoum International Airport was open. Sudanese labor laws do not apply in
 these EPZ's.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Although the law prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor, slavery persists. Aerding to the report by the U.N. Special
 
 
 Rapporteur, reports and information from a variety of sources after February 1994
 indcate that the number of cases of slavery, servitude, slave trade, and forced labor
 have increased alarmingly. The taking of slaves, particularly in war zones, and their
 export to parts of central and northern Sudan continued. There also continued to
 be credible, but unconfirmed reports that women and children were sold and sent
 abroad to work as domestics, agricultural laborers, or sometimes concubines. In
 some instances, local authorities took action to stop instances of slavery, in other
 cases the authorities did nothing to stop the practice.
 Both the Government and rebel factions continued to forcibly conscript young men
 and boys into the military or rebel militias. For example, in February a group of
 national service trainees were unexpectedly taken to Khartoum and flown to Juba,
 where they were expected to serve in combat. Young men and boys faced significant
 hardship and abuse once conscripted for military service. The SPLA reportedly held
 thousands of children in camps against their will as a reservoir of recruits (see Sec-
 tions 1.g. and 5). The rebel factions continued to force southern men to work as la-
 borers or porters or forcibly conscripted them into their fighting forces.
 The Special Rapporteur received testimony on regular abductions which took
 place in  ogrial during joint incursions by the army, the PDF, and the armed mili-
 tias. In addition, during April and May of 1995 it is reported that a train proceeding
 from Babanusa to Wau was used to transport civilians abducted during raids in the
 area carried out by government forces. According to testimony, PDF troops took
 thousands of cattle and abducted some 500 women and 150 children.
 All the reports and information received indicate the direct and general involve-
 ment of the SPAF, the PDF, armed militias, and mujahidin groups backed by the
 Government in the abduction and deportation of civilians from the conflict zones to
 the north. All these practices have a pronounced racial aspect, as the victims are
 exclusively Southerners and people beIoncg to the indigenous tribes of the Nuba
 Mountains.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Clhildren.-The legal minimum age for work-
 ers is 16 years, but the law is loosely enforced by inspectors from the Ministry of
 Labor in the official or wage economy. Children as youn as 11 or 12 years worked
 in a number of factories, particularly outside the capital, including the edible oil fac-
 tories at Um Ruwaba. In addition, gross poverty in Sudan has produced widespread
 child labor in the informal, unregulated economy. In rural areas, children tradition-
 ally assist their families with agcultural work from a very young age.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The legislated minimum wage is enforced by
 the Ministry of Labor, which maintains field offices in most major cities. Employers
 generally respect the minimum wage. Workers who are denied the minimum wage
 may file a grievance with the local Ministry of Labor field office, which is then sup-
 posed to investigate and take appropriate action if there has been a violation of the
 law. At yearos end, the minimum wage was approximately $10 (7,000 Sudanese
 pounds) per month. This wage is insufficient to support an average worker and fam-
 ily.
 The workweek is limited by law to six 8-hour days, with a day of rest on Friday.
 Although the laws prescribe health and safety standards, working conditions were
 generally poor, and enforcement by the Ministry of Labor minimal. The law does
 not address the right of workers to remove themselves from dangerous work situa-
 tions without loss of employment.
