 SUDAN :
 "September Laws.",Similar provisions were proposed to the
 former c9nst13utent assembly in 1988 by Hassan al Turabi,
 Secretary Genjeral of the National Islamic Front (NIF), after
 the NIF inp.nlusion in .the Government. The assembly set aside
 the piopos'al without rejecting it.
 Hudud punishments include amputation, hanging, and beheading,
 and such.s.entences were handed down in 1989. As in 1988,
 however, no Hudud pentences. were carried out under either the
 Sadiq or Omar-,Governments. Some.00 convicted prisoners still
 await execution of Hudud sentences. The Omar Government had
 not clarified its position on Hudud, and the SPLA/M strongly
 rejected suggestions of a national plebiscite on Sharila.
 General Omar declared that the September Laws, which the
 SPLA/M-strong-y opposed and are a -ajor barrier to peace, are
 negotiable, but the Government also reportedly recalled two
 architects of the September Laws to draft a new Islamic
 constitution.
 By contrast, sentences of flogging.were routinely passed and
 carried out before the coup. -Repoxts -indicated that the
 standard.sentence for drinking alcohol was 40 lashes. Such
 punishments- re often inflicted sunmarily. In August Khartoum
 police allegedly .rrested two f acjpry workers and a baker for
 curfew violations and impediatqly gave each 20 lashes.
 Other reports since the,,coup suggest brutality by some
 soldiers, police, and security and prison officials. Boys
 selling ,items In the Khartoum markets were rounded up and
 beaten. Official sources acknowledged the floggings and
 roundups and promised closer supervision of the police.
 Although -rported police brutality declined after this
 commitment was made, unnecessary harassment by security forces
 continued in 1989. There were also persistent reports of
 beatings and other forms of torture inflicted on detainees and
 others in government penal institutions.
 d; ,Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Sudan's Criminal Code continued substantially unchanged in
 1989. Arrests must be followed by a statement of charges
 within a prescribed time, and the accused is to be brought
 before a court within 48 hours of arrest, informed of the
 charges, and allowed legal counsel. Bail is permitted except
 in some capital cases. But the state of emergency and martial
 law after the coup permit the Government wide powers of arrest
 and preventive detention for an indefinite period. Although
 most prisoners were allowed visitors, there were a few reports
 of prisoners held incommunicado, mostly trade unionists and
 Communists considered by the authorities to be troublemakers.
 Military authorities in southern and western areas may detain
 people without charge on suspicion of cooperation or sympathy
 with the rebellion. As the incident at Meiram indicates
 (Section l.a.), this power is sometimes abused.
 Under the Sadiq Government, there were few political prisoners
 in northern Sudan. Fifteen persons were arrested, however, in
 December 1988 following an alleged coup attempt. They
 included a number of top politicians and former military
 officers who allegedly supported former President Nimeri.
 They were subsequently released after the June 30 coup.
 The situation with regard to political detainees/prisoners
 changed dramatically with the coup on June 30. The Omar
 
 
 358
 BUDAN
 Government suspended legal due process and declared a
 nationwide state of emergency (SOE) that gave the Government
 wide-ranging arbitrary powers. The Government initially
 detained without warrants more than 300 people, including many
 of Sudan's prominent political and academic figures. They
 were later joined by academics who had petitioned against the
 regime's actions and by about 60 judges. Many detainees,
 including Sadiq al Mahdi, remained confined without charge in
 Kobar and other prisons at the end of 1989. At least 35 trade
 unionists were transferred to Shala Prison in El Fasher,
 approximately 400 miles from Khartoum. In September several
 Communists were detained, allegedly for instigating a protest
 against the Government by students at Khartoum University.
 When eight labor union leaders petitioned in August against
 the Omar Government's decree abolishing unions, they were also
 detained. Government officials later claimed that the unions
 had been a major source of Sudan's problems, and that the RCC
 would tolerate no challenge to its authority. These actions
 were condenined by other labor organizations, including the
 Organization bf African Trade Union Unity and the American
 Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations.
 When the doctors' union staged a nationwide strike in late
 November-early December, the Government detained about 30
 physicians, at least one of whom was severely beaten. Several
 physicians were later tried, and two convicted, for
 "instigating discord and war against the State."
 Conditions of imprisonment for the detainees in Kobar prison
 are relatively mild, and many were freed over the months
 following the coup. Sarra al-Fadil al-Mahdi, wife of Sadiq,
 was detained in September and confined under more rigorous
 conditions in Omdurman Women's Prison. Sadiq's other wife,
 Hafia Hussein Sherif, was also briefly detained but released.
 During this period the Government began to file charges,
 usually related to wrongful expenditure of public funds,
 against former officials of the Sadiq Government. Although
 summary arrest and detention procedures continued to be used,
 the Omar Government began to reconstruct a functioning if more
 politicized system of justice, and detentions on political
 grounds in northern Sudan became infrequent.
 There were approximately 150 political detainees held without
 charge in Sudan at year's end.
 There were no known cases of involuntary exile in 1989. With
 regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Under the Sadig Government, the Sudanese legal system was
 controlled by the transitional constitution of 1985 and
 Sudanese legal codes, including the penal code adopted in
 September 1983 (the September Laws). In addition, the SOE law
 of December 1987 gave authorities extensive emergency powers.
 The legal system involved a variety of courts, including the
 Supreme Court, civil, criminal, and Shari'a (Islamic) courts.
 Abolition in 1986 of the executive power to form special state
 security courts ensured that the regular criminal courts would
 try all prisoners. Such proceedings involved extensive
 guarantees of due process, including arrest pursuant to a
 warrant, public trials before a three-judge panel, the right
 of defendants to speak and present evidence on their own
 behalf and to obtain counsel, and appeals through a series of
 
 
 359
 courtsto the high court of appeals. Christian law graduates
 were n]9d_.are required to pass a proficiency examination in
 Islamic law to-practice law in Sudan. Tribal.law continues to
 be important in. rural areas, where disputes largely involve
 land, water, and family concerns. Courts also exist to
 monitor the activities of merchants and can impose prison
 sentences for fraud and operating without a business license.
 Both the judicial system and the judiciary have changed since
 the coup. One of the RCC's first decrees on June 30 abolished
 the 1986 transitional constitution and transferred all power
 over Sudan's constitution and laws to the RCC. The same
 decree'also provided that existing laws remained valid and
 that nonpolitical constitutional institutions continued,
 althoubh they would be required to enforce any changes in the
 laws approved by the RCC. The RCC removed and detained some
 60 judges, about one-tenth of. the Sudanese bench. The
 judiciary.was transfer-Xed to the Ministry of Justice, and the-
 Chief Justice, formerly elected by sitting judges, was
 appointed by Gpneral Omar.
 In place of the former system, a dual court structure based on
 three sources -of -law developed in 1989. Civilian courts
 continued to exist, albeit short of staff and less independent
 of the executive. Such courts continued to handle the large
 backlog of cases dating from before June 30. They applied the
 1983 Criminal Code (the September Laws) to try ordinary
 criminalQffenses, including, theft and even some capital
 crimes; civil cases continued to be handled largely according
 to previous laws, generally derived from British colonial
 models. Other courts were-established to monitor conformity
 with government-established prices for certain goods.
 The RCC also estathlished numerous special military tribupals,
 typically-comprised 9f three field-grade officers. These
 courts were used extensively to try officials from the Sadiq
 Government. In each cpse, the defendants were charged with
 crimes against the 1983 Criminal Code, usually corruption.
 The defendants were allowed counsel of their choice. In the
 first such case, however, involving former Supreme Council
 member Idris al Banna, the defendant's attorney was not
 allowed to.present a defense. Defendants subsequently were
 formally granted the right to counsel, and it was announced
 that Idris al Banna would be allowed to appeal the denial of
 effective counsel in his case. The trials were televised and
 open to the public.
 The military courts also tried nonpolitical civilian
 defendants accused of offenses specified in the SOE. Such
 crimes included possession of hashish and currency-exchange
 violations. The military courts also try offenses against the
 decrees of the RCC, which, along with the 1983 Penal Code and
 the SOE law, comprise the current Sudanese criminal code.
 Sentences given convicted defendants, both political and
 nonpolitical,-have been severe by Sudanese standards,
 including long prison terms and confiscation of property.
 An RCC decree on June 30 allowed the seizure of land, money,
 or commodities for the public welfare without reimbursement
 and for the seizure of the property of businesses under
 suspicion of resisting the Omar Government (pending legal
 determination of the case). These decrees were used to
 enforce price controls.
 
 
 360
 SUDAN
 Late in 1989 the military courts, which tried a limited number
 of cases, were discontinued in favor of state security courts,
 each staffed by three civilian judges. Like the military
 tribunals, these courts constitute a separate group of
 security courts parallel to the regular criminal and civil
 system. They are intended to try persons accused of
 violations of constitutional decrees,-emergency regulations,
 and some sections of the penal code, but defendants in these
 courts receive greater benefit from due process provisions
 than did those in the former military courts, including the
 assistance of counsel empowered to address the court and
 access to a court of appeals.
 In November the Government created another new set of security
 courts. According to the Special Courts Act of November 29,
 the military governors of the regions and the commissioner of
 the national capital can form special courts with jurisdiction
 parallel to that of the state security courts. The special
 security courts can be formed of three military officers or
 any three competent persons, and those created had both
 military and civilian judges. Attorneys can sit with
 defendants as "friends of the court" and advise them, but
 cannot themselves address the court. Sentences given by the
 special security courts are to be implemented immediately,
 except that death sentences must be approved by the Chief
 Justice and the Head of State. Defendants can file appeal
 briefs with the Chief Justice. The Government referred most
 security cases to these courts, leaving the civilian state
 security courts largely without a docket.
 The special security courts quickly became noted for their
 severe sentences. In December two defendants convicted of
 illegal possession of foreign currency and a third defendant
 convicted of currency smuggling were sentenced to death, as
 was a physician convicted of involvement in an illegal strike
 by doctors. Another physician involved in the strike was
 sentenced to 15 years in prison; two other physicians were
 acquitted. Despite international protests, on December 17 one
 of those convicted of cuxrency violations was hanged, along
 with a drug traffcker convicted earlier.
 In practice, the military courts and the succeeding special
 revolutionary courts applied a mix of precoup laws and
 postcoup decrees. The Attorney General's Office allegedly
 monitors the trials of political prisoners, but its influence
 is unclear.
 The military courts convicted less than 100, perhaps even
 fewer than 50 defendants during their 3-month existence.
 Large areas of the south are controlled by the SPLA/M.
 Reports indicated that a rudimentary system of justice based
 on village leaders was being used in some of these areas, and
 a similar system of justice was authorized by the Government
 late in 1989 for the war-torn province of South Kordofan.
 Under this system, a trusted village elder is appointed to
 adjudicate disputes, as well as to collect taxes and recruit
 soldiers and labor for the SPLA/M. SPLA offenders can be
 tried and have reportedly been severely punished. Other
 portions of these areas are outside effective judicial
 procedures, and those accused are often not provided
 recognizable due process. Some reports suggest that army
 units summarily try and punish those accused of crimes,
 especially offenses against civil order.
 
 
 361
 SUDAN ,
 f. Arbitrary Int tference'with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Corresponddnci-
 Government surveillance in Sudan, butside the combat zones,
 was rare before the coup. After June 30, security agencies
 considerably expanded'both the sdope and intensity of their
 activities throughout Sudan. Reports were received of petty
 harassment Of civilians and surveillance of church services by
 security offic ts.-'After-their release from detention in
 December, leading political figures Mohamed Osman al'Mirghani
 and Hassaf-al Turabi were confined to house arrest, their
 families vere kept under surveillance, and all visitors other
 than family were 'required to obtain government permission.
 Complaints about searches of homes without warrants also
 increas6d.- In one c se, armed police or soldiers without
 warranty reportedly entered homes'in the Khartoum area
 occupied by displaced persons from southern Sudan. They
 allege'dly confiscated equipment used for home brewing '(a
 traditional if illegal moneymaking sideline for southern
 Sudanese women), marked the homes with red paint, and forbade
 the families to reenter them.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian
 Law in Internal Conflicts
 Both government forces and government-affiliated militias as
 well as the SPLA/14 used excessive force and acted contrary to
 himanitarian law. Allegations of chemicar weapons use by the
 SPAF, however, appeared unfounded.
 In January witnesSed' repo'rted that in Allubi (Southern
 Kordofan) ,i December 1988 some 150 SPAF soldiers and 5
 officers engaged in a spree of looting, rape, and torture of
 civilians.. Other reports suggested similar activities by the
 SPAF in thT area of Tira El Akhdar that resulted in the
 burning of seven villages and the killing of eight villagers.
 Other reports of such activities, including in the west, were
 received following the coup. In several cases, army units
 reacted to perceived SPLA/M attacks by ferociously attacking
 the Dinka sections of nearby towns, killing substantial
 numbers of villagers. In one case, the unit commander
 reportedly was transferred, but no reports were received of
 disciplinary action against the soldiers who committed the
 atrocities. Government forces Iii Malakal forbade civilians to
 leave the town with enough rations to return to their villages
 and plant crops, effectively making the civilians prisoners in
 the town. East of Wau, the SPAF reportedly established a
 "free-fire zone" to discourage settlement. Army officers have
 also admitted rdpe and theft of relief supplies by soldiers in
 southeri garrisons.
 A particularly notable violation of humanitarian law occurred
 in the eastern Equatoria town of Torit, a center for relief
 activities. On June 1 an SPAF bomber appeared over the
 airport at Torit, which had recently been occupied by the
 SPLA/M. Tie plane made two runs on the airport, dropping
 several large bombs that narrowly missed a German Air Force
 transport, loaned to a relief agency and appropriately
 marked. Representatives of several donor nations protested
 the attack, which also caused a temporary suspension of German
 airborne'relief in the area. A similar bombing was reported
 at about the same time on a village near Torit, resulting in
 several wounded civilians. After the fall of Kurmuk to the
 SPLA/M in October, SPAF planes bombed the SPLA-held towns of
 Yirol and Waat. The attack on Yirol killed 4 civilians and
 
 
 362
 SUDAN
 wounded 10, and bombs narrowly missed a clearly marked ICRC
 hospital. The Government subsequently denied responsibility
 for these two incidents.
 Information on SPLA/M violations of humanitarianm law has been
 more difficult to obtain. SPLA/M forces, however, reportedly
 raped displaced persons fleeing besieged towns and were
 accused of planting land mines indiscriminately in the war
 zone. There are reports that during.the siege of Juba the
 SPLA fired rockets into the town on several occasions. These
 attacks reportedly killed more than 20 people, most of them
 women and children. In the Juba area, the SPLA also stole
 relief food from the inhabitants. When the SPLA/M took the
 town of Torit in February, SPLA fighters reportedly pillaged,
 raped, and killed civilians there. In late December, a relief
 plane of the French organization Medicins Sans Frontieres was
 shot down while taking off from the government-held town of
 Aweil. The Government stated that the SPLA/M was responsible,
 but there was no independent confirmation of that claim.
 Government forces and government-armed militias were accused
 of attacking groups fleeing the widening area of the conflict,
 preventing civilians from growing their own food through
 indiscriminate planting of land mines, and confiscating relief
 supplies intended for civilians for sale on the black market.
 The government-armed tribal militias (especially members of
 the Misseriyyah, Fertit, Taposa, and Ruzeigat tribes) made
 many attacks on their longstanding tribal opponents,
 particularly the Dinka, the most important source of support
 for the SPLA/M. In late December, Arab militia of the Sabha
 tribe killed over 200 Shilluk tribesmen in El Jebelein in
 reprisal for the murder of an Arab landowner. The Government
 announced several arrests and an investigation of the
 incident. Militia activity was especially vicious in the Nuba
 Mountains region of Southern Kordofan. The Sadiq Government
 routinely ignored abuses of human rights by the militias. In
 July the Omar Government brokered a settlement in El Fasher
 that reduced strife between the Fur tribe and government-armed
 groups that had been attacking the Fur.
 However, the Omar Government was not able to disarm the
 militias, which also received weapons through neighboring
 states, including Chad. In November.a government decree
 establishing "Popular Defense Forces" substantially
 implemented a controversial proposal, initially made under the
 Sadiq government by the National Islamic Front and parts of
 the Umma party., to legitimate the militias. Government
 control over the militias remained limited in 1989, although
 the decree suggested means for closer government supervision.
 A portion of one militia group, the Anyanya II, turned against
 the Government and now supports the SPLA/M; another faction
 remained loyal to the Government. In one case, the portion of
 the Anyanya II militia loyal to the Government reportedly
 visited villages near Abyei and engaged repeatedly in pillage,
 torture, killing, and rape of civilians who they alleged were
 SPLA/M supporters. Instances of enslavement of displaced
 persons and refugees were also reported (see Section 5). One
 observer found these areas ruled by "the law of the gun."
 Despite these limitations of control, the Government's
 historic policy of providing weapons to the militias and
 failing to investigate or punish atrocities committed by them
 associates the Government with the militias' actions. The
 SPLA/M also reportedly armed tribal militias in the Nuba area,
 although on a smaller scale.
 
 
 363
 SUDAN
 Both sides in the civil wartook prisoners, although the SPAF
 reportedly'held only SPLA/M officers. The ICRC was able to
 visit 8 SPLA/M prisoneks held by the Government and 150
 government-prisoners held by the SPLA/M. The total number of
 prisoners visitbd is only a-8m ll number of the.prisoners held
 by both sides.
 Both sides interfered with relief operations in 1989. Before
 the coup, Prime Minister Sadiq al Mahdi acknowledged the
 unauthorized distribution of relief supplies by a local
 official from stocks at Aweil. The SPLA/M reportedly attacked
 some relief convoys moving through SPLA/M-controlled
 territory. Other convoys were held up by negotiations between
 the Goverunment and the SPLA/M over the proportion of supplies
 to be reft in SPLA/M hands. Heavy mining on some southern
 roads greatly obstructed movement of relief convoys by land.
 Civilians suffered from mistreatment by'some local.
 townspeople,..attacks by armed militias, occasional military
 harassment of relief workers; and lack of humanitarian
 assistance from the army and SPLA/M themselves. Movement of
 food supplies by.land to Juba, the largest town in the south,
 was blocked by.the-SPLA/M, forcing the 300,000 residents to
 rely on-the uncertainties of airlift.
 While civilian deaths in the civil war and tribal fighting.
 were again high in 1989, interference or failure of both sides
 in the civil war to cooperate with food relief efforts and the
 subsequent closure of airspace to relief flights, government
 corruption and inefficiency, and lack of medical treatment
 continued to be the major causes of death in the areas
 affected-by the civil war in 1989. Overall in 1989 there were
 fewer deaths than in 1988, due in part to massive humanitarian
 efforts and intermittent cooperation. This improvement was
 threatened- in November by the Government's closure of Sudanese
 air space to relief flights following the fall of Kurmuk, to
 which the SPLA/M responded by imposing a 72-hour notification
 rule for flights over SPLA/M-held territory.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Under the Sadiq Government, Sudanese citizens had substantial
 freedom of speech and press, at least outside the war-torn
 southern areas. Parliamentary debate was free and criticism
 of the Government intense. Print media were lively and
 expressed h wide variety of Sudanese opinion. Political
 parties published their own newspapers, and independent
 journals presented a full range of opinions. Human rights
 abuses were often, if not always reliably, reported on,
 especially by English-language newspapers. Radio, television,
 and the Sudanese News Agency (SUNA) were under government
 control and tended to reflect government policies. Academic
 freedom was generally respected, and student groups held free
 elections for their leaders.
 Despite this substantial freedom of the press, there were
 limitations. In early 1989 the Sadiq Government fired the
 SUNA management, reportedly for not being sufficiently Islamic
 in their reporting. At the same time, the Cabinet began
 reconsideration of a new press law that would have imposed
 substantial limits on reporting, including banning attacks on
 religions and on Sudan's foreign policy. In March the Sadiq
 Government used the SOE law to arrest the editor of a biweekly
 newspaper, producing a protest from the Sudanese Journalists
 Association.
 
 
 364
 SUDAN
 The coup on June 30 radically changed this situation. Public
 expression of opposition viewpoints was banned; the broadcast
 media were tightly controlled; and licenses for all
 nongovernment publications were cancelled. For some time the
 only internal news sources were the. SPAF organ Armed Forces,
 SUNA, and radio and television--all government controlled. In
 August the Omar Government authorized a second daily
 newspaper, Modern Sudan. In September a third journal,
 National Salvation, appeared. Modern Sudan and National
 Salvation became the general daily papers, and Armed Forces
 returned to its previous situation as an irregularly published
 organ for the armed forces. All three journals reflect
 government views and are in Arabic only. Also in September
 Sudanow, an English-language government magazine, reappeared
 in a limited press run.
 Although a new press law under discussion could permit
 independent publications in the future, early return to the
 previous conditions of press freedom is unlikely.
 Academic freedom in Sudan has generally been respected, but
 many university professors felt less secure after the coup. A
 few professors and other leading intellectuals were detained
 or taken in for questioning, although most were soon
 released. An early decree of the RCC forbade universities to
 shut down in protest.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Despite the banning of demonstrations under the SOE law by the
 Sadiq Government, protests and marches periodically occurred.
 The National Islamic Front (NIF) held numerous demonstrations
 against the Sadiq Government in April, some of which became
 violent. The SOE and banning of political activity decreed on
 June 30 effectively eliminated the right to protest, and a
 large student demonstration at the University of Khartoum
 December 6 was firmly controlled by police forces, killing two
 students.
 Before the coup, Sudan had many political organizations and
 parties. Professional and business associations met
 regularly. They were routinely-given the required permits and
 licenses, and, outside the war zones in the south and west,
 the Government usually did not become involved in their
 proceedings.
 On June 30, the RCC decreed that the registrations of all
 nonreligious groups were canceled, and the groups were
 effectively disbanded. In September the Government put
 forward a program for reregistration of voluntary
 organizations. As long as political activity remains banned,
 it is unlikely that such organizations, even if reregistered,
 would play the active role in politics that some did before
 the coup.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Sudan is a multireligious country in both fact and law. Islam
 and Christianity have both been formally recognized as
 religions of Sudan, but adherents of other beliefs are not
 legally restricted. Muslims are a.majority in the five
 northern regions and the capital, although the presence in
 
 
 365
 these areas of over 3 million displaced persons from the south
 (an arda predominantly Christian ind animist) is affecting
 this balance. Foreign clergy may enter Sudan with certain
 restrictions. They are most likely to be admitted if they
 have certain technical skills, such as publishing, that are
 difficult.to obtain'in Sudan; clergy without special skills
 are less likely to'be admitted. In general, clergy are
 admitted to serve their own religious communities.
 Proselytizing by Muslims is allowed, as is'proselytizing by
 Christians of non-Muslims; but proselytizing of Muslims is
 discouraged and cln provoke reactions. Religious believers
 are free to engage in religious education and to partIcipate
 in religiously related charitable activities.
 Despite'these'provisions, Islam has traditionally'been favored
 by the Government. .nder the Foreign Missionary Society Act
 of 1962",publip ChriStian religious activity is.subject to
 close governmentsupervision. Among other provisions, the Act
 forbids the construction of churches without government
 permits, which have.not been issued for more than 10 years.
 The Sudan Catholic Bishops' Conference and'the Sudan Council
 of Chur~hbs both protes ted in 1989 against the Act, whose
 broad provisions were often capriciously interpreted by local
 officials.
 Several incidents exacerbated sectarian tensions in 1989.
 Before the boup, governtent officials in the south reportedly
 seized pibpefty belonging to Christian churcies, refused to
 return it,- and threatened those who protested the seizure. In
 April theNIF, then in opposition, called, for ,a "holy war"
 againsE the Vovernment and its'supporters. Local groups
 inspired by this appeal apparently interpreted it as an
 incitement to attack Christian'establishments. In the last 2
 weeks of Apiil, attacks were made against Christian churches,
 centers, ahO scbools in En Nahud (Ijoxthern Kordofan Province),
 Port Sudan (E'eaV    El Kamlin (El Gezira), and two
 establip4mentg in-Omdurman. In one of the Omdurman incidents,
 a charity,,n6neF operated by the-Sisters of Mother Teresa of
 Calcutt  was  tiacked by a mob incited by the imam of a nearby
 mosque. One of the nuns was severely beaten and the center
 was stoned, The imam was arrested and sentenced to 2 months
 in jail fb.d~sturbing the peace. In En Nahud, a Catholic
 Church compound was invaded by a mob of NIF supporters, who
 looted and ransacked the nuns' quarters and the parish
 offices. No one was reported arrested for this attack. The
 Sadiq Government discouraged participation in the NIF-led
 demonstrations but did not use its emergency powers to ban
 them.
 In another incident, ' Catholic catechist was reportedly
 jailed and robbed by security forces in El Daein in Southern
 Darfur. Personal papers he was carrying were also allegedly
 destroyed, and one of the officers reportedly demanded that he
 say Muslim prayers in order to be freed, which he refused to
 do. After holding him for 11 days in custody without charge,
 they released him at Umm Ruwaba in Northern Kordofan. No
 reports were received of disciplinary actions against the
 security officials involved.
 When the SPLA/M captured Torit in February, its fighters
 reportedly ransacked the home of Archbishop Paride Taban,
 taking religious articles, vestments, books, and other
 property. They also took the Archbishop and three Catholic
 priests into custody and held them incommunicado for 2
 
 
 366
 months. After international protests to the SPLA/M, they were
 released in mid-May.
 The coup on June 30 did not substantially affect religious
 activities in Sudan. Religious organizations continued to
 function essentially as before, and the decree revoking the
 registration of other voluntary organizations exempted
 religious bodies.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Freedom of movement in Sudan is hampered by the civil war, a
 very limited transportation infrastructure, and government
 restrictions. Exit visas are required to leave Sudan, a
 requirement thnt has been used to restrict travel abroad. A
 married Sudanese woman must have the permission of her husband
 or another male relative to travel abroad, and regulations
 specify that unmarried Sudanese women must travel with a
 family member or other sponsor. The travel restrictions for
 women were generally ignored before the coup, but after June
 30 they were increasingly strictly enforced. Reports were
 received of several women refused permission to board at
 Khartoum airport because security officials did not believe
 they had the required permission or escort. Foreigners must
 register, with-the police on entering the country, obtain
 permission to move from one location to another, and register
 again at the new location within 3 days of arrival.
 After the coup, the Omar.Goyernment imposed additional travel
 restrictions. A curfew was instituted in much of Sudan, and
 suspected curfew violators are subject to detention or summary
 floggings. Initially the Omar Government heavily restricted
 travel abroad by Sudanese, and immediately after the coup
 closed the Khartoum airport except for travel to Mecca in
 Saudi Arabia by Muslim pilgrims. A government spokesman
 stated in August that travel abroad (other than to Egypt) for
 medical treatment was -forbidden,.explaining these measures as
 necessary for improving production in Sudan. In practice,
 Sudanese have experienced little difficulty in leaving the
 country since the coup. Although Sudanese could move about
 .the country freely both before and after the coup, the Omar
 Government tightened travel restrictions on foreigners
 _-especially diplomats), principally by requiring travel
 permits that are sometimes difficult to obtain. These
 restrictions sometimes hampered relief efforts.
 The situation of displaced persons and refugees improved in
 1989 by comparison with 1988. Natural catastrophes were less
 severe, and under the umbrella of Operation Lifeline Sudan
 relief supplies moved more easily than in 1988. Although mass
 resettlement plans for the summer of 1989 were not carried
 out, some forced resettlement reportedly occurred in the
 Khartoum area in November and December, as well as in areas
 affected by the civil war. The SPAF reportedly forced farmers
 south of Kadugli to move from their villages, causing a major
 influx of families into the town of Kadugli. Reports of
 widespread starvation declined, but refugees and displaced
 persons continued to lack medicines and other necessities.
 Overall, Sudan's inability to resolve the civil war left the
 number of displaced persons at about the 1988 level of some 3
 million. Many of these people were concentrated in
 shantytowns and squatter huts in and around Khartoum.
 
 
 367
 Sudan's foreign refugee population (largely composed of
 Ethiopians, .Ugandans, and Chadians) was about 700,000. Sudan
 has not forced the repatriation of refugees and has generally
 accorded good treatment to refugees, although years of influx
 have nearly exhausted the meager available resources for
 refugees. Administrative problems halted almost.all'
 resettlement of refugees to third countries from May 1988 to
 April 1989, Dut the Omar Government seemed to have corrected
 these problems by the end of 1989.           -
 Large numbers of refugees have settled in the cities,
 especially the capital area. Refugees are restricted in their
 freedom tq travel and-own property, as are most non-Sudanese.-
 They also are..not permitted to become resident aliens or
 citizens of Sudan, regardless of the length of their stay.
 An exception.to the ggnerally good treatment of refugees in
 Sudan was the situation of Falashas (Ethiopian Jews) in
 Umrakoba Camp. This, group of 54 has been sequestered since
 1984, has often been denied access to United Nations High
 Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) protection officers, and
 receives minimal support from the Sudanese Government, which
 runs the camp. They are denied permission to travel and
 isolated from the general population of the camp, and they
 reportedly do not receive adequate health care.
 Urban refugees face considerable problems. Reports of
 harassment and petty thievery by police against refugees,
 beatings for minor infractions of the law, administrative
 obstruction and delays, and the need for small bribes to
 obtain everything from work permits to food-ration cards are
 common in urban areas. Refugees seldom have recourse to the
 legal system when attacked by policemen. The UNHCR Protection
 Officer reported that one group of refugees was imprisoned
 without charge when found at the scene of a murder. Although
 the murderer was promptly identified as Sudanese, the refugees
 remained in prison for 8 weeks.
 The Omar Government did not change the policy of the Sadiq
 Government, instituted in 1987, of accepting genuine political
 refugees but refusing refugees from famine.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Governdent
 At the end of 1989, a military regime ruled, and the people of
 Sudan had neither the right nor the ability peacefully to
 change their government. A government spokesmen declared that
 this situation will not change soon. In September the RCC
 issued its "Third Constitutional Decree" establishing a new
 governmental system for Sudan. It featured a head of state
 (General Omar) with sovereign powers. The all-military RCC
 continued as the legislative authority. A cabinet was
 established consisting of a prime minister and other
 ministers, all-appointed by the RCC. The Cabinet was given
 essentially administrative authority subject to the Head of
 State and the RCC. The courts were brought under the Head of
 State's supervision, and courts were specifically forbidden to
 review acts of the RCC or the Head of State.
 Under the Sadiq Government, Sudan had a multiparty
 parliamentary system that guaranteed the right of citizens to
 change their government. The system did not extend to large
 parts of the south, where the civil war prevented the holding
 of elections in 1986 in about half the electoral districts in
 
 
 368
 SUDAN
 southern Sudan, leaving empty 41 of the 301 seats in the
 constituent assembly. The democratic Government could not end
 the civil war as it was repeatedly deadlocked on the
 political/religious issue of the constitutional basis of
 government. A strict Islamic-based criminal code including
 Hudud punishments was proposed in 1988 but never passed,
 although the Shari'a-based provisions of the September Laws
 were never repealed and constituted a major issue in the civil
 war. The Sadiq Government was never able to meet its goal of
 holding a national constitutional conference.
 When they assumed power on June 30, the military leaders
 justified their action largely by citing the ineffectiveness
 of the democratic government. Claiming sectarian bickering as
 harmful to Sudan, they abolished all political parties, seized
 (and later distributed) the parties' assets, and detained
 (albeit in relatively mild conditions) the leaders of many
 precoup parties. RCC decrees banned all political activity
 and political parties. Under both the Sadiq and Omar
 Governments, local and provincial officials were appointed by
 the authorities in the capital. Most local officials
 appointed after the coup were military officers.
 The military Government publicly assigned a high priority to
 ending the civil war. However, by the end of 1989 there had
 been very little movement. John Garang, the leader of the
 SPLA, has called for a "restructured, unified Sudan, a
 multinationality country."
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government has traditionally been acutely sensitive to
 local or foreign criticism of its human rights performance.
 Several international human rights groups work actively in
 Sudan. General Omar also invited a group of Western
 ambassadors to examine the conditions of detention for
 political detainees in Kobar prison, and the visit took place
 on August 12. In September the Dinka intellectual, Francis
 Deng, who is based in Washington, was also permitted to see
 many political detainees in Kobar, including Sadiq al Mahdi,
 Mohamed Osman Mirghani, and Hassan al Turabi.
 Local human rights activists in Sudan have complained of being
 regarded as subversive, and many reportedly were called in for
 questioning by security officials both before and after the
 coup. Neither the Sadiq nor the Omar Government instituted
 any public investigations of alleged human rights abuses in
 1989. In late November, however, the Government received a
 delegation from Amnesty International to discuss detention
 without trial and other human rights concerns.
 Until June 30, Sudan had several active organizations
 monitoring human rights in the country, including the Sudan
 Human Rights Association (SHRA), the Sudan Bar Association
 (SBA), and the Sudan Catholic Bishops' Conference. Neither of
 the first two produced in 1989 detailed studies of human
 rights abuses in Sudan, and their status since the coup is
 uncertain. The Bishops' Conference still exists and actively
 monitors human rights concerns; its bimonthly newsletter
 publicizes violations of human rights, especially those
 involving religious discrimination. In late 1989, both the
 Bishops' Conference and the Sudan Council of Churches drafted
 public letters protesting religious discrimination.
 
 
 369
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 'Language, or Social Status
 Sudan's population of 24.5 million (1989) is a multiethnic mix
 of over 500 Arab and African tribes, with scores of languages
 and diale7Cts. In'general, Sudan is composed primarily of two
 cultures--Atab in the north and central areas and black
 Africa in the south. Sudanese governments have historically
 been dominated by northern Muslims (about 16 million). Some
 southern tribal groups, especially non-Arabs and non-Muslims,
 have demanded greater economic and political power and greater
 recognition of Sudan's cultural diversity.
 Discrimination in the north by the Muslim Arab majority
 against displaced persons from the south is common, and many
 reports wire received in the past of attacks by Arab tribes in
 the south against non-Arab southerners, especially members of
 the Dinka tribe. Residents of Arabic-speaking areas who do
 not theiselves speak Arabic are discriminated against in
 education, jobs, and other opportunities. University of
 Khartoum entrance examinations also favor Arabic speakers.
 Widespread popular attitudes in these areas also stereotype
 dark-skinned non-Arab southerners as inferior and lazy,
 leading to much informal discrimination against them.
 Sudanese laws continue to favor men, and men and women
 traditionally have segregated roles. Islamic laws of
 inheritance award additional property to men, while
 concurr4ntly assigning them the duty'of caring for their
 extended families. Although'education is freely open to both
 sexes and many women obtain university education, women
 traditionally receive less education and have fewer
 opportunities than do men. Some women, however, have been
 active in the professionS, the media, education, and politics,
 and at least one female presides over a court. Although not
 numerous, women are found in both the police and the
 military. Labor laws allegedly do not adequately protect the
 self-employed, the bulk of the female work force. However,
 one of the relatively few women's rights activists in Sudan
 noted at an international conference in 1989 that Sudanese
 women often did not avail themselves of the rights and
 opportunities bvailable to them, including access to the court
 system.
 Female genital mutilation (circumcision) is prevalent in
 Sudan. Reports indicate that this practice, although
 officially illegal, is very widespread,, especially in the
 north. Some reports suggest that over 90 percent of northern
 women have been circumcised, with consequences that include
 severe urinary problems, infections, and even death. The
 so-called Pharaonic circumcision, the most severe of the three
 forms of circumcision, is the most common and is usually
 performed between the ages of 4 and 7 years. Few physicians
 will perform the operation, which is most often done by
 paramedical personnel in improvised, often unsanitary
 conditioni. The operation reportedly is expensive--
 approximately $111 at the legal exchange rate--for a 10-minute
 procedure. Southern women, displaced to the north are
 increasingly visiting circumcision on their daughters, even if
 they themselves are not circumcised.
 Women refugees are particularly vulnerable to harassment and
 sexual abuse. Sexual favors are reportedly demanded of them
 by some*Sudanese officials in exchange for performance of
 official duties. Stories of rape of women refugees by
 
 
 370
 policemen are common, and women refugees without a male
 provider are sometimes forced into prostitution to earn a
 living.
 Among certain southern tribes, forcible sexual intercourse is
 common. No blame attaches to the practice, although the man
 involved must pay a price (often in livestock) to the woman's
 family if she becomes pregnant. In the same area, wives are
 often received on a trial basis lasting up to 4 years. The
 husband may dissolve the marriage during this time by
 returning the wife to her family, although he must pay a price
 for each child born during this time. Returned wives are
 reportedly often able to contract further marriages and are
 not stigmatized by having been returned.
 The extent to which wife beating occurs is unknown; it is not
 discussed as a public issue, and police do not normally
 intervene in domestic disputes. There were no known reports
 of wife beating in 1989, and no court cases involving either
 circumcision or violence against women. However, for a
 variety of reasons, many women would be reluctant to file a
 formal complaint of such abuse.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Sudan had a strong labor union movement during the period of
 the Sadiq government. Prominent labor organizations included
 the Sudanese Workers Trade Union Federation (SWTUF), which
 represented blue-collar workers, the white-collar Sudanese
 Employees and Clerks Federation (SFETU), the Sudanese Teachers
 Federation, and a number of professional associations.
 Sudanese unions lobbied actively and participated in
 international, African, and Arab labor organizations. Except
 for some government employees, strikes were legally
 permissible after exhausting other measures to resolve
 disputes. Technically illegal strikes were common and usually
 tolerated.
 The RCC's constitutional decree number 1 of June 30 abolished
 all labor unions and forbade strikes. Labor union offices
 were closed, and union assets were frozen. Many (probably
 over 100) union officials, especially those active in
 political parties, were detained or placed under house arrest
 between July and September, some for protesting the
 Government's action. Many were quickly released, but at least
 35 union officials remained imprisoned in Shala Prison in late
 1989, and others were detained elsewhere. In September
 General Omar announced the legalization of preliminary
 committees to manage union affairs, pending the drafting of
 new laws on union organization. Under this rubric, the SWTUF
 was restored, with its leadership unchanged, and its assets
 returned. Two other labor groups were also reinstated, and
 efforts were under way to legalize the remaining unions at the
 end of the year. Union officials were promised substantial
 participation in the process of developing new labor
 legislation.
 Although the Government pledged to respect all labor rights
 required by the International Labor Organization (ILO), it
 continued to forbid strikes, as well as all labor activity by
 unreinstated unions. The doctors' union, which had not been
 reinstated, staged a nationwide strike in late November and
 early December to protest the firing of government-employed
 
 
 371
 physicians and to demand removal of the Omar Government and
 restoration of democracy. In December a special security
 court convibted two doctors of leading the strike. One was
 sentenced to death, the other to 15 years in prison. Reports
 also indicated-thaf several members of the engineers union
 were detaihed'in;December to prevent a suspected strike.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Under the 1985'trdsitional constitution, suspended on June
 30, workers had the right to-organize and to bargain
 collectively, and unions did so actively. There were no
 officiaV constraints on union membership, and labor laws were
 applied uniformly throughout'the country (although with little
 effect-in the wat areas). Job creation and union membership
 were limited primarily by Sudan's shattered economy.
 On June 30 the RCC suspended the right to organize and bargain
 collectively. These rights were restored to legalized unions
 in September. Labor laws and practices are uniform throughout
 the territory controlled by the Government.
 c. Prohibition of-Forced or Compuls6ry Labor
 Sudanese law strictly prohibits forced or compulsory labor.
 Allegations of slavery, however, persisted in Sudan in 1989,
 and the issue remained dontroversial. Although the Government
 frequently denies the existence of slavery, Prime Minister
 Sadiq al Mahdi 9cknowledged that Dinka children were enslaved
 by Arab'tribes and cIaimed that Arab children were taken by
 Dinka tribes. He described the practice as a longstanding
 one, involving mutual raiding and taking of captives, but
 condemned it as "illegal" and "immoral." Slavery reportedly
 exists primarily in remote parts of Sudan, especially those
 where government control is weak and where displaced persons
 fleeing the war zones come into contact with armed groups.
 Informed sources suggest there could be many slaves in Sudan,
 largely women and children doing agricultural and domestic
 work and serving as concubines.
 The revival of slavery is often blamed on economic pressures
 and the civil war, especially the practice of arming tribal
 militias. Most of the slaves allegedly are Dinkas abducted by
 Arab militias, especially the Rizeigat and Misseriyah. One
 report by a former army officer indicated that his entire
 family had been killed or taken into slavery after a Rizeigat
 attack on their village in 1987. Reports have also been
 received in the past of Dinka children sold into slavery by
 their parents to prevent their possible starvation.
 Reports suggested that the SPLA/M often forced southern men to
 work as laborers or porters or forcibly conscripted them into
 SPLA ranks. In disputed territories this practice was
 implemented through raids, while in SPLAIM-controlled areas it
 was done through the SPLA/M-appointed village leader.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The legal minimum age for workers is 16. This law is enforced
 in the official or wage economy, but poverty in Sudan produces
 widespread child labor in the informal economy. In rural
 areas, children from a very young age assist their families
 with agricultural work.
 
 
 372
 SUDAN
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Although Sudanese laws prescribe health and safety standards,
 working conditions are generally poor and enforcement of
 environmental standards is minimal. Unemployment and
 underemployment are major problems in Sudan, especially among
 young people. Even graduates of prestigious schools have
 difficulty finding employment after graduation.
 Sudan limits the legal opportunities for employment for
 refugees to menial or marginally skilled jobs. Fortunate
 refugees find employment with an international organization,
 but most are foiced to take jobs far below their training or
 abilities. Rural refugees often find work as field laborers,
 earning the equivalent of a few pennies a day. Urban refugees
 find employment as day laborers or domestic help. The lack of
 legal opportunities to earn a living wage forces many into
 illegal activities such as smuggling, black-marketeering,
 moonshining, and prostitution.
 The workweek is currently limited to 6 days and 48 hours, with
 1 day of rest on Friday. After the coup, the Omar Government
 announced it was considering adopting a 5-day workweek.
 Laborers receive an extra month's pay for each year's labor.
 Most workers are given allowances for transportation, and some
 receive housing allowances. Labor standards are enforced in
 the public and private official economies but not in rural
 areas or in the informal economy. The minimum wage remains at
 the 1988 level of $67 per month at the official exchange
 rate. This salary is far from sufficient for subsistence in
 urban areas, and workers often must rely on farming, second
 jobs, or help from the extended family. Salaries in private
 industry are generally higher than those in the public sector.
 
 
 373
