Sudan
Fighting between Sudanese forces and rebel groups continued in Sudan’s wartorn
peripheries and was marked by serious violations of international humanitarian
and human rights law.
In Darfur, authorities failed to protect people from intensified inter-communal
clashes, particularly between Arab pastoral groups. Sudanese forces also
attacked communities presumed to support rebel groups. In Southern Kordofan
and Blue Nile, Sudan’s indiscriminate bombing and ongoing clashes with
rebels, and the obstruction of humanitarian assistance to rebel-held areas
since the outbreak of conflict in June 2011, have displaced tens of thousands
within those states and elsewhere in Sudan and forced more than 225,000 to
flee to refugee camps in South Sudan and Ethiopia.
Sudanese security forces continued to arrest and detain activists, opposition
party members, and people suspected of links to rebel groups. Authorities also
censored the media and restricted space for civil society, stepping up at the
end of 2012 the harassment of groups that receive foreign funding.
In September, protests, some of them violent, swept the country in response to
hikes in the price of fuel and other basic commodities. Sudanese forces
responded to the protests with live ammunition, and are implicated in the
killing of more than 175 protesters. Security officials detained hundreds of protesters
and opposition members and activists, many for weeks without charge,
and stifled media coverage of the protests.
Conflict and Abuses in Darfur
More than 500,000 people were displaced by conflict in 2013, a number far
exceeding previous years. The vast majority of Darfur’s displaced population,
estimated around 2.5 million people, remain in camps in Darfur and Chad.
Communal violence, especially between Arab pastoralist groups, significantly
increased in 2013. Sudanese government forces were unwilling or unable to
protect civilians and in some cases participated in the fighting. In April, Ali
Kosheib, a known militia leader who is wanted by the International Criminal
Court (ICC) for alleged crimes in Darfur, participated in large-scale attacks on ethnic Salamat villages in Central Darfur, before being seriously wounded in
May.
Government forces and allied militia carried out large-scale attacks, including
aerial bombing, on locations believed by the government to be controlled by
rebel groups. In February, government forces attacked Golo and Guldo in eastern
Jebel Mara, killing an unknown number of civilians and forcing tens of thousands
to flee to safer areas. In early April, government forces bombed and
attacked the towns of Labado and Muhajariya and several other villages in
South Darfur, and reportedly burned and looted homes and killed dozens of
civilians and displaced tens of thousands.
Sudan continued to deny peacekeepers from the African Union-United Nations
Mission in Darfur (UNAMID) access to much of Darfur. Insecurity also undermined
UNAMID’s work. Armed attackers in Darfur killed 12 peacekeepers and
injured many more between July and October alone.
Authorities have not prosecuted the vast majority of serious crimes committed
in violation of international humanitarian and human rights law during the
Darfur conflict. Although some pro-government media outlets reported that the
government’s special prosecutor investigated numerous cases, few if any
Sudanese government forces or militia have been prosecuted, and Sudan has
failed to implement justice reforms recommended in a 2009 report by the AU
High-Level Panel on Darfur, the lead mediation body.
Sudan has not cooperated with the ICC; arrest warrants or summonses for six
men, including President Omar al-Bashir, on charges of genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes remain outstanding. A case involving alleged
war crimes committed by one rebel leader proceeded at the ICC, while proceedings
against a second rebel leader were terminated following his death.
Conflict and Abuses in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile
In Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile, Sudanese government forces continued to
fight with the Sudan Revolutionary Front (SRF), a rebel coalition formed by the
Sudan People’s Liberation Army-North (SPLA-North) and Darfur rebel groups in
2011. In April, fighting spread to North Kordofan, displacing tens of thousands.
The conflict remains marked by serious violations of international human rights
and humanitarian law, including indiscriminate bombing that has killed and
maimed scores of people; destroyed schools, clinics, and other civilian buildings;
and instilled fear in the population.
More than a million people have been forced to flee from their homes; at least
230,000 live in refugee camps in South Sudan or Ethiopia. Sudan obstructed
humanitarian access to tens of thousands displaced in areas controlled by the
SPLA-North.
Sudanese government forces have also carried out mass detentions and prosecutions
in the two states. From November 2012 until May 2013, authorities
detained 32 ethnic Nuba women from Southern Kordofan without charge
because of their suspected affiliation with the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement-North (SPLM-North), the opposition party Sudan banned in 2011.
Authorities have also brought charges against dozens of men from Blue Nile
state in an anti-terrorism court on the basis of their presumed links to the rebel
movement.
Restrictions on Freedom of Assembly, Association
In September, government security forces shot tear gas, rubber bullets, and live
ammunition at protesters during sometimes violent mass protests, using excessive
force. Sudanese human rights groups reported that more than 175 people,
most of them teenagers or in their early twenties, were killed by shooting during
the protests.
Security forces also shot and killed at least seven people including two children
in Nyala, South Darfur, during September protests over the killing by militia of a
prominent businessman. Government forces have also violently dispersed student
protests on several other occasions across the country during the year. In
May, security forces shot at students at El Fashir University, North Darfur, injuring
eight.
Sudanese authorities targeted and harassed, intimidated, and closed some
civil society organizations, in particular several that had received foreign funding.
In December 2012, security officials shut down three civil society groups
and one literary forum, and summoned leaders of other groups for questioning.
Authorities have obstructed groups from legally registering and refused permission
for or cancelled public activities in towns across Sudan.
In early 2013, authorities also shut down Nuba and Christian groups, arresting
staff and confiscating property. Church leaders were questioned about sources
of funding, and the government deported or otherwise forced to leave Sudan
more than 170 foreign church members.
Politically Motivated Arrest and Detention
After a cut in fuel subsidies sparked mass demonstrations in September,
National Intelligence and Security Service (NISS) officials detained hundreds of
protestors and opposition party members and activists, arresting many from
their homes. NISS detained hundreds without charge, many of them for several
weeks.
In January, security officials detained six leading members of Sudan’s political
opposition parties, apparently for attending a meeting of opposition groups
that signed an opposition agreement known as the New Dawn Charter, and held
them without access to lawyers or appropriate medical care for at least 10
weeks before their release without charge.
Despite a pledge in April by President al-Bashir to release all political prisoners,
scores remained in detention without charges, many from conflict-affected
parts of the country. In July, authorities arrested more than 24 people, including
ethnic Nuba and Darfuri student activists, for their perceived links to rebel
groups.
Restrictions on Press Freedom
Despite a pledge in May to halt prepublication censorship of newspapers,
whereby security officials remove articles before a newspaper goes to print,
authorities have continuously censored media. They have suspended publication
of some papers, confiscated printed editions, suspended individual journalists,
blocked websites, and harassed and threatened journalists with prosecution
for criticizing the government
In September, authorities tightened restrictions on media to prevent coverage
of the protests. Security officials instructed newspaper editors not to publish articles related to the protests, confiscated editions of three newspapers, summoned
several journalists for questioning, jammed the reception of international
TV stations, and blocked the Internet for one day. Most newspapers and the
TV stations have resumed, but remain under tight scrutiny.
Stalled Law Reform
Sudan has yet to pass a new permanent constitution, despite the end of the
transition period in the 2005 Comprehensive Peace Agreement, during which it
had adopted an Interim National Constitution, and the secession of South
Sudan.
The National Security Act of 2010 and many other laws contravene basic human
rights norms. Authorities continued to apply Shari’a law sanctions that violate
international prohibitions on cruel, inhuman, or degrading punishment. On
February 14, Sudan implemented a penalty of cross-amputation, the amputation
of the right hand and the left foot. Women and girls continue to be subjected
to flogging and other humiliating punishments under discriminatory public
order laws.
In July, parliament passed amendments to the Sudan Armed Forces Act of 2007
that subject civilians to the jurisdiction of military courts for a range of broadly
defined offences such as undermining the constitutional system, leaking classified
information, and the publication of “false news.”
Key International Actors
Sudan’s relations with South Sudan remained tense in 2013, with both countries
accusing the other of support to rebel movements. Implementation of a
September 2012 agreement signed by Sudan and South Sudan was slow. The
agreement addresses a range of outstanding issues, including oil production,
debt, the status of the nationals of one country resident in the other, border
security, and resolution of border disputes. The status of the contested area of
Abyei remains unresolved.
The United Nations, African Union, and key nations involved in Sudan continued
to press for implementation of the September 2012 agreement but made little progress addressing Sudan’s internal armed conflicts or human rights
record.
In September, the AU extended the mandate of its High-Level Implementation
Panel to December 2014. The UN extended the mandates of the peacekeeping
missions in Darfur and Abyei, while the UN Human Rights Committee extended
the mandate of the independent expert on Sudan.
Efforts by advocacy groups in relation to the ICC arrest warrant for President al-
Bashir’s appeared to again restrict his international travel. He cut short a July
trip to Nigeria and cancelled September plans to attend the UN General
Assembly.
In October, the European Parliament adopted a strong resolution on the human
rights situation in Sudan urging the Sudanese Government “to cease all forms
of repression against those who exercise their right to freedom of expression,
both online and offline, and to protect journalists.”