 SUDAN
 The Transitional Military Government, which took power after
 the overthrow of the undemocratic regime of President Nimeiri
 in April 1985, presided over elections a year later as it had
 promised. Although rebel activity prevented elections in 37
 southern districts (over half of the south's total), voting in
 the rest of the country was orderly, peaceful, and fair, the
 first free elections since 1968. The new coalition
 Government, consisting of six political parties and headed by
 Prime Minister Sadiq al-Mahdi, took office in May pledging to
 restore democracy and the basic rights of its citizens.
 Despite this democratic achievement, the civil war in southern
 Sudan continued unabated. The rebel Sudan People's Liberation
 Movement/Army (SPLM/SPLA) has escalated military pressure on.
 the central Government, calling for a new constitution, new
 elections, repeal of the Shari'a laws, and a more equitable
 division of political power between the north and the
 historically disadvantaged south. With shifting guerrilla
 tactics by the SPLA and the Government's arming of ethnic
 militias to combat the SPLA, law and order have broken down in
 large areas of the south. Bandits and cattle raiders operate
 openly alongside government and SPLA forces in southern
 Kordofan, eastern Equatoria, central Equatoria north of Juba,
 and along the border with Uganda.
 Against this civil strife, and against a continuing burden of
 1 million refugees, the economy continued its slide in 1986
 with a further drop in export earnings, an inflation rate as
 high as 50 percent, high unemployment, and a large and growing
 ($10 billion) foreign debt. On the other hand, after 3 years
 of drought and famine, Sudan enjoyed its largest grain harvest
 ever. But the fighting in the south raised the spectre of
 starvation there, with hundreds of thousands at risk. After
 the SPLA shot down a civilian aircraft in August, killing all
 63 people on board, further SPLA threats against air traffic
 in the south hindered international efforts to provide famine
 relief. In turn, the Government refused to allow relief
 shipments to civilians in rebel-held areas. Both sides used
 famine as a political weapon, while efforts to negotiate a
 peace accord reached a stalemate.
 Sudan has made considerable progress toward restoring human
 rights since the Nimeiri regime was overthrown. The
 transitional Constitution of October 10, 1985 remains in
 effect. All political forces, including the SPLM, have
 indicated they look to a projected constitutional conference
 as their opportunity to establish a new, democratic
 constitution as the basis for Sudan's future. No statistics
 are available on abuses in the war zones, but the migration of
 people out of these areas and their chilling reports imply
 widespread disregard for human life and basic human rights by
 all parties active there.
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 During the election campaign in March and April, two southern
 candidates were murdered, Joseph Kabulu in eastern Equatoria
 and Morris Abal Servino in western Bahr al Ghazal.
 Investigations tend to point to political rivals, but no one
 has been brought to trial in either case.
 
 
 309
 SUDAN
 Reports from a variety of sources suggest that in southern
 Kordofan ethnic violence and lawlessness increased during
 1986. Dinka communities, for example, report raids in which
 Messariya Arab nomads burned houses, stole cattle, raped
 women, and abducted young people for use as slaves.
 Independent confirmation is difficult, but petitions and
 police reports from communities in the area show a serious
 breakdown of security. Stories of less serious incidents
 circulate about other areas in the south where armed militias
 have used their power against civilians. In the course of
 this increased lawlessness, there have been numerous
 casualties, both civilian and military. In late December, the
 Sudanese Government announced that its soldiers had shot dead
 22 wounded SPLA captives. The Government tried to portray
 this as euthanasia, but it probably constitutes a
 contravention of international law.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no known abductions by Sudanese Government
 agencies, but the SPLA kidnaped a German relief worker in
 January, a Norwegian missionary in March, and two American
 nuns in July. All four were released unharmed. The SPLA has
 also been accused of abducting 41 Messariya Arab tribesmen in
 southern Kordofan in September, one of the nomadic groups
 which the Government has been arming.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 A major objective of the SPLA is the removal of the Shari'a
 laws. While they are still officially in force, the "hadd"
 punishments of the Islamic "September laws" of former
 President Nimeiri, including amputations and hanging, have not
 been applied since April 1985 when Nimeiri was overthrown.
 The Chief Justice and the Supreme Council (the five member
 body that serves as the Head of State) must both sign
 authorizations for "hadd" punishments. Neither the Council
 nor the transition Government signed any such authorizations.
 Flogging does occur, but less frequently and less severely
 than during the period prior to the 1985 change of government.
 Cases of torture are rare, but police treatment of persons
 under arrest reportedly is sometimes brutal. One known case
 was reported from southern Kordofan where a Nuban Anglican
 priest, Father Jebrayil Tutu, was arrested by local
 authorities in Kadugli in May 1985 on suspicion of aiding the
 SPLA. Although formal charges were never brought against him,
 he was tortured under questioning: his hands were tied so
 tightly that he has lost their use, and his legs were bound to
 an exhaust pipe while he was left outside in- the sun all day;
 he is still recovering from severe burns. In general, prison
 conditions are poor, due largely to Sudan's poverty, and local
 treatment of prisoners varies considerably, from shackling
 prisoners to allowing them to go home at night.
 Little information is available on the treatment of prisoners
 of war in the southern conflict. Neither side admits to
 holding prisoners, although there was a rare publicized
 exchange in August outside the southern town of Wau. It is
 reportedly SPLA policy to induce prisoners to join the SPLA,
 plying them with propaganda about the movement. According to
 a variety of sources, the SPLA has generally released
 prisoners it takes. In the case of the highly publicized
 
 
 310
 SUDAN
 kidnapings of expatriates, the SPLA eventually released them,
 and there were no reports of ill treatment. On the other
 hand, southerners claim that government troops torture SPLA
 captives or people suspected of being SPLA sympathizers in
 order to get information.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 In 1986 the Government released or put on trial for specific
 charges the last of the political prisoners from the former
 Nimeiri regime and those detained under the transitional
 Government. On January 1, Independence Day, 119 prisoners
 were released nationwide. While the national record is
 commendable, the situation in the south has deteriorated.
 The extent of arbitrary arrest in the south is not well
 documented, but such arrests are reportedly used at the local
 level in all three regions to control collusion with the rebel
 SPLA. In October Khartoum newspapers reported a list of 29
 government officials detained in Malakal for allegedly
 sympathizing with the SPLA. Other sources confirm that
 persons on the list are being held without charge. Although
 some detainees have been permitted to see visitors, the exact
 number of detainees is not known; one estimate is more than
 60. Similar detentions may also occur in other areas of the
 south, but the state of communications between north and south
 has been reduced to rumor and a few radio links. North of
 Malakal, there is no specific evidence of arbitrary arrest and
 detention.
 Sudan's code of criminal procedure, modeled after British law,
 requires a warrant by a competent magistrate for arrest;
 arrests made at the scene of a crime must be followed by a
 statement of charges within a specific period of time. The
 accused must be informed of the charges against him and
 permitted legal counsel. Only certain capital offenses do not
 permit bail. However, Sudan's legal system includes measures
 under the state of emergency, still in effect although not
 enforced, which give wide powers of arrest and preventive
 'detention to the Government. Technically, these could be
 invoked at any time.
 There were no known cases of involuntary exile in 1986, nor of
 forced labor.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The judicial process involves a police or magistrate
 investigation, a field report, an arrest warrant, the arrest,
 and a trial before a panel of three judges. Trials are public
 except in rare cases where the accused requests a closed
 trial, for example to avoid scandal. Defendants have the
 right to present evidence, speak on their own behalf, and to
 obtain legal representation. There are legal aid services for
 the poor, but their resources are limited; the Attorney
 General's office tries to apportion the aid to those facing
 serious charges who are most in need. A case may be appealed
 through the full series of courts from the magistrate level to
 the High Court of Appeals.
 The appointment of judges is now made by a committee within
 the judiciary, generally considered independent of political
 forces. One case of a judge in Equatoria being dismissed in
 late 1985 by the regional administration for making political
 
 
 311
 SUDAN
 judgments sympathetic to the SPLA was taken through the
 appeals process in 1986 on the grounds that the local
 government did not legally have the authority to dismiss the
 judge. Several Equatorian judges supported the case by going
 on strike from September 1985 to March 1986.  The case was
 resolved by two of the striking judges being dismissed, the
 regional head of the court of appeals transferred to Malakal,
 and the judge who was originally dismissed being sent to serve
 in Khartoum's traffic court.
 The trials of former Nimeiri officials continued in 1986, most
 notably the "Falasha" trial of Omer al Tayeb, Nimeiri's Vice
 President and head of his secret police, for participation in
 the airlift of Ethiopian Jews to Israel in 1985. These trials
 were technically conducted under Nimeiri's National Security
 Act (1973), which permits special courts for security
 offenses. However, the transitional Government chose to press
 criminal charges and the procedures have followed those of the
 standard courts. Omer al Tayeb was sentenced to 20 years in
 prison and fined for abuse of power, intimidation, blackmail,
 agitation, and bribery. For the Falasha airlift itself, al
 Tayeb received two sentences of life imprisonment for ordering
 state security to work for a foreign power and for endangering
 the independence of Sudan, and a fine equivalent to $6 million
 for obtaining wealth illegally.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 There were no complaints of governmental interference with the
 privacy of ordinary Sudanese citizens. Refugees, however,
 have been rounded up in Khartoum and either detained or fined
 for not having their documents with them.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Government actively affirms freedom of speech and the
 press, although there are still restrictions on freedom of
 assembly (see Section 2.b.). During the first free election
 campaign in 17 years in April 1986, there was widespread
 expression of opinion by over 40 political parties and a
 still-growing number of independent and party newspapers. The
 Government closed its two major daily newspapers in August
 while debating whether it should own newspapers in a
 democratic society.
 The transitional Government approved new regulations to ensure
 the independence from strict government control, of Sudan
 Radio and Television Corporation and the Sudan News Agency.
 The new Government has not implemented these regulations, but
 apparently the Sudanese News Agency (SUNA), Sudan Radio, and
 Sudan Television have attempted to be nonpartisan,
 independent, and neutral.
 Subtle curbs, however, do exist on freedom of expression.
 After the August incident in which the SPLA shot down a
 civilian airliner, the Prime Minister went on record saying
 that further contact with the SPLA would be considered
 treasonous, as would publications sympathetic to the SPLA. An
 article by a professor at the University of Khartoum was
 subsequently rejected by a major daily newspaper on that
 ground. Several editions of the southern newspaper Nile Star
 
 
 312
 SUDAN
 published in Equatoria have been destroyed by local officials
 to prevent its distribution. Elsewhere in the south, pressure
 comes from military and government officials to silence
 opposition opinion.
 Due to the escalation of war in the south, the Government has
 taken over the private radio of the Sudan Council of Churches
 (SCC) in Malakal and Wau and other radio links to Khartoum.
 In Wau, the SCC radio is released for SCC use in the morning
 but commandeered by the Government for the rest of the day.
 In Malakal, local security officials control the radio,
 although they have permitted SCC to use it in their presence.
 For lack of money, the Sudanese Government has dropped
 subscriptions to all Western news services, except for Agence
 France Presse.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Sudan's new democratic Government has not yet lifted the state
 of emergency declared by ex-President Nimeiri, giving the
 Government wide control over public assembly. Although the
 Government has refrained from invoking most emergency powers,
 permits are required for large political meetings and
 demonstrations. Permits have been denied for some potentially
 controversial events such as anti-SPLA marches or
 demonstrations by radical university students.
 The transitional Constitution of 1985, still in effect,
 guarantees the rights of workers to organize and bargain
 collectively. The primary labor organizations are the
 Sudanese Workers Trade Union Federation (SWTUF), the Sudanese
 Federation of Employees Trade Unions (SFETU), and the Trade
 Unions Alliance, representing respectively blue collar,
 nonprofessional white collar, and professional white collar
 unions. Trade unions from all parts of the country are
 represented in these federations. The Sudanese labor union
 movement played an active role in the overthrow of Nimeiri in
 1985 and the formation of the transitional Government leading
 to elections in 1986. The SWTUF continues to participate in
 both regional and international labor activities.
 Strikes are legal except within the judiciary, the armed
 forces, and police, and they have been held without
 repression. Some have been declared "illegal strikes" when
 the process of negotiations and arbitration was not allowed to
 run its course before the strike (legal only as a measure of
 last resort) was called.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Islam predominates in the northern two-thirds of Sudan, while
 traditional African religions and Christianity are the major
 beliefs in the south. Small Christian (Coptic, Greek, Syrian,
 Armenian) and minuscule Jewish communities exist in the north,
 primarily in Khartoum. Non-Muslim southerners have migrated
 to nQrthern cities in increasing numbers in search of work or
 to escape the famine in the south, swelling the congregations
 of the Roman Catholic and Protestant churches there. Both
 Islam and Christianity are recognized as religions of Sudan,
 but adherents to other religious beliefs are not legally
 restricted.
 
 
 313
 SUDAN
 The current coalition partners of the Government, the Umma
 Party and the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP), are based in
 the Ansar and Khatmiyya Islamic orders respectively. The
 opposition National Islamic Front (NIF) is composed of
 fundamentalist Muslims. The transitional Constitution now in
 effect retains Islamic law and custom as the main source of
 legislation, and most southerners oppose it as inherently
 discriminatory against them. A perennial major issue of
 debate In the Constituent Assembly remains proposed amendments
 to the Constitution which redefine but retain Islamic law as
 its basis. The NIF advocates retaining strict Islamic law,
 while the Umma and DUP may accept some recognition of
 Christianity and other religions as sources of legislation in
 addition to Islam. Southern deputies and the SPLM advocate
 return to a secular constitution.
 While both Muslim and Christian missionaries are active in
 Sudan, Christians claim that they may not preach to Muslims;
 three people.were reportedly arrested in Dongola, northern
 Sudan, this year for doing so. Christian denominations have
 not been granted building permits for new churches for many
 years in contrast to the numerous mosques being constructed in
 both the north and the south. Although their congregations
 are growing rapidly, the Khartoum Christian churches have been
 confined to the buildings constructed during colonial times or
 to preaching outdoors, which requires an assembly permit.
 Christian groups have also had difficulty obtaining required
 permits for conducting relief work among displaced southerners
 in the northern cities.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Freedom of movement within Sudan has been effectively
 restricted by the expansion of the war in the south. The
 SPLA's shooting down of a civilian airliner in August halted
 traffic to southern airports for 2 months. Continuing SPLA
 threats to shoot down either civilian or military planes
 inhibited the airlift of relief supplies to the cities in risk
 of starvation, particularly Wau and Malakal. Rail and river
 transport were halted, and road transport severely affected,
 by rebel activity in most areas of the south.
 Thousands of southerners have begun fleeing north to escape
 the war. Their resettlement in northern towns has not been
 restricted, but provisions exist which could be invoked at any
 time for moving destitutes out of the cities and removing
 shanty towns.
 Sudan has welcomed approximately I million refugees and
 drought victims from Ethiopia, Uganda, and Chad, but they face
 increasing resentment from local populations which have few
 resources to share with them. For refugees, movement within
 Sudan requires specific documentation. It is becoming more
 difficult for Ethiopian refugees to leave the eastern
 settlements to work in the cities. Technically, in order to
 travel they must first obtain a work permit which is given for
 holding a specific job, not for finding work. Recently
 policies have been proposed for forced resettlement of
 refugees in rural areas and for the resettlement of Ugandan
 refugees away from the border.
 Over 500 Ethiopian refugees were expelled by Sudanese Refugee
 Commission officials in July. They were returned to the
 
 
 314
 SUDAN
 Ethiopian border after they were refused refugee status in
 Sudan. United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
 officials were only informed of these involuntary
 repatriations after the fact.
 Sudan requires exit visas for anyone leaving the country.
 This requirement can be used to restrict individuals from
 foreign travel: for example, unmarried women cannot travel
 alone and must be accompanied by a family member or other
 sponsor. Exceptions are possible but are infrequently
 granted.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: the Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Sudan held free and fair elections in April 1986 for the first
 time since 1968. Abroad spectrum of parties participated in
 these elections ranging from the Communists to the
 fundamentalist National Islamic Front (NIF), and many parties
 in the political center. A coalition Government formed in May
 includes the Umma, Democratic Unionist Party (DUP), and four
 small southern parties, with the NIF and the communists in the
 opposition. A five-member Supreme Council, with two Umma, two
 DUP, and one southern member, constitutes the collective Head
 of State. Division of power among the Constituent Assembly,
 the Council of Ministers, and the Supreme Council is broadly
 based on the transitional Constitution; but specific areas of
 authority have been gradually defined in practice, with the
 Council of Ministers, particularly the Prime Minister,
 controlling key decisions such as economic, defense, and
 foreign policy.
 Thirty-seven of 68 seats representing southern constituencies
 (of a national total of 301) remain unfilled in the National
 Assembly. Elections were not conducted in those districts due
 to security concerns related to the war. Even in the southern
 districts where elections did take place, the number of voters
 was small in relation to the population; southerners are thus
 heavily underrepresented in the current Government.
 There are only two women deputies in the National Assembly,
 and there are no women serving in the Cabinet or in other high
 office. There is one woman judge on the Court of Appeals.
 Women and men did have equal voting rights in the April
 elections.
 A national constitutional conference has been under discussion
 since the time of the transitional Government. The newly
 elected Government created a special ministry to oversee the
 convening of this conference, but no fixed date or
 arrangements have been set. Sudanese of different parties
 hold different views of the conference. Some see it as a
 forum for peace negotiations with the SPLM; others as a more
 technical body to draft specific articles for a new
 constitution. Most charge the conference with establishing
 the basis of Sudan's government, whether it should have a
 federal system, the status of Islamic law, and resolving other
 central issues of national debate. One of the key issues will
 be regional autonomy. It was a 1983 decree by Nimeiri
 dividing the south into three regions, thereby abrogating the
 1972 Addis Ababa accords, that greatly revived southern
 opposition and military insurgency. Until these issues are
 resolved, Sudan will continue under the transitional
 
 
 315
 SUDAN
 Constitution, which contains a certain ambiguity about the
 division of duties within the national Government and between
 the national Government and the regions.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The new democratic Government of Sudan has advocated a return
 to observance of human rights after the autocratic rule of
 Nimeiri. The Government has been receptive to investigations
 by international human rights organizations including Amnesty
 International, The International Commission of Jurists, and
 the Arab Human Rights Organization. Sudan ratified the
 Organization of African Unity Human and Peoples' Rights
 Charter in March 1986. Khartoum was the site of the Arab Bar
 Association's conference on human rights in the Arab world in
 December 1986 in recognition of the role played by the
 Sudanese people in toppling authoritarian rule.
 Sudan's Human Rights Organization, founded in 1985, has a
 growing membership under the direction of an executive
 committee and a trusteeship council of lawyers and academics,
 and has received grants from abroad. Its campaigns have
 concentrated on international issues, specifically a campaign
 for the release of Nelson Mandela and another for the release
 of Somali prisoners. There is debate within the organization
 over the utility and timing of future campaigns for local
 human rights issues, particularly in the south.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Sudap 's population of 21.1 million (1984) is composed of two
 dist nct cultures--Arab and black African. (There are also
 small communities of Greeks, Armenians, Syrians, and Copts.)
 Sudanese, especially those in the periphery, recognize and
 resent the Government's emphasis on central and northern
 Sudan, where the population is most fully Arabized.
 Historically, all of Sudan's governments have featured
 political and economic domination by northern Muslims
 (approximately 13 million), and, within this group, of a few
 prominent families. Two of these families lead the Umma and
 Democratic Unionist parties which form the core of the current
 coalition Government. Non-Arab and non-Muslim groups in the
 ethnically diverse south and among the Nuba of the Kordofan
 Mountains and partially Arabized Muslim groups, such as the
 Fur in the west and the Beja in the east, have begun
 mobilizing to demand a greater share of the nation's economic
 development and political power.
 Southerners coming north looking for work or to escape the war
 face social discrimination by the Muslim Arab majority. Rents
 may be artificially raised to keep southerners or refugees
 from residing in certain areas. Southern students, unable to
 attend schools in the war zones, have had difficulty finding
 places in the northern schools. This is partly due to
 overcrowded conditions, but some of those who were placed in
 secondary schools left voluntarily because they were so badly
 treated by the local population.
 While men and women retain traditionally segregated roles
 within Sudanese society, a few women play an active role in
 the professions, the press, and higher education, and they
 
 
 316
 SUDAN
 attend national and international forums. Separate
 educational facilities for males and females are the rule,
 however. Female circumcision, although illegal, is widely
 practiced throughout northern Sudan. Efforts to eradicate it
 have failed so far, despite significant concern among educated
 women.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 In the modern sector, Sudanese labor law and practice embrace
 international standards. The workweek is limited to 6 days
 and 48 hours, with a full 24-hour rest period. Custom grants
 an extra month's pay for each year's labor, as well as
 allowances for transportation and sometimes for housing.
 Prescribed minimum wages for blue collar workers are $32 per
 month and for white collar workers $96 per month. Annual
 raises must be a minimum of 5 percent of annual salary. The
 salary scale for industries sets a higher minimum wage than
 that for government workers. Under Sudanese law, the minimum
 age for workers is 16. All workers, including domestic
 servants, enjoy paid annual holidays prescribed by law.
 Sudanese labor law also prescribes health and safety
 standards, but in a country where the general standards are so
 low, conditions are poor and enforcement of standards is
 virtually nonexistent. Many Sudanese youth are self-employed
 or employed in family enterprises.
 
 
 317
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COJNTRY: SUDAN
 1984     1985     1986
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...       197.5    303.6     71.2
 LOANS ..............   ... 50.3     64.5      0.0
 GRANTS ............. ....  147.5   239.1     71.2
 A.AID ....................   146.3    149.3     71.2
 LOANS .................    0.0      3.0      D.0
 GRANTS ............. ....  146.3   149.3     71.2
 (SC.SUDP.ASSIST.)...      120.3    114.0     10.0
 B.FOOO  FOR  PEACE .......     51.1    154.3      0.0
 LOANS ..............   ... 50.3     64.5      0.0
 GRANTS ................    1.1     89.8      0.0
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ..........      50.0     64.5      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....       50.0     64.5     0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0      0.0     0.0
 TITLE  II-TOTAL .........       1.1     89.8     0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV  &  WFP.       1.1     89.4     0.0
 VOL.RELIEF  AGENCY .....       0.0      0.4      0.0
 C.OTHER  E:ON.  ASSIST...       0.1      3.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.1      0.0      0.0
 PEA:E  CORPS ......       0.1      0.0     0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.3      0.0      0.0
 OTHBR ..............     0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL.  ASSIST.-TOTAL...       46.5     46.4     17.0
 LOANS ..............        0.3      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................   46.5     46.4     17.0
 4.4AP  GRANTS ..........      45.0     45.0     16.1
 3.CREDIT  FINANCING ....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 ..INTL MIL.E0.TRNG             1.5      1.4      0.9
 ).TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER  GRANTS ........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL  ECON.  &  MIL...    244.0    350.0    88.2
 LOANS ..............   ...  50.0    54.5      0.0
 GRANTS ............. ...... 194.0  285.5     88.2
 OTHER  US  LOANS ..........      0.0      0.0      0.0
 EK-IM  BANK  LOANS .......      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL  OTHER ..............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1984     1935     19a6     1946-86
 TOTAL .........   92.9     76.9     62.6   1411.1
 IBRO               3.0      0.0      6.0    159.2
 IFC                0.0      0.0      0.0     33.2
 IDA               91.4     37.5     62.6    972.4
 103                0.0      0.0      0.0      6.0
 AOA                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFOB               3.0     38.1      0.0    11 .9
 UNDP              1.5      1.3      0.0     85.5
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0      0.0     43.9
 EE:                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
 318
