 SUDAN
 
 President Nimeiri's campaign of reconciliation with
 his principal political antagonists and rivals,
 begun in 1977, continued throughout 1978. By mid-
 September virtually all political prisoners, including
 communists, had been released. Several of the most
 prominent opposition figures had moved into senior
 positions of the Sudan Socialists Union (SSU), the
 country's sole legal political party, and some also
 into positions of authority within the government
 itself. Parliamentary elections in February-March 1978
 were held nAtionally and in the south for the Southern
 Regional Assembly. Many candidates not endorsed by the
 SSU ran and won in the north. In the south, where
 the Christian/animist population had endured a seventeen
 year civil war (1955-72) against the Muslim north,
 opposition candidates swept the elections and took over
 the regional government. In addition, constitutional
 guarantees were reinstated restoring civil liberties
 that had been withdrawn in 1975. Thus, while the
 Nimeiri regime remained authoritarian, the past year
 witnessed an increase in political freedom. The
 Government also pursued important economic development
 objectives.
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 There has been no recent incident of torture of which
 the Department of State is aware.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 While cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punish-
 ment is not practiced in Sudan, conditions in Sudanese
 prisons reflect the acute poverty of the country,
 and are not likely to improve significantly in the near
 future.
 
 (169)
 
 
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 As part of the reconciliation campaign an inter-agency
 government committee was formed in mid-1978 to review
 the state security act, which provides for measures
 designed to prevent unauthorized political activity.
 The reconciliation campaign itself resulted in the
 release of some 1,230 political prisoners. In 1975,
 following an attempted coup, amendments which were
 added to the act effectively withdrew certain civil
 liberties. It appears likely that these amendments
 will now be dropped and civil liberties restored by
 1979. Preventive detention, which is allowed under the
 Sudanese Constitution, will be retained but specific
 provisions limiting its use are expected to be restored.
 Preventive detention is used sparingly.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Other than during periods of political crisis such as
 last occurred in July, 1976 following a bloody but
 unsuccessful coup, fair public trials are the rule.
 There were no trials for political crimes during 1978.
 However, severe commodity shortages led to increasing
 official concern over hoarding, smuggling, profiteering
 and black market operations. Well publicized government
 warnings indicated that perpetrators of such crimes
 would be dealt with sternly. There were indications
 that they would be tried by state security courts
 rather than by ordinary civil tribunals. As of mid-Dec-
 ember there was no substantive information on the
 actual handling of such cases, which were only begin-
 ning to reach trial.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 Constitutional guarantees against invasion of the home
 are respected.
 2.   Government Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 In order to effectively exploit Sudan's 200 million
 acres of unused arable land, the Sudanese Government is
 
 
 actively engaged in promoting the development of this
 vast agricultural potential. These programs, which are
 designed to accomplish national unification through
 national economic development, benefit not only the
 readily accessible urban poor but also the more inacces-
 sible rural poor. In addition, the Sudan has devoted
 significant resources to subsidizing low-cost housing
 in urban areas, to expanding health care delivery
 systems and to improving both academic and vocational
 education. These areas have benefitted from the five
 percent annual real growth rate which was recorded from
 1972 to 1977.
 3.   Respect for Civil and Political Liberties Includ-
 ing
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion
 and Assembly:
 Articles in the Constitution relating to freedom of
 opinion remain suspended. Political freedoms such as
 assembly and free speech can be exercised only within
 the limits defined by the nature of a changing politi-
 cal climate. In the aftermath of President Nimeiri's
 reconciliation with his opposition, these limits appear
 to have been broadened. There is religious freedom.
 The press is controlled but not subjected to direct
 censorship by the government. The most important
 elements of the press are owned by the government or
 SSU, but are permitted to, and occasionally do, comment
 critically on domestic issues.
 Two major trade union federations in Sudan -- one
 for blue collar and the other for professional (largely
 government) workers -- both represent their members'
 interest within broad guidelines set by government
 and party. During the past year both led strikes
 which, although illegal, did not result in harsh
 government counter-measures. Instead, lengthy negotia-
 tions followed, as did a major effort by the government
 to meet legitimate workers' demands.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 Constitutional guarantees of freedom of movement within
 
 
 172
 the country were repealed by the 1975 amendments, but
 there are no restrictions currently in force. Foreign
 travel or emigration is permitted although exit permits
 are required.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 The Sudanese Socialist Union is the only legal political
 party within the country. During the past year
 most principal opposition leaders who have responded to
 President Nimeiri's offer of reconciliation have become
 members of the SSU. Measures are being considered
 which, under a broad SSU umbrella, would allow consider-
 ably greater freedom of political activity for groups
 identified with former political parties. Independent
 candidates may campaign for office upon approval of the
 SSU. If elected, they may serve in the People's
 Assembly. Candidates are elected by universal adult
 sufferage and women may vote and campaign for office.
 Although there is a woman Cabinet Minister and women
 hold various government and SSU positions, women in
 general still have the restricted status of a tradi-
 tional Muslim society. Politicians associated with
 parties or movements predating the current government
 remain at liberty to express their views in private or
 if they wish from within SSU party fora, as noted
 above. They may not attempt to organize opposition to
 the government, although in the southern region a group
 of independents with SSU permission ran in opposition
 to the regional government, won, and were allowed to
 take office.
 4.   Government Attitudes and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-Government Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 To the knowledge of the Department of State, no requests
 were made in 1978 for outside investigation of the
 human rights situation in Sudan.
 
 
