 SUDAN
 Sudan is a multiparty parliamentary democracy based on a
 transitional Constitution. Its principal government
 institutions are the Constituent Assembly, the Council of
 Ministers (Cabinet), and the Council of State that shares
 executive power with the Council of Ministers. Three major,
 and many smaller, parties contested parliamentary seats in 260
 out of 301 constituencies in free elections in 1986 and are
 represented in the unicameral Assembly. The remaining 41
 constituencies, all located in the south where conflict
 precluded elections, are unrepresented in the Assembly. In
 May Prime Minister Sadiq al Mahdi formed a new coalition
 composed of the three Main northern parties and some
 southerners. Although Islamic parties dominate the
 Government, non-Muslim southerners are politidally active.
 Since independence, Sudan has had successive democratic and
 authoritarian governments. The current system dates from the
 ouster of President Nimeiri in 1985. Most southerners oppose
 the transitional Constitution as inherently discriminatory
 because it retains Islamic law and custom as the main sources
 of legislation.
 The Sudanese People's Armed Forces (SPAF), of approximately
 75,000 men, is largely responsible for Sudan's internal and
 external security and battles the Sudanese People's Liberation
 Army (SPLA) in the south. Martial law is in effect in
 government-controlled southern regions, but much of the area
 is not under effective government authority. Domestic order
 outside the south, including enforcement of the State of
 Emergency (SOE) periodically renewed since 1985, is the shared
 responsibility of the military, police, and Ministry of
 Interior.
 Against a background of civil strife and natural disasters,
 and about 700,000 refugees from neighboring countries, the
 economy continued its downward spiral in 1988. The Government
 failed to agree to an International Monetary Fund "shadow"
 program which would set the stage for a comprehensive economic
 reform plan supported by international donors. High
 inflation, high unemployment, stagnating export earnings,
 rising imports, and an unpayable foreign debt led to major
 declines in the standard of living.
 There continued to be serious human rights violations in Sudan
 in 1988, stemming primarily from the civil war. These
 included credible reports of substantial human rights abuses
 by government forces, including government-armed militias, and
 SPLA forces in and near the contested areas of the south.
 Military operations by both sides dislocated hundreds of
 thousands of people and effectively depopulated vast areas of
 the south. Estimates ranged up to 2 million displaced
 persons, including 360,000 forced to flee into neighboring
 Ethiopia. Until late in the year, elements of the competing
 forces frequently interfered or failed to cooperate with
 international relief efforts in order to gain advantage in the
 civil war. As a result of such interference, and of
 government negligence or inefficiency, many displaced persons
 suffered from severe malnutrition, and there were many deaths
 due to starvation and disease. Outside the south, Sudan's
 parliamentary democracy continued to operate with openness,
 and national issues were candidly debated in the media and
 public forums. In August the Government toughened the SOE
 after heavy rains and floods left hundreds of thousands
 homeless. The Prime Minister appointed a committee chaired by
 
 
 346
 SUDAN
 the Attorney General to implement the decree, which banned
 strikes and demonstrations, imposed the death penalty for
 sedition, and expanded the Government's police powers. SOE
 laws were not widely applied in 1988, but were used on
 occasion to ban marches and demonstrations. At the end of
 1988, the Government had delayed its efforts to implement an
 Islamic criminal code due to strong domestic opposition.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Most deaths in the civil war in 1988 resulted from starvation
 caused by inefficiency and negligence as well as both sides'
 interference with or failure to cooperate with relief
 efforts. In certain areas, soldiers and militiamen were
 accused of attacking groups fleeing the conflict, withholding
 relief food from civilians, preventing civilians from growing
 their own food, and trading in confiscated relief supplies
 intended for civilians. As a result, there were thousands of
 civilian deaths from starvation and disease. Limited access
 to the area has prevented an accurate assessment of the number
 of deaths from starvation. However, estimates of deaths have
 ranged from 100,000 to 250,000, with some observers believing
 the number could be even higher.
 There were also credible reports in 1988 that noncombatant
 civilian tribespeople in areas of the civil war were killed
 directly or indirectly in the fighting, primarily by the SPLA
 and government-supported tribal militias. Estimates varied
 widely but probably numbered in the hundreds. Allegations
 against the Government focused heavily on its arming tribal
 militias in past years--notably, the Misseriyyah, the Baggara,
 the Rizeigat, and the Murahilin--which have continued to
 attack longstanding tribal opponents, primarily the Dinka, who
 are the predominant force in the SPLA.
 In 1988 the Sudanese press reported on a number of killings
 due to the civil conflict. While the credibility of these
 reports varied widely, they often were based on eyewitness
 accounts. According to one report, 86 Nubans and southern
 Sudanese agricultural workers were killed by unknown gunmen
 south of Gedaref on April 3. The victims' hands reportedly
 were tied behind their backs and their bodies dumped in a
 canal. Another report stated that in early May, Baggara
 militia attacked about 200 displaced southerners walking from
 Bahr El Ghazal to a relief camp in Southern Darfur. The
 Baggara reportedly killed most of the men and abducted many of
 the women and children as slaves. About 10 percent of the
 original group reached their original destination. Members of
 the Bahr Al Ghazal Fertit tribe reported in June that five
 members of their tribe had been killed in cold blood in Wau in
 May by government security forces. Some reports of killings
 did not appear in the press, apparently due in part to
 government efforts to prevent publicity. For example, there
 were credible reports that intercommunal violence in the Nuba
 mountains of Southern Kordofan took scores of lives in
 November.
 Many of the accounts concerned SPL killings. For example, an
 account in the newspaper Renewal, published by the Catholic
 Press Institute, stated that when SPLA forces raided a village
 
 
 347
 SUDAN
 near Juba in May, 10 villagers were killed, mostly by mines
 placed by the SPLA on the path out of the village, and that
 one man had been shot at point blank range. The witness said
 the SPLA force looted property, raped women, and took away
 captives. This and other accounts reported that SPLA mines
 had caused many deaths and injuries in the area. In June a
 Ugandan government newspaper accused the SPLA of the killing,
 torture, and rape of Ugandan and Sudanese refugees along the
 Sudan-Uganda border. The SPLA has been widely accused of
 trying and executing senior members of its own ranks who
 disagreed with SPLA leader John Garang, including some
 dissenters who favored negotiations with the Government. In
 July the Government radio station announced that the SPLA had
 executed Khol Acuil, a former Vice President of the High
 Executive Council for the Southern Region, and four other
 men. Reports of SPLA executions of political dissidents have
 not been confirmed.
 Several human rights organizations released studies in 1988 on
 the human rights situation in Sudan. In July Amnesty
 International (AI) published a special 10-page study of human
 rights in Sudan following the collapse of the Nimeiri regime.
 The AI document, while welcoming positive measures such as the
 repeal of two laws allowing political prisoners to be det-ained
 without trial and the restoration of political parties,
 reported incidents of political killings and extrajudicial
 executions on both sides and appealed to the Sudanese
 Government to investigate reported massacres of civilians by
 government forces. In April the Minority Rights Group, an
 international research and information charity based in Great
 Britain, released a study on southern Sudan by Douglas H.
 Johnson, a former employee of the Regional Ministry of Culture
 and Information in Juba. The study criticized the
 government-armed militias, accusing them of massacres and
 slavery.
 The Government has not punished military officials for human
 rights abuses in the conflict. Major General Abu Gurun,
 former Sudanese army commander in the southern garrison town
 of Wau, who has been accused of inflicting atrocities against
 civilians, including food deprivation and crucifixions, was
 transferred from the Wau command to the leadership of the
 Military Academy in Khartoum in 1988. This was generally
 considered to be a career-enhancing transfer. There has been
 no investigation of the charges against Abu Gurun.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of the Government engaging in the
 planned disappearance of people, but large movements of people
 due to war and intertribal conflict have caused thousands of
 people to lose contact with friends and families.  There were
 frequent stories of abductions of civilians by tribal militias
 and by the SPLA for forced labor. The son of a senior SPLA
 member, Joseph Oduhu,.accused the SPLA of kidnaping and
 imprisoning his father. The SPLA denied the younger Oduhu's
 charge.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Both government forces and the SPLA have been accused of
 torture and ill-treatment of civilians. In February, for
 example, army intelligence agents reportedly tortured 30
 citizens--members of a group called the General Union of
 
 
 348
 SUDAN
 Southern and Northern Fung (GUSNF)--in the Kurmuk and Qayson
 area following the recapture of those towns from the SPLA.
 In 1983 former President Nimeiri abrogated the special status
 of the south and imposed an extreme version of Shari'a law
 that provided for harsh corporal punishments known as "Hudud,"
 commonly referred to as the "September laws." Hudud
 punishments, including amputations and hanging, are still
 officially in effect, and the courts gave such sentences in
 1988. However, no Hudud sentences have actually been carried
 out since Nimeiri's overthrow in April 1985. In the meantime,
 over 400 convicted prisoners were awaiting the execution of
 Hudud sentences at the end of 1988, and the issue remained at
 the center of the national debate and conflict (see Section
 3). In March an amputation sentence was passed on a southern
 Christian, Martin Anuel Agulik. Two other persons, Hakim Kuku
 and Martin Adwin Ayil, were also sentenced to amputation in
 1988. The Sudanese press also reported one sentence of death
 by stoning for adultery.
 The courts regularly give sentences of flogging. In December
 1987, the Government announced the abolition of flogging for
 many offenses and reduced the number of lashes from 25 to 10.
 However, persons arrested for intoxication are given 40
 lashes, usually shortly after arrest. In one instance in
 1988, a southern Sudanese citizen alleged that he had been
 beaten by Muslim vigilantes for being drunk and was then
 lashed by officials.
 In June Amnesty International initiated a worldwide appeal to
 influence the Government of Sudan to repeal amputation and
 flogging as legal penalties.
 Police treatment of persons under arrest is sometimes harsh,
 and police patrols harassed people on occasion in 1988. In
 February an Irish nurse working for an Irish volunteer medical
 service agency in Khartoum reportedly was stopped while
 driving home from work by a police patrol and beaten.
 Prison conditions are generally poor. Local treatment of
 prisoners varies widely--some are kept in shackles
 continuously, while others may be allowed to return home
 nights.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Sudan's Code of Criminal Procedure, modeled after British law,
 requires a warrant by a Magistrate for arrest. Arrests made
 at the scene of a crime must be followed by a statement of
 charges within a specific period of time. The accused must be
 brought before a court within 48 hours of arrest, informed of
 the charges against him, and permitted legal counsel. Only
 certain capital offenses do not permit bail. However, under
 the SOE, the Government has wide powers of arrest and
 preventive detention for an indefinite period which
 technically can be invoked at any time. Preventive detentions
 under the SOE appear to be rare in northern Sudan. There were
 no reports in 1988 of persons held incommunicado in Sudanese
 prisons although such detentions for short periods may
 occasionally occur.
 In southern and western areas, military authorities are
 empowered to detain people without charge if suspected of
 cooperation or sympathy with the rebellion. There are no
 reliable reports of how many persons were so detained in 1988,
 
 
 349
 SUDAN
 including "prisoners of war." In May the SPLA announced it
 would cease to take prisoners of war claiming this had always
 been the Army's policy and that it intended to adopt the same
 course. However, in July the SPLA returned through the
 International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) a captured
 Army officer, and there were also other reports of SPLA
 prisoners held by the Army.
 There are few, if any, political detainees or prisoners in
 northern Sudan. Professor Ushari Mahmoud, coauthoe of a
 well-known 1987 report on the El Daein massacre and slavery in
 Sudan, was detained in late 1987 for the second time since the
 publication of his report. He was released in January 1988.
 In December 1988, 16 alleged coup plotters were arrested, 9
 from the military and 7 civilians. At the end of the year
 they were still under detention.
 Public officials occasionally use detention as a method of
 punishment in personal disputes. It was alleged in June that
 the then-governor of Upper Nile detained seven senior regional
 civil servants because they had coauthored a letter to the
 Prime Minister accusing the governor of corruption. The
 governor was also reported to have had the Director of his
 region's coordination office in Khartoum arrested after
 learning he intended to run for the governor's position.
 There were no known cases of involuntary exile. With regard
 to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The legal system comprises a variety of courts involving the
 Supreme Court, civil, criminal, Shari'a (Islamic), and tribal
 courts. In 1986 the National Assembly abolished the executive
 power to form Special State Security Courts, thus ensuring
 that trials of all prisoners would take place in the regular
 criminal courts.
 The judicial process involves a police or magistrate's
 investigation, an arrest warran, the arrest, and a trial
 before a panel of three Judges. The appointment of judges is
 made by a committee within the judiciary. Trials are public
 except when the accused requests a closed trial. Defendants
 have the right to present evidence, speak on their own behalf,
 and obtain legal representation. There are legal aid services
 for the poor, but their resources are limited. The Attorney
 General's office apportions legal aid to those facing serious
 charges and to those most in need. A case may be appealed
 through the full series of courts from the magistrate level to
 the High Court of Appeals. Christian law graduates must take
 a proficiency examination in Islamic law in order to practice
 law in Sudan.
 In rural areas, customary tribal law usually is observed and
 enforced, even though many cases in the provinces are heard by
 nonlocal judges from Khartoum who may be generally unfamiliar
 with specific tribal laws. Rural disputes most often concern
 land, water, and family matters.
 The post of Justice Minister was created in the new Cabinet
 formed in May and given responsibility for administering the
 court system. The person appointed to this post was also
 appointed Attorney General. The Sudan Bar Association, which
 often is highly critical of the Government, questioned how the
 
 
 350
 SUDAN
 judiciary could be independent under the authority of a
 politician who was also the nation's highest prosecutor.
 Although the executive branch generally complies with judicial
 orders, there is tension between the executive and judicial
 branches. This tension surfaced in March, when citizens of
 Darfur combined with local residents in Khartoum in a peaceful
 march protesting the lack of security in Darfur. A government
 minister, without legal authority, directed first a judge and
 then the Chief Justice to order the police to break up the
 demonstration under authority of the SOE. When the Chief
 Justice also refused, the Minister reportedly threatened him.
 The Government refused to apologize for the Minister's
 behavior.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family,Home, or
 Correspondence
 Outside the combat zones, there were few complaints of
 Governmental surveillance or interference with the privacy of
 ordinary Sudanese citizens. There were no known accusations
 of improper monitoring of correspondence. The scarcity of
 operating telephones in Sudan makes wiretapping impractical.
 Search warrants are ordinarily required to search private
 dwellings, but whether these documents are normally obtained
 is not known. There is a perception among northerners that
 the large number of displaced southerners in Khartoum
 represents a security threat. However, tens of thousands of
 southerners have resettled in Khartoum with minimal government
 resistance. Refugees have been harassed for living in
 Khartoum and other urban areas without permission. Some have
 been detained or fined for not carrying identity papers.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 There is freedom of speech and press in Sudan. Parliamentary
 debate is wide-ranging and reflects the deep political,
 ethnic, and religious differences in the country. The print
 media are lively and express a wide variety of political
 opinion, often sharply critical of Government officials and
 their policies. Each major political party has its own
 newspaper. In addition, other publications present a full
 range of opinions from the Islamic right to the Communist
 left. There are two independent English-language newspapers
 which are prosouth and antigovernment. These newspapers
 reported extensively on human rights abuses in Sudan. Radio
 and television are state owned and tend to support Government
 policies.
 There are signs, however, that the Government is considering
 placing limits on press freedom. An initial draft of a new
 law to regulate the press, drawn up by a professional
 committee headed by the well-respected journalist, Bashir
 Muhammad Sayyid, was rejected by the Information Minister as
 overly lenient to journalists. The Prime Minister and other
 government officials made a number of statements in 1988
 critical of the press including a threat to liquidate the
 Sudan Times which has been the most vigorous newspaper in
 reporting human rights abuses. After his appointment in May,
 the new Information Minister replaced the Director of Sudan
 Television with a new Director who reportedly favors a
 stronger "Islamic" slant in television broadcasts. In
 response to foreign reporting critical of the Government's
 handling of distribution of relief supplies to flood victims,
 
 
 351
 SUDAN
 the Information Minister announced in August a series of new
 regulations under the SOE imposing censorship on the
 international press in Sudan. The Prime Minister subsequently
 supported the measures, but in the face of heavy domestic and
 international criticism, the measures were rescinded within a
 week of their promulgation.
 Academic freedom is generally respected. The university
 campus in Juba has been the focal point of much student and
 teacher unrest. The university was open as security and food
 conditions permitted but was closed as of the end of the year.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 While demonstrations and marches periodically occur in Sudan,
 the Government formally banned such activities in August when
 the SOE law was revised. Under a special SOE declared for
 Khartoum in December, the Government banned a large peace
 demonstration planned for December 21. Nevertheless,
 demonstrations took place in Khartoum and elsewhere at year's
 end over increased prices of consumer goods, which left at
 least one person dead and several injured. The Government
 quickly rescinded the price increases.
 In May government representatives picketed a meeting of the
 southern parliamentary opposition group, the Union of Sudan
 African Parties (USAP). They reportedly recorded license
 numbers of vehicles and names of persons at the meeting and
 called out participants for questioning about the
 proceedings. A senior Government official later came to the
 meeting and accused the participants of being "rebels" and
 SPLA sympathizers.
 There are many professional groups in Sudan, e.g., the Sudan
 Bar Association, which meet regularly. In general, the
 activities of these groups outside the south and west have not
 been affected by the conflict and the SOE, and the Government
 does not normally intervene in their proceedings.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it pertains to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Sudan is a multireligious country. Islam and Christianity are
 formally recognized as religions of Sudan, but adherents to
 other religious beliefs are not legally restricted. The
 people of the five northern regions and the capital are
 predominantly Muslim, although the influx of over 1.5 million
 displaced southerners has begun to alter this balance; those
 from the three southern provinces are animist or Christian.
 Religious groups must register with the Ministry of Religious
 Affairs.
 In May six southern Sudanese Christian catechists were
 reportedly arrested, sentenced by a local Islamic court,
 flogged, and imprisoned by the Southern Kordofan Provincial
 Government for attempting to perform maintenance on a church
 building. After publication of their story in the Sudanese
 press, the six were released from prison on bail pending a
 review of their case before a Magistrate. The case remained
 unresolved at the end of 1988.
 Religious differences are a source of friction among the
 various groups, and the civil war has strong religious
 
 
 352
 SUDAN
 overtones. In an interview with a British journalist, a
 member of a government-armed tribal militia in Southern Darfur
 justified his militia's raids on Dinka villages across the
 provincial border in Bahr Al Ghazal as a "Holy War," a
 "Jihad." The Government is concerned, however, that the war
 not be seen by the outside world solely as a Muslim-Christian
 conflict and often describes it as Ethiopian-sponsored
 Communist aggression.
 A number of incidents and statements exacerbated sectarian
 tensions in 1988. On a factfinding trip to Southern Kordofan,
 Sudan Times editor Bona Malwal reported that "in Kordofan and
 Darfur, Islamic Fundamentalism, fanned by primitiveness and
 ignorance, takes an extremist and intolerant view of other
 religions in the area. Christian churches are routinely
 burned, destroyed, or closed down, and Christians murdered,
 imprisoned, or banished." The Catholic Bishop Paridi Taban of
 Torit Diocese in Equatoria accused the Government of racism
 and discrimination, and the Catholic Archbishop of Juba,
 Paolino Lukudu, stated his belief that the Government was
 engaged in an "extermination program."
 In May then-governor of Kordofan Mohammad Ali Al Mardi accused
 the Catholic Church of sending SPLA saboteurs to Khartoum
 through the Church's relief activities for displaced
 southerners in El Obeid. The governor ordered the Church to
 stop helping the travel of displaced southerners to the
 national capital. Christians in the capital periodically
 complain that they have difficulty obtaining government
 permission to build new churches. For example, the press
 reported in 1988 that the Government ordered the demolition of
 a partially constructed chapel in the Christian cemetery,
 which it claimed had not been authorized by the Government.
 Demolition had not yet occurred, however, at the end of the
 year.
 d. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation.
 Freedom of movement within the country is impeded by the civil
 war, an inadequate transportation infrastructure, and
 Government restrictions. Sudan continues to require exit
 visas for anyone leaving the country, a requirement that can
 be used to restrict persons from foreign travel. Married
 Sudanese women must receive their husband's or other male
 relative's permission to travel abroad. By regulation,
 unmarried Sudanese women cannot travel alone but must be
 accompanied by a family member or other sponsor. In practice,
 many are able to travel unescorted. Foreigners must register
 with the police upon entering the country, obtain permission
 to move from one location to another, and register again upon
 arriving at the new location.
 The number of civilian victims of the war increased in 1988,
 with long streams of southerners moving north--mostly Dinka
 women, children, and old people--suffering from severe
 malnutrition. Their plight was exacerbated by the
 maldistribution of food supplies, inconvenient siting of
 feeding centers, mistreatment by some local townspeople,
 military harassment of foreign relief workers, and a lack of
 much humanitarian assistance from the regionally based Army.
 By the end of 1988, approximately 2 million Sudanese had been
 displaced, with almost 1.5 million taking refuge in
 "unplanned" shanty towns around Khartoum. Over the past 2
 years, about 360,000 Sudanese, mostly young males, have walked
 
 
 353
 SUDAN
 to refugee camps in southern Ethiopia arriving in very poor
 health. Many of those walking out of the south have died on
 the way. Because sufficient food did not reach a number of
 towns in Sudan where internally displaced people gathered,
 many died of starvation.
 There were a number of reports of interference by Sudanese
 military with food supplies of needy people in southern
 Sudan. In February the Army seized, allegedly for high
 priority military operations, 20 trucks belonging to a foreign
 relief agency that were being used for delivering food to
 needy people in southern Sudan. In the southern garrison
 towns of Wau and Malakal, some members of the Sudanese Army
 reportedly sold relief supplies at high prices on the black
 market. The Army also allegedly prevented citizens from
 bringing food into or out of these towns without permission
 and in Malakal severely restricted the growing of food crops.
 In the key province of Kordofan, the regional military
 government reportedly placed a low priority on delivering food
 to camps for displaced southerners which resulted in many
 cases of starvation. However, in September the new governor
 in Kordofan intervened vigorously to ensure that relief
 supplies were expedited to towns receiving an influx of
 displaced persons. Subsequently, the Prime Minister visited
 Southern Kordofan and announced publicly that displaced
 southerners were to be treated humanely and that reception
 centers would be created near the regional border to care for
 them. An emergency airlift of relief supplies to the area was
 carried out with government cooperation in October.
 Prior to this intervention, southern politicians and others in
 Khartoum charged that distribution of relief supplies flown
 into the country in August to aid victims of the floods and
 rains was tainted by favoritism and corruption. According to
 these observers, supplies were allocated on the basis of
 political affiliation and religion; those needing the supplies
 most, the displaced southerners living in the shanty towns,
 received little assistance.
 Early in the year, Prime Minister Sadiq al Mahdi and SPLA
 Leader John Garang agreed to a plan by the International
 Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) to supply food to civilian
 victims of the war in both government and SPLA-held towns in
 the war zone, but delaying tactics by both sides prevented
 implementation of the plan for nearly a year. The ICRC
 surveyed six sites, and was finally able to initiate relief
 operations in early December.
 Sudan's foreign refugee population, which consists largely of
 Ethiopians, Ugandans, and Chadians, fluctuates between 800,000
 and 1 million. Sudan has not forced the repatriation of
 refugees, and those registered with the Ministry of Labor can
 work at most occupations. The Government seeks to settle
 refugees, sometimes forcefully, in the countryside, but large
 numbers have settled in cities, especially the capital area,
 in search of jobs, shelter, and food. Exit visas for refugees
 accepted for resettlement outside Sudan have often been
 delayed without a clear explanation after approval by the
 receiving country and Sudanese security authorities.
 About half of the 300,000 Ethiopian famine victims accepted by
 Sudan during the famine emergency of 1984-85 remain in Sudan.
 Fearing an additional influx of up to 500,000 refugees from
 Ethiopia in search of food, the Sudanese Government announced
 
 
 354
 SUDAN
 in October 1987 that it would no longer accept refugees. It
 later qualified the announcement, saying it would accept
 genuine political refugees but not more famine victims. Since
 October 1987, about 15,000 new political refugees have come
 from Ethiopia and were being helped by the Sudanese Government
 and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
 as were 15,000 earlier arrivals who were returned to refugee
 camps after having settled on their own elsewhere in Sudan.
 The Government continues to cooperate with aid agencies to
 provide assistance to refugees.
 There is popular sentiment in some areas settled by refugees
 to make them a scapegoat for endemic economic problems, and
 there were degrading incidents in 1988 involving refugees.
 One of the most serious was an attack on at least 102
 Ethiopian refugees by newly recruited soldiers near Gedaref,
 reacting to an inaccurate report of the killing of an army
 sergeant by Ethiopians. According to the UNHCR, most of the
 victims reported the extortion of property including
 identification cards. While no one was killed in the attack,
 the 92 refugees who were injured were refused treatment by
 doctors in the Gedaref hospital. In July a refugee girl who
 had attempted suicide reportedly died a few days after being
 physically removed from the Gedaref hospital and denied
 treatment by several Sudanese medical facilities because she
 was Ethiopian.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Sudan's multiparty parliamentary system, which guarantees the
 right of citizens to change their government, does not extend
 to large parts of southern Sudan. Of the 301-member
 Constituent Assembly, 41 seats are not filled as the civil war
 prevented elections from being held in roughly half the
 districts in southern Sudan in 1986. Outside the south, the
 current Assembly was elected to a 4-year term in a hard-fought
 and fair election. The Government is based on a transitional
 Constitution. In addition to the Assembly, a 28-person
 Council of Ministers, and the 5-member Council of State are
 other chief governmental institutions.
 In May a new coalition government was formed, again led by
 Prime Minister Sadiq al Mahdi and consisting mainly of the
 three largest northern-based parties, the Umma Party, the
 Democratic Unionist Party (DUP), and the National Islamic
 Front (NIF). In late December the DUP withdrew from the
 coalition. At the end of the year, it was unclear whether the
 DUP would rdturn to the coalition or whether a new coalition
 would be formed without the DUP. With the exceptions of the
 Communist and tiny Ba'ath parties, political parties in Sudan
 tend to be based on either a religious sect or tribal group.
 The Umma, the DUP, and the NIF are based in the Ansar and
 Khatmiyya Islamic orders and the Muslim Brotherhood,
 respectively. The opposition Union of Sudan African Parties
 (USAP) is a mostly Christian grouping.
 Sudan's fragile democracy has repeatedly been tested and
 deadlocked on the political/religious issue of the
 constitutional basis of government. The new coalition
 Government committed itself to the passage of new Islamic laws
 within 2 months, and in September, the Council of Ministers
 forwarded to the Constituent Assembly the Attorney General's
 proposed draft of a strict Islamic-based criminal code
 featuring Hudud punishments. The draft code encountered much
 
 
 355
 SUDAN
 opposition and was referred in October to a parliamentary
 committee. The goal of holding a national conference to draw
 up a new constitution remained unmet, although in December the
 Constituent Assembly approved a plan to hold such a
 conference. Southern deputies and the SPLA advocate a return
 to a secular constitution. A special ministry created in 1986
 to oversee the convening of a constitutional convention was
 transformed into a constitutional commission in 1988.
 The Prime Minister has important appointive powers. Other
 than Constituent Assembly members, there are no elected
 government officials in Sudan. Regional, provincial, and
 local government officials are appointed by the Prime
 Minister. Frequently the appointees are unpopular in their
 assigned areas, and regional government for many parts of
 Sudan is ineffective. Local officials are also strapped by
 serious shortcomings in transportation and communication
 infrastructure. In some areas, most notably in the south and
 far west, where civil order has deteriorated seriously, local
 officials have been unable to provide security and meet other
 basic responsibilities. In response, the Government has begun
 a program of restoring traditional "native" administration in
 many areas.
 .In the south particularly, governors are still appointed more
 for their loyalty to the central Government than their
 acceptability to their constituents. The Council of the
 South, a largely powerless body created in 1986 by the Prime
 Minister to oversee southern affairs, is also staffed with the
 Prime Minister's appointees. The Council was dissolved in
 1988, then reinstituted under a new Council Chairman, but the
 remaining Council seats had not been filled by the end of 1988.
 Women and men have equal voting rights in Sudan. Non-Muslims
 can reach high levels in the military and the civil service.
 There are 3 Christians in the 28-member Cabinet, and 1 on the
 5-man Council of State. Two out of a total of 260 sitting
 members in the Constituent Assembly are female, both members
 of the National Islamic Front. The highest ranking female in
 government is the Minister of State for Education.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government is acutely.sensitive to local or foreign
 criticism of its human rights performance, most recently on
 the issue of distribution of food relief. Human rights issues
 are openly discussed and debated both in official and private
 circles. However, the Government did not institute any public
 investigations of alleged human rights abuses in 1988, and it
 did not reply to AI's special study of human rights in Sudan
 following the collapse of the Nimeiri regime (published July
 1988), which had earlier been forwarded to the Government for
 comment.
 Sudan has several active organizations that monitor human
 rights in the country, including the Sudan Human Rights
 Association (SHRA), the Sudan Bar Association (SBA) and the
 Sudan Catholic Bishops' Conference. Neither the SHRA nor the
 SBA has produced in-depth reports of human rights abuses in
 Sudan.
 
 
 356
 SUDAN
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Sudan's population of 21.1 million (1984) is composed
 primarily of two distinct cultures--Arab and black African.
 Historically, all of Sudan's governments have featured
 political and economic domination by northern Muslims
 (approximately 13 million). Various tribal groups in the
 south, especially those who are non-Muslim or non-Arab have
 demanded a greater share of the nation's economic development
 and political power, and greater recognition of Sudan's
 African as well as Arab culture. Southerners coming north
 looking for work or to escape the war often face social
 discrimination by the Muslim Arab majority. For example,
 southern students, unable to attend schools in the war zones,
 have had difficulty finding places in the northern schools,
 although the Government ostensibly ensures that a certain
 number of places are reserved for them.
 Men and women retain traditionally segregated roles, and
 Sudanese laws favor men. There were reports that Sudanese
 families displaced by the war and facing starvation generally
 allowed their daughters to starve to death first in the hope
 of providing their sons with enough food to survive. Under
 the Islamic law of inheritance, women receive only half as
 much property as men. The incidence of female circumcision,
 although illegal, remains high, and the practice is ingrained
 in the culture of many groups. Owing to tradition and social
 circumstances, women receive less education than men, although
 legally they are entitled to equal opportunities. They have
 fewer employment opportunities, but some women play an active
 role in government, the professions, the media, and higher
 education. There are a number of professional women heading
 Government ministry departments, research institutes, and
 other institutions such as schools.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The Sudanese labor movement played an active role in the
 overthrow of Nimeiri in 1985 and in the formation of the
 Transitional Military Government leading to restoration of
 democracy in 1986. Unions have become a strong institution in
 Sudan. The 1985 Transitional Constitution, amended in March
 1987, provides for the right of workers to form and join
 unions. Unions elect their own leaders without interference
 from the Government, although all political parties, both
 within and without the Government, take a keen interest in the
 outcome. The unions' leaders are generally responsive to
 members' concerns.
 The primary labor organizations are the Sudanese Workers Trade
 Union Federation (SWTUF) and the Sudanese Employees and Clerks
 Federation (SFETU). The SWTUF, which represents blue-collar
 workers, has been a stable organization since 1985. Its
 white-collar counterpart, the SFETU, underwent major changes
 in December 1987, when the Government required it to split
 into three separate federations: employees, professionals,
 and teachers. (However, this division, intended to limit the
 power of the Communists by isolating them in the smallest of
 the three new federations, was generally supported by the rank
 and file.) In addition, a Trade Union Alliance composed
 mostly of white-collar workers and professionals serves as an
 informal lobbying group. Sudanese unions actively participate
 
 
 357
 SUDAN
 in Arab and African labor organizations and the International
 Labor Organization (ILO). Several small Sudanese unions are
 affiliated with the Communist-controlled World Federation of
 Trade Unions. The invited guests and observers at the 1988
 General Congress of the SWTUF included officials of the Arab
 and African regional bodies with which it was affiliated and
 representatives of counterpart African and Arab federations
 and of more distant national labor centers such as the American
 Federation of Labor-Congress of Industrial Organizations.
 There is no "labor party" in Sudan. Individual unions tend to
 support the party .adhered to by the union's own elected
 leadership. The blue-collar unions tend to be more Islamic
 and traditional and the white-collar ones more secular,
 although there are exceptions. One important noneconomic
 issue on which most unions opposed the Government in 1988 was
 the imposition of a new Shari'a (Islamic) legal code.
 Strikes are ordinarily legally permissible, except in the
 judiciary, armed forces, and police. The SOE imposed in
 August temporarily banned all strikes. The law stipulates
 that the process of negotiations and arbitration must run its
 course before a union may strike. There were, however, a
 number of strikes in 1988 which did not pursue this process.
 Although these strikes were technically illegal, the
 Government generally tolerated these strikes and took no legal
 action against participants. Reacting to a plan of bank
 employees to strike in protest against the Government's plan
 to privatize publicly owned banks, the Finance Minister in
 July charged union leaders with manipulating the debate over
 privatization for their own personal and political goals. The
 Minister said the Sudanese Government might draft new labor
 laws to prevent strikes in vital industries, such as finance,
 water, and electricity. Most strikes in 1988 were motivated
 primarily by economic considerations, such as demands for pay
 raises and improved working conditions. Some strikes,
 particularly after the formation of the Government coalition
 in May, also had political goals.
 b. The Right To Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The Transitional Constitution of 1985 provides for the right
 to organize and to bargain collectively. In 1988 unions
 representing water and electrical workers, railroad workers,
 agricultural workers, bank employees, and teachers, among
 others, bargained with management (in all these cases the
 Government) for better salaries and working conditions for
 their workers. There are no official constraints on union
 organization. The catastrophic condition of the Sudanese
 economy is the primary constraint on the creation of jobs and
 expansion of union membership. Many observers believe that
 state-owned enterprises maintain unnecessarily inflated
 employment rolls and are unwilling or unable to challenge the
 unions and reduce the rolls. There were no instances in 1988
 of any form of.intimidation of union officials. This type of
 activity has been absent since the overthrow of the Nimeiri
 dictatorship in 1985. Labor legislation is applied uniformly
 throughout the country, although at present it has limited
 applicability in the war areas. There are no export
 processing zones in Sudan.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Government law strictly forbids forced or compulsory labor.
 There were, however, continued allegations of slavery in Sudan
 
 
 358
 SUDAN
 in 1988, and the issue remained controversial in the country.
 The Government has denied that slavery exists. Observers have
 claimed, however, that no Sudanese government has been able to
 eradicate the centuries-old practice of slavery and that it
 still exists in remote parts of Sudan. According to some
 reports, the civil war, particularly the Government's practice
 of arming tribal militia, and economic pressures revived
 slavery.   There have been allegations of persons working
 without pay as cattle boys and domestic servants. Some
 allegedly were abducted during raids by members of the
 Rizeigat and Misseriyyah government-armed tribal militias on
 rival tribes, primarily the Dinka. There were also reports of
 Dinka parents selling their children to prevent their probable
 starvation. The southern-run English-language newspapers
 published occasional allegations of abductions and
 enslavements of rival tribespeople. In February the Sudan
 Times reported interviewing an escaped slave described as a
 12-year-old Dinka boy. According to his account, the boy and
 six other members of his family were abducted in January 1987
 from their village in Bahr Al Ghazal by members of the
 Misseriyyah militia. The boy said he had been forced to work
 for a year on a farm in Southern Kordofan belonging to one of
 the militiamen who captured him.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The legal minimum age for workers is 16. This law is enforced
 in the official or wage economy. Cases of child labor are
 widespread in the parallel economy due to the depressed
 condition of the Sudanese economy. In rural areas, children
 assist their families with agricultural work.
 e. Acceptable Conditibns of Work
 Sudanese laws prescribe health and safety standards, but in
 general, working conditions are poor. -Enforcement of
 environmental standards is minimal. Unemployment and
 underemployment are major problems in Sudan, particularly
 among youth. Graduates, even of such prestigious schools as
 Khartoum University, face severe difficulties in finding any
 type of employment after completing their education.
 Sudanese labor laws and practices, by and large, conform to
 international standards.
 The workweek is limited to 6 days and 48 hours, with a 1-day
 rest period on Friday. Laborers are given an extra month's
 pay for each year's labor. Most workers receive allowances
 for transportation and some for housing. These standards are
 effectively enforced in the official economy, in both the
 public and private sectors. However, in rural areas and in
 the parallel economy, these standards are not enforced. The
 minimum wage was raised in December to about $67 per month at
 the official exchange rate, or $26 per month at a new, legal
 parallel rate which closely reflects the free market. This
 salary is far from sufficient for subsistence in urban areas,
 and workers must rely on supplementary means such as some
 farming, second jobs, or help from the extended family.
 Salaries in private industry are generally higher than those
 in the public sector.
 
 
 359
