SUDAN
Despite growing international attention in 1993 to the dismal record of human ri^ts abuses in Sudan, the situation continued to deteriorate as the country's increasingly isolated and repressive government, controlled by Hassan al-Turabi's National Islamic Front (NIF) and nominally headed by Lt. General Omar Hassan Ahmed al-Bashir, moved to consolidate its power. The regime, which began the year with a "diplomatic offensive" designed to forestall mtemational criticism, including the release of several political detainees, soon clamped down when it became apparent that this tactic would not be effective. In March 1993, the UN Commission on Human Rights expressed its "deep concern" at the serious violations of human rights in Sudan, including summary executions, arbitrary arrest and detention, forced displacement and torture.
The Commission on Human Rights also called for the appointment of a Special Rapporteur to investigate human rights conditions in Sudan. Special Rapporteur Caspar Biro of Hungary, whose appointment was approved by the United Nations Economic and Social Council in July, travelled on fact-fmding missions to Sudan in September and December and "firmly conclude[d]" in a report to the Commission "that grave and widespread violations of human rights by government agents and officials, as well as abuses by members of the [Sudan People's Liberation Army] factions in zones controlled by them, continue to take place."
State Department and congressional condemnation of human rights practices in Sudan also increased during the year, culminating in August when the State Department designated Sudan as a state sponsor of terrorism.
Seeking to blunt international criticism of its human rights abuses, the Sudanese government intensified a strategy of portraying itself as a victim of Western hostility, principally inspired by the United States, toward its Islamic orientation. The Sudanese delegation to the UN Commission on Human Rights characterized reports of abuses as "politically motivated and largely based on rqjorts fi"om dubious sources" such as, in its view. Médecins sans Frontières, Africa Watch and Amnesty International. The latter group, the Sudanese government declared, "is no longer credible and not as such qualified to address any matter relating to the Sudan." More recently, in late February and March 1994, governmental officials called the Special Rapporteur's report "a flagrant blasphemy and a deliberate insult to the Islamic Religion" and attacked Mr. Biro as "an enemy of Islam."
The 1993 State Department report on Sudan, like those of the two previous years, is a generally comprehensive and accurate analysis of the present government's appalling human rights record. All areas required to be included by the State Department's instructions for preparation of the report are dealt with in
346
_SUDAN
reasonable detail. The consequences of the civil war and the Arabization and Islamization campaign, including the implementation of Islamic law (Shari'd) and discrimination against non-Muslims, are thoroughly addressed. The report does, however, have three significant shortcomings. First, it fails to discuss official repression of non-fimdamentalist Muslims, and displays a tendency to make related generalizations regarding Islam in Sudan. Second, there is inadequate focus on the egregious abuses of human rights in the Nuba Mountain region of south Kordofan. Finally, there is no discussion of the government's attacks On the legal profession.
The report makes no mention of abuses directed against Muslims and Islamic groups not affiliated with the NIF. In addition to making the report more complete, discussion of such abuses would rebut the regime's claim to be the defender of the Islamic faith, resisting the West's "crusades" and its "cold war against Islam."
In some places, the report treats the fimdamentalist ideology of the NIF as representative of all Sudanese Islamic viewpoints. This fosters the inaccurate impression, described by one Sudanese scholar, of "a monolithic Muslim Arab north increasingly energized by the ideology of Islamic revivalism" and committed to "the local fundamentalists' particular version of political Islam." In fact, another scholar points out, Islam in Sudan is far fi"om homogeneous, but rather is "eclectic and diverse. " This is demonstrated by the fact that in the last fi"ee election, in 1986, the fundamentalist NIF received less than 19% of the vote, at a time when the civil war prevented voting in most of the primarily non-Muslim south. Furthermore, the two mainstream political parties in the deposed democratically-elected coalition government, the Democratic Unionist and Umma Parties, are associated with two traditional non-fundamentalist Islamic orders and their spiritual leaders: the Democratic Unionist Party with the Khatmiya sect, led by the Mirghani family, and the Umma Party with the Ansar sect, headed by the Mahdi family.
During the past year. Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch and the UN Special Rapporteur, among others, reported a campaign of persecution and harassment of non-NIF Islamic groups and their members. On May 22, authorities took control of the holiest shrine of the Ansar order, the Omdurman religious complex of the tomb of Mohamed Ahmad al-Mahdi. Also in late May important mosques of the Khatmiya order and those of another traditional Islamic sect in Sudan, the Ansar Sunna order, reported to be bitterly opposed to the policies of the NIF, were expropriated by the government. During the same period, there were several reports of arrests of members of these three sects, including Sheikh al-Hadiya, the Ansar Sunna leader.
The choice of language in some sections renders the report vulnerable to the charge that it reflects generalized Western hostility to Islam as a whole. For example, the report states that the regime's militia and Popular Police are "infused with Islamic ideology," and that "some Islamic nongovernmental (NGO) personnel
347
CRITIQUE 1993
. . . withheld food and key services from the needy unless they converted to Islam." A more appropriate formulation of these passages would have noted, accurately, that the militia and Popular Police are infused with NIF ideology and that government- or MF-sanctioned personnel had withheld relief from the needy.
Analysts and journalists have characterized the Sudanese government not so much as Islamic as an oligarchy presiding over an Orwellian police state, behind an Islamic facade. This ruling clique has grasped the claim of Western hostility to Islam as a means of bolstering its legitimacy. As noted, UN Special Rapporteur Caspar Biro was attacked by the government as satanic, a "confirmed anti-Muslim fanatic" on a "biased and politically-motivated mission" with the intention of "embarrassing the pro-Islamic goverrmient of the Sudan," and a blasphemer ccOTiparable to Salman Rushdie. In a February 1994 letter to UN Secretary-General Boutros Boufros-Ghali, the Permanent Representative of the Sudan to the United Nations accused the Special Rapporteur of "hurting the feelings of Muslims worldwide" and requested that "cognizance be taken that the Government of the Sudan is in no position to cooperate with Mr. Gaspar Biro because of the contempt he has shown for Islam and his lack of professionalism and lack of impartiality, as well as his hostile attitude." During 1993 NIF leader Hassan al-Turabi and others in the government stated that the Western "propaganda campaign" against them would be used as a challenge to mobilize for a holy war (jihad).
In its discussion of freedom of religion, the report states: "Under Sudanese law, Muslims may proselytize freely." Considering the restrictions imposed by the regime on non-NIF Islamic groups, it should be noted that this freedom is in fact only extended to members of NIF-approved groups.
While the report does briefly mention that apostasy by Muslims is punishable by death pursuant to the 1991 Criminal Act, the issue is more complex than presented. The law may not only be used as a threat to individuals who convert from Islam to another religion, as in the example cited in the'report. The report of the UN Special Rapporteur expresses the fear that it may also be used against "those belonging to the majority faith who dissent from the official position on religious matters." In its response to the Special Rapporteur's report, the Sudanese goverrmient stated:
The punishment is inflicted in cases in which the apostasy is a cause of harm to the society, while in those cases in which an individual simply changes his religion the punishment is not be [sic] applied. But it must be remembered that [unthreatening] apostasy is an exceptional case, and the common thing is that apostasy is accompanied by some harmful actions against the society or State.
348
_SUDAN
In addition, although the statute exempts "recent converts" from punishment for renouncing Islam, the Special Rapporteur points out tiiat the concept of "recent convert" is not clearly defined. The law may therefore be enforced against individuals in government-controlled areas of the south, and in the Nuba Mountains, who may have converted to Islam under duress in order to obtain relief supplies. The Special Rapporteur's fears are well-founded, as demonstrated by the fatwa, or religious decree, issued in early 1992 by authorities in Kordofan state, declaring a jihad in southern Sudan and South Kordofan, including the Nuba Mountains "transition zone." The fatwa declares that Muslim rebels are apostates and non-Muslim rebels infidels, and that is an Islamic duty to fight both. The decree further states that "those Muslims who deal with dissidents and rebels and raise doubts about the legality of Jihad are hypocrites and dissenters and apostates from the Islamic religion."
Last year's Critique suggested that the State Department report could have given a more thorough account of the government's campaign against the Nuba people. This year's report does briefly mention the forced conscription, displacement, kidnapping and enslavement of the Nuba, as well as the restrictions on their freedom of religion. But once again, a more complete description would have helped convey the gravity of the systematic persecution of the Nuba, which has been characterized as "genocidal" and an example of "ethnic cleansing." Reports indicate that all Nuba, whether Christian, animist or Muslim, are subject to abuse, and the UN Special Rapporteur has concluded: "If the present process of uprooting of the Nuba communities is not stopped soon, it may be irreversible."
A Sudanese government official from Kordofan, now seeking asylum in Switzerland, has corroborated reports of the eradication of Nuba communities, describing a pattern in which villages are subjected to artillery barrages, surviving males of combat age are executed, and the survivors are forcibly relocated in "peace villages," where,they are forced to work for landowners "under conditions approaching oufright slavery." Amnesty International has reported that in December 1992 and January 1993, Nuba villages in the Heiban and Moro areas were attacked by soldiers and the Popular Defense Forces (PDF). Survivors reported that villagers died when their homes were set ablaze or were gunned down as they fled. Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International have also reported that the educated elite and leadership of the Nuba, including teachers, lawyers, civil servants and the administrator of a mosque, have been targeted for elimination through arrest and "disappearance."
In previous years, the Critique has called for a more detailed discussion in the report of the Sudanese government's unrelenting attack on the legal profession . While this year's report does discuss ways in which the independence of the judiciary has been undermined, it should also have described the suppression of the private bar, which would have more fully conveyed the scope of the
349
CRITIQUE 1993
curtailment of the administration of justice, as well as the restriction of freedom of association and the ability to monitor the regime's compliance with international human rights standards. Since the 1989 coup, the government has singled out the Sudanese judiciary and bar as hostile to its rule, and both have been targets of unrelenting and systematic attacks. The Sudan Bar Association has a long history of support for democracy and human rights. During the Nimeiri dictatorship, it organized public rallies, participated in demonstrations and submitted memoranda to the government regarding human rights and fundamental freedoms. In 1983, when Nimeiri introduced a version oiShari'a known as the "September Laws," the Bar Association defended without compensation all those accused of political crimes under the new code and protested the oppressive nature of the new laws and their violation of international principles. When the democratically elected government which assumed power in 1986 failed to repeal the September Laws, the Bar Association continued to work for their repeal. In 1988, the NIF was brought into the coalition government and its leader, Hassan al-Turabi was placed in charge of the Ministry of Justice. When Turabi drafted a penal code even more draconian than the September Laws, the Bar Association was instrumental in blocking its passage in parliament. (Turabi's code was eventually adopted in March 1991.)
The Sudanese Bar Association was banned in 1989 and replaced with a government-appointed committee. In March 1992, the government made provision for the election of Bar Council members under the Trade Unions Act of 1992, which, as reported to the UN Special Rapporteur, "relegates the Bar to the status of a workers trade union (although lawyers belong to an independent profession), and subjects it to possible interventions by either the Registrar of Trade Unions or the Ministries of Labour." It was also reported to the Special Rapporteur that the majority of lawyers boycotted the elections.
Since the coup, lawyers have been harassed, detained and tortured. In December 1992, Altayib Mohammed Khayr, the leader of Darfur state, assailed lawyers as a "new fribe . .. intent on spreading corruption and destroying justice." He asserted further that, "There is no lawyering in Islam and this new fribe must be eradicated, its base uprooted and removed" from his "chaste" region. The day after this declaration, supporters of the NIF attacked and vandalized lawyers' offices in Darfur. Security authorities also raided a house in which lawyers had gathered for a social function and brought the lawyers before a court, where one of them was sentenced to a flogging.
With respect to the representation of detainees in legal proceedings, the Special Rapporteur stated that access to lawyers is restricted or "completely lacking," falling far short of international standards. In response to the government's announcement that the frial of 29 persons accused of plotting against the state would be held publicly, the Special Rapporteur e>q)ressed his hope that this trial would be "in conformity with the international standards for a fair trial and that
350
_SUDAN
independent monitors [would be] allowed to attend" the proceedings. In fact, at the opening of the trial in December 1993, defense counsel protested that they had not been allowed to speak with their clients. Moreover, when the defense lawyers left the courtroom to confer among themselves, guards blocked them from returning.
In its February 1994 letter to Secretary-General Boutros-Ghali, rebutting the Special Rapporteur's report, the government of Sudan accused Mr. Biro of refusing to accept an invitation to attend the opening of the trial on December 20, 1993, thereby missing a "golden chance to judge for himself how fairly trials are conducted in the Sudan," depriving the regime of the chance to "clear the unfounded allegations levelled against it under what are called 'arbitrary trials,'" and raising "a lot of doubts about [Biro's] honesty and credibility." None of these developments are adequately dealt with in the 1993 report.

351
