 SUDAN
 Following the military coup that overthrew Sudan's democratically elected govern-
 ment in 1989, Lt. General Omar Hassan al-Bashir and other military leaders who
 staged the coup formed the National Salvation Revolution Command Council (RCC).
 The RCC suspended the 1985 transitional Constitution abrogated press freedoms
 and dissolved all political parties and trade unions. ChTaireby Bashir, the RCC
 nominally ruled Sudan until it dissolved itself in October, appointing Bashir Presi-
 dent of the Republic and transferring to him most of its powers. Even prior to the
 RCC's dissolution, real power rested with the Head of State Bashir, a few other
 military officers, and above all the National Islamic Front (NIF), headed by Hassan
 al-Turabi. Though officially banned like the other parties, the (NIF) effectively con-
 trolled the Government. NIF members and supporters held most key positions in
 the Government security forces, judiciary, academia, and media. With the abolition
 of the RCC, the NIF further tightened its grip on the state.
 The regime controls most of Sudan, outside of parts of the south and the Nuba
 mountains controlled by factions of the Sudanese People's Liberation Army (SPLA):
 SPLA Mainstream, ledby John Garang, and SPLA United, led by Riak Machar. The
 civil war continued throughout 1993, marked by bitter fighting between the SPLA
 factions that caused widespread suffering among the southern population.
 To supplement the Sudan People's Armed Forces (SPAF) and the militia, the Pop-
 ular Defense Forces (PDF), in 1993 the regime created the Popular Police, which,
 like the militia, is infused with Islamic ideology. The mission of the Popular Police
 includes encouraging proper social behavior. Martial law and the state of emergency
 remained in place in 1993, permitting arbitrary actions such as indefinite detention
 of opponents.
 Civil war, corruption, economic mismanagement, high inflation, and over 3.5 mil-
 lion internally displaced persons have devastated Sudan's primarily agricultural
 economy. Starvation and malnutrition are rife. The war has left parts of Sudan de-
 populated and without effective government. Reforms aimed at privatizing ineffi-
 cient state-run firms and stimulating private investment have failed to revive a
 moribund economy saddled with massive military expenditures.
 The human rights situation remained dismal in 1993, with no sign of improve-
 ment. The Government and the SPLA factions all committed serious human rights
 abuses. SPAF and PDF abuses included massacres, kidnaping and enslavement,
 forced conscription, and rape. Government forces forcibly displaced many civilians
 from the Nuba mountains, conducted forced conscription, and kidnapped or enslaved
 civilians. In the areas they controlled, government forces routinely harassed, impris-
 oned--often incommunicado for lengthy periods--and tortured hundreds of oppo-
 nents. The SPLA factions also engaged in widespread killings and other abuses. In
 the spring, SPLA/Mainstream forces tried to murder an international relief worker
 and a journalist operating in the south. The Government maintained myriad secret
 police forces, both official and unofficial. They routinely acted as if they were a law
 unto themselves, harassing, imprisoning, and torturing without restraint opponents
 and suspected opponents of the regime.
 Government and SPLA hindrance of international relief efforts remained a prob-
 lem throughout the year, frequently interrupting relief flows and often causing
 widespread suffering. The Government continued to repress freedoms of speech,
 press, assembly, association, and political choice. Discrimination and violence
 against women continued. The same lack of freedoms prevailed in SPLA-controlled
 areas. In the context of the Government's Arabization and Islamization drive, dis-
 crimination against non-Muslims continued and included forced Islamization. In
 government-controlled areas of the south and the Nuba mountains, some Islamic
 nongovernmental organization (NGO) personnel, acting with the tacit approval of
 local authorities, withheld food and key services from the needy unless they con-
 verted to Islam. Fear of Arabization and Islamization, including the imposition of
 Shari'a (Islamic law), was a key cause of opposition to a united Sudan in the south,
 where most of the largely black African population are Christians or animists.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Official and unofficial government
 forces committed an undetermined number of political killings of persons suspected
 of being members or collaborators of the insurgent SPLA. Moreover, according to re-
 liable eyewitnesses, in February and March security forces shot to death about 30
 persons on the beach at Suakin. There is no evidence that the victims received any
 trial; nor did the authorities give prior public notice of the executions, as required
 
 
 278
 
 under Sudanese law. Asked about the executions, the authorities denied that they
 took place. Reportedly, SPLA forces in the Nuba mountains summarily executed
 local villagers who refused to provide them with food or clothing. SPLA factions
 were suspected of conducting both political killings and extrajudicial killings (in ad-
 dition to outright massacres during combat operations) but conclusive proof was
 lacking.
 There are credible reports that in 1993 government security forces beat and tor-
 tured to death detainees. According to one such report, retired Brigadier Camillo
 Odong N. Loyuk was chained by his wrists and testicles to the bars of his cell win-
 dow and beaten until he died.
 b. Disappearance.-Scores of persons arrested by government security forces in
 Juba, following SPLA attacks on the city in the summer of 1992, remain unac-
 counted for and are feared dead including two employees of the USAID office in
 Juba, Dominic Morris and Chaplain Lake, and Michael Mutto of the U.N.'s Juba
 office. Thirty-four guards from Juba prison disappeared without a trace after the se-
 curity forces took them away for interrogation.
 Disappearances of persons suspected of supporting the SPLA continued to occur
 rou dnely throughout the war zones in 1993.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Torture, previously uncommon in Sudan outside of the war zones, has become rou-
 tine at the hands of official and unofficial security forces. Throughout 1993, beatings
 of suspected opponents upon their arrest was commonplace. For example, when gov-
 ernment security forces arrested dozens of students for demonstrating against the
 regime in the Khartoum area in October, they were brutally beaten. According to
 reliable accounts, while in custody some students were forced to stand for hours,
 their hands manacled to the ceiling of a tiny cell.
 Throughout the year the security forces continued to hold opponents-including
 trade unionists, politicians, and students--incommunicado, often for months, in safe
 houses known locally as ghost houses. Many prisoners were beaten upon arrival at
 the ghost houses before their interrogation began. Torture and mistreatment of
 ghost house inmates often continued throughout their incarceration. In a letter
 passed to his relatives, Brigadier General Mohammad Ahmed al Rizk al Faki, held
 in Suakin Prison, related that he had been subjected to psychological and physical
 torture, including beatings, electric shock, rape, and partial castration. According to
 former inmates, mistreatment included whipping and clubbing; shackling and sus-
 pension by the wrists; the application of electric shocks; burning with hot irons; sub-
 mersion in hot and cold water; prolonged blindfolding; denial of food, water, sleep,
 and access to toilet facilities; confinement in overcrowded and unsanitary quarters;
 deprivation of medical care; and psychological torture, such as mock executions, and,
 in the case of some female prisoners, sexual abuse. The Government has not pros-
 ecuted any security personnel for such abuses, although they are widely known.
 These abuses could not occur without the knowledge of the highest authorities.
 There were recurrent reports that SPAF, PDF, and SPLA forces in the field periodi-
 cally committed rape. According to one credible report, in March soldiers raped dis-
 placed women in Meiram when the military train to Wau reached the town.
 Conditions in official prisons are harsh. Almost all the prisons were built before
 independence in 1956, are poorly maintained, and many lack such basic facilities
 as toilets and showers. Health care is rudimentary and food inadequate. Minors are
 regularly detained with adults.
 Sudan's 1991 Criminal Act, based on the Shari'a, prescribes for some offenses spe-
 cific "hudood" punishments, including amputation, stoning, and lashing. The courts
 handed down several amputation sentences during the year, but none was known
 to have been carried out by year's end. The Government, however, routinely meted
 out lashings in the north, most often to persons convicted of consuming alcohol, fol-
 lowing trials that did not meet internationally accepted standards of fairness.
 Angelican Bishop Elbersh was lashed publicly in 1993 for alleged adultery. On New
 Year's Eve 1993, the Government arrested and lashed several young Muslim women
 whom it accused of wearing immodest dress or consuming alcohol. In one instance
 of flogging in November, Kamal Mekki Medani was flogged despite medical evidence
 that he suffered from hypertension and diabetes and might not be able to withstand
 the punishment.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The 1991 Criminal Code does not ad-
 dress periods of detention and security arrest. Other laws allow the Government to
 detain persons without charge and without reference to the judiciary. The state of
 emergency introduced following the 1989 coup authorizes the Government to arrest
 persons without warrant and detain them indefinitely without charge or trial.
 Under the National Security Act, the Government may detain a suspect for interro-
 
 
 279
 gation for up to 72 hours. This is renewable for up to a month with "justification,"
 which is not defined.
 The President has the power to authorize "precautionary detention* for up to 3
 months 'to preserve the general security." In practice, he delegates this authority
 to subordinate officials. A person thus detained is supposed to be notified "in suit-
 able time', interpreted as within these 3 months, of the reasons for detention. The
 President may extend the detention for 3 more months if a magistrate approves the
 extension. In practice, these legal provisions are often ignored as the authorities
 often detain opponents in ghost houses indefinitely. On occasions when extensions
 are formally requested, they are rarely, if ever, denied.
 Sudanese law allows for bail except in the case of accused murderers and political
 opponents of the regime.
 In theory, indigent defendants receive legal counsel from the Government in the
 case of crimes punishable by death or life imprisonment. However, courts do not al-
 ways inform defendants of this right. Moreover in some cases counsel is only al-
 lowed to advise the defendant an  may no address the court. Thus, despite some
 theoretical protections, Sudanese arrested by the Government, especially by the se-
 curity authorities, are likely to suffer arbitrary treatment, including, in many cases,
 incommunicado detention.
 Because of the regime's secrecy and arbitrary detention practices it was impos-
 sible to know the exact number of political detainees and prisoners held at the end
 of 1993. Throughout the year, the Government picked up hundreds of suspected op-
 ponents thughout the country. Some were leading figures, such as Democratic
 Unionist Party leader Sid'Ahmed Al Hussein, whose arrest was widely noted. Others
 were less prominent persons whose arrests were known only to their family and
 friends. While many of those arrested were held for a few  a   or weeks, others
 were kept for months. Reasonable estimates of the number of political detainees and
 prisoners in Sudan by year's end ranged between several score and several hundred.
 Moreover, the authorities often reireued suspected opponents to report in the
 morning to the security offices, made them wait until the evening, then oed them
 to return the next day. This de facto arrest lasted for days, weeks, or in some cases
 months, during which time the victims could not earn a livelihood.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Government has made the judiciary largely
 subservient to it. In a 1989 decree, the RCC assumed all power over Sudan's Con-
 stitution and laws and gave control of the judiciary to the Ministry of Justice. The
 October 1993 decree dissolving the RCC gave the power to issue constitutional de-
 crees to the appointed, NIF-controlled transitional National Assembly. The Chief
 Justice, formerly elected by sitting judges, is now appointed. Since 1989 the authori-
 ties have replaced hundreds of judges considered ideologically unacceptable. Many
 of the new judges have ties to 1he NF. They favor strict application of the Shari'a;
 many have little or no legal training.
 Sudan's judicial system includes the regular courts, both criminal and civil, the
 special security courts, military courts meant mainly for military personnel, and
 tribal courts which are important in rural areas, where disputes often involve land
 and water rights and family matters. The 1991 Criminal Act governs criminal cases.
 Civil cases are still handled largely according to the 1983 Civil Transactions Act.
 In keeping with Shari'a law, a woman's testi~mony in court is worth one-half that
 of a man's. Military trials do not meet international standards; proceedings are se-
 cret and brief. The 1991 trial of 53 officers accused of coup plotting lasted only a
 few minutes. None of the officers had legal representation.
 The 1989 Special Courts Act created three-person special security courts to deal
 with a wide range of offenses including violations of constitutional decrees, emer-
 gency regulations, and some sections of the Penal Code, as well as drug and cur-
 rency offenses. Special courts, which have a mix of military and civilian judges, han-
 dle most security-related cases. Attorneys may advise defendants as "friends of the
 court" but normally may not address the court. Sentences are usually severe and
 implemented at once. Death sentences, however, are referred to the Chiei Justice
 and the Head of State. Defendants may file appeal briefs with the Chief Justice.
 These courts handle most security-related cases.
 The Government officially exempts the three southern states, whose population is
 mostly non-Muslim, from parts of the 1991 Criminal Act. However, the Act permits
 the possible future application of Shari'a in the south, if the local legislative assem-
 blies, envisioned in the regime's projected political system, so decide. Moreover, in
 1993 the Government transferred most non-Muslim judges from the south to the
 north, replacing them with Muslim judges. There were no reports, however, of
 hudood punishments, other than lashings, carried out by the courts in government-
 controlled areas of the south. Fear of the imposition of Shari'a remaine[a key issue
 in the rebellion.
 
 
 280
 Parts of the south fell outside effective judicial procedures and other govern-
 mental functions. According to credible reports, SPAF and PDF units summarily
 tried and punished those accused of crimes, especially so-called offenses against civil
 order. In SPLA areas, there was some reliance on traditional justice by village el-
 ders, but the SPLA ultimately ruled by summary methods, including beatings, tor-
 ture, and arbitrary execution.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Government routinely interferes with its citizens' privacy. Throughout 1993
 searches without warrants, often at night, continued, particularly against persons
 suspected of political crimes. The Government maintained a wide network of inform-
 ants who conducted pervasive surveillance, constrained only by resource and man-
 p ower limitations. Informers were common in schools, universities, and workplaces.
 ormer Prime Minister Sadiq al-Mahdi, former Communist Party Head Mohammed
 Ibrahim Nugud, and other key opposition figures were under nearly constant sur-
 veillance. In addition, the Government continued its practice of dismissing govern-
 ment employees suspected of antiregime views--particularly members of the mili-
 tary, over a hundred of whom were dismissed during the year. Security personnel
 often opened and read mail, including mail delivered by courier service.
 They also examined registered mail before it was sent. Telephones were often
 tapped. Government-instituted neighborhood "popular committees," ostensibly a
 mechanism for political mobilization, served as a mechanism for monitoring house-
 holds. These committees caused many Sudanese to be wary of their neighbors who,
 for whatever reason, could report them for "suspicious" activities. Security officers,
 for instance, investigated Sudanese for "excessive" contact with foreigners. The com-
 mittees also furnished or withheld documents essential for obtaining exit visas from
 Sudan. In high schools, students were sometimes pressured to join proregime youth
 groups. Some who refused were badly beaten.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-The civil war was marked by bitter fighting between the rival SPLA factions
 and a major government summer and fall offensive aimed at sealing off Sudan's bor-
 der with Uganda. Government forces, pro-government tribal militias, the PDF, and
 the SPLA factions commonly used excessive force and constantly violated humani-
 tarian norms by attacking civilian targets. Neither side tried to investigate or pun-
 ish those responsible. Sudan's Air Force bombed indiscriminately, often using the
 crude tactic of dumping bombs from transport planes on targets, including civilian
 villages, in SPLA areas. In late December, the Air Force bombed villages in the vi-
 cinity of Mundri in Western Equatoria and Chukundum in Eastern Equatoria. In
 addition, there were reliable reports that SPLA forces in the Nuba mountains fre-
 quently killed local villagers who would not give them food and other assistance.
 All sides in the conflict were guilty of massacring civilians. SPAF and PDF troops
 accompanying the February-March military train from Babanusa to Wau fanned out
 in front of the train, killing or capturing civilians they found in their path, stealing
 cattle, and burning houses, fields, and granaries. Hundreds were killed. More
 starved to death after losing their crops, food supplies, and cattle.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Government severely curtailed freedom of
 speech following the 1989 coup. In 1993 a climate of intimidation and surveillance,
 fostered in part by the Government's informer network, continued to inhibit open,
 public discussion of political issues. Radio, television, all of the print media, and the
 Sudanese News Agency (SUNA) remained under the Government's control and re-
 flected its policies. The media rarely mentioned, and always negatively, opposition
 figures.
 All the print media were government-owned and controlled. The press--the Ara-
 bic-language dailies Modern Sudan, Victory, and National Salvation; the English-
 language daily New Horizon; and various weeklies and monthlies--strong advo-
 cated government policies. They almost never criticized the Government, anYon the
 few occasions they did, the criticism was benign.
 The Government appointed the chief editors of the print media, alleviating the
 need for formal daily censorship. Sudan television news had a permanent military
 censor to ensure that the news reflected government views. For most of 1993, the
 Minister of Information was an army brigadier. In early 1993, the Government
 closed the local offices of the daily As-Asharq al-Awsat and detained its chief cor-
 respondent, Mohammed Abdel Sayyid, in a ghost house. The Government accused
 him of espionage, treason, and illegal possession of government documents. In the
 face of a mounting campaign of international pressure, the Government released
 him after a month and a a F. It never brought his case to trial.
 
 
 The Government adopted in mid-1993 a new Press Code that called for
 privatizing existing state-owned print media and allowing the creation of new, pri-
 vate newspapers. By the end of the year, however, no existing newspapers had been
 privatized, and no new private newspapers were created. Many local journalists
 were skeptical about the new Code and complained that it did not take their views
 into consideration. They further noted that it restricted coverage of many issues,
 from military affairs to subjects that could raise religious or racial tensions or exac-
 erbate social differences.
 The regime complained of an anti-Sudan bias among the international, especially
 Western, media. In the second half of 1993, the Government permitted a number
 of foreign journalists to enter Sudan and allowed them a degree of freedom, letting
 them meet with a wide spectrum of leaders, including some from the opposition, and
 allowing them to visit war zones. The Government, however, monitored the journal-
 ists' movements closely and on at least one occasion confiscated part of a television
 crew's film.
 The Government routinely confiscated issues of foreign publications entering
 Sudan that had material it judged hostile to the regime. Many respected journalists
 who worked in the local media before 1989 have quit the profession, and many have
 left Sudan.
 Academic freedom does not exist in Sudan. The climate of intolerance fostered by
 the regime-fed, for instance, by the dismissal after the coup of many academics
 considered antiregime-and its practice of brutally repressing suspected opponents
 had a chilling effect on academic debate. The Government used political and ideo-
 logical criteria in appointing new faculty.
 b.Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-These freedoms were severely
 restricted. The declaration of the state of emergency and martial law on June 30,
 1989, effectively eliminated the right to protest. Only government- sponsored gath-
 erings were permitted. The security forces broke up demonstrations sponsored by
 nongovernment organizations. In October and November, police used tear gas and
 baton charges to disperse students and others who were protesting in the Khartoum
 area. When riots broke out in Gedaref in February and El Obeid and Er Rahad in
 October, security forces fired on the crowds, killing several persons in each locality.
 Apart from a few indigenous NGO's involved in relief work and the Sudan Indus-
 tries Association, all other private associations were either government- or NEF-con-
 trolled.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Under Sudanese law, Muslims may proselytize freely, but
 non-Muslims may not proselytize Muslims. The 1991 Criminal Act makes apostasy
 by Muslims punishable by death, although there are no known cases in which this
 sentence has been applied. Some Muslim converts to Christianity were, however,
 harassed in 1993 by local authorities. Two villagers from a small community of Arab
 Christians at Abdullahi, near Umm Rawaba, were arrested in August, imprisoned
 for several days, and threatened with death if they did not convert back to Islam.
 The Foreign Missionary Societies Act of 1962 subjects public Christian religious
 activity to close government supervisior. It forbids the construction of churches
 without government permits- none has been issued for over 10 years. Missionary
 groups need licenses to proselytize; the licenses specify where they may operate and
 restrict their activities outside these areas. Foreign missionaries need special per-
 mission, which is difficult to obtain and easy to lose, to work in Sudan The Sudan
 Catholic Bishops' Conference (SCBC), the Sudan Council of Churches (SCC), an um-
 brella group that includes all of Sudan's Christian churches, and the Copts all faced
 restrictions stemming from the Act, which local officials often interpreted capri-
 ciously. Christians have generally experienced few problems building churches in
 government-controlled areas of southern Sudan. In the predominately Muslim areas
 of northern Sudan however, Christians have not received a government permit to
 build a church, and no new churches have been built, since the early 1970's.
 Non-Muslims complained throughout 1993 of pervasive, multifaceted pressure in
 favor of Islam and against other religions. The authorities regard Islam not just as
 a faith, but also as the basis of Sudan's Arab culture. Thus, almost every subject
 matter in the schools is infused with Islam and the Koran, to which Muslims and
 non-Muslims alike are exposed. In the popular defense forces, all trainees, including
 non-Muslims, received indoctrination in the Islamic faith.
 There were reliable reports in some war zones, particularly the Nuba mountains,
 that government forces closed churches and restricted the movements of Christian
 clergy. In government-held parts of the south and the Nuba Mountains, some Is-
 lamic NGO personnel withheld food and key services from the needy unless they
 converted to Islam. The local authorities appeared to condone, at least tacitly, these
 practices.
 
 
 282
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Government restrictions hampered freedom of movement. All Sudanese
 needed to obtain exit visas before leaving the country. Numerous individual Suda-
 nese and some categories of persons (such as policemen and other security person-
 nel) were often denied exit visas. The authorities kept lists of political figures and
 other Sudanese not permitted to travel abroad. In one case, the authorities refused
 leading southern Sudanese opposition politician Eliaba Surur permission to attend
 the U.S. Institute for Peace Conference on Sudan because of his dissident activities
 in Khartoum. Security officials sometimes made arbitrary decisions on the issuance
 or cancellation of exit visas. In addition, as tensions with Egypt rose in the first half
 of 1993, Sudanese authorities denied most requests for travel to Egypt.
 An evening curfew, imposed when the new regime seized power in 1989, was lift-
 ed in Nove ber.
 Some former political detainees were forbidden to travel outside of Khartoum.
 Other Sudanese were able to move about the country, but those who failed to
 produce an identity card at one of the numerous checkpoints risked being arrested
 and even beaten. This was especially true of southerners in the north.
 Nondiplomatic foreigners needed permits, which were hard to obtain and often re-
 fused, well in advance for all in-country travel outside of Khartoum. (Diplomats
 could travel freely to many locations.) Foreigners had to register with the police on
 entering the country, seek permission to move from one location to another, and reg-
 ister again at each new location within 3 days of arrival. Foreign NGO staff some-
 times faced difficulties in obtaining entry visas or work or travel permits once they
 were in country.
 Tens of thousands of persons, largely southerners and westerners displaced by
 famine and civil war, continued to live in squatter slums in the Khartoum area. In
 a reprise, on a smaller scale, of the massive destructions of squatter settlements in
 1992, in 1993 the Government razed hundreds of these squatter dwellings. Thou-
 sands were made homeless; some were forced to relocate to primitive resettlement
 sites outside the city where conditions were harsh and distances from employment
 opportunities great. Many of these people had been in Khartoum for years; some
 even had title to the land. The Government promised to give those who had titles
 new plots of land elsewhere. NGO's attempting to provide food or health care in the
 resettlement camps often had problems securing access from the Government.
 Sudan was generally hospitable to refugees. At the end of the year, the refugee
 population (largely composed of Ethiopians and Eritreans) was about 630,000, about
 half of whom received assistance from the United Nations High Commissioner for
 Refugees (UNHCR). There were no reports of forcible repatriation of refugees in
 1993. UNHCR resettlement of refugees to third countriesproceeded smoothly.
 Refugees could not become resident aliens or citizens of Sudan, regardless of their
 length of stay. However, a large number of refugees were tolerated and found em-
 ployment, although typically in menial occupations, in the cities, especially in the
 capital area.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The people of Sudan had neither the right nor the ability to change their govern-
 ment peacefully. In 1992 the RCC instituted an appointed "Transitional National
 Assembly" (TNA). The main activity of this rubber-stamp body, however, was to rat-
 ify legislation proposed by the executive. The RCC dissolved itself in October, mak-
 ing its chairman President of the Republic and transferring to him most of its pow-
 ers. The ourts had no authority to review acts of the RC C or the Head of State.
 Claiming that sectarian bickering was harmful to Sudan, in 1989 the regime abol-
 ished all political parties. In 1990 the RCC, rejecting both multiparty and one-party
 systems, adopted a Libyan-style political structure based on ascending levels of non-
 partisan assemblies, some of whose members are elected in nonpartisan elections,
 and the others government-appointed. The Government is currently implementing
 the system, which the NIF is thoroughly manipulating and controlling, at the pro-
 vincial and state levels. The lack of basic freedoms of assembly, speech, and press,
 the absence of political parties, the rigging of the participatory process, and the sig-
 nificant proportion of appointed members make the system essentially undemo-
 cratic.
 Government rhetoric gave high priority to ending the civil war. Yet, by the end
 of the year, despite Nigerian mediation and peace talks with both SPLA factions in
 Abuja, Nigeria, and with SPLA/United in Nairobi, Kenya, there had been no
 progress toward peace. For much of the spring the Government and the SPLA ob-
 served a cease-fire, which collapsed in the summer as the Government launched a
 major offensive. The rival SPLA factions continued to fight intermittently through-
 
 
 283
 out the year. At year's end several efforts at mediation between the SPLA factions
 and the SPLA and the Government were under way, conducted by neighboring
 states, church groups, and former U.S. President Carter. However, the commitment
 of the various warring parties to peace was unclear, and prospects for successful ne-
 gotiations seemed dim.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government tried to stamp out any domestic criticism on human rights is-
 sues, frequently and vehemently denying any human rights abuses. Almost all of
 the relatively few local, independent human rights monitors have been arrested and
 detained at one point or another since the 1989 coup. In 1991 the Government cre-
 ated the Sudan Human Rights Organization (SHRO)-not to be confused with the
 previous SHRO, which the regime dissolved after the 1989 coup-to defend its
 human rights record. This organization has yet to criticize the Government. In an
 attempt to demonstrate the regime's concern for human rights, the TNA adopted in
 1993 the "Sudan Document of Human Rights" and created a Human Rights Com-
 mittee. The latter, however, has been no more critical of government human rights
 abuses than has the SHRO.
 The Sudan Catholic Bishops Conference (SCBC) and the Sudan Council of
 Churches (SCC) continued to seek to monitor and publicize human rights abuses,
 especially those involving religious discrimination.
 The Government was highly defensive about foreign criticism of its human rights
 record. It vehemently attacked Amnesty International for criticizing Sudan's human
 rights record. In September the Government allowed Gaspar Biro, the U.N.'s Special
 Rapporteur on Human Rights in Sudan, to visit the country. Although Biro was able
 to travel to some sensitive areas, including the Nuba mountains, the Government
 tried to restrict his access to dissidents. It arrested several persons for meeting or
 trying to meet with him-including several spouses of political prisoners. The plice
 clubbed and arrested the women as they assembled peacefully in front of the U.N.
 offices in Khartoum where Bire was working. The Government subsequently ac-
 cused Biro and the U.N. Human Rights Commission of being biased against Sudan.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Women.-Sudanese laws and traditions favor men over women, and women tradi-
 tionally have been relegated to segregated roles. Islamic laws of inheritance award
 additional property to men, while assigning them the duty of caring for their ex-
 tended families. Under traditional Shari'a law, a woman inherits half as much of
 the estate as a man with the same degree of kinship. Discrimination against women
 in professional positions continued to increase in 1993.
 Though there are no women in the highest ranks of government women in lesser
 positions play a modest role in day-to-day government operations. he TNA included
 some women members. The NIF did not, however, encourage women's involvement
 in politics, viewing this as contradicting their traditional role. Education was open
 to both sexes, and many women obtained university training. Women, however, tra-
 ditionally receive less education and have fewer opportunities than men. Small
 numbers of women were found in the professions the police, and the military. They
 also formed sexually segregated units within the PDF.
 Since 1991, government directives require that women working in government of-
 fices and female students and teachers conform to Islamic dress codes. This is de-
 fined as nondecorative "modest" clothing covering the entire body except for the
 face, hands, and feet. The Government enforces the new regulations, particularly in
 the schools and other public institutions. On New Year's Eve several Muslim women
 were arrested and lashed for wearing clothing that did not conform with the Gov-
 ernment's version of modest dress.
 Violence against women appears to be common although accurate statistics do not
 exist. Wife beating reportedly is common. The Government did not address the issue
 of domestic violence against women; nor was it discussed publicly. The police do not
 normally intervene in domestic disputes, and there were no reports of court cases
 involving violence against women in 1993. For a variety of cultural reasons, many
 women are reluctant to file formal complaints against such abuse. Women refugees
 were particularly vulnerable to harassment and sexual abuse.
 Among some southern tribes, rape is common. No blame attached to the practice,
 although the man involved must pay the woman's family if she becomes pregnant.
 Among some ethnic groups, wives are taken on a trial basis lasting up4 years. The
 husband may dissolve the marriage during this period by returning the wife to her
 family, although he must pay a price for each child born during this time. Such
 
 
 284
 
 wives reportedly are able to contract further marriages and are not stigmatized by
 having been returned.
 Children.-The Government demonstrated no significant concern for the rights
 and welfare of children. A considerable number of children suffered serious abuses,
 including occasional enslavement, in the war zones.
 Female genital mutilation (circumcision) remains common in Sudan. Reports indi-
 cated that the practice, though illegal is widespread, especially in the north. Some
 reports suggest that over 90 percent of northern Sudanese females have been so mu-
 tilated, with consequences that sometimes has included severe urinary problems, in-
 fections, and even death.
 The so-called Pharaonic mutilation (infibulation), the severest of the three types
 is the most common and is usually performed on girls between the ages of 4 and
 7 years. Because few physicians will perform the operation, it is most often done
 by paramedical personnel in improvised, unsanitary conditions, with severe pain
 and trauma to the child. Southern women displaced to the north reportedly are in-
 creasingly imposing circumcision upon their daughters, even if they themselves have
 not been subjected to it.
 The Government's Administration for the Rehabilitation of Street Children runs
 several camps near Khartoum and other cities for children who are found living in
 the streets. The management of several of these camps is entrusted to an Islamic
 NGO. Children in the camps may not leave without permission, and undergo a mili-
 tarized regimen that includes strict discipline and physical and military exerch,,s.
 Health care and schooling in the camps is reportedly poor. All the inmates must
 study the Koran, although there is reason to believe that a number of them are not
 Muslims.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.--Sudan's population of 24.9 million (1993
 census) is a multiethnic mix of over 500 Arab and African tribes, with scores of lan-
 guages and dialects. There are primarily two cultures in Sudan: the Arab, Muslim
 culture in the north and central areas and the non-Muslim, black African culture
 in the south. The west has a smaller population of Muslim black Africans. Northern
 Muslims, who form a majority of about 16 million, have traditionally dominated the
 Government. Most southern ethnic groups want independence, or, at a minimum,
 the right to self-determination.
 The NIF-dominated regime pursued religious, ethnic, and ideological discrimina-
 tion in almost every aspect of society. The Muslim Arab majority in the north prac-
 ticed widespread iscrimination against the several million displaced non-Arabs
 from the south. Residents in Arabic-speaking areas who do not themselves speak
 Arabic are discriminated against in education, jobs, and other opportunities.
 The Arabization of instruction in higher education discriminates against non-
 Arabs. To compete for study at a university, students completing high school must
 pass examinations in four subjects: English, mathematics, Arabic, and religious
 studies. The examinations for all the subjects except English are given in Arabic,
 disadvantaging those whose native tongue is not Arabic. As the entire university
 curriculum is now in Arabic, this disadvantage continues throughout higher edu-
 cation. Widespread popular attitudes in northern areas stereotype darker-skinned
 non-Arabs as inferior and lazy.
 Religious Minorities.-In government-controlled areas of the south, there was evi-
 dence of a policy of Islamization, as non-Muslim civil servants were often replaced
 by NIF supporters. In the north, some non-Muslims lost their jobs in the civil serv-
 ice, the judiciary, and other professions. Copts noted that whereas a decade or two
 ago they were well-represented in key professions like banking, in recent years the
 Government has hired no Copts for such jobs. In 1993 few non-Muslim university
 graduates found government jobs at all. Frequent dismissals in the police and army
 purged professionals to make room for NIF supporters. Businesses owned and oper-
 ated by non-Muslims experienced overt discrimination, such as denial of trading li-
 censes, or petty harassment.
 The Khartoum State government decreed in 1993 that women could not enter offi-
 cial buildings unless their dress met Islamic standards of modesty. All Sudanese
 public school girls, regardless of faith, must wear Islamic-style uniforms and
 scarve,3. In 1993 the State of Khartoum also put pressure on local private Christian
 schools in an attempt to make their female students wear scarves.
 Although Sudanese law recognizes Sudan as a multireligious country, official tol-
 erance of non-Muslims remained low in 1993. Muslims are in the majority in Sudan
 and predominate in the north, but they are in the minority in the mostly Christian
 or animist south. There are also 1 to 2 million or more displaced southerners, most-
 y Christians or animists, and about half a million Christian Copts in the north. The
 overnment holds that Islam, the dominant faith, must inspire the state's laws, in-
 stitutions, and policies. The Government, however, states that other religions should
 
 
 285
 be respected and freedom of worship guaranteed. Seeking to demonstrate a commit-
 ment to freedom of religion, the Government invited the Pope to visit Sudan, which
 he did for a day in February. Yet, despite official statements about tolerance, many
 non-Muslims faced various restrictions on their freedom to practice their religion.
 People with Disabilities.-The Government has not enacted any special legislation
 or taken other steps to mandate accessibility to public buildings for the disabled.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Although Sudan had a strong labor union movement
 during the Government of Sadiq al-Mahdi, the RCC abolished the precoup labor
 unions and forbade strikes. Stiff punishments, including the death penalty, were
 prescribed for violations of labor decrees. Government officials condemned-usually
 falsely-union activists as "Communists." Many labor leaders were dismissed from
 their jobs or detained, although most of those arrested were later freed. In 1993,
 however, the Government detained scores of union activists suspected of antiregime
 activities. In May the International Labor Organization (ILO) Committee on Free-
 dom of Association deplored the Government's detention of four trade unionists and
 its lack of response to allegations of torture against three of them.
 In September 1989, the regime established preliminary, government-controlled
 steering committees to manage union affairs, pending the drafting of new laws on
 union organization. The Sudan Workers Trade Unions Federation (SWTUF), the
 leading blue-collar labor organization, with about 800,000 members was restored
 with its leadership unchanged and its assets returned, but under tight government
 steering committee control. Besides SWTUF, there was a Professional and Employ-
 ees' Trade Union Federation.
 The Government established further steering committees in 1990. A new labor
 law went into effect in 1992, and union elections at the local level took place that
 year, after a delay to permit the steering committees to arrange the outcomes. The
 elections resulted in government-approved slates of candidates voted into office by
 prearranged acclamation.
 The Government continued to forbid strikes, and there were none in 1993. Unions
 remained free to form federations and affiliate with international bodies, such as the
 African Workers' Union and the Arab Workers' Union.
 The U.S. Government in 1991 suspended Sudan's eligibility for trade benefits
 under the Generalized System of Preferences because of its violations of worker
 rights.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-An RCC constitutional decree
 of June 30, 1989, suspended the right to organize and bargain collectively. These
 rights were restored to organizing committees in September of the same year. How-
 ever, government control of the steering committees and the continued absence of
 labor legislation allowing union meetings, filing of grievances, and other union activ-
 ity greatly reduced the value of these rights. Although local union officials raised
 some grievances with employers, few carrmed them to the Government. No collective
 bargaining takes place in practice. Wages are set by a government-appointed and
 -controlled wage council which includes representatives from the Ministries of Labor
 and Finance, the private sector, and t  rade unions.
 The Government announced in 1993 the creation of two export processing zones
 on the Red Sea coast. At year's end, however, it was unclear whether or not Suda-
 nese labor laws would apply fully in these zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.--Sudanese law prohibits forced or
 comulsory labor. Nonetheless     d slavery has persisted in Sudan. The taking of slaves,
 particularly in war zones, and their export to parts of central and northern Sudan
 were recurrent practices in 1993. The captives were forced to do agricultural and
 domestic work, and some women were made to serve as concubines. Although in
 some cases local authorities took action to stop instances of slavery, in others the
 authorities chose to look thetheher waery re were a number of unverified reports
 that some captives were being exported to Libya. The International Labor Orgniza-
 tion (ILO), in its 1993 WordiLaor Repert, noted that traditional slavery survived
 in modern-day Sudan and "even seemed to be on the increase" in the context of the
 ongoing civil war. Also in 1993, the ILO's Committee of Experts on the Application
 of Conventions and Recommendations expressed regret that the Government of
 Sudan had failed to provide its report responding to allegations of slavery. The an-
 nual ILO conference in June therefore cited Sudan for the third time in a "special
 paragraph," its severest form of criticism.
 The SPLA often continued to force southern men to work as laborers or porters
 or forcibly conscripted them into SPLA ranks. In disputed territories, this practice
 was implemented through raids, while in areas firmly under SPLA control it was
 done through the SPLA-appointed village leaders.
 
 
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The legal minimum age for work-
 ers is 16, but the law is loosely enforced by inspectors from the Ministry of Labor
 in the official or wage economy. In addition, gross poverty in Sudan has produced
 widespread child labor in the informal, unregulated economy. In rural areas, chil-
 dren traditionally assist their families with agricultural work from a very young
 age.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The legislated minimum wage is enforced by
 the Ministry of Labor, which maintains field offices in most major Sudanese urban
 centers. Employers generally respect the minimum wage. Workers who are denied
 the minimum wage may file a grievance with the local Ministry of Labor field office,
 which is then supposed to investigate and take appropriate action if there has been
 a violation of the aw. In late 1993, the Government increased the minimum wage
 to approximately $15 (4,900 Sudanese pounds) per month. Given Sudan's soaring in-
 flation, however, living standards for the average Sudanese worker continued to de-
 teriorate. Conservative estimates by nongovernmental institutions estimate that in
 a major urban center, a Sudanese family of 4 required by the end of 1993 at least
 $36 (12,000 pounds) per month to meet its most basic needs.
 The workweek is limited by law to 6 days and 48 hours, with a day of rest on
 Friday. Although Sudanese laws prescribe health and safety standards, working
 conditions were generally poor and enforcement by the Ministry of Labor minimal
