 SUDAN
 The human rights situation in Sudan improved markedly
 during 1977 as a result of President Nimeiri's initia-
 tive to reconcile difficulties with all Sudanese
 dissident elements. Following the conclusion of an
 agreement with his principal rival, the leader of the
 Mahdists, Nimeiri released over 1200 political prison-
 ers and granted amnesty to all opponents of his regime
 imprisoned since he came to power in 1969. Sudan is
 now attempting to reinstitute legal guarantees of civil
 and political rights by revoking emergency powers and
 amending the constitution.
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Includ-
 ing Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 The use of torture by the Sudanese Government appears
 to be extremely rare. There have been no public
 allegations in recent years of torture being used by
 the government.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 While cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punish-
 ment is not practiced in Sudan, conditions in Sudanese
 prisons reflect the poverty of the country.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 In 1975 the People's Assembly amended the Sudanese
 constitution to permit the President to take any
 action to protect the constitution, the country and
 wthe May [1969] revolution." The President therefore
 has the power of arbitrary arrest and imprisonment, but
 has used it sparingly. In the summer of 1977 President
 Nimeiri declared a general amnesty and released over
 1200 prisoners detained for politically related crimes.
 By this measure virtually all such prisoners being held
 in Sudan have been released.
 (110)
 
 
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Other than in periods of political crisis, fair
 public trials are the rule. In the aftermath of
 the abortive coup in 1976, during which several hundred
 prominent Sudanese were killed without provocation, 457
 alleged perpetrators were nonetheless afforded a public
 trial by a security tribunal. Some 300 were subse-
 quently convicted and reportedly executed.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 There are constitutional guarantees against invasion
 of the home and these are normally respected.
 2. Government Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 The Sudanese Government is actively promoting the
 development of its vast agricultural potential through
 programs designed to benefit not only the urban poor,
 who are readily accessible, but also the more inaccess-
 ible rural poor. In addition, Sudan has devoted
 significant resources to housing, health care and
 education.
 Two major trade union federations in Sudan, one for
 blue-collar and the other for professional (largely
 government) workers, both make a genuine effort to
 represent their member's interests within broad guide-
 lines set by government and party.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, In-
 cluding:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion,
 and Assembly
 In September 1976 the Sudanese Government suspended
 articles of the Constitution relating to freedom of
 opinion. Political freedoms such as assembly
 and free speech can be exercised only within certain
 
 
 limits. There is religious freedom    The press is
 controlled by the government; it is permitted to
 comment critically on domestic issues. Private and
 public committees have been organized to advise the
 government on measures to reinstitute legal safeguards.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 Constitutional guarantees of freedom of movement
 within the country were formally repealed by the 1975
 amendments, but there are no such restrictions currently
 in force. There is no policy of restriction of
 foreign travel or emigration, although exit permits
 are required.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 The Sudanese Socialist Union (SSU) is the only legal
 political party in the country. Therefore there is
 limited freedom to participate in the political
 process. Independents may campaign for office upon
 approval of the SSU. Independent candidates have
 been elected to the Peoples' Assembly. Candidates are
 elected by universal adult sufferage. Politicians
 associated with parties or movements predating the
 current government remain at liberty to express their
 views in private, but they may not attempt to organ-
 ize in opposition.
 4. Government Attitudes and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-Governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Sudanese Government is somewhat sensitive to the
 human rights issue. Amnesty International reports
 that it planned to accept Sudan's 1976 invitation to
 send a mission to discuss human rights problems, but
 that subsequent negotiations-on detailed arrangements
 for the mission have been inconclusive.
 
 
