	SUDAN
The entrenchment in Sudan of the government fronted by Lt. General Omar Hassan al-Bashir and dominated by the National Islamic Front (NIF) of Dr. Hassan al-Turabi has been characterized by pious proclamations against a background of severe repression. Having demonstrated a flagrant disregard for human rights since it came to power in 1989, the Sudanese government had by 1994 established a police state aptly described in last year's edition of the Critique as "Orwellian" in its systematic social manipulation. A draconian set of emergency rules has suspended civil and political rights for Muslims as well as non-Muslims, while women and non-Muslims encounter particular discrimination. Intimidation of the civilian opposition in the north reflected the same absolutist strategy as the bombing of village populations in the south, where the government's war against factions of the Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA) defied attempts at mediation.
Faced with international criticism and economic isolation, the regime has oscillated between "charm offensives" intended to improve its image in the West — to the. extent of hiring a US public relations consultant — and defiant accusations that critics are motivated by hatred of Sudan and its "Islamic orientation." For its part, the United States has tended to focus more on the hitherto unproven involvement of the Sudanese regime in international "Islamist" terrorism than on its demonstrably brutal human rights record. The 1994 State Department report rightly describes the human rights situation as "dismal" and is careful to record the abuses of both the government and the southern-based insurgents. However, this diplomatic concern for even handedness is likely to go unappreciated and unacknowledged by the Sudanese government.
UN Special Rapporteur Gaspar Biro, appointed in July 1993 to investigate the situation in Sudan, was attacked by government officials as an "enemy of Islam" after presenting firm conclusions of grave and widespread violations by both government and SPLA agents. Khartoum has been similarly dismissive of detailed investigations by Human Rights Watch/Africa and Amnesty International, whose motives and sources it
235
CRITIQUE 1994
derides along with the "hostile campaign" it perceives in the western media.
In addition to "summary execution, torture, rape, kidnapping, looting of goods and burning of houses" by all sides in the Sudanese conflict, Dr. Biro's 1994 report noted as special concerns the indiscriminate and intensified aerial bombing of civilians by the government, the use of children as soldiers by all parties, continued interference by all parties in the distribution of humanitarian aid and the increasing use of land mines. He also found an "alarming" increase in forced disappearances in southern towns controlled by the government and concluded:
While cases concerning locally or nationally well-known personalities or local workers of foreign humanitarian agencies are well-documented and widely publicized, the Special Rapporteur received information during his recent mission on the enforced disappearance of average citizens who do not receive the same degree of publicity.
The first reference to the UN Special Rapporteur in the 1994 State Department report on Sudan is a description of the personal abuse leveled against him by the regime. Although it acknowledges the "detailed and documented" nature of Dr. Biro's work, the report's only other reference to it concerns his findings regarding "special camps where people [reportedly] ... come to purchase women and children" from the war zones of Southern Sudan and the Nuba Mountains. While the State Department continues to improve its coverage of Sudan, the fleeting and fragmentary nature of this reference is characteristic of the shortcomings of the 1994 report. Although it may fulfill its brief to the letter by touching on a reasonably comprehensive spread of areas of concern, the report's telegraphic brevity raises more questions than it can answer. By failing to contextualize events, it once again misses an opportunity to shed more light on its carefully compiled list of incidents and infrmgements. The systematic and large-scale nature of human rights abuse as an instrument of social policy by the Sudanese government is simply not conveyed when presented in piecemeal fashion as apparently unrelated violations.
236
_SUDAN
The report displays a certain lack of focus when considering the complexities of Sudan's religious and political composition. While mention is made (in the discussion of political and other extrajudicial killing) of "intra-Islamic divisions," highlighted by a machine-gun attack on a rival mosque, the report tends elsewhere to use terms such as "Arab," "Islamic" and "Northern Sudanese" in a manner that fails to distinguish the policies of the NIF from the rest of the northern Sudanese community. Even when discussing the mosque attack, it concentrates on the "pro-Saudi" nature of the Ansar al-Sunna al-Muhammadiya sect whose members were killed and neglects to mention the sect leader's criticisms of the NIF. (It also refers misleadingly to "Omdurman's Thawra Mosque", when Thawra is simply a district of Omdurman with many other mosques.)
Apart from this mention of a small, ultra-conservative sect, the existence of alternative Sudanese Islamic viewpoints is still virtually disregarded. Although the report contrasts government "practice as opposed to government rhetoric" where the rights of children are concerned, in general the regime's claim to be acting in the name of Islam is largely taken at face value. Only when describing the April 1994 trial of 29 men accused of a bomb plot does the report venture to challenge the government's religious credentials. Here, it points out that the court acknowledged that confessions were elicited from the defendants through the use of torture but found them to be admissible evidence "because the defendants could not prove they were being tortured at the time they confessed." Noting that the court "also claimed that Islamic law allows torture," the report cites "the bulk of Islamic jurisprudence" as disputing this assertion. In fact there is an ambiguity in Islamic law in this regard. Early Islam tried to regulate preexisting practices such as amputation, and can be read either as condoning them or as attempting to avoid excesses. Since the Khalifa Omar Ibn al-Khattab — shortly after the death of the Prophet Mohamed — suspended the practice of amputation for theft, there are precedents for ruling that such huddud punishments are not obligatory. Certainly they are gross violations of accepted international human rights law.
237
CRITIQUE 1994
Elsewhere the language used in the report remains ambiguous. It continues to refer to "Islamic" bodies and ideology, notably in the Popular Defense Force militia, Popular Police force and "Islamic" NGOs. This leaves the report open to accusations of Western anti-Islamic prejudice and helps the Sudanese government to claim religious legitimacy. As last year's edition of the Critique pointed out, it would be more appropriate — and more respectful of non-NIF Muslims — to use more precise terminology. In discussing the restrictions placed on NGOs by the SPLA/SPLM (Sudan People's Liberation Movement), the report acknowledges the ties between "many Islamic NGOs" and the government and NIF; given that, it could more accurately refer to "National Islamic Front" ideology, personnel and apparatus throughout. In citing the Popular Police's role in "enforcing proper social behavior," or the government's targeting of "persons suspected of political crimes," the report might usefully have put such terms in quotation marks to avoid any inference that it was accepting government terminology at face value.
The report is also guilty of a careless use of language in relation to women's rights, in the assertion that: "Among some southern tribes, rape is common. No blame is attached to the practice, although the man involved must pay the woman's family if she becomes pregnant." Cultural differences in attitudes to extramarital sexual intercourse vary widely in Sudan, as does the definition of the concept of rape. Social decorum may dictate that an affair between two unmarried individuals be termed "rape," even if an informal settlement of liability is reached. For this reason alone, sweeping statements of this nature create a false impression of "some southern tribes" as sexually violent or promiscuous. This undermines the more valid observations that women are treated as property, that sexual abuse — particularly of southern women in the north — is widespread, and that rape of a far less ambiguous nature is commonplace both in the war zone and in police cells. The suggestion that rape in prison "does not appear to be a major problem" overlooks frequent reports that warders demand sexual favors from women prisoners. Sexual abuse of males — a highly sensitive issue for Sudanese, but indisputably part of the repertoire of torture — is not mentioned at all.
238
_SUDAN
People with disabilities suffer from discrimination that was endemic in the society before the advent of the NIF, and it would be unrealistic to expect improvements in legislation or social provision from a government that embodies the most callous aspects of that society. Nonetheless, the report's statement that the government "does not discriminate against handicapped persons" is demonstrably untrue. The advocates of a penal code that permits the amputation of limbs have also harassed and dismantled the charitable organization that was helping to provide amputees — mostly from the end of the Nimeiri era — with artificial limbs.
The report's detailed information about the banning of trade unions and restrictions on freedom of association seems to be contradicted by that section's closing paragraph, which says that "[ujnions remained free to form federations and affiliate with international bodies, such as the African Workers' Union and the Arab Workers' Union." The Bush Administration suspended Sudan's eligibility for trade benefits in 1991 because of its violations of worker rights. Since the preceding paragraphs make it clear that only government-approved.candidates can stand for office in unions tightly controlled by government-approved steering committees, any residual freedom is meaningless.
An accurate account of the extensive use of detention by the security forces notes the difference between theory and practice in the 1992 National Security Act. This act supposedly sets forth the limits to detention — up to 72 hours, renewable for up to one month with "justification" — and gives the president the right to authorize "precautionary detention" of up to three months. In fact, as the report makes clear, there is no definition of what constitutes "justification," and the authority for further detention is delegated to subordinate officials. Indefinite detention results from the legal provisions being routinely ignored, and it is commonplace for security officers to carry blank arrest warrants already signed by a judge.
The Sudanese authorities completely disregard the independence of the judiciary, and the government's administrative decisions cannot be
239
CRITIQUE 1994
challenged. Judges have been appointed and dismissed for political reasons, and highly trained and experienced judges are among the estimated 7,000 civil servants who have been removed from their employment since the June 1989 coup. The report confirms that all non-Muslim judges from government-controlled parts of the south have been moved to the north and given "low-level tasks such as adjudicating traffic disputes."
On December 2, 1994, security forces searched the residences in Khartoum of two well-known Sudanese lawyers, Mustafa Abdel Gadir and Ali Mahmoud Hassanain, without a warrant. They searched the men's offices, including confidential files, and summoned them to the security offices. The two lawyers were reportedly made to stand against a wall for several hours and verbally harassed and ill-treated during their interrogation. Upon their release they were ordered to return to the security offices the following day. Dr. Biro notes that both jurists were acting as defense lawyers in a case concerning "torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment described by the Special Rapporteur in his interim report."
The report should have qualified its comment that the number of new arrests decreased in 1994 compared with previous years. To grasp the significance of this decline, it is important to note that many opposition political activists have left Sudan as a result of government harassment. Others have been held for questioning many times over and thus do not count as "new" arrests. The regime also appears to have recognized that long-term detentions are counterproductive, since they draw attention to its activities. Instead, it has adopted a new policy of frequent short-term detentions, averaging three days, which means that detainees are freed before human rights agencies can issue alerts. On their release, suspects are often required to report back daily to the security offices, where they may be beaten or undergo psychological ill-treatment. As the report shows, although not technically detained, they cannot maintain their employment or mobility while their time is taken up in this manner. Techniques such as the sexual abuse of male detainees are deliberately employed to shame the victims into silence.
240
_SUDAN
In its consideration of the government's attitude toward domestic criticism on human rights issues, the report notes that the government established its own "Sudan Human Rights Organization" (SHRO) in 1991 to defend its record. Although it notes that this body is not to be confused with the previous independent SHRO, which was dissolved by the government, it fails to point out that it was precisely the reactivation of the original SHRO in exile that prompted the formation of a pro-government body of the same name.
The Bashir government has alternated overtures to opposition politicians with threats and periods in detention, with former Prime Minister Sadiq al-Mahdi a frequent target. The report gives a rather sketchy account of the episode in which he was arrested with two other senior Umma Party figures, Hamad Bagadi and Abdul Rahman Farah, and charged with conspiracy to overthrow the government by means of bombings and assassinations. It would have been more valuable to learn what pressure was applied to extract the incriminating confessions that accompanied their release. When the report goes on to mention the repeated detention of Sid Ahmed al-Hussein, it would have been more illuminating for the reader to be told that he was the most senior representative of the oppositon Democratic Unionist Party remaining in the country at that time. Instead, his name appears without explanation. It could also be argued that the Sudanese government has tended to distinguish between the few opposition figures who might be a more effective threat outside the country because of their links with the Western establishment, and the majority of activists who function best inside the country. In order to maximize their disadvantage, the former are not allowed to leave, while the latter are forced abroad.
A similar selectivity is at work in the government's handling of the foreign media. The report's comment that foreign journalists are periodically admitted under close supervision is not sufficiently nuanced: those with a close understanding of Sudanese politics tend to be kept out, even during the "open" phases, while others with minimal experience of the country are encouraged. A similar weeding-out process is evident when
241
CRITIQUE 1994
figures such as NIF leader Dr. Hassan al-Turabi embark on fence-mending expeditions to Western countries. Occasionally this strategy backfires: one journalist accompanying two British members of Parliament to Kadugli, capital of the Nuba Mountains, was told that the Arabic slogan carved into a hillside meant "welcome." In fact, she knew the language sufficiently to read the word jihad.
The peace initiative launched by neighboring countries in the Hom of Africa under the auspices of the Inter-Govemmental Authority on Drought and Development (IGADD) had stalled at the end of 1994, amid accusations from the Khartoum government that its members were biased against Sudan. The initiative itself was largely prompted by concerns about the destabilizing effect on the region not only of the war but also of the Sudanese government's support for radical Islamic groups beyond its borders. One member state, Eritrea, broke off diplomatic relations with Sudan, alleging that Khartoum was supporting the insurgent Eritrean Islamic Jihad; Khartoum responded by accusing Eritrea of training dissidents from the cross-border Beja tribe. Relations with Uganda were increasingly strained toward the end of 1994, culminating in the mutual expulsion of ambassadors in April 1995. Again, each side accused the other of aiding insurgent rebel forces.
The report's discussion of the peace talks is marked early on by ambiguity. The introduction says that the civil war "continued, despite efforts by Kenya, Uganda, Ethiopia, Eritrea and Sudan, under the auspices of [IGADD]." This conflates the acknowledgment of Sudan's membership with the fact that the remaining members of IGADD were responsible for the peace initiative. It also suggests — misleadingly — a seriousness of purpose on the part of the Sudan government that is not apparent on the ground. Indeed, in the section dealing with freedom of movement, the report makes it plain that "although government rhetoric supported ending the civil war, the Government launched major military offensives in the south throughout the year." However, the report refrains from including explicit detail on the government's role in creating a stalemate in the peace negotiations, preferring to blame "the intransigence of the various warring parties, whose commitment to peace was questionable." This overlooks
242
_SUDAN
the Sudanese government's spoiling tactics, both in the field and behind the scenes at the Nairobi peace talks, including its refusal to accept the Declaration of Principles agreed upon by all other parties to the negotiations. Khartoum has ruled out discussion of two key issues: the role of religion in the state and the question of southern self-determination. Since the conflict itself arose out of the interlinked questions of religion and slavery, it is hard to see what other issues the government might discuss with the southerners.
When addressing the destructive effects of the war itself, the report sums up the abuses by both sides competently but without specific reference to the fact that internationally accepted rules of war are being violated. These violations, in the Nuba Mountains as well as in the south, are examined in the context of international law by Human Rights Watch/Africa in its June 1994 report entitled Civilian Devastation.
The evidence amassed in the 1994 State Department report amounts to a clear and almost comprehensive catalogue of the excesses of the Sudanese government and the rebel factions in the south. Within the limitations of the format, the report also strives to put a modicum of political flesh on the bones of human rights issues. Two exceptions remain — namely the shortcomings in its discussion of Islam and its still minimal coverage of marginalized areas such as the Nuba Mountains — and the blurring of these key questions gives cause for concern about the interpretation that US decision-makers will put on the report. Western policies seem to veer between exaggerated statements about the international "Islamic threat" and a form of realpolitik that treats Lt. Gen. Bashir and Dr. Turabi as people with whom it is possible to do business. Neither approach is adequate to the task of bringing stability and justice to Sudan, which must be predicated on establishing a framework of respect for human rights.
243
CRITIQUE 1994
244
