SUDAN
The 1988 report on Sudan is a solid account that contains a wealth of detailed information on both broad questions and specific cases. The report touches on most major developments in 1988 and shows considerable familiarity with the relevant issues and the wider political context.
With regard to Sudan's dvil war, the report accurately and forcefully documents the devastating ^o<^es committed by both government forces and the anti-government guerrilla group, the Sudanese People's liberation Army (SPLA). The report ^ves a detailed picture of the extent to which bc^ sides to the conflict are responsible for serious violations of human rights and humanitarian law, such as killing noncombatants, improperly deplo)ing land mines, and using starvation as a poUtical weapon. The report also details the problems of Sudan's enormous displaced population. The State Department does not hesitate to speak in its own voice, instead of referring to "allegations" and "unconfirmed reports." There are only minor points of emphasis with which we would quarrel
In stating that there was a reduction in killings by militias in 1988, the report should have made clear that this was not in any way related to government initiatives. While it is hard to estimate the exact number of people killed by militias, we believe that the State Department's estimate of hundreds is too low.
The report also imderestimates the extent of discrimination against southerners. It does not indicate, as it should, that deep-rooted cultural perceptions among northerners have created biases against southerners, who are generally regarded as second-class citizens. This is an important point because this bias influences the way the central government functions. The report notes that in the Cabinet in place at the end of 1988 there were only three Christians out of 28 members. It should also have noted that when southerners have been ^ven ministerial posts, their portfolios have rarely, if ever, included such politi-
181
Critique
cally significant areas as defense, foreign affairs, finance or the interior. Instead, southerners have been allocated politically marginal posts, such as the Ministry of "Youth and Sport" or the Ministry of "Re^onal Co-ordination and Local Government."
Wkh respect to the important question of distribution of food to starving people in the South, the report correctly points out that government negligence and inefficiency, as well as interference or failure to cooperate with relief operations, caused the deaths of many people. The report does not, however, pay sufficient attention to local differences in the way that provincial commanders and local-level officials use food at their disposal for personal financial gain. In this respect, offidals in Darfur have behaved more decently than their counterparts in Kordofan, for example.
Finally, the report gives the impression that feeding the starving in Sudan is the responsibility of foreigners, and that the role of the Sudanese government is, at most, not to interfere with relief efforts. The report should have stated in clear terms that the government of Sudan has the principal responsibility in this regard, and that, out of indifference or hostility to the fate of Southerners, the government has not even attempted to fulfill that respon-siblity, let alone to facilitate efforts by others.
182
