 SUDAN
 The 1989 military coup that overthrew Sudan's democratically elected government
 brought to power Lt. General Omar Hassan A1-Bashir and his National Salvation
 Revolution Command Council (RCC). Bashir and the RCC suspended the 1985 con-
 stitution, abrogated press freedom, and disbanded all political parties and trade
 unions. In 1993 the RCC dissolved itself and appointed Bashir President. In March
 Bashir won highly structured national elections as President, while an elected Na-
 tional Assembly replaced the transitional national assembly. The opposition boy-
 cotted the electoral process. Despite promulgation of new national institutions and
 an interim constitution through constitutional decrees, the new Government has
 continued to restrict most civil liberties. Since 1989 real power has rested with the
 National Islamic Front (NIF), founded by Dr. Hassan Al-Turabi. He became Speaker
 of the 1996 National Assembly. NIF members and supporters continue to hold key
 positions in the Government; security forces; judiciary; academia; and the media.
 The newly created supreme political institution, the National Convention, which
 sets national policy guidelines, is also under NIF control. The judiciary is subject
 to government influence.
 The civil war, which has resulted in the death of more than 1.5 million Sudanese,
 continued into its 13th year. The principal insurgent factions are the Sudanese Peo-
 ple's Liberation Movement (SPLM) andthe South Sudan Independence Movement
 (SSIM). Neither side has the apparent ability to win the war militarily. Informal
 peace efforts included one meeting in May following the U.N. Educational and
 Science agency's (UNESCO's) 1995 Culture of Peace" effort to initiate a dialog be-
 tween the Government and insurgent leaders. These meetings did not, however, con-
 stitute peace negotiations.
 Government efforts led one insurgent faction leader, Riak Machar of the SSIM
 and a number of less significant figures, to sign a "political charter" on April 10.
 However, the SPLM, the major insurgent movement, has regarded the document
 with suspicion. Regional nations of the renamed Intergovernmental Authority on
 Development (IGAD) played no role in the peace process in the wake of the 1995
 government rejection of the IGAD declaration of principles.
 In addition to the regular police and the Sudan People's Armed Forces (SPAF),
 the Government maintains an external security organ, an internal security organ,
 a militia known as the Popular Defense Forces (PDF), and a parallel police force,
 the Popular Police, whose mission includes enforcing proper social behavior, includ-
 ing restrictions on alcohol and "immodest dress." Mem ers of the security forces
 committed numerous human rights abuses.
 Civil war, economic mismanagement, over 3 million internally displaced persons
 in a country of 27.5 million, and a refugee influx from neighboring countries have
 devastated Sudan's mostly agricultural economy. Exports of gum arabic, livestock,
 and meat accounted for more than 50 percent of export earnings. Reforms aimed
 at privatizing state-run firms and stimulating private investment failed to revive a
 moribund economy saddled with massive military expenditures and a huge foreign
 debt of approximately $16 billion. Per capita national income is estimated at $900
 per year.
 The human rights situation remained extremely poor, as both the Government
 and insurgents committed serious human rights abuses. Government forces were re-
 sponsible Tor extrajudicial killings, disappearances, forced labor, slavery, and forced
 conscription of children. Government security forces regularly harassed, arbitrarily
 arrested and detained, tortured, and beat opponents or suspected opponents of the
 Government with impunity. Prison conditions are harsh, and the judiciary is largely
 
 
 265
 subservient to the Government. The authorities do not ensure due process, and the
 military forces summarily tried and punished citizens.
 The Government continued to restrict freedom of assembly, association, religion,
 privacy, and movement. Citizens do not have the ability to change their government
 peacefully. In the context of the Islamization and Arabization drive, pressure-in-
 cluding forced Islamization-on non-Muslims remained strong. Fears of Arabization
 and Islamization and the imposition of Shari'a (Islamic Law) fueled support for the
 southern insurgency. Discrimination and violence against women and abuse of chil-
 dren continued. Discrimination against religious and ethnic minorities persisted, as
 did government restrictions on worker rights. Child labor is a problem.
 On a positive note, the Government resumed coration       with international
 human rights monitrs. The U.N., including the Special Rapporteur on Sudan and
 the Rapporteur on Religious Intolerance visited areas under the Government's con-
 trl. The Government also invited the Rapporteur on Freedom of Expression to visit.
 Coopration with U.N.-sponsred relief operations was mixed. Government forces
 periodically obstructed the flow of humanitarian assistance. Problems with relief
 flights in the south centered on the Government's denial of more than a dozen des-
 tinations to both the U.N. Operation Lifeline Sudan and the International Commit-
 tee of the Red Cross (ICRC). In December US. Congressman Bill Richardson helped
 conclude an agreement between the ICRC and an insurgent leader allied with the
 Government, Kerubino Kwanyin Bol, which freed three ICRO hostages Kerubino
 had captured from an ICRC flight. The agreement gave Kerubino some relief sup-
 p lies in return for the release of three expatriate ICRO staff members. The other
 five hostages, SPLA soldiers (from the SPLMZ military wing) being returned under
 accepted ground rules to their place of origin by the ICRC after treatment for
 wounds at an ICRC hospital, were given the choice of returning to Khartoum with
 the other released hostages, returning to territory held by SPLA by walking, or
 staying under Kerubino's control. They chose the latter, but their current where-
 abouts are unknown. In July authorities restored permission for relief flights by C-
 130 aircraft with large cargo capacity.
 Insurgent groups continued to commit numerous, serious human rights abuses.
 The SPLM continued to violate citizens' rights, despite its claim to be implementing
 a 1994 decision to assert civil authority in areas that it controls, and in many cases,
 has controlled for many years. The SPLM was responsible for extrajudicial killings,
 kidnapings, arbitrary detention, and forced conscription, and occasional arrest of for-
 eign relief workers without charge. The SPLM failed to follow through on its prom-
 ise to investigate a 1995 massacre. The ICRC publicly noted that the SPLM taught
 courses to offiers of the SPLA at the request of that organization. The ICR also
 noted that the SPLA has begun to observe some basic laws of war. It takes pris-
 oners on the battlefield and permits ICRC visits to them. However, the SPLA did
 not allow the ICRC to visit rebels accused by the insurgent grup of "treason" or
 other crimes. The Government still does not apply the laws o war  the southern
 insurgency and takes no prisoners.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Ex  otajudicial Kiling.-No substantiated reports of political
 or other extrjudicial killings came from insurgent zones, possibly due to the limited
 access to such zones by outside observers. In their attacks on insurgent forces, gov-
 ernment troops also killed civilians (see Section 1.g.). Police also used excessive force
 against demonstrators. According to conflicting reports, police killed six or seven
 demonstrators in an incident in Omduran (see lction 2.b.).
 Insurgent forces are believed to have committed political and other extrajudicial
 killings, with details generally unavailable. Rebels also killed civilians during their
 attacks on government forces (see Section 1.g.).
 b. Disappearance.-There were continued allegations that the Government was re-
 sponsible for the arrest and subsequent disap  arance of those suspected of support-
 ing rebels in government-controlled zones o      n e souh       a Mountains.
 The Government established a Committee to Investigate Slavery and Disappear-
 ances m         r the Nuba Mountains in response to a resolution passed by the 1995 U.N.
 General Assembly. The Committee reportedly interviewed or obtained reliable infor-
 mation on the whereabouts of all but about 3 dozen of the more than 200 persons
 whose cases of disappearance the U.N. had cited.
 Scores of persons arrested by government forces in Juba in 1992, including two
 Sudanese employees of the U.S. Agency for International Development, Domonic
 Morris and Chaplain Lako, remained unaccounted for, most are believed dead. In
 
 
 266
 
 spite of reliable reports that a few of those arrested in Juba in 1992 are held in
 a Khartoum prison, the Government denied any knowledge of their whereabouts.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Government's official and unofficial security forces continued to torture and
 beat suspected opponents. From December 1995 through January 1996, authorities
 in Juba teat and tortured a young man of the Toposa ethnic group to extract a con-
 fession that he had organized antigovernment cells. They detained and demanded
 a confession from a Roman Catholic priest of the same ethnic group, threatening
 to kill the youth and others unless the priest confessed to antigovernment activities,
 which he did.
 Reports continued to decline of use of, and torture in, "ghost houses,* places where
 security forces detained government opponents incommunicado under harsh condi-
 tions for an indeterminate time with no supervision by the courts or other independ-
 ent authorities with power to release the detainees. Their use has likely declined
 due to the increased control of the NIF regime, which decreased the need to intimi-
 date opposition groups. The west wing of Khartoum's main Kober prison remains
 under the supervision of the security services. It was removed from prison services'
 control in 1995. While other prison wardens are accountable to courts of law for
 abuses they perpetrate, security forces are not. Despite the widespread use of tor-
 ture, the Government has never publicly disciplined any security official for employ-
 ing it.
 ihe 1991 Criminal Act, based on an interpretation of Shari'a law, prescribes spe-
 cific "hudud" punishments, including amputation, stoning, and lashing for some of-
 fenses. The courts continued their informal suspension of the amputation and ston-
 ing penalties and did not impose sentences involving them during the year. The
 courts routinely meted out lashings, most often to persons convicted of brewing or
 consuming alcohol. Two U.S. citizens of ethnic Sudanese origin were lashed in early
 1996.
 Conditions in government prisons remain harsh, but not life threatening. Built be-
 fore Sudan's 1956 independence, most prisons are poorly maintained, and many lack
 basic facilities such as toilets or showers. Health care is primitive and food inad-
 equate. Minors are often held with adults. Female prisoners are housed separately
 from men; rape in prison is reportedly rare. Prison officials arbitrarily denied family
 visits. While there are currently no independent Sudanese human rights organiza-
 tions, international human rights officials have visited prisons in the past.
 There are credible reports of beatings and other punishment of prisoners, often
 by SPLA and SSIA rebels, but the only verifications have been reports by ICRC and
 others who have been to SPLM prisoner of war camps. The SPLM allows the ICRC
 to visit battlefield prisoners, except those accused of treason or other crimes. The
 SSIM permits no such visits.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Legal provisions under the 1992 and
 1995 National Security Acts and Criminal Code effectively set a fairly simple proc-
 ess to detain anyone for 3 months, with presidential determination, backed by a
 magistrate, available to detain for an additional 3 months. In July the authorities
 moved to charge and court martial a number of persons accused following a March
 coup attempt. Allegations continue that some individuals are detained indefinitely.
 The law allows for bail, except for those accused of crimes punishable by death
 or life imprisonment. In theory, the Government provides legal counsel for indigent
 persons in such cases. However, reports continue that defendants do not always re-
 ceive this right, and that counsel in some cases may oniy advise the defendant and
 may not address the court.
 Authorities continued to detain political opponents of the Government during the
 year. In the wake of antigovenent demonstrations, especially by students, au-
 thorities arrested many individuals. A number of medical personnel were detained
 following prtests and a confrontation with public order personnel at Khartoum hos-
 pital. A notable incident of harassment was the arrest and brief detention of former
 vice president Abel Alier, who refused to be turned away from attending a gathering
 at former prime minister Sadiq A-Mahdi's residence. Mr. Alier later publicly de-
 scribed degrading treatment that he received from security forces.
 In August a military officer of the SPLA in charge at Akot detained six mission-
 aries without charge for 12 days, contravening the SPLM's April resolution that "no
 person shall be held in incommunicado detention without charge or trial." During
 the detention, the SPLM military officers refused to accede to the demand of the
 SPLM civil authority "commissioner" for that county, who demanded the mission-
 aries' release, calling into serious question the powers of that civil authority. The
 Swere released oniy when the more powerful SPLA authorities intervened. By
 year's end, an investigation had been organized by the SPLM and the new Sudan
 Council for Churches, but no action had been token against the perpetrators.
 
 
 267
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judiciary is not independent and is largely
 subservient to the Government. The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, formerly
 elected by sitting judges, is now appointed. As the senior judge in the judicial serv-
 ice he also controals the judiciary.
 The judicial system includes four types of courts: Regular courts, both criminal
 and civil; special mixed security courts; military courts; and tribal courts in rural
 areas to resolve disputes over land and water rights and family matters.
 The 1991 Criminal Act governs criminal cases, whereas the 1983 Civil Trans-
 actions Act still applies to most civil cases. Military trials, which are sometimes se-
 cret and brief, do not provide procedural safeguards, have sometimes taken place
 with no advocate nor counsel permitted, and no effective appeal from a death sen-
 tence. Other than for clemency, witnesses may be permitted.
 Trials in regular courts nominally meet international standards of legal protec-
 tions. For example, the accused normally have the right to counsel, and the courts
 are required to provide free legal counsel for indigent defendants accused of crimes
 punishable by death or life imprisonment. In practice, however, these legal protec-
 tions are unevenly applied.
 In 1989 the Special Courts Act created special three-person security courts to deal
 with a wide range of offenses, including violations of constitutional decrees, emer-
 gency regulations, some sections of the penal code, as well as drug and currency of-
 lenses. Special courts, on which both military and civilian judges sit, handle most
 security related cases.
 Attorneys may advise defendants as "friends of the court" but normally may not
 address the court. Lawyers complain that they are sometimes granted access to
 court documents too late to prepare an effective defense. Sentences are usually se-
 vere and implemented at once. Death sentences, however, are referred to the Chief
 Justice and the Head of State. Defendants may file appellate briefs with the Chief
 Justice.
 The RCC dissolved the respected Sudanese Bar Association in 1989 and rein-
 stated it with an NI-controlled leadership. Lawyers who wish to practice in Sudan
 must maintain membership in the Bar Association. Human rights monitors report
 that the Government continued to harass, detain, and torture members of the legal
 profession whom it viewed as political opponents.
 The Government officially exempts the 10 southern states, whose population is
 mostly non-Muslim, from parts of the Criminal Act. However, the Act permits the
 possible future application of Shari'a law in the south, if the state assemblies so de-
 cide. There were no reports that hudud punishments, other than lashings, were car-
 ried out by the courts in government-controlled areas of the south. Fear of the impo-
 sition of Sharia law remained a key issue in the rebellion.
 Parts of thee o        t   Nuba Mountains fell outside effective judicial proe-
 dures and other governmental functions. According to credible reports, government
 units summarily tried and punished those accused of crimes, especially for offenses
 against civil order.
 In July the Government brought to military court 31 persons alleged to have plot-
 ted a coup in March. The Commander-in-Chief, President Bashir, asked that the At-
 torey General approve, under the relevant provision of law, that 10 of the civilians
 accused be tried in the military court. The Attorney General so approved. The trial
 continued at year's end.
 Magistrates in SPLM-held areas follow a penal cde roughly based on the 1925
 Sudan code. In rural areas outside effective SPLM control, tribal chiefs apply cus-
 tomary laws. The SPLM proclaimed a civilian structure to eliminate the secret and
 essentially political trials conducted by military commanders in previous years, but
 at year's end there was no evidence to indicate that any such civilian trials had
 been held.
 The Government maintains that it holds no political prisoners, although credible
 resorts persist that the Government holds several political detainees (see Section
 1.d.).
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Government routinely interferes with its citizens privacy. Security forces frequently
 conducted night searches without warrants. They targeted persons suspected of po-
 litical crimes or, in northern Sudan, of distilling or consuming illegal alcoholic bev-
 erages. The Government razed the homes of thousands of squatters (see Section
 2.d.).
 A wide network of government informants conducted pervasive surveillance in
 schools, universities, markets, workplaces, and neighborhoods. The Government dis-
 banded political parties and prevented citizens from forming new political groups.
 The Government continued to summarily dismiss military personnel and other gov-
 ernment employees whose loyalty was suspect. The government committee set up
 
 
 in August 1995 to review cases of persons summarily dismissed since the 1989 coup
 continued to function. In May the government press reported that 124 government
 employees laid off after the coup had been reinstated and, on the recommendation
 of the committee, the President improved the pension status of 582 others. This ac-
 tion followed the reinstatement of 63 government employees in February.
 Security personnel routinely opened and read mail and monitored telephones. The
 Government continued to restrict ownership of satellite dishes by private citizens
 by enforcement of its licensing requirement.
 A Muslim man may marry a non-Muslim, but a Muslim woman cannot marry a
 non-Muslim, unless he converts to Islam. However, this rohibition is not univer-
 sally observed, particularly in the south and among Nubians. Non-Muslims may
 only adopt non-Muslim children; no such restrictions apply to Muslims.
 Various government bodies have decreed on different occasions that women must
 dress according to modest Islamic standards (see Section 5.).
 A wide variety of Arabic and English publications are available, but they are sub-
 ject to censorship.
 Government-instituted neighborhood "popular committees"-ostensibly a mecha-
 nism for political mobilization-served as a means for monitoring households' activi-
 ties. These committees caused many citizens to be wary of neighbors who could re-
  ort them for "suspicious" activities, including "excessive" contact with foreigners.
 e committees also furnished or withheld documents essential for obtaining an exit
 visa. In high schools, students were sometimes pressured to join pro-regime youth
 groups.
 Both the Government and rebel factions continued to forcibly conscript citizens
 (see Section 6.c.).
 The insurgent SPLM is not known to interfere with privacy, family, home or cor-
 respondence in areas it controls, although correspondence is difficult in war zones.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-Since the civil war resumed in 1983, more than 1.6 million people have been
 killed as a result of fighting between the Government and insurgents in the south.
 The civil war continued unabated, and all sides involved in the fighting were re-
 sponsible for abuses in violation of humanitarian norms. At year's end, the Govern-
 ment controlled virtually all the northern two-thirds of the country and some areas
 of the southern third. Insurgents operating under the National Democratic Alliance
 began small scale activities along the Ethiopian and Eritrean border areas in Janu-
 ary. Government aircraft and helicopter gun ships bombed or attacked civilian areas
 at Kotobi, Tambura, and Maridi, and other places in the south.
 Government forces routinely killed rebel soldiers captured on the battlefield. Only
 a small group of prisoners captured before the 1989 coup are reported being held
 as prisoners of war in government-controlled areas. These persons are held in Juba
 and have been visited by the ICRC.
 The Government did not detain nongovernmental organization (NGO) workers in
 areas captured by its forces; however, government restrictions in practice limited or
 denied travel by relief NGO's to many areas long controlled by insurgents.
 Rape of women is cominitted by both parties to the conflict in the south.
 Both sides routinely displacd and often killed civilians or destroyed clinics and
 dwellings intentionally during their offensive operations. Insurgent forces along the
 Eritrean border laid land mines which caused casualties to civilian travelers as well
 as to military forces.
 Northern Muslim opposition groups under the 1995 "National Democratic Alli-
 ance" (NDA) umbrella structure, which includes the SPLA, took military action
 against the Government. The NDA claimed to have attacked government garrisons
 and strategic points near the Ethiopian and Eritrean borders. They also indiscrimi-
 nately laid land mines on roads and paths, which killed and maimed both soldiers
 and civilians.
 The SPLM has taken a number of prisoners over the years, many during its offen-
 sive from October to December 1995. The ICRC has publicly confirmed that it regu-
 larly visits more than 300 such detainees, but was refused permission to visit SPLA
 criminal and civil prisoners. The SPLM has returned some prisoners of war to the
 Government under parole.
 Rhetoric and meetings to advance a dialog for peace continued during the year.
 In May meetings under UNESCO's "Culture of Peace" effort took place in the Neth-
 erlands, following the initial meeting of September 1995. Government and rebel rep-
 resentatives participated.
 An unrelated government effort with splinter SSIM leader Risk Machar resulted
 in the signature of a "political charter" in April, which gained a few more signatures
 of figures previously associated with Riak's faction or dissidents from the SPLM.
 
 
 The SPLM and NDA did not sign and remain suspicious that the political charter
 is a trick by the Government to forestall negotiations.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Government severely curtails freedom of
 speech and press. Government intimidation and surveillance, fostered in part by an
 informer network, continued to inhibit open, public discussion of political issues.
 Radio, television, and much of the print media are controlled directly by the Govern-
 ment and are required to reflect government and NIF policies. However, some lively
 discussions of domestic and foreign policy do take place in the press. All journalists,
 even in the privately owned Arabic daily press, practice self-censorship. Sudan Tele-
 vision has a permanent military censor to ensure that the news reflects official
 views.
 Of the four privately-owned daily newspapers operating in October, Akhbar Al-
 Youm followed a careful line and did not encounter any problems. The Government
 closed AI-Rai A-Akher in July for publishing articles "harming the National secu-
 rity and social stability," and tried to cancel the publishing license of Dar AI-Ahlia
 publishing house as well. The owners sued the authorities over the issue. No judg-
 ment has yet been rendered. A new Press Law came into effect in November. Tnder
 its provisions, actions such as those taken by Al-Rai Al-Akher are not possible.
 Three new daily newspapers regarded as pro-NIF were launched.
 The Government often charged that the international, and particularly the West-
 ern, media have an anti-Sudan and anti-Islam bias. Government press policy eased
 during the year, and the Government granted a number of foreign journalists visas
 to report on the March elections. Rebel movements have provided relatively few op-
 portunities for journalists to report on their activities.
 In spite of the restrictions on ownership of satellite dishes, citizens do have access
 to foreign electronic media. Foreign radio signals are not jammed. In addition to its
 own domestic and satellite television services, Sudan Television offers a pay cable
 network of six channels, which directly rebroadcasts uncensored Cable News Net-
 work (CNN), the London-based, Saudi-owned, Middle East Broadcasting Corporation
 (MBC), Dubai TV, and Kuwait TV.
 Academic debate includes a vigorous campus polemic with         pro-NIF  and
 antigovernment sentiments prominently displayed and heard. NIF students have
 tried to influence the outcome of student government elections, and burned the of-
 fices of the head of a private university who had approved student elections which
 brought a pro-NDA slate to power. The Minister of Higher Education temporarily
 closed the University due to subsequent death threats against the university official.
 The government security forces continued to arrest and detain academic staff linked
 with opposition parties. The Government continued to use political criteria when-
 ever possible in appointing new faculty members.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The authorities severely re-
 stricted these freedoms, permitting only Government-authorized gatherings. The
 declaration of the state of emergency and of martial law on June 30, 1989, effec-
 tively eliminated the right of assembly. Demonstrations occurred repeatedly
 throughout the year, organized by students, by other residents of Omduran unhappy
 at lack of water, and by those especially disaffected by skyrocketing prices. Police
 brutally suppressed all these demonstrations, arresting scores of protesters, and
 killing others. For example, in September demonstrators clashed with police in pro-
 tests triggered by new government regulations on the weight of bread loaves. That
 prompted bakeries to shut down. In September police killed between 6 and 11 dem-
 onstrators and injured several others. Scores of protestors were arrested in the Sep-
 tember riots. A government newspaper reported that 35 persons were sentenced to
 receive up to 20 lashes.
 The Government dissolved all political parties in 1989, and prohibits citizens from
 forming new political groups or other associations. In 1989 the Government dis-
 solved the Bar Association and reinstated it under NIF leadership with highly con-
 trolled elections. All lawyers who/wish to practice in Sudan must maintain member-
 ship in the organization (see Scion I.e.).
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Although the Government has stated that all religions
 should be respected and that freedom of worship is ensured, in practice the Govern-
 ment treats Islam as the stat religion and has declared that Islam must inspire
 the country's laws, institutions, and policies. The October 1994 Societies Registra-
 tion Act replaced the contro ersial Missionary Societies Act of 1962. It theoretically
 allows churches to engage i a wider range of activities than did the Missionary Act,
 but churches are subject tothe restrictions placed on nonreligious corporations. The
 Government permits non-Muslims to partcipate in services in existing and otherwise
 authorized places of worship. The Government continued to deny permission to
 
 
 build churches. In December the Papal Nuncio detailed the continuing government
 Policy to deny permits to build churches; since independence, only one Roman
 Catholic church has been built. Some makeshift structures have been permitted.
 While non-Muslims may convert to Islam, the 1991 Criminal Act makes apostasy
 (which includes conversion to another religion) by Muslims punishable by death.
 Authorities continued to restrict the activities of non-Muslims, and there contin-
 ued to be reports of harassment and arrest for religious beliefs and activities. There
 were reports that three Muslim Nubian women and a Christian clergyman were ar-
 rested after the clergyman converted the women to Christianity. The women were
 later released without charge.
 Muslims may proselytize freely, but non-Muslims are forbidden to proselytize.
 Foreign missionaries and religiously oriented organizations continued to be harassed
 by authorities, and their requests for work permits and residence visas are delayed.
 Children, regardless of presumed religious origin, who have been abandoned or
 whose parentage is unknown, are considered Muslims and can only be adopted by
 Muslims. Non-Muslims may adopt other non-Muslim children. No equivalent restric-
 tion is placed on adoption by Muslims. Foundlings or other abandoned children are
 considered by the State to be Sudanese citizens and Muslims and therefore can only
 be adopted by Muslims. In accordance with Islamic law, Muslim adoptees do not
 take the name of their adoptive parents and are not automatic heirs to their prop-
 ert.
 Popular Defense Force (PDF) trainees, including non-Muslims are indoctrinated
 in the Islamic faith. In prisons, Government-supported Islamic NGO's offer induce-
 ments to, and pressure on, non-Muslim inmates to convert. Islamic NGO's in war
 zones are reliably reported to withhold food and other services from the needy un-
 less they convert to Islam. Children, including non-Muslim children, in camps for
 vagrant minors are required to study the Koran (see Section 5).
 In rebel-controlled areas, Christians, Muslims, and followers of traditional African
 beliefs generally worship freely.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Government restricted freedom of movement by denying exit visas
 to some categories of persons, including policemen and doctors. The Government
 also kept lists of political figures and other citizens not permitted to travel abroad.
 Because of tensions with Egypt, the authorities denied many requests for travel to
 that country.
 Women may not travel abroad without the permission of their husbands or male
 guardians. Some former political detainees were forbidden to travel outside Khar-
 toum. Movement was generally free for other citizens outside the war zones, but
 those who failed to produce an identity card at checkpoints risked arrest. Foreigners
 needed permits, which were difficult to obtain and often refused, for domestic travel
 outside of Khartoum. Foreign diplomats, however, could travel to many locations
 under government escort. Foreigners had to register with the police on entering the
 country, seek permission to move from one location to another, and reregister at
 each new location within 3 days of arrival. Foreign NGO staff sometimes had prob-
 lems obtaining entry visas or work or travel permits once they had entered the
 country.
 Insurgent movements also required that foreign NGO personnel obtain permission
 before traveling to areas that they control, although such permission was granted
 regularly.
 Tens of thousands of persons, largely southerners and westerners displaced by
 famine and civil war, continued to live in squatter slums in the Khartoum area.
 Throughout 1996 the Government razed thousands of squatter dwellings in this
 area; inhabitants knew that their homes were slated for destruction, but not when
 it would occur. Bulldozers would typically arrive unannounced in a neighborhood
 and carry out the razing the same ay. Although the Government promised to sell
 the inhabitants a plot of land for approximately $145, tens of thousands were made
 homeless temporarily. Usually, the inhabitants established temporary shelters on
 the site of their razed dwellings until they could gain title to a plo.t of land. Muslims
 who did not have sufficient money to purchase the land and construct a dwelling
 could obtain assistance from Islamic charities; others could not.
 The Government cooperated with the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees
 (UNHCR) and other humanitarian assistance organizations and accorded refugees
 relatively good treatment. It provided first asylum, although no figures are available
 for 1996. In April a UNHCR census revealed a total refugee population of 139,874,
 of whom an estimated 124,000 were Eritreans, in camp for many years. In Decem-
 ber the Government, together with the government of Eritrea, agreed to begin dis-
 cussion of repatriation of Eritrean refugees in a technical committee which would
 include the UNHCR. Approximately 28,000 Ethiopians repatriated early in the year,
 
 
 leaving about 15,000 in camps. Many refugees, including an estimated 26,000 Eri-
 treans, live in villages and towns in Sudan. There were no reports of forcible repa-
 triation of refugees, regardless of their status. Some reports cited mistreatment of
 refugees, including beatings and arbitrary arrests. Refugees could not become resi-
 dent aliens or citizens, regardless of their length of stay. The Government allowed
 a large number of refugees to work. An estimated 600,000 Sudanese refugees, in-
 cluding 230,000 in camps, remained in Uganda, as a result of fighting between the
 Government and insurgents. Refugees flowed from Sudan to Ethiopia, Eritrea, and
 Kenya.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens had no genuine opportunity to change their government peacefully
 through the March elections. The elections were structured in a way that ensured
 that the NIF would retain control of the government and that its vision of national
 institutions, including ultimately a new constitution, would prevail.
 In June, 10 leading political figures sent a memorandum to President Bashir, ad-
 dressing him merely as "Commander-in-Chief," which criticized the NIF and cited
 various NDA documents and resolutions. They urged that the "ruling authority" re-
 sign in favor of an interim administration. International human rights organizations
 reported that a number of political opponents of the Government (none signatory
 to the memorandum) were detained following release of the memorandum.
 In 1989 the RCC abolished all political parties and temporarily detained the
 major party leaders. In 1990 the RCC rejected both multiparty and one party sys-
 tems, establishing 2 years later an entirely Government-appointed Transitional Na-
 tional Assembly, based on a Libyan-style political structure with ascending levels
 of nonpartisan assemblies. The essentially powerless appointed legislature was re-
 placed following the March elections by an elected National Assembly, in which 125
 of its 400 members were appointed from the National Convention. Opposition par-
 ties boycotted the election.
 The federal system of government was instituted in August 1995, and is slowly
 developing a structure of 26 states, which the Government sees as a possible induce-
 ment to the insurgents for accommodation through a principle of regional autonomy.
 Women are underrepresented in government and politics. There is one woman in
 the Cabinet, the Minister of Health. Women have the right to vote, and seats in
 the National Assembly are set aside for representatives of women's organizations
 and for female student representatives. There are 25 women in the National Assem-
 bly.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government began to implement international conventions and basic human
 rights practices. Previously it had vigorously sought to suppress domestic criticism
 on human rights issues. During the year, it resolved serious differences with U.N.
 Special Rapporteur Gaspar Biro, who visited in July. The Government also received
 the Rapporteur of the Committee on Religious Intolerance and invited the
 Rapporteur of the Committee on Freedom of Expression.
 Sudan's Human Rights Advisory Council, a government body whose rapporteur is
 the Solicitor General for Public Law, has taken an increasing role in addressing
 human rights issues within the Government. There are no human rights NGO's;
 however, individual human rights activists operate in anon~ymity.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 A governmental decree prohibits discrimination based on religion or sex. Redress
 is provided through the admiistrative courts or the Labor Office. The 1992 General
 Education Act stipulates equal opportunity in education for the disabled. Mecha-
 nisms for social redress, especially with respect to violence against women and chil-
 dren, are particularly weak.
 Women.-Violence against women continues to be a problem, although accurate
 statistics on violence against women do not exist. Many women are reluctant to file
 formal complaints against such abuse, although domestic violence is a legal ground
 for divorce. The police do not normally intervene in domestic disputes. Displaced
 women from the south were particularly vulnerable to harassment, rape, and sexual
 abuse. The Government did not address the problem of violence against women, nor
 was it discussed publicly.
 Some aspects of the law and many traditional practices discriminate against
 women. Gender segregation is common in social settings. In keeping with Islamic
 law, a Muslim womanas the right to hold and dispose of her own property without
 
 
 interference. Women are ensured inheritance from their parents. However, a daugh-
 ter inherits half the share of a son, and a widow inherits a smaller percent. It is
 much easier for men to initiate legal divorce proceedings than for women. These
 rules apply only to Muslims and not to those of other faiths, for whom religious or
 tribal law apply. Although a Muslim man may marry a non-Muslim, a Muslim
 woman cannot marry a non-Muslim unless he converts to Islam. Women cannot
 travel abroad without the permission of their husbands or male guardians (see Sec-
 tion 2.d.).
 A number of government directives require that women in public places and gov-
 ernment offices, and female students and teachers conform to what it deemed an
 Islamic dress code. This, at the least, entailed wearing a head covering. However,
 enforcement of the dress code regulations was uneven.
 Credible but unconfirmed reports continued that women held in special camps in
 the south were sold to northerners to work as domestic servants (see Section 6.c.).
 Children.-A considerable number of children suffered serious abuse, including
 enslavement and forced conscription in the war zones. There continued to be credi-
 ble but unconfirmed reports of the existence of special camps in the south in which
 people from the north or from abroad came to purchase women and children for
 work as domestic servants (see Section 6.c.).
 The Government forcibly conscripted young men and boys into the military forces,
 as did the insurgents. In the late 1980's, the SPLM forcibly recruited an estimated
 17,000 boys between the ages of 12 and 15 years for military duty; it trained them
 in camps that it operated in Ethiopia. These recruits were kept separated from
 other SPLM forces until the SPLM was expelled from Ethiopia in 1991; thereafter,
 a pproximately 10,000 traveled with the SPLM forces until they either reached the
 enyan refugee camp at Kakuma, settled in other areas controlled by the SPLM,
 or were absorbed into regular SPLM military units. In September the SPLM and
 U.N. children's agency, UNICEF, repatriated more than 160 boys to their parents,
 perhaps the last group that has not since come of legal military age.
 The Government has operated camps for vagrant children. Police periodically
 sweep the streets of Khartoum and other major cities, taking children whom police
 personnel deem homeless to these camps where they are detained for indefinite peri-
 ods. Until recently, these children were not allowed to leave the camps and are sub-
 jected to strict discipline and physical and military training. Health care and school-
 ing at the camps are generally poor; basic living conditions are often primitive. All
 the children, including non-Muslims, must study the Koran, and there is pressure
 on non-Muslims to convert to Islam. Teenagers in the camps are often conscripted
 into the PDF.
 Female genital mutilation (FGM), which is widely condemned by international
 health experts as damaging to both physical and psychological health, is wide-
 spread, especially in the north. It is estimated that as many as 90 percent or more
 of females in the north have been subjected to FGM, with consequences that some-
 times have included severe urinary problems, infections, and even      death.
 Infibulation, the severest type of FGM, is the most common and is usually per-
 formed on girls between ages 4 and 7. It is often performed by traditional practition-
 ers in improvised, unsanitary conditions, causing severe pain and trauma to the
 child. No form of FGM is illegal under the Criminal Code. However, the health law
 forbids doctors and midwives from practicing its severest form, Pharaonic circumci-
 sion or infibulation. Women displaced from the south to the north reportedly are in-
 creasingly imposing FGM upon their daughters, even if they themselves have not
 been subjected to it. The Government has neither arrested nor prosecuted any per-
 sons for iolating the health law against FGM.
 Two NGO's with funding from the U.N. and a government agency are actively in-
 volved in eradication of FGM, which they describe as a "harmful practice." A small
 but growing number of urban, educated families are completely abandoning the
 practice. A larger number of families, in a compromise with tradition, have adopted
 the least severe form of FGM as an alternative to infibulation.
 People With Disabilities.-The Government does not discriminate against disabled
 persons but has not enacted any special legislation or taken other steps, such as
 mandating accessibility to public buildings and transportation for the disabled. The
 1992 General Education Act requires equal educational opportunities for the dis-
 abled,
 Religious Minorities.-Although the law recognizes Sudan as a multireligious
 country, in practice, the Government treats Islam, the religion of the majority, as
 the state religion. Muslims predominate in the north, but are in the minority in the
 south where most people practice Christianity or traditional African religions. One
 to two million disp aced southerners who practice Christianity or traditional African
 religions and about 500,000 Coptic Christians live in the north.
 
 
 273
 In Government-controlled areas of the south, there continued to be credible evi-
 dence of a policy of Islamization of public institutions. Some non-Muslims lost their
 jobs in the civil service,he e judiciary, and other professions. Few non-Muslim uni-
 versity graduates found government jobs. Some non-Muslim businessmen com-
 plained of pett harassment and discrimination in the awarding of government con-
 tracts and trade licenses. There were also reports that Muslims receive preferential
 treatment for the limited services provided b y the Government, including access to
 medical care.
 Nat iona/RacilIEtshnic Minorities.-Sudan's population of 27.5 million is a
 multiethnic mix of over 500 Arab andAfrican tribes with scores of languages and
 dialects. The Arab, Muslim culture in the north and central areas and the non-Mus-
 lim, African culture in the south are the two dominant cultures. Northern Muslims,
 who form a majority of about 16 million, have traditionally dominated the govern-
 ment. The southern ethnic groups fighting the civil war (largely followers of tradi-
 tional African reigions or Christians) seek independene, or some form of regional
 self-determination, from the north.
 The Muslim majority and NIF-dominated Government continued to discriminate
 against ethnic minorities in almost every aspect of society. Citizens in Arabic-speak-
 ing areas who do not speak Arabic experienced discrimination in education, employ-
 ment, and other areas. The use of Arabic as the medium of instructio n  higher
 education discriminated against non-Arabs. For university admission, students com-
 pleting high school are required to pass examinations in four subjects: English;
 Mathematics; Arabic, and Religious Studies. Even at the university level, examina-
 tions in all subjects except English were in Arabic, placing non-native speakers of
 Arabic at a disadvantage.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Although there was a strong labor union movement
 during the government of Sadiq Al-Mahdi, the RCC abolished the precoup labor
 unions, closed union offices, froze union assets, forbade strikes, and prescribed se-
 vere punishments, including the death penalty, for violations of RCC labor decrees.
 The Government dismissed many labor leaders from their jobs or detained them, al-
 though most of those arrested were later freed.
 The Sudan Workers Trade Unions Federation is the leading blue-collar labor ora-
 nization with about 800,000 members. In 1992 local union elections were held, afier
 a delay to permit the government-controlled steering committees to arrange the out-
 comes. The elections resulted in government-approved slates of candidates voted
 into office by prearranged acclamntion.
 The U.S. Goveent in 1991 suspended Sudan's eligibility for trade benefits
 under the generalized system of preferences because of its violations of worker
 Seiont.WokrRgt
 umnons remained free to form federations and affiliate with international bodies,
 such as the African Workers' Union and the Arab Workers' Union.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-A 1989 RCC constitutional
 decree temporarily suspended the right to organize and bargain collectively. Al-
 though these rights were restored to labor organizing committees in September, gov-
 ernment control of the steering committees meant in practice that the Government
 dominates the process of setting wages and working conditions. The continued ab-
 sence of labor legislation allowing for union meetings, fiingof grievances, and other
 union activity greatly reduced the value of these formal rights. Although local union
 officials raised some grievances with employers, few carried them to the Govern-
 ment. Wages are set by a tripartite committee comprising representatives of the
 Government, labor unions, and business. Specialized labor courts adjudicate stand-
 ard labor disputes.
 In 1993 the Government created two export processing zones (EPZ's); it later es-
 tablished a third at Khartoum International Airport. At year's end, only the EPZ
 at Khartum International Airport was open. The labor laws do not apply in EPZ's.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Although the law proibits forced
 or compulsory labor, slavery persists. A   urding to the report by the U.N. Special
 Rapporteur, reports and information from a variety of sources after February 1994
 indicate that the number of cases of slavei, servitude, slave trade, and forced labor
 have increased alarmingly. The taking of slaves, particularly in war zones and their
 export to parts of central and northern Sudan continued. There also continued to
 be credible, but unconfirmed, reports that women and children were sold and sent
 to the north or abroad to work as domestic servants, agricultural laborers, and
 sometimes concubines. The Government has not taken any action to halt these prac-
 tices. In May two reporters from The Baltimore Sun, a US. newspaper, bought two
 children in an alleged slave market; the children were returned to their parents by
 
 
 274
 the reporters. Others, such as representatives of Christian Solidarity International,
 have also confirmed the practice of slavery by arranging the purchase of children.
 The average price per child is reportedly about $300 worth of cattle; the price is
 $500 if the puirhaser is a Westerner.
 Reliable reports indicate the direct and general involvement of the SPAF, the
 PDF, and armed militias, backed by the Government, in the abduction and deporta-
 tion of civilians from the conflict zones to the north. These practices all have a pro-
 nounced racial aspect, as the victims are exclusively black southerners and people
 belonging to the indigenous tribes of the Nuba mountains.
 In some instances, local authorities took action to stp slavery; in other cases the
 authorities did nothing to stop the practice. In response to a resolution of the 1995
 U.N. General Assembly, the Government in May established a committee to inves-
 tigate charges of slavery. This committee submitted a report to the Government,
 which was communicated to the U.N. General Assembly.
 Both the Government and rebel factions continued to use force to conscript men
 of military age into the fighting forces. For example, in February a group of national
 service trainees were unexpectedly taken to Khartoum and flown to Juba, where
 they were expected to serve in combat. Conscripts face significant hardship and
 abuse in military service. The rebel factions continued to force southern men to
 work as laborers or porters.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The legal minimum age for work-
 ers is 16 years, but the law is loosely enforced by inspectors from the Ministry of
 Labor and in the official or wage economy. Children as young as 11 or 12 years of
 age worked in a number of factories, particularly outside the capital, including the
 edible oil factories at Um Ruwaba. In addition, severe poverty has produced wide-
 spread child labor in the informal, unregulated economy. In rural areas, children
 traditionally assist their families with agricultural work from a very young age.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The legislated minimum wage is enforced by
 the Ministry of Labor, which maintains field offices in most major cities. Employers
 generally respect the minimum wage. Workers who are denied the minimum wage
 may file a grievance with the local Ministry of Labor field office, which is then re-
 quired to investigate and take appropriate action if there has been a violation of
 the law. At year's end, a new minimum wage of approximately $10 (15,000 Suda-
 nese pounds) per month had been approved but not implemented. This wage is in-
 sufficient to provide a decent standard living for an average worker and family. The
 workweek is limited by law to six 8-hour days, with a day of rest on Friday. Al-
 though the laws prescribe health and safety standards, working conditions were
 generally poor, and enforcement by the Ministry of Labor minimal. The law does
 not address the right of workers to remove themselves from dangerous work situa-
 tions without loss of employment.
