Sudan
The present government in Sudan is the most undemocratic and repressive in the modern history of the country and has an abysmal human rights record by any standard. There are consistent reports of arbitrary detentions, torture and extrajudicial executions in certain areas of the country where it appears that the government is engaged in its own form of what some call "ethnic cleansing" and others call genocide. Some anticipate that the death toll in Sudan will be greater than in either Bosnia or Somalia.
Despite the extreme and pervasive human rights violations in Sudan, the world community has largely ignored the situation until very recently. Finally there appears to be some major focus on the problems, but as yet no solutions. The United Nations General Assembly passed a resolution in December 1992 that expressed "deep concern at the serious human rights violations in Sudan, including summary executions, detentions without due process, forced displacement of persons and torture" and recommended that "the serious human rights situation in Sudan be monitored." Earlier in the year, the United States Senate issued a resolution condemning the Sudan government for its abuses and directing the U.S. President to work with the United Nations to consider international means to ameliorate the humanitarian situation in Sudan. In addition, the British House of Lords, the Kenyan government, the Japanese government, the European Economic Community, the European Parliament and several other inter-governmental regional organizations have all, in one way or another, expressed concern for human
rights abuses in Sudan and condemned the government for its brutality. During the visit of Pope John Paul II to Sudan in February 1993, the Pope called repeatedly for Sudan's leaders to cease what he called religious persecution of Christians and to end "the terrible harvest of suffering" caused by the civil war in the south. In March 1993, the UN Commission on Human Rights condemned Sudan for widespread executions and terror and voted for the first time to order a public examination of violations in Sudan. While the deterioration in the human rights situation continued in 1992, it is encouraging that the rest of the world seems to finally be recognizing the severity of the abuses in Sudan. Despite this large and growing condemnation of Sudan's human rights abuses, General al-Bashir told a public rally on December 7, 1992, that reports of human rights violations were "baseless rumors based on unfounded facts" and that Sudan would "turn a deaf ear to any condemnation in any forum." The international community must keep exerting intense pressure on the Sudanese government so that violations cease.
As the critique stated last year, the 1991 State Department report on Sudan was a generally accurate and complete description of the human rights situation in the country, with some minor exceptions. The 1992 report continues the accurate and candid reporting and makes several improvements. However, there is still a need for more complete reporting in some areas, especially as to the issue of hunger and famine where the vague reporting last year has lapsed into a virtual omission of the severity of the hunger
364
Sudan
problem which continues to exist.
The report accurately states that Sudan is "nominally" ruled by Lt. General Omar Hassan Ahmed al-Bashir and a group of military officers who formed the National Salvation Revolution Command Council (RCC). It also explains that the RCC government is inspired by and closely identified with the National Islamic Front (NIF) and that NIF members and supporters hold important positions throughout the country to such an extent that they form a "government within the Government." The report should have taken the next logical step and stated the role of Hassan al-Turabi, leader of the NIF. Most observers of Sudan politics believe that Turabi is the most powerful person in Sudan and that al-Bashir, in actuality, serves at the pleasure of Turabi and the NIF. Describing the role and influence of Turabi would help demonstrate the degree to which the Sudanese government and most of Sudanese society are controlled by a political Islamic fundamentalist group.
It became clear during 1992 that human rights abuses were perpetrated by factions of the opposition Sudanese People's Liberation Army (SPLA) as well as by the government forces. The report accurately attributes blame to the various participants in the continuing civil war. However, a valid distinction may exist. That distinction was expressed in a paper presented at a 1992 human rights meeting in Cairo organized by the Sudan Human Rights Organization:
The major difference between the
SPLA and the NIF government in
Khartoum is that whereas the
SPLA does not normally condone human rights abuses committed by its soldiers against civilian citizens, it has been established beyond reasonable doubt that the Sudan government actually abets human rights abuses as part of its strategy of repression and coercion in order to impose its unacceptable policies on the Sudanese people.
If this distinction is valid, the report should so state in order to avoid giving readers the impression that all sides in the civil war are equally culpable.
In describing the Shari'a punishments (hudood) for certain offenses, the report mentions the consumption of alcohol as an offense resulting in lashings. Although lashings may seem like an extreme punishment for such a minor offense, more extreme examples exist and should have been stated to demonstrate the lack of correlation between the offense and the punishment. For instance, women appearing in public not wearing the compulsory Islamic uniform (a long dress covering all the body and a veil to cover the head) can be expelled from academic institutions and government service and can be flogged and beaten in public. Amnesty International reported that such an incident occurred in October 1991 when, after comments by local government authorities in Khartoum that women in the capital were not dressing in conformity with Islamic principles, women were publicly flogged in Khartoum and Wad Medani for dressing "indecently." There have been other more recent reports of teenage girls being dragged off the street because their hair is not covered and
365
Sudan
punished with 40 to 70 lashes.
Last year the critique took issue with the statement in the 1991 report that "indigent defendants are provided with legal counsel by the Government." The same statement is repeated in the 1992 report. Again, we note that the right to counsel exists only in the case of "serious crimes" (offenses punishable by death or life imprisonment), that the right to counsel is illusory in many cases since courts generally do not inform defendants of this right, and that in some cases counsel is not allowed to address the court but may only sit with the client and whisper advice. Furthermore, there were reports of some trials that were held after curfew, thus effectively making them in camera and allowing no opportunity for witnesses to attend. In the section on denial of fair public trial, the report itself describes a case where 53 military officers were tried without legal representation. The report should have qualified the statement to reflect the many limitations on the right to counsel.
The report accurately, but incompletely, portrays the plight of the Nuba people, thousands of whom were uprooted and forcibly moved from place to place during the year. It reports speculation that a systematic attempt was underway to eradicate the identity of the Nuban people. A more complete description would have mentioned the reports of the many extrajudicial executions, the Nuba men who are being held as prisoners in el-Obeid Prison, and the instances of torture, such as the case of Ahmad Nassar, who was reportedly arrested, deliberately blinded, and then released. Amnesty International uses the term "ethnic clean-
sing" in describing these many forms of abuse against the Nubans. As the report mentions, the government's news blackout and refusal to grant access to the Nuba Mountains lends credence to the charge of "ethnic cleansing" and it also, understandably, makes it difficult for the State Department (or non-governmental organizations) to get all the facts. Since the end of 1 992, Amnesty International has received unconfirmed reports of mass killings involving the deaths of several hundred civilians in the Kualit area near Heiban.
Last year the critique noted that the discussion of violations in the Darfur region in western Sudan understated the government's involvement and suggested that the report should have more carefully examined the government's claim that its military operations in the area were aimed only at criminal activity. This year's report limited its discussion of Darfur to a brief description of the inhuman treatment of prisoners in Shalla prison and a mention of two criminals being hanged and crucified as hudood punishments, despite the fact that many other gross violations continued in 1992. For instance, in early January, 3,000 rebels were killed in a surprise attack at the village of Balaj. Also, many civilian tribesmen in the area were killed or tortured and their villages were burned down. Reports from the area indicate that detentions are now a routine practice and that many people are tortured. The report should have discussed the situation in the Darfur region more fully.
Last year the critique observed that the 1991 report seriously underestimated the magnitude of the famine problem in
366
Sudan
Sudan by reference to the "thousands" dependent on food relief, the "thousands" who may have perished of starvation, and the "thousands" in the west at risk of starvation. Other sources estimated that between eight and nine million were at risk of starvation. The critique suggested that relevant data be accumulated, analyzed and reported rather than referring to the "thousands" being affected. Although this year's report contains a rather extensive description of the many problems with relief efforts during the year, it makes no mention of the number of people affected by famine, except in the last paragraph of the introduction where it states that "large segments" of the southern and western Sudanese populations are threatened with starvation. In October the Washington Post reported that, according to rough estimates, four million people face starvation as a result of war and drought in the south and that an additional three million people in the more prosperous north have also been targeted for international relief. More recently, the U.S. Agency for International Development has stated that between four and four and one-half million people in Sudan will require emergency assistance in 1993. We again suggest that the relevant data be accumulated, analyzed and reported in order to put the magnitude of the famine problem in perspective.
Although Human Rights Watch reported that the events of 1992 had brought the relief program Operation Lifeline Sudan (OLS) to an effective end, the State Department report states that agreements were reached at year's end to reopen OLS, offering some hope of a reasonably secure supply of food for the people in the southern war zone. However, despite
the agreement, the continued threat of aerial bombardment of relief efforts by the government effectively prevents the OLS from operating, and as of mid-March 1993 OLS has not resumed relief shipments. The tone of the report as to possible improvements in food relief appears to be overly optimistic.
Although there were written documentations of many abuses of academic freedom in 1992, the report devotes only one brief paragraph to the decline in academic freedom. Students and lecturers, regardless of age, are made to attend Popular Defense Force training camps. The training involves arduous exercise and classes in the brand of militant Islam favored by the government, an experience that most university-educated people find humiliating. Those who refuse to attend are summarily dismissed. A ban on the activities of the student union at the University of Khartoum caused some students to protest by refusing to sit for exams. Many of the students were savagely beaten by armed groups, some students were later taken to examination centers at gunpoint, and other students were forced to take their examinations at gunpoint. In late 1990, 17 males and 17 females, all students at the University of Gezira, were subjected to brutal corporal lashing for participating in strikes and demonstrations in protest of the dismissal of academic staff. They each received 40 lashes, and some of the girls suffered psychological trauma. One of the soldiers who refused to beat the girls was himself given 40 lashes as punishment. There is little doubt that the government condoned this incident since it was personally supervised by the Deputy Governor of the Central Region. Although this latter inci-
367
Sudan
dent occurred prior to the period covered by the 1992 report, it was not mentioned in either the 1990 or 1991 reports and helps to illustrate the lack of academic freedom, which continued throughout 1992. More recently, in February 1992, some 10 female students from Khartoum University Girls Hostel were arrested by security during student unrest, dragged on the ground, humiliated and beaten and then reportedly detained an entire day at security offices where they were repeatedly beaten and verbally abused. This incident is not mentioned in the report. The restrictions on academic freedom should have been more fully discussed in the report.
The last two years the critique commented on the mild tone of the reports in the area of worker rights. The 1992 report inexplicably continues this neutrality and also states that "no labor officials were known to have been detained in 1992." This is false. The International Centre for Trade Union Rights reported that the Sudanese Security Forces detained over 600 Sudanese trade unionists in a new campaign of repression and intimidation which started around mid-August 1992. Also, the Arab Lawyers' Union reported that about a dozen people, including two trade unionists, were arrested between December 21 and 27, and that they have not been charged or tried and their place of detention is unknown. The report should have at least noted these credible reports.
The last paragraph of the 1990 report commented on the lack of legal employment opportunities for refugees, forcing many into illegal activities. This discussion was dropped from both the 1991
and 1992 reports without explanation, despite the continuation of the poor employment possibilities for refugees.
Among the several specific improvements from last year's report are: the mention of the more than 300 judges replaced by appointees affiliated with the NIF (many of whom have little or no legal training) and the more specific, and thus more accurate, references and comparisons to the policies regarding torture and citizen privacy of prior Sudanese governments.
368
