Sudan
The January 9, 2005 Comprehensive Peace Agreement ending the twentyone-
year civil war between the Sudanese government and southern rebels has
brought little significant improvement to Sudan in the area of human rights.
Implementation of the agreement was delayed by several factors, including
the sudden death of southern rebel leader Dr. John Garang. As part of the
agreement, the Sudanese government lifted the state of emergency thoughout
Sudan (with the exception of Darfur and the east) but attacks on villages
in Darfur continued, and killings, rape, torture, looting of civilian livestock
and other property took place on a regular basis. Arbitrary arrests and detentions,
executions without fair trials, and harassment of human rights defenders
and other activists remained a feature of Sudanese policy in both Darfur
and other areas of Sudan. For the first time, however, the U.N. Security
Council made use of its power to refer the situation of Darfur to the
International Criminal Court (ICC) in March 2005. .
The Crisis in Darfur
In 2005, indiscriminate and targeted killings, rape, forced displacement, and
looting of civilians of the same ethnicity as the rebel groups in Darfur continued
to occur at the hands of government-backed militias or “Janjaweed”
although on a lesser scale than in 2003-2004. An upsurge of attacks occurred
in September and October 2005, including targeted attacks on international
aid workers and members of the African Union Mission in Sudan (AMIS),
tasked to monitor the April 2004 ceasefire agreement and protect civilians
under imminent threat. Government-supported militias also attacked civilian
villages and an internally displaced persons camp in Aro Sharow, West
Darfur.
This violence contributed to the inability of the two million internally displaced
people, living precariously in camps, to return home. Subject to attack
when leaving the camps, displaced person remained confined in them,
dependent on international humanitarian aid. Women and girls particularly were victims of sexual attacks in any remote area when going for water, firewood
or fodder, or to take their wares to market.
Sudanese government policy towards the displaced communities continued to
be marked by suspicion and abusive policies such as frequent arbitrary
arrests, detentions of displaced leaders on an ethnic basis and increasing
harassment and intimidation of humanitarian aid agencies assisting the displaced
persons. In some areas, women who complained about rape to the
police were humiliated and threatened; some unmarried women and girls
were accused of adultery solely on the basis of their unwanted pregnancy and
unwed status.
The Sudanese government took no concrete steps to implement a 2004
Security Council resolution demand to disarm and disband its allies, the
Janjaweed. Government militia allies, to whose abuses civil servants turned a
blind eye, and army troops committed abuses with impunity, encouraging
further lawlessness. In June 2005, the Sudanese government set up a tribunal,
the “Special Criminial Court on Events in Darfur,” purportedly to try individuals
guilty of abuses. However, as of October 2005, of six cases tried by
the new tribunal, none concerned major crimes associated with the conflict.
No medium or high-level government officials or militia leaders were suspended
from duty, investigated, or prosecuted for serious crimes in Darfur.
The two main rebel movements—the Sudan Liberation Army (SLA) and the
Justice and Equality Movement—were responsible for numerous abuses,
including attacks on civilians, commercial vehicles and aid workers, abductions
of civilians, looting of livestock and the use of child soldiers. A splinter
faction of the JEM captured more than thirty ceasefire monitors from the
African Union Mission in Sudan in October then released them after a few
days.
As the year wore on, the rebel movements were increasingly plagued by
internal splits, partly on an ethnic basis, and with increasing fragmentation.
Reports of abuses by certain rebel factions grew, particularly by those factions
controlling the Jebel Marra region.
Southern Sudan
A long-awaited peace agreement, the result of almost three years of negotiations,
was signed between the Sudanese government and the southern-based
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement (SPLM) on January 9, 2005, allowing
autonomy for the southern region for six and a half years, followed by a referendum
on self-determination for the south. The agreement also provided
for elections at national, regional, state and local levels after four years. It
also provided that half the government revenues of oil produced in southern
Sudan be allocated to the southern regional government.
The north-south peace agreement, however, had major human rights defects,
including the absence of any mechanism to ensure accountability for abuses
committed during the twenty-one year war waged mostly in southern Sudan.
John Garang´s death in a helicopter accident on July 30 provoked a massive
response among southerners in Khartoum, Malakal, and Juba. Khartoum saw
the worst of the communal violence that followed: three days of ethnicallymotivated
attacks by southerners and northerners resulted in more than 130
deaths and more than 800 wounded. The Sudanese government reportedly
arrested more than 1,500 people, most of whom were almost immediately
released.
While it is too early to judge his potential for bringing democratic changes
to the southern Sudan, Garang’s successor and long-time deputy, Gen. Salva
Kiir, had been a low-profile leader within the Sudan People’s Liberation
Army (SPLA) for reforms to promote accountability within the movement.
One early indication is favorable: Gen. Salva Kiir instructed that the selection
process for legislators to both the regional and national assemblies be
opened up to public participation, as there was no time to organize elections.
Southerners rushed to take part. While many obstacles exist to the creation
of a southern government that is transparent and accountable and enforces
human rights, this early willingness to let people choose their representatives
is a good sign. They already enjoy more human rights than do their northern
fellow citizens, in that the presence of security forces in the southern garrison
towns is lessened and there has been more free speech, free press and free assembly in the south than for decades. The national army, however, has
not withdrawn from the south but under the peace agreement it has about
two years to complete this process.
Attacks on Human Rights Defenders
Human rights defenders and other activists remained under serious threat of
arbitrary arrest and detention in 2005. A prominent human rights defender
based in Khartoum, Dr. Mudawi Ibrahim Adam, the chairperson of the
Sudan Social Development Organization (SUDO), was arrested twice—in
January and May 2005—and charged with “crimes against the state.” Articles
51, 52, 53, and 58 of the Sudanese Criminal Code, which include “crimes
against the state” and espionage, were often used used to intimidate individuals
speaking out about abuses, including international humanitarian aid workers
working in Darfur. More than twenty international or national aid workers
were arbitrarily arrested, detained, or threatened by Sudanese police and
security forces in Darfur in the first six months of the year alone.
Key International Actors
Throughout 2005, international policy towards Sudan vacillated between
condemnation and appeasement. This reflected the varying interests at stake,
such as the implementation of the north-southern peace agreement, ending
the atrocities in Darfur, and even regional counterterrorism efforts. The U.S.
government was a prime example of this policy schizophrenia. U.S. officials
vociferously condemn the continuing attacks, but the U.S. Central
Intelligence Agency invited Sudanese security chief Salah Ghosh, a likely
indictee before the ICC for war crimes committed in Darfur, to Washington
in April 2005 to discuss Sudanese-U.S. counterterrorism interests.
Divided interests regarding Sudan were prevalent not just bilaterally among
western governments, but also within the United Nations Security Council.
The single most important achievement of the Security Council was the historic
referral of Darfur to the ICC on March 31, 2005. In June the ICC
announced that it would investigate the crimes in Darfur. In a second March
2005 resolution, the Security Council established a sanctions committee to identify individuals who violated an arms embargo on Darfur and who committed
abuses; the sanctions would not apply retroactively. Despite the continuing
abuses in Darfur throughout 2005, however, the Security Council
was prevented from enacting stiffer sanctions due to resistance from China
and Russia, two of its five permanent members. In November Sudanese
authorities roughed up two visiting members of the sanctions committees’
panel of experts.
The African Union played an increasingly prominent role in Darfur. In April
2005 the AU requested, and the Sudanese government agreed, to a further
deployment to total 7,700 military and police for AMIS’ expanded mission.
Donors pledged U.S. $291 million for the project, including logistical assistance
for this deployment from NATO, the E.U., the U.N., the U.K., the
U.S., Canada, France and others. AMIS’ peace support efforts in Darfur had
mixed results. Although AMIS troops contributed to some measure of
improved security and civilian protection in those areas where they were
deployed, the mission was plagued by continuing logistical and financial
problems. The AU’s efforts at mediating peace talks on Darfur were not as
successful; sharp leadership clashes within the SLA, which had the most
forces in the field of all the rebel groups, left the group unable to make decisions
at the negotiating table.