 SUDAN
 The Nimeiri regime is now in its fourteenth year, having come
 to power through a military coup in 1969. After being chosen
 as President in a single candidate referendum in October 1971,
 General Nimeiri dissolved the Revolutionary Command Council
 formed at the time of the coup and transferred many of its
 members and powers to the general secretariat of the newly
 created Sudan Socialist Union. In 1977, the Sudan Socialist
 Union chose Nimeiri as its presidential candidate and Nimeiri,
 as the only presidential candidate, was reelected by plebiscite
 for a six-year term ending in October 1983.
 The President dominates all branches of the Government. In the
 executive he is de facto Prime Minister, Minister of Defense,
 and Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces, and has periodically
 assumed other ministerial portfolios as well. All judges are
 responsible to him for "proper performance" of their duties. On
 the legislative side, he exercises executive oversight of the
 National Assembly through his power to appoint 10 percent of the
 membership, to convene and dissolve it, to rule by decree during
 recesses, and to limit legislative inquiry into executive affairs.
 In 1972, Nimeiri brought an end to Sudan's 17-year civil war by
 granting the southern region local autonomy. In 1981, Nimeiri
 reorganized the northern part of the country into regions and
 delegated considerable responsibility to the regional governments.
 In the past year the President has used his. wide powers to con-
 trol the increasingly negative political consequences of the
 continued economic deterioration of the country. In January.
 1982, students seized the occasion of the Government's announce-
 ment on New Year's Eve of the removal of sugar subsidies to take
 to the streets. The ensuing violence spread across the country
 and about 30 people were killed. Though offering to resign,
 Nimeiri-stayed on after meetings with civilian and military
 leaders. He then replaced his two vice presidents and much of
 the military heirarchy, and reorganized the Sudan Socialist
 Union's political bureau and central committee. These changes
 reconsolidated Nimeiri's political.authority, though they did not
 halt the economic slide.
 Sudan's geopolitical importance draws it into the wider issues
 both of the Middle East and of the Horn of Africa. The most
 significant threat to Sudan is Libya, whose leader, Muammar
 Qadhafi, has sworn to bring about Nimeiri's downfall. Libya's
 signing of the Tripartite Agreement with Ethiopia and South Yemen
 in August 1981 resulted in increased radical pressures on Sudan..
 Sudan's relationship with Ethiopia has also been complicated by
 the presence in Sudan of Eritrean refugees opposed to the Ethio-
 pian government.
 In 1977, Nimeiri negotiated a "reconciliation agreement" with
 much of his opposition and many former opponents who now partici-
 pate in the Government. In 1982, economic conditions and secur-
 ity considerations led to some infringements, such as the tem-
 porary detention of some southern politicians for forming an
 illegal political party, and the security roundups in Khartoum of
 "idlers" who have been forced to return to their homes outside
 the city. The regime tolerates some dissent, though this toler-
 ance has decreased slightly as economic conditions have worsened.
 Despite the imposition of some restrictions on political expres-
 sion and activities, the personal rights of individuals are
 generally respected in Sudan.
 
 
 305
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Preedom from-
 a. Killing
 There have been no known cases of politically-inspired killings.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reported cases of politically-inspired disappear-
 ances in Sudan during the past year.
 c. Torture
 Sudan's Constitution forbids torture. There were no reported
 cases of officially sanctioned or inspired torture in Sudan
 within the past year.
 d. Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 The Sudanese Constitution provides protection against cruel,
 inhuman, or degrading treatment. Constitutional guarantees are
 widely respected. There has been no evidence of systematic abuse
 of prisoners. However, in keeping with the stark poverty of the
 Sudan, prison conditions are spartan. Though black Africans from
 southern Sudan and refugees complain of unequal treatment, these
 incidents appear to reflect individual prejudice rather than
 government policy.
 e. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 The Constitution guarantees habeas corpus and requires a court
 issued warrant to arrest a citizen. This legal protection,
 however, does not apply to detentions "necessitated by the
 exigencies of public security and public welfare.' Specifically,
 the State Security Act of 1975 authorizes detention on security
 grounds for as long as six months. Estimates of the number of
 persons detained under this Act are generally unavailable and
 meaningless since the Act is the legal justification for brief
 detentions of a few hours and urban roundups of migrants as well
 as for more serious charges. In May, when seven lawyers were
 arrested on unspecified charges, the bar challenged the consti-
 tutionality of the State Security Act. The Supreme Court upheld
 the legality of the arrests under the Act but the Government
 released all seven lawyers within a few weeks.
 f. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Public trials by civilian courts are the rule. Defenders have
 the right to counsel provided at their own expense except for
 capital and very serious offenses. Sharia law for Muslims and
 custom/tribal law, especially in the south, are also recognized.
 However, there has been some erosion of this legal safeguard. In
 the first half of the year Khartoum authorities continued round-
 ups of vagrants, undocumented refugees, and non-resident Sudanese
 without respecting legal processes. Also, special *price courts"
 presided over by military officers empowered to render summary
 -ustice (including fines, imprisonment, or lashes) continued to
 try merchants accused of violating price controls. These public
 quasi-military tribunals do n t apply the rules of evidence re-
 quired in the civilian court s stem. Convictions can be appealed,
 but the requisite written trial records usually are not available.
 Security tribunals have sometimes been used in cases involving
 serious political charges. They convene by decision of the
 
 
 306
 President of the Republic, on the recommendation of the Attorney
 General, if the President believes that the activities of the
 accused represent a clear threat to the state. The tribunals
 are usually open, but may be closed by decision of the chief
 magistrate. In 1982 two leaders of the illegal Communist Party
 were tried for treason under this.procedure after secret docu-
 cments were foundin their~possession. They were given 5-10 year
 prison sentences.
 The Constitution guarantees-the independence of the judiciary
 but empowers the President to appoint or remove judges at all
 levels. In recent months Nimeiri has relieved two justices of
 the Supreme Court, and this action appears to have made lower
 level judges reluctant to rule against the executive. The
 military seldom interfere in the judicial process except for
 the price courts and national security tribunals.
 Persons convicted in a provincial court or lesser magistrate
 can petition to the regional court of appeals and to the
 Supreme Court. Judgments in special security tribunals are
 approved by the President before they are announced, and no
 appeal of a judgment'is permitted.
 g. Invasion of the Home
 The Constitution declares dwellings inviolable and not to be
 entered or searched without permission of their occupants except
 in the manner prescribed by law. However, this guarantee was
 violated during the urban roundups of refugees and southerners
 early in 1982.
 2.   Respect for Civil and Political Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution guarantees freedom of expression. Citizens
 openly criticize government policies, and they display little
 fear of retaliation. There is an unwritten understanding,
 however, that comments must be in the form of "constructive
 criticism." Any criticism of the President tends to be
 indirect, aimed either at government policies or the "incom-
 petent" advice and conduct of advisors.
 The Government exercises little or no direct prepublication cen-
 sorship of the press or other media. Nonetheless, journalists
 customarily avoid sensitive subjects, because in past years a few
 have been arrested or fired for disregarding the unwritten
 boundaries. For example, there has been no mention of the return
 to Sudan of Nimeiri's rival, Ansar leader Sadiq el Mahdi, in
 September despite the fact that he has a broad following.
 The English language press is more independent than the Arabic
 press. The respected monthly English language magazine "Sudanow,"
 published by the Government itself, includes articles critical of
 the Government, particularly its economic policies. However, it
 too has bounds. For example, the magazine covered in detail
 President Nimeiri's economic austerity measures announced in the
 fall of 1981 but passed over lightly the violent street demon-
 strations that ensued in January 1982. There is free access to
 foreign newspapers, magazines, and books, both Western and Soviet,
 but circulation of material from abroad is small, and the Govern-
 ment has sometimes removed publications from sale that Contain
 unflattering information about the regime. The Sudanese are
 open in their private speech. They are not afraid to be openly
 critical of the Government's policies and are not concerned about
 
 
 307
 being informed on. Wiretapping and mail opening are not practiced
 except in cases where the Government believes there is strong
 evidence that national security is involved.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of peaceful assembly was not restricted in 1982. On
 several occasions, students marched in protest against government
 policies without interference as long as no property was de-
 stroyed. Suspected opposition political figures are watched but
 there is generally no effort made to prevent their meeting with
 supporters. One exception to this occurred at the beginning of
 1982, when leaders in the southern region of Sudan who were
 opposed to a plan to split the south into three governmental
 entities were detained on the grounds they had formed an illegal
 political party. They were released within a few weeks and
 remained an active factor in the elections then underway.
 The Sudanese Constitution guarantees the freedom to organize
 labor unions. Labor is officially represented in the Sudan
 Socialist Union through two federations which are independent of
 government control -- the Sudanese Workers' Trade Union Federa-
 tion and the Sudanese Federation of Employees and Professional
 Trade Unions. Union membership is estimated at about 20 percent
 of the working population. In both the private and public
 sectors unions engage in collective bargaining for wage increases
 and benefits. It is unclear as to what degree the leadership of
 the two federations represent the opinions of their rank and
 file, especially members of the more militant unions such as the
 railroad workers, whose strike the Government broke in 1981.
 Workers in Sudan have the right to strike and can exercise that
 right without interference as long as the work stoppage is not
 viewed as threatening to national welfare and security.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is guaranteed under the Sudanese Constitu-
 tion. Approximately one-third of the population is non-Muslim,
 and both Islam and Christianity are recognized as "religions of
 Sudan."
 The influential Muslim Brotherhood, whose leaders include the
 Attorney General, has pressed for Islamization of Sudanese law.
 Attempts to expand the jurisdiction of Sharia (Islamic) Courts
 have stalled in the National Assembly. Marriage, divorce,
 inheritance, and family law traditionally are governed by the
 Sharia rather than secular law. While the state gives financial
 support to mosques and to Muslim educational projects, it does not
 otherwise discriminate against the large non-Muslim minority.
 Christian missionaries freely operate educational projects and
 modest evangelical activities in the non-Muslim south. In the
 north, evangelist activities are confined to non-Muslims. Any
 effort to convert Muslims in any part of the country would proba-
 bly provoke official restrictions.
 There are three major Muslim groups which have traditionally been
 organized along political lines. The largest group is the Ansar,
 who are descendants of followers of the Mahdi. The Ansar led the
 bloody 1976 coup attempt. The Muslim Brothers are generally well
 educated Muslims who seek closer ties to the moderate Arab world.
 They control the student government at the University of Khartoum.
 The Khatmiyya is a less structured pro-government political
 group based on a traditional Sufi brotherhood. Since the national
 reconciliation of 1977, the Muslim Brothers have participated in
 the Government and the Sudan Socialist Union. After a short
 
 
 308
 period of participation in government, most Ansar have reverted
 to a neutral stance. Ansar leader Sadiq al Mahdi, a former Prime
 Minister, returned to Sudan in late 1982 following several years
 of unofficial voluntary exile but has remained politically
 inactive.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Constitutional guarantees of freedom of movement and against
 deportation and exclusion from the country are attenuated by
 a 1975 constitutional amendment suspending freedom of movement
 inside Sudan in cases of national security. The government
 campaign to reduce the numbers of migrant Sudanese, aliens, and
 refugees in urban centers has taken advantage of this exception.
 The emigration of educated and trained manpower to oil-rich
 Middle Eastern countries has reached such proportions that the
 Government has attempted to curb the flow. Specialized univer-
 sity graduates, such as physicians, are under obligation to pay
 the cost of their education through a fixed term of service
 within the country. Other categories of personnel in short
 supply, such as teachers and technicians, encounter difficulty in
 obtaining exit permits. New regulations issued in 1982 required
 emigrants to pay up to 2,000 Sudanese pounds to obtain permission
 to leave; those already abroad must present proof that they have
 paid an expatriate's income tax of 10 percent in order to return.
 However, failure to pay does not affect citizenship. Sudan is
 also negotiating government-to-gOvernment labor contracts to
 control further the exodus.
 Sudan also has a major asylum problem as close to 500,000
 refugees from neighboring Ethiopia and Uganda have moved to
 Sudan. Sudan has been a gracious host to these refugees and has
 worked closely with the United Nations High Commissioner for
 Refugees and other humanitarian groups in meeting refugees'
 essential needs. Assistance to refugees has caused some problems
 with local residents who feel refugees received special help
 which is not available to non-refugees. Sudan has tried to keep
 refugees from flooding urban centers but otherwise exerts no
 pressure on the refugees to return home. Southern Sudanese who
 fled during the 17-year civil war returned shortly after the
 conclusion of the conflict in 1972.
 e. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 The Sudan Socialist Union is the only legal political party,
 but factions which correspond with former political parties
 operate under the party umbrella. President Nimeiri came to
 power, in a 1969 military coup which also had the support of the
 Sudan Communist Party. Following a communist-led coup attempt
 in 1971, Nimeiri dissolved-the Revolutionary Command Council and
 -created, the Sudan Socialist Union as the sole political party
 in Sudan. In the 1977 elections Nimeiri was challenged for the
 Sudan. Socialist Union's nomination but Nimeiri won handily and
 he, as the Union's candidate, was then confirmed by yes-no
 plebiscite. In 1982, the Union again chose Nimeiri to be its
 candidate; this time Nimeiri was unopposed. On the national
 level, Nimeiri has successfully dissuaded most parties and
 factions from active opposition through his.policy of 'national
 :reconciliation." The cabinet and party central committee
 incorporate factions of most political groups. Outside the
 regime's umbrella are the clandestine Communist Party, the faction
 of the Ansar headed by Sadiq el Mahdi, and rump elements of
 several other groups, mostly now in self-imposed exile. Because
 
 
 309
 parties other than the Sudan Socialist Union are illegal, groups
 like the Ansar and Muslim Brotherhood operate informally but
 openly to look after their political interests. The Government,
 at present, actively combats only the Sudanese Communist Party.
 Under the Constitution, membership in the Sudan Socialist Union
 is open to any citizen able and willing to pay nominal monthly
 dues. The Sudan Socialist Union seeks to include all sectors of
 society. The Sudan Socialist Union must approve all candidates
 for both the National Assembly and the regional assemblies,
 though they need not belong to it. It rejected no candidates in
 the January 1982 National Assembly elections or in the elections
 for the new regional assemblies the year before. All candidates
 must run on non-partisan platforms.
 Nimeiri.has sought to expand participation in the political
 process by encouraging decentralization. In 1972, Nimeiri nego-
 tiated an end to the civil war by granting the south special
 regional autonomy and status. .A southern regional government was
 established to-.handle local issues such as education, culture,
 and agriculture. Nimeiri expanded the regional government
 system to the north in 1981. The five new regions in the north
 established-in January 1982 held selections in June 1982 for
 governor. All the appointed interim governors were reappointed
 for full terms under a process by which regional electoral
 colleges selected three candidates for each position, and Nimeiri
 then chose among them.
 3.   Government Attitude Regarding International and Non-
 governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations of
 Human Rights.
 The Government of Sudan is sensitive to accusations of human
 rights violations and cooperates with human rights investiga-
 tions, but frequently is slow to respond. In its 1982 report
 Amnesty International expressed concern about detention without
 trial of government opponents, unfair trials, and poor prison
 conditions. Freedom House in 1982 called Sudan "Partly Free."
 4. ' Economic, Social, and Cultural Situation
 Sudan is among the poorest nations in the world, with a popula-
 tion of 19 million growing at the rate of 3.3 percent annually
 and a per capita Gross National Product of $470. In rural Sudan,
 85 percent of the populace lives in conditions of poverty. In
 the past year, lack of foreign exchange and serious inflation
 estimated at 30-40 percent have aggravated these difficult
 economic circumstances. The presence of about 500,000 refugees
 has been an additional economic drain despite international
 assistance. Though having great agricultural potential, Sudan is
 unable to supply 100 percent of the nutritional requirements of
 its population. Great distances between population and commer-
 cial centers and the lack of a viable communication and trans-
 portation infrastructure severely retard the exploitation of
 Sudan's natural and human resources. The problems are particu-
 larly acute in the south and the west, which are effectively cut
 off from the rest of the country for long periods during the
 year, by flooding.
 Medical, educational, and other services are poor outside Khar-
 toum. The World Health Organization, for example, has declared
 the principal hospital for the southern region one of Africa's
 worst. Sudanese life expectancy is 46.2 years, and the infant
 mortality rate is .124.4 out of 1,000 live births. Adequate
 sanitation is lacking, with half the population unable to obtain
 
 
 310
 safe drinking water.
 Schools enroll about 51 percent of primary school age children,
 with the percentage substantially higher in the cities and much
 lower in rural areas. Despite cultural barriers to female
 participation in activities outside the house, the national
 education system selects through competitive examinations the
 best male and female students for government-financed higher
 education. Universities are located in Khartoum, Wad Medani, and
 Juba; others are projected for the new northern capitals but they
 remain in the speculative stage.
 Racial and cultural differences cause some discrimination.
 Southern Sudanese, who are mostly Nilotic, complain of unfair
 treatment at the hands of their fellow countrymen in the north,
 who are generally Arab. The history of Sudan reflects repeated
 attempts of the Arab north to control the African south. Until
 the late 1800's, slaves from the south were an important source
 of income to the Arabized north. Raids by nomadic Arabized tribes
 on the more sedentary African tribes are now only history. The
 negotiated settlement of the civil war greatly helped to ease
 north-south tensions. Though the hospitality of the Sudanese in
 receiving refugees has been admirable, they encounter difficulty
 in finding employment and movement outside refugee camps.
 Women are accepted in many professions, but traditional practices
 are strong outside the cities. Female circumcision is widespread,
 though laws and government policy prohibit this ancient custom.
 The extreme poverty of the nation, the lack of infrastructure and
 trained manpower, acute budgetary problems, and other problems have
 limited advancement towards development goals in 1982.
 
 
 311
 U.S.OVdRSAS -LOANS AN) GRANTS-      3LIGATV0NS AN) LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS 00 OLLaRS)
 LOUNTRY: SUDAN
 1960      1931     1982
 I.ECCN. A$SST.-TOTAL ...         1?'        O.4     151.3
 LOANS ............          25.0      30.0      Z5.0
 L4ANTS ........     .        71.4      77.4    126.8
 A.AIO  ..................         70.1     ?4.5     124.9
 LOANS ............            00.       0.0       0.0
 GRANTS .............         70.1      74.5    124.9
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSST.)              0.04:0      0.0 190:O
 d.FOc!) FUR Pt ACE .......       23        34.9      26.9
 LOANS. ............         25.0      52.0      25.0
 ..RANTS..............         1.3       4.?       1.9
 TITLE I-TOTAL,..........          25.0     50.0      25.0
 REPAY. IN ;-LOANS .....         25.3      30.0      25.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR.....           0.0       0.0       0.0
 TITLE 1I-TOTAL... .....           1.3       4.9       1.9
 F.RLIEP./FC.DSV    WF-.=         0.7       3.        0.5
 VOL.RELIWf AIZNCY..,             ).       1.7       1.4
 C.OTHZR ECOV. ASSIST ..            0.0      0.0       0.0
 LOANS ................. .   0.0       0.,0      0.0
 GRANTS .............          0.0       o ,       0.0
 PEACt'1O;PS;..             C.0       0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS 0......".3 0.0                       0.0
 OTH'. ............          .J.      0.0      0.0
 I I.AIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL.           5 . 4    31.3     1  ?l. 2
 LOANS..... .... .....        ;5.0      30.0      50.0
 GRANTS....  .    .   ...... ..4         .3     51.2
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........          0.0       1.7       0.0
 .LREDIT SALdS-FS ....         2.,       S 3.0    50.0
 L.INTL !IL.iOTi4G ....          0.4       0.6       1.2
 O.TrAN-EXLESS STOSK...           0.3       0.0       0.0
 E.OTHEP SR4NTS ..,,,           0.1       0,       50.0
 III.TOTAL ELQN. R MIL...         121.3     141.?     ?53.0
 LUANS..      ...........     50.0      60.0     75.0
 GRANTS.............         71.!      91.7    178.0
 UTHEK US LOANS ..........           0.3      1.2       0.0
 .EX-IM 6ANK LUANS .......           G 0.0             0.0
 ALL OThER .......,.,,......       0.0      1.2       0.0
 A5S5TANCt FRO INTENATIONAL AGiNOIES
 TOTAL.........  . 1.4       5C.4       !9 5.?   6.
 0do                 Q.U      O.U       0.0    139.2
 ,                     .3      0,        0.3      33.2
 ICA               '17,.C      O.3       0.0    492.6
 ADB                 U.U      0U.       0.0       0.0
 AFJ 0.0                      .        0..      70.1
 uNOP              1&.       14.       0.0      10.3
 OTi1R-UN            -6.1     26.1       0.0      43.9
 c:                   3.0      0.0 d      .0       0.U
 
 
 312
