 SUDAN
 The Nimeiri regime is now in its twelfth year, having
 come to power through a military coup in May 1969. Himself
 the near-victim of a communist coup attempt in 1971, Presi-
 dent Nimeiri used his early years in power both to consoli-
 date his authority and to work out a settlement of the
 debilitating civil war which had pitted South against North
 for 17 years. The latter effort successfully culminated in
 the Addis Ababa agreement of 1972, which provided for a
 large measure of regional autonomy for the southern Sudan,
 including the creation of a regional legislature and a High
 Executive Council to administer the area. Nimeiri's success
 in ameliorating North-South problems has encouraged him to
 move toward decentralization in the northern part of the
 country -- a regionalization bill passed the People's
 Assembly in December 1980 -- in order to bring government
 closer to the people. It has also led him to counsel
 neighboeing African leaders on the benefits of moderate
 political solutions to regional and ethnic conflicts within
 their borders.
 The Sudan continues to suffer from intractable economic
 and social problems including the rising cost of imported
 oil, a heavy debt service burden, a skills and brain drain
 to neighboring oil rich countries, and a refugee population
 now estimated to be over four hundred thousand. In June the
 government hosted an international conference on its refugee
 problem in an effort to seek international participation in
 a plan to settle the refugees in the Sudan and to make them
 self-supporting. To put its economic house in~order, the
 government is working with the International Monetary Fund
 to implement a stabilization plan.
 At the beginning of the year, President Nimeiri placed
 his continued leadership of the country on the agenda of
 the Third National Congress of the Sudanese Socialist
 Union (SSU), Sudan's single political party. Early in the
 selection of delegates to the Congress, former First Vice
 President Abdul Gasim Ibrahim entered his candidacy in
 opposition to Nimeiri but later withdrew it due to lack of
 support. As a result, Nimeiri received a unanimous mandate
 to continue in office until the end of his term in 1983.
 The Sudan continued to be troubled in 1980 by insta-
 bility and conflict in neighboring countries. Conflicts in
 Ethiopia, Uganda, and Chad have sent between four and five
 hundred thousand refugees into the Sudan, and refugees
 continued to arrive during 1980. As a matter of conviction
 and policy, the Sudan does not turn any bona fide refugee
 away. However, the refugees constitute a significant
 drain on the slender economic resources of this very poor
 country, create something of a law and order problem in the
 major cities, and contribute to incipient instability
 along Sudan's border with Uganda and among some of Sudan's
 western tribes.
 Elections were held in the SSU for the local and national
 leadership, for the National People's Assembly, and
 
 
 266
 for its counterpart legislature in the semi-autonomous
 southern region. Sporadic plotting to overthrow the govern-
 ment occurred during the year as it had in the past. There
 were some new arrests for such activities. Trials were held
 for some previously arrested regime opponents, resulting
 both in acquittals and convictions. Anti-government activi-
 ties continued to be generated by a former cabinet minister
 in self-exile in London, and internally, by clandestine
 organizations of communists, Baathists and partisans of the
 abolished National Unionist Party. These activities appear-
 ed to receive external financial support.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including -
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Torture is prohibited under Sudanese law. Charges of
 torture have surfaced very occasionally but not during 1980.
 Past allegations have been investigated. Amnesty Interna-
 tional Report 1980 cites allegations of torture which were
 made in Hay 1979 during a court-martial of 45 military offi-
 cers and former officers. The government appointed a
 commission of inquiry into the allegations, the conclusions
 of which are not known.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 There were no reports of such treatment, although prisons
 and other detention facilities are austere, reflect-
 ing the acute poverty of the country. In the absence of
 allegations to the contrary, there is no reason to believe
 that incarcerated people are not adequately fed and other-
 wise provided for. To the limited extent they currently
 apply Islamic law, the Sudanese do not inflict corporal
 punishment or dismemberment.
 c. Disappearances
 There were no reports of any cases of politically inspired
 disappearances in Sudan in 1980.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 During the course of the year several hundred persons,
 the majority allegedly communist, were detained for investi-
 gation of conspiracy against the government. Such people
 generally have been released after a short detention, and
 there are probably no more than a few dozen long-term
 detainees. The right of habeas corpus'exists, defend-
 ants can choose their own legal counsel, and indigents
 charged with major offenses are afforded appointed counsel.
 After detention for suspicion, charges may be dropped by the
 arresting authority on a finding of insufficient evidence.
 Through habeas corpus petition the same issue is also raised
 in the judicial system, and may result either in judicial
 dismissal of charges for lack of sufficient evidence, or
 release on bail.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Public trials by civilian courts are the rule. However,
 security tribunals have sometimes been used when serious
 political charges were involved. Security tribunals are
 
 
 267
 convened by decision of the President of the Republic,
 on the recommendation of the Attorney General, if the
 President believes the activities in question represent a
 clear threat to the stability of the state. The tribunals
 are usually open, but may be closed by decision of the
 chief magistrate. There were approximately five cases in
 which security tribunals were convened during the past
 year, and all involved plots to overthrow the government.
 f. Invasion of the Home
 A constitutional guarantee-protects the home against
 invasion, and this is generally respected. In 1980 there
 were a few instances of house-to-house searches without
 warrant in cases involving plotting to overthrow the
 government.
 2. Government Policies Relating to the Fulfillment of Such
 Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care and Education
 The developmental goals of the Sudan as enunciated by
 President Nimeiri are for wdevelopment and progress, guided
 by a balanced ambition for welfare and an honorable life in
 an environment of social justice."
 The Sudan is one of the world's poorest countries, with a
 gross national product estimated by the World Bank to be
 $320 per capita. Further, there is significant income
 disparity, with twenty percent of the population receiving
 just under half the income. This means there are about ten
 million persons living in or near poverty.
 The constitution provides for free medical care and educa-
 tion. Medical facilities tend to be concentrated in
 Khartoum and the east-central region of the country. This
 is also where literacy is highest. In rural areas, and in
 the west and south especially, the level of healty care and
 literacy is much lower. With foreign assistance, and from
 its own limited resources, the government is attempting to
 broaden educational and health programs in the disadvantaged
 regions. Apart from the scarcity of resources, other
 constraints on rapid improvement are the sheer size of the
 country, inadequate infrastructure, lack of skilled person-
 nel and tribal and nomadic cultural patterns. Despite
 cultural barriers to female participation in activities
 outside of the house, especially in traditional regions, the
 national education system selects through competitive
 examination the best male and female students from through-
 'out the country for free education up to and including
 university and post-graduate levels. While males dominate
 the student populations at educational institutions, females
 constitute a sizeable minority at all levels, including the
 universities.
 The governmentts attempts to insure adequate food supplies
 nationwide is hampered by severe transportation bottlenecks.
 Drought conditions have affected Sudanese in the sparsely
 settled south-eastern portion of the country.
 As noted in the introduction, the government has maintained
 an open-door policy to refugees from neighboring countries,
 principally Ethiopia, but also Uganda, Zaire and Chad,
 estimated to number between four and five hundred thousand.
 
 
 268
 The Sudan is trying to provide the refugees with land
 and livelihood. In 1980 it sought and received considerable
 international assistance in providing food and educational,
 medical and ottier social services.
 Allegations of government corruption are fairly common,
 although seasoned observers think the incidence of corrup-
 tion is probably much lower than in other countries where
 salary scales are similarly low. A few officials were
 charged and brought to trial over the last several years.
 Others accused of corruption have simply been dismissed from
 their public service jobs. Such corruption as there is
 appears to be petty and is not an all-pervasive feature of
 the administrative scene.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 Freedom of opinion and expression are guaranteed by the
 constitution, as are freedom of religion and assembly.
 The Sudanese people openly criticize their government
 and its policies if they wish to do so. In the national
 People's Assembly, members freely challenge what they
 perceive to be policy failures, oversights or mistakes.
 This is expected, however, to be in the form of construc-
 tive criticism. The editorial policy of the press and
 all other major media outlets is controlled by the govern-
 ment or its supporters. However, the English language press
 is more independent than the Arabic press. For example, the
 respected monthly English language magazine Sddadow fre-
 quently publishes hard-hitting "exposes" directed at the
 government.
 Islamicization of Sudanese laws is increasing but is far
 from compfete. Nevertheless, governmental leaders maintain
 adamantly that freedom of religion will not be restric-
 ted. However, there are indications that missionaries or
 staff for non-Muslim religious institutions encounter
 difficulties obtaining residence visas.
 Sudan has a viable and effective trade union movement which
 is able to bring pressure both on employers and the govern-
 ment. Arbitration is mandatory under law but it is regu-
 larly by-passed; wage and other benefits are frequently won
 as a result of strikes and threats of strikes. Females make
 up only slightly over ten percent of the urban work force.
 Few women are considered unemployed. By law women are
 accorded equal pay with men for equal work.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 The constitution guarantees citizens freedom from deporta-
 tion and from exclusion from the country. A constitutional
 guarantee of freedom of movement within the country has been
 in suspense since a restriction was enacted by the People's
 Assembly in the aftermath of the nearly successful 1975
 coup attempt. However, the restriction is not currently
 applied. The Sudan is suffering from a significant "brain
 drain," i.e., immigration of educated and trained manpower,
 to oil-rich Gulf and Middle Eastern countries. This phenom-
 enon has grown to such proportions that the government no
 
 
 269
 longer accepts it as simply an inconvenience. Some cate-
 gories of government personnel in short supply, such as
 teachers and technicians, encounter difficulty in obtaining
 exit permits. The government is endeavoring to map out a
 comprehensive national policy aimed at balancing individual
 rights with national obligation derived from education and
 training at national expense.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 The Sudanese Socialist Union is the only legal political
 party. Membership is open to all Sudanese. Membership dues
 are about six cents per month. The structure of the SSU is
 designed to ensure participation in the political process
 of all sectors of society, i.e., women, youth, laborers,
 capitalists, professionals, intellectuals and the armed
 forces. The SSU system is used to select a majority of the
 membership of the People's Assembly, but, a large number of
 candidates run for geographical constituencies in direct
 popular elections such as were held in 1980. Candidates for
 the People's Assembly must be cleared with the SSU, but the
 candidates need not be members. No candidates were elim-
 inated by this provision in the 1980 elections. Candidates
 for the 136 geographical constituencies are elected on the
 basis of popular ballot. Candidates for 196 seats are
 elected by sectoral organizations such as women, youth,
 worker organizations, farmer and capitalist associa-
 tions, and local councils and cooperative committees, on a
 geographically equitable basis. The remaining 36 members of
 the 368 seat Assembly are appointed by the President. Many
 members of former political parties are members of the
 People's Assembly. About half could readily be identified
 as having been active earlier in the Umma, National Unionist
 or Communist Parties, or in the Muslim Brotherhood. There
 also is representation of these political groups (except for
 the communists) in the cabinet and on the SSU Central
 Committee. Despite the fact that the old political parties
 have been declared illegal, groups like the Ansars and
 Muslim Brothers basically operate and look after their own
 interests, which are sometimes at variance with those of the
 regime.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Amnesty International Report 1980 indicates the main
 concern of Amnesty was the detention without trial of
 political opponents. The report refers to the detention of
 several hundred persons in 1979, many of them in the wake of
 widespread demonstrations and trade union strikes against
 government economic policies. No requests in 1980 for
 outside investigations of the human rights situation in the
 Sudan were reported.
 
 
 270
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 
 COUNTRY: SUDAN
 
 1978     1979     1980
 
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...
 LOANSo..............
 GRANTSoo...........
 A.AID ................
 LOANS..............
 GRANTSo............
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...
 BeFOOD FOR PEACE.......
 LOANS .........
 GRANTS.............
 TITLE I-TOTAL .......
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS.....
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR...
 TITLE I1-TOTAL .....
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY.....
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...
 LOANS...... ........
 GRANTS .... ....
 CONTR. TO IFI....
 PEACE CORPS......
 OTHER............
 iI.MIL. ASSISTo-TOTAL...
 LOANS..............
 'GRANTS.........
 A.PAP GRANTS .......
 B.CREDIT SALES-FMS....
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG....
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK..
 E.OTHER GRANTS,.,
 III.TOTAL ECON. & NILo.o
 LOANS............
 GRANTS.......  .....o
 OTHER US LOANS..........
 EX-IM BANK LOANS......o
 ALL OTHER.esooosov.ooe
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL A(
 1978     1979
 lll~el ~ l ------   ---------lll
 
 TOTALe..ew,*
 IBRO
 IFC
 IDA
 1DB
 ADS
 AFDB
 UNDP
 OTHER-UN
 EEC
 
 114.0
 0.0
 20.5
 78.0
 0.0
 0.0
 12.4
 3.1
 0.0
 0.0
 
 19.9     37.5
 9.8     19.0
 10.1     18.5
 7.6     16.7
 0.0      0.0
 7.6     16.7
 0.0      0.0
 12.3     20.8
 9.8     19.0
 2.5      1.8
 9.8     19.0
 9.8     19.0
 0.0     0.0
 2.5      1.8
 2.0      1.6
 0.5      0.2
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.2      5.3
 0.0      5.0
 0.2      0.3
 0.0     0.0
 0.0     5.0
 0.2      0.3
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 20.1    -42.8
 9.8     24.0
 10.3     18.8
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 
 96.4
 25.0
 71.4
 70.1
 0.0
 70.1
 40.0
 26o3
 25.0
 13
 25.0
 0.0
 1.3
 0.7
 0.6
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 25.4
 25.0
 0.4
 0.0
 25.0
 0.4
 0.0
 0.0
 .121.8
 50.0
 71.8
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 
 GENCIES
 1980     1946-80
 
 196 4
 0.0
 0.3
 170.0
 0.0
 0.0
 10.0
 16.0
 0.1
 0.0
 
 8470*
 159.2
 32.9
 521.2
 0.0
 0.0
 50.5
 65.7
 17.8
 0.0
 
 ----------------------------------------------------------
 
 
 271
