 SUDAN
 Jaafar Nimeiri came to power by military coup in 1969, and
 formally assumed the presidency in 1971, by means of a single
 candidate referendum. The President dominates all branches of
 government and is the leader of the Sudan Socialist Union, the
 sole political organization. He has periodically assumed
 ministerial appointments, currently is Minister of Defense and
 Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces, and is de facto Prime
 Minister. All judges are responsible to him for 'proper
 performance* of their duties. He exercises oversight of the
 People's Assembly through his powers to appoint 10 percent of
 its membership, to convene and dissolve it, to rule by
 provisional decree during recesses (normally July-October),
 and to limit legislative inquiry into executive affairs.
 Sudan has traditionally been a tolerant society, currently
 offering hospitality and protection to over 800,000 refugees
 of diverse religious and ethnic backgrounds from several
 neighboring countries. In 1984, however, controversy over
 religious law and insurgency in the south led to setbacks in
 human rights.
 During 1984, President Nimeiri stepped up his program to
 Islamize Sudanese institutions. Laws Islamizing the military,
 civil transactions, the tax structure, and other areas were
 passed. Nimeiri had already promulgated new criminal,
 procedures, and judiciary codes under Islamization in late
 1983. In 1984 Nimeiri also proposed a set of constitutional
 amendments which would have made Sudan an Islamic state and
 made the President the religious as well as the secular
 leader. The People's Assembly debated the amendments in July
 but adjourned without ratifying them.
 In the 1972 Addis Ababa Accords, President Nimeiri brought an
 end to Sudan's 17-year civil war between the Muslim north and
 the largely non-Muslim south by granting the southern third of
 the country special regional autonomy. However, within the
 past 18 months, armed insurgency under the Sudan Peoples
 Liberation Movement has resumed in the south and escalated in
 scale in 1984 with an attendant increase in civilian
 casualties. The conflict was fueled by the President's
 decision to decentralize the south into three regions, which
 some southerners see as an infringement of the south's special
 autonomy, and aggravated by the program to Islamize Sudanese
 institutions, including installing summary justice. In
 September, President Nimeiri reversed direction and announced
 that he would accept reunification of the three regions if
 southerners can come to a consensus on a new regional
 government.
 Following the Government's decision in 1983 to incorporate
 traditional Islamic punishments drawn from the Shari'a into
 the penal code, the President declared a state of emergency on
 April 29, in part to ensure that the Shari'a was applied more
 broadly, and he suspended most constitutionally guaranteed
 rights. Civilian courts, which had been slow to carry out
 amputations and other punishments, lost most of their
 jurisdiction over criminal cases. In their place, emergency
 courts, later known as 'decisive justice courts," were
 established with summary jurisdiction over criminal cases.
 More than 50 public amputations for thievery took place during
 the emergency. Public lashings were common for misdemeanors.
 Public hangings for murder and in one case robbery took
 
 
 322
 SUDAN
 place. The new laws were not applied in the south, but were
 enforced against non-Muslims, including southerners, living in
 the north. On September 29, President Nimeiri announced the
 end of the state of emergency and dismantled the emergency
 courts, but soon promulgated a new judiciary act which
 perpetuated and institutionalized many of the summary
 practices of the emergency courts. Amputations and hangings
 continued after the state of emergency was lifted.
 Sudan's relations with Libya have been strained for several
 years; Libyan leader Muammar Qadhafi has undertaken or backed
 several plots to overthrow the Government. On March 16, 1984,
 in an isolated incident, a Libyan airplane bombed Omdurman,
 killing five and injuring others. During 1984, Sudanese
 authorities apprehended a number of groups of Libyan-financed
 Sudanese subversives planning to overthrow the Government (the
 most recent being in October). Qadhafi has publicly expressed
 support for southern Sudanese insurgents. Sudan's
 relationship with Ethiopia continues to be complicated by the
 presence of Eritreans in Sudan who oppose the Ethiopian
 Government and by the presence of dissident Sudanese in
 Ethiopia. Armed attacks against the Nimeiri Government were
 mounted from Ethiopia in 1984.
 Sudan is a poor country, but has considerable developmental
 potential, especially in agriculture. Despite a number of
 reforms, the country is in a precarious financial situation
 and suffering from serious drought. It has been obliged to
 restrain imports, seek debt rescheduling, cut back its
 development program, and rely on heavy donor food imports.
 The insecurity in the south has created new problems for the
 economy, e.g. , postponement of oil field development and
 pipeline construction.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no known instances of politically inspired killings
 in 1984. However, the level of fighting between the Sudanese
 people's armed forces and southern insurgents escalated in
 1984. Insurgents operate freely in the countryside of about
 one-half of Bahr El Ghazal region and two-thirds of Upper Nile
 region, and have mounted attacks on many towns and military
 garrisons in these areas. Southern insurgent groups have
 killed several thousand non-combatants (mostly southerners) in
 the course of their attacks on villages and military
 garrisons. Twice they have attacked riverboats primarily
 carrying civilians. In one case as many as several hundred
 people were killed. In February, insurgents attacked Chevron
 Oil Company's base camp at Rub Kona in the south's Upper Nile
 region, killing three foreign workers. Sudanese military
 units have at times not discriminated between combatants and
 non-combatants in their operations against insurgent groups.
 Fights between rival southern insurgent groups, inter-tribal
 warfare, and banditry in the south have also caused numerous
 deaths.
 
 
 323
 SUDAN
 b. Disappearance
 There were no known cases of politically inspired
 disappearances in Sudan in 1984. On four occasions, the
 insurgents took hostage Westerners working in the south. A
 few still remain hostage.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 There have been no reported cases of torture in Sudan in
 1984. The criminal code introduced in 1983 contains
 penalities based on traditional Islamic laws. Public lashing
 for both men and women is now a common punishment for many
 minor crimes. For example, those found guilty of
 drinking/possessing liquor, blasphemy, gambling, or illegal
 possession of commodities usually receive lashes (often with a
 fine and/or imprisonment). The maximum lashing sentence is
 100 lashes. The new code made right-hand amputation the
 standard sentence for theft of anything valued at over $40.
 Aggravated theft and many other offenses carry a maximum
 penalty of cross-limb amputation, i.e., of the right hand and
 left foot.
 As of December 31, 1984, there had been 54 hand and 16
 cross-limb amputations. In the same period there were eight
 public hangings. The first man hanged under the new penal
 code, in June 1984, was convicted of armed robbery. All of
 the others executed were convicted of murder. Three were
 sentenced to posthumous crucifixion after hanging, but the
 crucifixion was not carried out. No women have been sentenced
 to amputation or hanging. The exact proportion of non-Muslims
 and Muslims subjected to these punishments is not available,
 because neither prison records nor official announcements
 record the religion or ethnic background of those sentenced.
 Amputations and hangings continued after the state of
 emergency was lifted in October. Under the Islam-based
 criminal code, persons injured by someone committing a
 criminal act have the option to invoke the right of
 retribution.  (The victim would otherwise accept monetary
 compensation from the defendant.) For example, in one case, a
 woman found to have started a fight in which another woman's
 arm was broken was sentenced to have her arm broken as
 punishment. There were three reported instances of such
 punishment in 1984; the others involved two tooth extractions
 and a stabbing.
 Adultery by Muslims and recurrent homosexuality are capital
 offenses. No capital sentences have been executed owing to
 the onerous standard of proof required. (For adultery, the
 testimony of four male eyewitnesses is required before a
 sentence of death can be imposed. ) More circumstantial
 evidence of adultery or homosexuality has resulted in
 conviction for "shameful acts.* Evidence of adultery has also
 sometimes resulted in conviction for 'attempted adultery.'
 Many people have been convicted of and lashed for these
 offenses.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Constitution guarantees habeas corpus and requires a court-
 issued warrant to arrest a citizen. The State Security Act of
 1975 authorizes arrest without a warrant and detention without
 
 
 324
 SUDAN
 charges for renewable 90-day periods on security grounds.
 Many persons have been detained for short periods of time
 under the Security Act, then either released or tried. About
 80 people, mainly from the Ansar sect and the Republican
 Brothers, were taken into custody in mid-1983. In December,
 Ansar leader Sadiq al Mahdi and his chief lieutenants were
 released after 15 months detention, as were Republican Brother
 leader Mahmoud Taha and several followers.
 (In January 1985, Taha and four other Republican Brothers were
 rearrested for distributing anti-Shari'a literature and
 condemned to death by a civilian court for the crime of
 apostasy, unless they recanted. Taha was executed when he
 refused to acknowledge the authority of the court or to
 recant. The others were granted amnesty, after they had all
 recanted and sought the court's clemency. After Taha's
 execution, Sudanese security authorites rounded up several
 hundred Republican Brothers. Some were later released.
 Although the Republican Brother movement has been declared
 heretical and illegal, it is not known whether additional
 Republican Brothers will be tried.)
 At the end of 1984, there were 230 Baathists and communists in
 detention and an unknown but probably small number of
 southerners. Nuba priest Philip Abbas Gaboush and 208 others,
 mostly Nubas and southerners, were detained in late October in
 connection with an alleged coup plot. As the year ended,
 their trial before a special criminal court was in process.
 (In January 1985, Gaboush and the entire group were released
 when he petitioned the President for amnesty.)
 Nimeiri's 1984 state of emergency decree suspended the arrest
 warrant requirement, habeas corpus, and the right to bail.
 People found violating the law were arrested on the spot and
 immediately jailed with no access to an attorney. Most cases
 were brought quickly to trial. Lifting of the state of
 emergency restored these suspended rights. However, bail must
 now be deposited in full, and in cash, prior to release,
 whereas before the state of emergency a signed guarantee of
 bail was sufficient.
 During the state of emergency, authorities aggressively
 enforced laws against adultery, hoarding commodities, and
 possession/trafficking of alcohol. Some married couples found
 together were jailed for attempted adultery until they could
 prove they were married. Some merchants with permission to
 possess excess amounts of controlled commodities were jailed
 until they could provide proof. Some non-Muslims, for whom
 sale of alcohol is illegal but possession is not, were
 arrested for selling alcohol when found in possession of small
 amounts.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Current trial procedures have their origins in the state of
 emergency which was canceled in September 1984. Under the
 state of emergency, specially-created 'emergency courts,"
 later renamed "decisive justice courts," followed summary
 procedures. These three-man courts consisted of a policeman,
 military officer, and a civilian regarded as pious but
 untrained in law. The accused was not allowed to be
 represented by legal counsel, though an attorney could be
 present in court as a *friend.* Evidence was largely oral
 
 
 325
 SUDAN
 testimony by the accused and witnesses. No record was kept.
 Trials were short, and sentences other than amputation or
 death were carried out immediately after being decided. There
 was no appeal. Death sentences had to be approved by the
 President.
 Limited appeal rights reappeared in July with the
 establishment of a Decisive Justice Court of Appeal. Appeals
 had to be submitted within three days of sentencing. The
 Appeals Court generally limited its scope to the question of
 whether sentence was appropriate. The judge who originally
 passed sentence also sat on the Court of Appeal, and most
 sentences were upheld. In two instances, the Appeals Court
 added hand amputation to a lesser sentence. Once it lowered a
 death sentence to 40 lashes when the accused changed his
 confession.
 Shortly after President Nimeiri lifted the state of emergency
 and abolished the decisive justice courts, a new judiciary
 system was set up along the same lines. Summary procedures
 continue to be followed in every criminal trial, with no
 records kept. The accused may now be represented by an
 attorney, but defense counsel may not cross-examine
 witnesses. The appeals procedure is unchanged. The Court of
 Appeal is the final authority for criminal cases and the
 Supreme Court is not involved. Most of the decisive justice
 court judges have been appointed to the new judiciary.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Emergency regulations in 1984 empowered the police and armed
 forces to enter and search private homes and businesses, to
 stop and inspect all vehicles, and to interrogate any person
 without prior judicial authorization. Authorities used these
 powers frequently during the first two months of the state of
 emergency and with decreasing frequency thereafter. The
 lifting of the state of emergency formally cancelled these
 arbitrary police powers. However, under the State Security
 Act, security forces maintain the power to apprehend and
 detain persons without a warrant.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Newspapers, magazines, radio, and television in Sudan are
 under government ownership, and there is little criticism of
 the Government. Coverage of internal events is largely
 confined to reports published by the Sudan news agency (Suna)
 which is an office of the presidency. The monthly
 English-language magazine Sudanow, however, sometimes contains
 articles mildly critical of government policies and programs.
 Foreign publications are generally available in Sudan and are
 not censored. On occasion, a particular issue of a foreign
 publication containing an article critical of the Sudanese
 Government has been withheld from circulation.
 Citizens, including senior government officials, openly
 criticize government policies, including those of the
 President, in personal expression and display little fear of
 retaliation. Sudanese often voice strong criticism aimed
 either at government policies or the advice and conduct of
 
 
 326
 SUDAN
 advisors and ministers. Debate in the Assembly is also quite
 free. However, government tolerance of criticism does have
 its limits. In August 1984, a man who had interrupted and
 denounced the President while he was speaking in a mosque, was
 sentenced to two years in jail and 80 lashes. Suna published
 the substance of his criticisms, however. (On January 23,
 1985, it was announced that he had submitted an appeal for
 clemency to President Nimeiri and apologized for his actions
 and was released from imprisonment.)
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Constitution guarantees the freedom to organize labor
 unions. The State Security Act of 1975 forbids any strike,
 work stoppage, or collective resignation. Labor is officially
 represented in the Sudan Socialist Union through two
 federations which are independent of government control--the
 Sudanese Workers Trade Union Federation and the Sudanese
 Federation of Employees Trade Unions. Union membership is
 estimated at about nine percent of the working population. In
 both the private and public sectors, unions engage in
 collective bargaining for wage increases and benefits.
 Unions, trade associations, and professional groups are
 permitted to maintain relations with recognized international
 bodies in their fields. Though freedom to form new trade
 unions was suspended during the state of emergency, the Sudan
 Workers Trade Union Federation held its annual congress in May
 and the Sudan Railway Workers Trade Union completed elections
 for a new executive committee in late July.
 There was a strike by the Sudan's doctors' union from March 1
 to April 12 in protest over low government salaries for
 doctors and poor conditions in hospitals. Though the
 Government threatened the union's leaders with imprisonment
 under the State Security Act of 1975, the two sides eventually
 worked out an acceptable compromise. In May, however,
 President Nimeiri abolished the doctors' union and all other
 professional unions on the grounds that they had become too
 politicized.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Islam predominates in the northern two-thirds of Sudan, while
 traditional African religions and Christianity constitute the
 major beliefs in the south. Small Christian communities
 (Coptic, Greek, Syrian) exist in the north, primarily in the
 Khartoum area. Many non-Muslim southerners have migrated to
 the cities in the north in search of work. Under the 1973
 Constitution, Islam, as the religion of the majority, and
 Christianity, as the religion of a 'large number" of Sudanese,
 are recognized as "religions of Sudan.' The religious rights
 of adherents to traditional African religions are not
 restricted. The Constitution also states that Islamic law and
 custom shall be the main source of legislation.
 In 1984 President Nimeiri proposed a set of amendments to the
 Constitution which, among other things, would have declared
 Sudan to be an Islamic republic and made the President its
 religious as well as secular leader. The peoples' assemblies
 of all three southern regions passed resolutions urging
 rejection of the proposed amendments because they would deny
 full rights to non-Muslims. Southern representatives made
 similar arguments during debate on the amendments in the
 
 
 327
 SUDAN
 National People's Assembly, which postponed debate in mid-July
 and adjourned without ratifying the amendments.
 Southerners have also opposed the Islam-based criminal code on
 the grounds that it infringes upon the rights of non-Muslims.
 Most southerners, as non-Muslims, believe that Sudan's legal
 codes, based in part on traditional Islamic laws and
 containing Islamic punishment for certain crimes,
 intrinsically make non-Muslims second class citizens. While
 insisting that the new laws are fair because they treat
 Muslims and non-Muslims equally, the Government has not
 implemented them in the three southern regions. However, the
 laws have been enforced on non-Muslims, including southerners,
 living in the north.
 Groups of military and other public employees which included
 non-Muslims have been required en masse to swear an Islamic
 oath of personal fealty to the President.
 The Government provides financial support to many of the
 country's mosques and to Muslim educational projects. Islamic
 missionaries are actively attempting to convert non-Muslims in
 the south. Attempting to convert Muslims to another religion
 is strictly forbidden. Christian missionaries freely operate
 welfare and education projects in the south. The Christian
 communities of Sudan maintain strong links with their
 coreligionists outside Sudan without impediment. Non-Muslim
 Sudanese are represented in all strata of government, security
 institutions, and private organizations. There is no
 discrimination in Sudan against any of the various Muslim
 sects, except insofar as they are politically active. There
 are three major Muslim political groupings: the Ansar, the
 Khatmiyya, and the Muslim Brotherhood. The religious
 practices of these groups are unrestricted, but political
 activities considered a threat to the security of the state
 often result in the imprisonment of key leaders. For example,
 Ansar leader Sadig Al Mahdi and several of his followers were
 under detention until their release in December, as were
 leaders of the Republican Brothers, a very small group. The
 Khatmiyya are politically inactive. The Muslim Brothers now
 participate widely in the Government.
 Christian-Muslim relations in the Nuban areas of South
 Kordofan have always been uneasy and tensions have reached a
 new level of confrontation over the past few months.
 Authorities recently ordered 16 Christian churches in the
 Nuba-inhabited area of Heiban in South Kordofan to be closed.
 A number of local residents and churchmen were arrested for
 disobeying the order. An Italian priest in Kadugli was
 arrested, charged with "inciting the people against the
 government" and two clinics in Kadugli operated by Italian
 priests and nuns were closed. When Heiban area residents
 protested, the Chairman of the Higher Council for Religious
 Affairs and the Deputy Governor of Kordofan ordered the
 Commissioner of South Kordofan to allow the oldest of the
 churches to reopen. He has not complied; and two churches in
 Heiban remain closed and the churches in the surrounding area
 remain open, except four which were burned down by persons
 unknown.
 
 40-387 0 - 85 - 22
 
 
 328
 SUDAN
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Although freedom of movement is constitutionally guaranteed, a
 constitutional article suspending internal movement in cases
 of national security is used by the Government to reduce the
 number of Sudanese and foreign migrants moving to major urban
 centers.
 The Government has taken steps to reduce the flow of Sudanese
 professionals and skilled workers leaving the country for Gulf
 states in search of higher salaries. Certain professionals
 (such as doctors) who have graduated from local universities
 must spend a fixed term of service in Sudan before being
 allowed to work overseas. Other categories of technicians in
 snort supply find it difficult to obtain exit visas. Persons
 currently employed in Sudan who wish to work for an extended
 period of time in another country must obtain a leave of
 absence from their employer. The tax on foreign earned income
 was recently lowered from 10 percent to 2.5 percent.
 Sudan currently hosts over 600,000 persons displaced from
 Ethiopia, about 165,000 from Uganda, and as many as 100,000
 from Chad. Despite the tremendous burden on Sudan's food
 resources and administrative capabilities, the Government has
 received them hospitably and works closely with the United
 Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other international
 groups to accommodate their needs. Sudan exerts no pressure
 to repatriate, but discourages them from moving from their
 placement centers into heavily populated urban areas. During
 1984 a small number of Ugandans voluntarily returned to their
 country. Approximately 60,000 Sudanese have moved across the
 border into Ethiopia in the past two years due to unsettling
 political and economic conditions in southern Sudan. The
 Government has appealed to them to return and promised there
 will be no recrimination, as long as they do not take up
 insurgent activities.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 President Nimeiri and his close associates dominate all
 branches of government, as well as the Sudan Socialist Union,
 the only legal political party in Sudan since 1971, which
 selects the sole candidate for the presidential elections. In
 1977 Nimeiri's nomination was challenged in the Sudan
 Socialist Union but he won easily. In 1983 Nimeiri alone
 stood for nomination, and he received affirmative votes
 reported at more than 99 percent.
 Tne Sudan Socialist Union seeks to include all sectors of
 society. The Union must approve all candidates for both the
 People's Assembly and the regional assemblies, although
 candidates need not belong to it. The Union rarely rejects a
 candidacy. All candidates must run on non-partisan platforms.
 A degree of legislative branch independence from the executive
 was demonstrated in 1984 by the National People's Assembly's
 failure to ratify President Nimeiri's proposed constitutional
 amendments. The three southern regional People's Assemblies
 also adopted resolutions opposing them.
 
 
 329
 SUDAN
 In maintaining his power, Nimeiri has over the years pursued
 twin policies of national reconciliation and
 decentralization. In 1972 he negotiated an end to the civil
 war by granting the south special regional autonomy in such
 local issues as education, culture, and agriculture. In 1977
 Nimeiri dissuaded several northern political factions from
 active opposition but left outside the regime's reconciliation
 umbrella the Communist Party, Baathists, Republican Brothers,
 and others. The Ansar headed by Sadiq Al Mahdi, were included
 in the reconciliation until 1983 when Sadiq broke with
 Nimeiri. The Muslim Brotherhood has members in the
 Government, and operates informally but openly to look after
 its political interests.
 After dividing the north into six regions, Nimeiri extended
 additional decentralization to the south in June 1983 by
 abolishing the southern regional government and creating three
 southern regions. Though some southern politicians supported
 this move, many more southerners opposed it, considering it a
 violation of the special regional autonomy guaranteed by the
 1972 Addis Ababa Accords. Nimeiri had said he was ready to
 reunite the three regions at the end of an 18-month trial
 period, if the southerners so desired, but there has been
 little response to date to his call for dialogue, and the
 status quo remains in effect.
 Signs of southern dissatisfaction with the central Government
 increased in 1984, taking the form of attacks by growing
 insurgent groups on government installations in the south as
 well as public criticism by southern leaders. Southerners
 point to redivision of the south, introduction of the
 Islam-based penal code, and the proposal of a constitutional
 amendment to declare Sudan an Islamic republic as evidence
 that they receive less than equal consideration in decisions
 on matters affecting the entire country. The Government has
 offered amnesty to insurgents willing to lay down their arms
 and proposed dialogue with southerners to resolve their
 grievances.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Sudanese Christian leaders have protested the application of
 Islamic laws in Sudan, particularly noting that sentences such
 as severance of limbs and lashing are punishments that
 "degrade the person" and "dull the morals of the nation."
 Amnesty International also protested the use of such
 punishments in several messages to the Sudanese Government in
 1984. As a response, the Government has stated that the new
 laws are based on strict adherence to Islam, which the
 Government dlleges provides greater protection of human rights
 than Sudan's old secular laws or the laws of many other
 countries. Amnesty International in its 1984 report (covering
 1983) expressed its concern over large scale detentions
 without trial of political opponents of the Government.
 Freedom House's 1984-85 rating for Sudan is "not free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 With a per capita GNP of $443 for 1982, Sudan is a poor
 country. Its developmental potential, particularly in
 agriculture, is considerable. However, over-anbitious
 
 
 330
 SUDAN
 government development plans throughout much of the 1970's,
 combined with poor financial management, created staggering
 international debt obligations. Because of its precarious
 financial position, Sudan has been obliged to restrain
 imports, seek debt relief through rescheduling, and curtail
 its development program. In concert with the International
 Monetary Fund, Sudan has undertaken a number of economic
 reforms in recent years. Nevertheless, the country's
 financial situation will remain problematic for years to come.
 Sudan's population is 21.1 million, growing at an annual rate
 of 2.7 percent. The country's area is just under one million
 square miles. Life expectancy is almost 48 years, and infant
 mortality occurs at a rate of 118.9 per thousand live births.
 In 1981, the primary school enrollment ratio was about 48
 percent--56 percent of boys and 39 percent of girls. Overall
 attendance figures obscure, however, dramatically lower rates
 in rural Sudan, particularly the south. The World Bank
 estimates that 46 percent of Sudan's population has access to
 safe water. In 1977, caloric supply as a percent of the daily
 requirement was 96.8. However, the current drought in much of
 Sudan has raised the specter of malnutrition in some regions
 of the country, particularly the west. In addition, the
 drought has resulted in migration from the northern to the
 southern parts of Kordofan and Darfur. Migrants from the west
 have appeared in large numbers near Khartoum. An
 internationally organized food relief effort was launched in
 .1984.
 In addition to economic constraints, geography and cultural
 diversity have had an adverse effect upon delivery of
 government services and income distribution. Vast distances,
 deserts, swamps, and rain forests impede transportation and
 communication. Sudan's population includes urban groups,
 tenant farmers at large irrigated schemes, isolated riverline
 settlers, nomadic and semi-nomadic herdsmen, and a plethora of
 tribal groups. If one excluded the population settled along
 the Nile and the inhabitants of perhaps half a dozen urban
 centers, the indices for health, sanitation, and education
 cited above would drop dramatically.
 The great cultural dichotomy in Sudan is between the north and
 the south. Neither is monolithic. In addition to ethnic
 Arabs, the north includes indigenous tribesmen and descendants
 of Central and West African settlers. The south is a rich
 mixture of tribal groups and languages. Generally speaking,
 however, the north is Muslim and arabized. The south is
 non-Arabized African and non-Muslim, with animists
 outnumbering Christians.
 Southerners have traditionally felt aggrieved at their
 treatment at the hands of northerners, and this includes
 economic matters. The Government is formally committed to the
 concept of a culturally diverse Sudan. Southerners do fill
 high positions in the Government, including the second Vice
 Presidency. But the south remains the most economically
 backward region in Sudan. However, the poorly developed
 infrastructure of the south, its lack of access to
 international markets, and the present emphasis upon the
 rehabilitation of existing projects as well as Sudan's general
 poverty, all tend to limit developmental progress in the
 south. Moreover, much donor aid activity has ceased in the
 south due to security concerns.
 
 
 331
 SUDAN
 While the distinction between men's and women's roles in
 Sudanese society persists, it is not so strong as in many
 other Arab and African countries. Women are accepted in
 professions, even though their absolute numbers are small. In
 rural areas, division of labor exists, but men and women can
 be seen working alongside one another in some endeavors. The
 drive to Islamize Sudanese society has not had a dramatic
 impact upon women's rights thus far. While more conservative
 attire has been encouraged, the veil has not become
 mandatory. As a result of the rash of arrests for 'attempted
 adultery" during the early months of the state of emergency,
 relations between unmarried persons have become more
 circumspect. Women retain the right to drive automobiles and
 work openly in offices with men. Female circumcision, though
 illegal, is widely practiced throughout much of Sudan.
 Efforts to eradicate it have been unsuccessful.
 
 
 332
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: SUDAN
 1982     1983     1984
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        151.8    166.3    197.4
 LOANS ................     25.0     50.0     50.0
 GRANTS .................  126.8    116.3    147.4
 A.AID  ........................ 124.9  115.3    146.3
 LOANS ..............  ....  0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .................. 124.9    115.3    146.3
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...        100.0     82.3    120.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......        26.9     51.0     51.1
 LOANS ...................  25.0     50.0     50.0
 GRANTS .......... .... 1.9           1.0      1.1
 TITLE I-TOTAL ............      25.0     50.0     50.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....       25.0     50.0     50.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL .........         1.9      1.0      1.1
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.          0.5      1.0      1.1
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....         1.4      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............  ....  0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS ......         0.0      0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        101.2     44.3     46.5
 LOANS ................     50.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ............. .... 51.2      44.3     46.5
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........         0.0     43.0     45.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....        50.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG ....         1.2      1.3      1.5
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS                 50.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & NIL...        253.0    210.6    243.9
 LOANS ................     75.0     50.0     50.0
 GRANTS .................  178.0    160.6    193.9
 OTHER US LOANS ..........         0.0     27.4      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......         0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER ................      0.0     27.4      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1982     1983     1984     1946-84
 TOTAL ........     65.2    132.1     91.4   1270.1
 IBRD               0.0       0.0      0.0    159.2
 IFC                0.3       0.0      0.0     33.2
 IDA               56.0     130.0     91.4    872.3
 IDB                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 ADS                 0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFDS                8.6      0.0      0.0     78.8
 UNDP                0.3      2.1      0.0     82.7
 OTHER-UN            0.0      0.0      0.0     43.9
 EEC                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
