 SUDAN
 The 1989 military coup that overthrew Sudan's democratically elected government
 brought to power Lt. General Omar Hassan Al-Bashir and his National Salvation
 Revolution Command Council (RCC). Bashir and the RCC suspended the 1985 Con-
 stitution, abrogated press freedom, and disbanded all political parties and trade
 unions. In 1993 the RCC dissolved itself and appointed Bashir President. In March
 1996 Bashir won highly structured national elections as President, while a National
 Assembly with 275 of 400 members popularly elected in a deeply flawed process re-
 placed the transitional national assembly. The opposition boycotted the electoral
 process. Despite promulgation of national institutions and an interim constitution
 through constitutional decrees, the Government continues to restrict most civil lib-
 erties. Since 1989 real power has rested with the National Islamic Front (NIF),
 founded by Dr. Hassan A1-Turabi, who became speaker of the National Assembly
 in 1996. NIF members and suppoters continue tohold key positions in the Govern-
 ment; security frces; judiciary; academic institutions; and the media. The supreme
 political institution, the National Convention, which sets national policy guidelines,
 is also under NIF control. The judiciary is subject to government influence.
 The civil war, which has resulted in the death of more than 1.5 million Sudanese,
 continued into its 15th year. The principal insurgent faction is the Sudan People's
 Liberation Movement (SPLM), a body created by the Sudan People's Liberation
 Army (SPLA). The SPLA remains the principal military force in the insurgency. In
 April the South Sudan Independence Movement/Army (SSIMA), which broke away
 from the SPLA, and several smaller southern factions concluded a peace agreement
 with the Government. These former insurgent elements then formed the United
 Democratic Salvation Front (UDSF). However, the SPLM, its armed wing, the
 SPLM'A, and most independent analysts have regarded the April 21 Agreement as
 a tactical government effort to enlist southerners on its side. The SPLM/A and its
 northern allies in the National Democratic Alliance (NDA) carried out successful
 military offensives in areas along the borders with Ethiopia and Eritrea and in large
 parts of the south during the year. Neither side appears to have the ability to win
 the war militarily. There was some progress toward peace during the year. At a
 July meeting of the regional Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
 President Bashir accepted the 1994 IGAD Declaration of Principles as "the basis for
 discussions and negotiations" for peace. The Government had rejected that docu-
 ment in 1994, while the SPLM/A had accepted it. Government and SPLM/A delega-
 tions met with the IGAD in September and participated in IGAD-mediated peace
 talks.
 In addition to the regular police and the Sudan People's Armed Forces (SPAF),
 the Government maintains an external security organ, an internal security organ,
 a militia known as the Popular Defense Forces (PDF), and a number of police forces,
 including the public order police whose mission includes enforcing proper social be-
 havior, including restrictions on alcohol and "immodest dress." In addition to the
 
 
 328
 group of regular police forces, there is the Popular Police Force, which is made up
 of nominees from neighborhood popular committees for surveillance and services,
 and acts with police powers for political and social ends. Members of the security
 forces committed numerous serious human rights abuses.
 Civil war, economic mismanagement, over 4 million internally displaced persons
 in a country of an estimated 27.5 million persons, and, to a lesser extent, the refu-
 gee influx from neighboring countries have devastated Sudan's mostly agricultural
 economy. Exports of gum arabic, livestock, and meat accounted for more than 50
 percent of export earnings. Reforms aimed at privatizing state-run firms and stimu-
 lating private investment failed to revive a moribund economy saddled with massive
 military expenditures and a huge foreign debt of approximately $16 billion. Per cap-
 ita national income is estimated at $900 per year.
 The human rights situation remained extremely poor, and the Government com-
 mitted serious human rights abuses. Citizens do not have the ability to change their
 government peacefully. Government forces were responsible for extrajudicial killings
 and disappearances. Government security forces regularly tortured, beat, harassed,
 ara   rilbarrested, and detained opponents or suspected opponents of the Govern-
 ment wit impunity. Prison conditions are harsh, and the judiciary is largely sub-
 servient to the Government. The authorities do not ensure due process, and the
 military forces summarily tried and punished citizens. The Government still does
 not fully apply the laws of war to the southern insurgency and has taken few pris-
 oners of war.
 The Government continued to restrict freedom of privacy, assembly, association,
 religion, and movement. The Government eased restrictions on freedom of the press
 in May; however, all journalists continue to practice self-censorship. There are no
 independent human rights organizations. In the context of the Islamization and
 Arabization drive, pressure-including forced Islamization-on non-Muslims re-
 mained strong. Fears of Arabization and Islamization and the imposition of Shari'a
 (Islamic law) fueled support for the civil war throughout the country. Discrimination
 and violence against women and abuse of children continued. Discrimination against
 religious and ethnic minorities persisted, as did government restrictions on worker
 rights. Child labor is a problem. Slavery remains a problem. Government security
 forces were responsible for forced labor, slavery, and forced conscription of children.
 On a less negative note, the Government continued cooperation with international
 human rights monitors. The U.N. Special Rapporteur on Sudan twice visited areas
 under the Government's control, although his first visit was aborted when he left
 the country after the Government stated that it could not ensure his security. The
 Government also invited the Working Group on Contemporary Forms of Slavery; it
 had not visited as of year's end.
 Cooperation with U.N.-sponsored relief operations was mixed. Government forces
 periodically obstructed the flow of humanitarian assistance. Problems with relief
 flights in the south centered on the Government's denial of aircraft clearances to
 both the U.N. Operation Lifeline Sudan and the International Committee of the Red
 Cross (ICRC). The Government failed to resolve the problem of false accusations
 that it had made against the ICRC in November 1996 in which it alleged that the
 ICRC transported of arms and ammunition. As a result, the ICRC undertook only
 severely limited operations during the year.
 Insurgent groups continued to commit numerous, serious abuses. The SPLM/A
 continued to violate citizens' rights, despite its claim to be implementing a 1994 de-
 cision to assert civil authority in areas that it controls, and in many cases, has con-
 trolled for many years. The SPLM/A was responsible for extrajudicial killings, beat-
 ings, arbitrary detention, forced conscription, and occasional arrests of foreign relief
 workers without charge. The SPLM/A again failed to follow through on its promise
 to investigate a 1995 massacre. SPLM/A leaders were guilty of, or complicit in, theft
 of property of nongovernmental organizations (NGO's) and U.N. agencies operating
 in the south. The ICRC reported in 1996 that the SPLA had begun to observe some
 basic laws of war; it takes prisoners on the battlefield and permits ICRC visits to
 them. However, the SPLA did not allow the ICRC to visit prisoners accused by the
 insurgent group of "treason" or other crimes.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-In their attacks on insurgent forces,
 government troops killed civilians (see Section 1.g.).
 Insurgent forces committed political and other extrajudicial killings; however, de-
 tails are generally unavailable. There are reliable reports that rebel forces that cap-
 
 
 329
 tured villages along the border with Ethiopia in January carried lists used to iden-
 tify leading government figures whom they summarily killed.
 Rebels also killed civilians during their attacks on government forces (see Section
 l'Disappearance-There were continued allegations that the Government was re-
 sponsible for the arrest and subsequent disappearance of those suspected of support-
 ing rebels in government-controlled zones of the south and the Nuba Mountains.
 In June the Government's Advisory Council on Human Rights released the results
 of an independent judicial commission's investigations into the fate of some of the
 scores of persons arrested by government forces in Juba in 1992 who had dis-
 appeared. The commission's report lacked details, and its description of the "confes-
 sions" of five citizens was not credible. These confessions formed the basis for the
 execution of these persons after a trial by a military tribunal, which reportedly was
 conducted under the law with the approval of the Attorney General.
 In 1996 the Government established a Special Commission to Investigate Slavery
 and Disappearances in response to a resolution passed by the 1995 U.N. General
 Assembly.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Government's official and unofficial security forces continued to torture and
 beat suspected opponents. In March the U.N. Special Rapporteur on Torture de-
 scribed torture as a fairly extensive problem.
 Torture victims included youth and student leaders and those deemed opponents
 of the Government. In March armed security personnel with handheld radios de-
 tained Ahlia University student, Magdi Abdelmoniem Hassan, chairman of the stu-
 dent union of the university. They took him to two locations where they severely
 beat him. Photographs show weals on his back and his medical report also indicated
 a ruptured ear drum. Senior political prisoners released in May after being held
 since January stated that fellow detainees who were youths and students and those
 allegedly affiliated with the rebels were beaten badly while in custody. In mid-Sep-
 tember security forces arrested and beat Osman Zein A1-Abdin Issa, an independent
 student activist from Khartoum University. There were credible reports in Septem-
 ber that security forces in Juba severely beat a Sudanese Protestant Christian cler-
 gyman. In December security forces beat approximately 50 women who attempted
 to deliver a petition to the U.N. office in Khartoum (see Section 2.a.). Security forces
 also beat defendants in the 1996 coup attempt (see Section 1.e.).
 There were reports that security forces tortured persons in "ghost houses," places
 where security forces detain government opponents incommunicado under harsh
 conditions for an indeterminate time with no supervision by the courts or other
 independent authorities with power to release the detainees. The use of ghost
 houses increased in the first part of the year, then generally declined due to in-
 creased government control, which reduced the incidence of such abusive measures.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Arbitrary arrest and detention remain
 problems. Legal provisions under the 1992 and 1995 National Security Acts and
 Criminal Code effectively set a fairly simple process to detain anyone for 3 months.
 A presidential determination, supported by a magistrate, may serve to detain a per-
 son for an additional 3 months. Alegations continue that some individuals are de-
 tained indefinitely.
 The law allows for bail, except for those accused of crimes punishable by death
 or life imprisonment. In theory, the Government provides legal counsel for indigent
 persons in such cases. However, reports continue that defendants do not always re-
 ceive this right, and that counsel in some cases may only advise the defendant and
 may not address the court.
 Authorities continued to detain political opponents of the Government during the
 year.
 In December security forces beast and arrested approximately 50 women who had
 tried to deliver a petition to the U.N. offices in Khartoum (see Section 2.a.).
 In the wake of January attacks into Sudan from across the Ethiopian border
 north and south of the Blue Nile river, authorities arrested many persons. The Gov-
 ernment released prominent political figures by the end of May, but still held a
 number of student leaders and those said to have been accused of contacts with the
 insurgents at year's end.
 The Government does not use forced exile; however, some prominent political
 leaders fled into exile.
 e. Denial of Fair-Public Trial.-The judiciary is not independent and is largely
 subservient to the Government. The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, formerly
 elected by sitting judges, is now appointed. As the senior judge in the judicial serv-
 ice, he also controls the judiciary.
 
 
 330
 
 The judicial system includes four types of courts: Regular courts, both criminal
 and civil; special mixed security courts; military courts; and tribal courts in rural
 areas to resolve disputes over land and water rights and family matters.
 The 1991 Criminal Act governs criminal cases, and the 1983 Civil Transactions
 Act applies in most civil cases. Military trials, which are sometimes secret and brief,
 do not provide procedural safeguards, have sometimes taken place with no advocate
 or counsel permitted, and do not provide effective appeal from a death sentence.
 Other than for clemency, witnesses may be permitted to appear.
 Trials in regular courts nominally meet international standards of legal protec-
 tions. For example, the accused normally have the right to counsel, and the courts
 are required to provide free legal counsel for indigent defendants accused of crimes
 punishable by death or life imprisonment. In practice, however, these legal protec-
 tions are unevenly applied.
 In 1989 the Special Courts Act created special three-person security courts to deal
 with a wide range of offenses, including violations of constitutional decrees, emer-
 gency regulations, some sections of the Penal Code, as well as drug and currency
 offenses. Special courts, on which both military and civilian judges sit, handle most
 security related cases. Attorneys may advise defendants as "friends of the court" but
 normally may not address the court. Lawyers complain that they are sometimes
 granted access to court documents too late to prepare an effective defense. Sentences
 are usually severe and implemented at once. Death sentences, however, are referred
 to the Chief Justice and the Head of State. Defendants may file appellate briefs
 with the Chief Justice.
 In December authorities convicted 35 women on charges of "disturbance" and
 "raising riots" in an apparently rigged trial (see Section 2.a.).
 The Government dissolved the respected Sudanese Bar Association in 1989 and
 reinstated it with an NIF-controlled leadership. Lawyers who wish to practice must
 maintain membership in the Bar Association. The results of the September election
 of officers of the Bar Association, marked by blatant irregularities, were nullified
 under widespread suspicion of fraud by supporters of the NIF. Bar Association elec-
 tions were conducted again in December. The NIF-associated group won overwhelm-
 ingly, again amid accusations of blatant fraud. Human rights monitors report that
 the Government continued to harass, detain, and torture members of the legal pro-
 fession whom it viewed as political opponents.
 The Government officially exempts the 10 southern states, whose population is
 mostly non-Muslim, from parts of the Criminal Act. However, the Act permits the
 possible future application of Shari'a law in the south, if the state assemblies so de-
 cide. No reports cited court-ordered hudud punishments, other than lashings, in gov-
 ernment-controlled areas of the south. Fear of the imposition of Shari'a law re-
 mained a key issue in the rebellion.
 Parts of the south and the Nuba Mountains fell outside effective judicial proce-
 dures and other governmental functions. According to credible reports, government
 units summarily tried and punished those accused of crimes, especially for offenses
 against civil order.
 Sentences were announced during the year for persons accused in the 1996 coup
 attempts. Reports of the secret trials indicated that 12 defendants were convicted
 and sentenced to imprisonment for up to 7 years for the March coup attempt. Seven
 civilians and nine soldiers were convicted in the April coup attempt and sentenced
 to up to 5 years' imprisonment. Many defendants from both cases were acquitted,
 including cameraman Osama Ghandi. According to Human Rights Watch, Ghandi
 retracted his confession in court and showed scars that resulted from beatings used
 to obtain his confession.
 Magistrates in SPLM/A-held areas follow a Penal Code roughly based on the 1925
 Sudan code. In rural areas outside effective SPLM control, tribal chiefs apply cus-
 tomary laws. In 1996 the SPLM proclaimed a civilian structure to eliminate the se-
 cret and essentially political trials conducted by military commanders in previous
 years, but at year's end there was still no evidence to indicate that any such civilian
 trials had been held.
 The Government maintains that it holds no political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Famil, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Government routinely interferes with its citizens privacy. Security forces frequently
 conducted night searches without warrants. They targeted persons suspected of po-
 litical crimes, and in the north, persons suspected of making alcoholic beverages,
 which are illegal.
 Security personnel routinely opened and read mail and monitored telephones. The
 Government continued to restrict the ownership of satellite dishes by private citi-
 zens through use of its licensing requirement.
 
 
 331
 A Muslim man may marry a non-Muslim, but a Muslim woman cannot marry a
 non-Muslim, unless he converts to Islam. However, this prohibition is not univer-
 sally observed, particularly in the south and among Nubians. Non-Muslims may
 adopt only non-Muslm children; no such- restrictions apply to Muslims.
 Various government bodies have deeed on different occasions that women must
 dress according to modest Islamic standards (see Sections 1.c. and 5.).
 The Government razed thousands of squatter dwellings in Khartoum during the
 year. Most inhabitants knew that their homes were slated for destruction but not
 when it would occur. Bulldozers typically arrived unannounced in a neighborhood
 and carried out the razing the same day. Although the Government promised to sell
 the inhabitants a plot o land for approximately $145, many were made homeless
 temporarily. Usually, the inhabitants established temporary shelters on the site of
 their razed dwellings until they could gain title to a plot of land. Muslims who did
 not have sufficient money to purchase the land and construct a dwelling could ob-
 tain assistance from Islamic charities; others could not. By September the Khar-
 toum state government had begun to implement procedures to grant title and move
 squatters in advance of demolition.
 A wide network of government informants conducted pervasive surveillance in
 schools, universities, markets, workplaces, and neighborhoods. The Government dis-
 banded political parties and prevented citizens from forming new political groups.
 The Government continued to summarily dismiss military personnel and other gov-
 ernment employees whose loyalty was suspect. The government committee set up
 in August 1995 to review cases of persons summarily dismissed since the 1989 coup
 in theory continued to function. However, no results have been released since May
 1996.
 Government-instituted neighborhood "popular committees"-ostensibly a mecha-
 nism for political mobilization-served as a means for monitoring households' activi-
 ties. These committees caused many citizens to be wary of neighbors who could re-
 port them for "suspicious" activities, including "excessive" contact with foreigners.
 The committees also furnished or withheld documents essential for obtaining an exit
 visa. In high schools, students were sometimes pressured to join pro-regime youth
 groups.
 Both the Government and rebel factions continued to conscript citizens forcibly,
 including high schooLage children (see Section 6.c.).     1
 The insurgent SPL/A is not known to interfere with privacy, family, home, or
 correspondence in areas that it controls, although correspondence is difficult in war
 zones.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law In Internal Con-
 flicts.-Since the civil war resumed in 1983, more than 1.5 million people have been
 killed as a result of fighting between the Government and insurgents in the south.
 The civil war continued unabated, and all sides involved in the fighting were re-
 sponsible for abuses in violation of humanitarian norms. At year's end, the Govern-
 ment controlled virtually all the northern two-thirds of the country, but had lost sig-
 nificant areas of the southern third to the SPLA. In January insurgents operating
 under the NDA moved from small scale activities in the areas that border Ethiopia,
 and Eritrea to larger scale attacks. Government aircraft and helicopter In ships
 bombed or attacked civilian areas in the south and, according to African Rights, in
 the Nuba Mountains. The NGO Christian Solidarity International reported govern-
 ment bombing of villages in Blue Nile province.
 Government aircraft dropped bombs near Moyo and Koboko in Uganda. The Gov-
 ernment admitted that the Moyo bombing was in error, but did not comment on the
 Koboko bombing.
 Government forces routinely killed rebel soldiers captured on the battlefield. Only
 a small group of prisoners captured before the 1989 coup are reported held as pris-
 oners of war in government-controlled areas. These persons are believed to be held
 in Juba and were visited by the ICRC in past years.
 Government restrictions in practice limited or denied travel by relief nongovern-
 mental organizations to many areas long controlled by insurgents. The U.N."s Oper-
 ation Lifeline Sudan, a coalition of relief/aid NGO's, was allowed to operate in the
 south.
 Rape of women is committed by members of both parties to the conflict in the
 south. Both sides routinely displaced and often killed civilians or destroyed clinics
 and dwellings intentionally during their offensive operations.
 Insurgent forces along the border with Eritrea laid land mines, which caused cas-
 ualties to civilian travelers as well as to military forces.
 Northern Muslim opposition groups under the 1995 NDA umbrella structure,
 which includes the SPLA, took military action against the Government. The NDA
 attacked government garrisons and strategic points near the Ethiopian and Eritrean
 
 
 borders and seized a number of villages during attacks in January. Its forces also
 indiscriminately laid land mines on roads and paths, which killed and maimed both
 soldiers and civilians. The SPLA has taken a number of prisoners over the years,
 many during its offensive from October to December 1995. The ICRC regularly vis-
 ited many of these prisoners, but was refused permission to visit SPLA criminal and
 civil prisoners. The SPLMIA has returned some prisoners of war to the Government
 under parole.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Government severely curtails freedom of
 speech and press. Government intimidation and surveillance, fostered in part by an
 informer network, continued to inhibit open, public discussion of political issues.
 Journalists practice self-censorship.
 On December 1, security forces severely beat 50 women who attempted peacefully
 to deliver a petition to the U.N. offices in Khartoum. A total of 36 women were sub-
 sequently arrested and charged with "disturbance" and "raising riots." The women
 were tried that night in a public order proceeding whose outcome apparently was
 predetermined by the authorities. All except one of the women were fined approxi-
 mately $6 each; the other woman was lashed 40 times. Of the five defense lawyers,
 the male lawyer was fined approximately $300, and the four female lawyers were
 sentenced to 10 lashes each, on undetermined charges. The Government failed to
 condemn, investigate, or discuss the action, and both the brutal attack and the
 rigged trial apparently were intended to intimidate and humiliate opponents of the
 hehGovernment strictly controlled the print media, including government dailies,
 but eased its restrictions in May. It modified the November 1996 Press and Publica-
 tions Law. It changed, among other things, the composition of the Press Council,
 which overseas journalism and media affairs. Some lively discussions of domestic
 and foreign policy have taken place in the press since then. However, in mid-May
 police detained and released on bail Alwan reporter Ishraga Al-nour for writing that
 the inadequate training of the Popular Police resulted in injuries, threatening public
 safety. The Popular Police eventually withdrew the charges against her. At least
 five privately owned daily newspapers operated as of year's end. Al-rai Al-akher re-
 sumed publishing in June, having won a court case against the Government dating
 to its closure the previous year. A wide variety of Arabic and English publications
 are available, but they are subject to censorship. All journalists, even in the pri-
 vately owned Arabic daily press, still practice self-censorship.
 Radio and television are controlled directly by the Government and are required
 to reflect government and NIF policies. Sudan television has a permanent military
 censor to ensure that the news reflects official views.
 The Government often charged that the international, and particularly the West-
 ern, media have an anti-Sudan and anti-Islam bias.
 In spite of the restrictions on ownership of satellite dishes, citizens have access
 to foreign electronic media; the Government does not jam foreign radio signals. In
 addition to its own domestic and satellite television services, Sudan television offers
 a pay cable network of six channels, which directly rebroadcasts uncensored Cable
 News Network (CNN), the London-based, Saudi-owned Middle East Broadcasting
 Corporation (MBC), Dubai TV, and Kuwait TV. Rebel movements have provided rel-
 atively few opportunities for journalists to report on their activities.
 Academic freedom does not exist. Public and most private universities, closed
 since January largely as a result of NIF students' efforts to influence by violence
 the outcome of student government elections, reopened in October. The closure effec-
 tively ended academic debate, which had included a vigorous campus polemic with
 pro-NIF and anti-Government sentiments prominently displayed and heard. Before
 the January closure, the Government had used political criteria whenever possible
 in appointing new faculty members.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The declaration of the state of
 emergency and of martial law on June 30, 1989, effectively eliminated the right of
 assembly, and the Government severely restricted this freedom. The authorities per-
 mitted only government-authorized gatherings. The Government dispersed several
 unapproved demonstrations during theyear. In December security forces beat and
 arrested approximately 50 women who had tried to deliver a petition to the U.N.
 offices in  artoum. Thiry-six women were charged with 'disturbance" and "raising
 riots" (see Section 2.a.). The Government dissolved all political parties in 1989, and
 prohibits citizens from forming new political groups or other associations. In 1989
 the Government dissolved the Bar Association and reinstated i under NIF leader-
 ship with highly controlled elections. All lawyers who wish to practice in Sudan
 must maintain membership in the organization (see Section i.e.).
 
 
 333
 Professional association members accused the Government of manipulating the
 elections in many associations. In November, journalists severely criticized the Gov-
 ernment's manipulation of Journalists' Union elections in November to ensure vic-
 tory by progovernment candidates. In Bar Association elections held in December,
 the NIF-associated group won overwhelmingly amid accusations of blatant fraud.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Although the Government has stated that all religions
 should be respected and that freedom of worship is ensured, in practice the Govern-
 ment treats Islam as the state religion and has declared that Islam must inspire
 the country's laws, institutions, and policies. The 1994 Societies Registration Act re-
 placed the controversial Missionary Societies Act of 1962. It theoretically allows
 churches to engage in a wider range of activities than did the missionary act, but
 churches are subject to the restrictions placed on nonreligious corporations. The
 Government permits non-Muslims to participate in services in existing and other-
 wise authorized places of worship. The Government continued to deny permission
 to build Roman Catholic churches. Some makeshift structures have been permitted.
 In March authorities began to demolish multi-use Roman Catholic church buildings
 in the Kalakala area of Khartoum state. This is believed to be the first attack on
 legally owned church property in Sudan. The Khartoum state government publicly
 claimed that the demolitions were part of village planning. The church's attorney
 discussed rebuilding the structures with the authorities. While non-Muslims may
 convert to Islam, the 1991 Criminal Act makes apostasy (which includes conversion
 to another religion) by Muslims punishable by death.
 Authorities continued to restrict the activities of Christians, followers of tradi-
 tional African beliefs, and other non-Muslims, and there continued to be reports of
 harassment and arrest for religious beliefs and activities.
 Muslims may proselytize freely, but non-Muslims are forbidden to proselytize.
 Foreign missionaries and religiously oriented organizations continued to be harassed
 by authorities, and their requests for work permits and residence visas are delayed.
 Children who have been abandoned or whose parentage is unknown-regardless
 of presumed religious origin-are onsidered Muslims and can only be adopted by
 Muslims. Non-Muslims may adopt only other non-Muslim children. No equivalent
 restriction is placed on adoption by Muslims. Foundlings or other abandoned chil-
 dren are considered by the State to be Sudanese citizens and Muslims and therefore
 can only be adopted by Muslims. In accordance with Islamic law, Muslim adoptees
 do not take the name of their adoptive parents and are not automatic heirs to their
 property.
 PDF trainees, including non-Muslims, are indoctrinated in the Islamic faith. In
 prisons, Government-supported Islamic NGO's offer inducements to, and pressure
 on, non-Muslim inmates to convert. Islamic NGO's in war zones are reliably re-
 pOrted to withhold food and other services from the needy unless they convert to
 lam. Children, including non-Muslim children, in camps for vagrant minors are re-
 quired to study the Koran, and there is pressure on non-Muslims to convert to Islam
 (see Section 5).
 In rebel-controlled areas, Christians, Muslims, and followers of traditional African
 beliefs generally worship freely.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Government restricted freedom of movement by denying exit visas
 to some categories of persons, including policemen and doctors. The Government
 also kept lists of political figures and other citizens not permitted to travel abroad.
 A leading lawyer and advocate of human rights, Ghazi Suleiman, was not permitted
 to travel to the West because the Government includes him on such a list. Because
 of tensions with Egypt, the authorities denied many requests for travel to that coun-
 try.
 Women may not travel abroad without the permission of their husbands or male
 guardians. Some former political detainees were forbidden to travel outside Khar-
 toum. Movement was generally free for other citizens, outside the war zones, but
 those who failed to produce an identity card at checkpoints risked arrest. Foreigners
 needed permits, which were difficult to obtain and often refused, for domestic travel
 outside of Khartoum. Foreign diplomats, however, could travel to many locations
 under government escort. Foreigners must register with the police on entering the
 country, seek permission to move from one location to another, and reregister at
 each new location within 3 days of arrival.
 Foreign NGO staff sometimes had problems obtaining entry visas or work or trav-
 el permits once they had entered the country.
 Insurgent movements also required that foreign NGO personnel obtain permission
 before traveling to areas that they control, although they generally granted such
 permission. In July the SPLM detained a Roman Catholic priest who sought to
 
 
 enter one of their zones without a valid permit and returned him to the aircraft in
 which he arrived for dispatch back to Kenya.
 Tens of thousands of persons, largely southerners and westerners displaced by
 famine and civil war, continued to live in squatter slums in the Khartoum area. Ac-
 cording to the Khartoum state government, a master plan seeks to upgrade condi-
 tions in some camps, requiring movement of populations to other areas so that roads
 may be built or enlarged and services established. The Khartoum state government
 is in contact with foreign NGO's and U.N. agencies concerning this eflbrt. During
 the year, the Government razed thousands of squatter dwellings in Khartoum (see
 Section 1.f1).
 The Government cooperated with the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees
 (UNHCR) and other humanitarian assistance organizations and accorded refugees
 relatively good treatment. UNHCR statistics for 1996 estimated that there were 1
 million refugees, with 148,000 in camps and 750,000 scattered in urban areas
 throughout the country.
 The Government provides first asylum, although no figures are available for 1997.
 There were no reports of forcible repatriation of refugees, regardless of their sta-
 tus. Some reports cited mistreatment of refugees, including beatings and arbitrary
 arrests. Refugees could not become resident aliens or citizens, regardless of their
 length of stay. The Government allowed a large number of refugees to work. SPLA
 military gains in the areas across the Uganda border enabled a number of Sudanese
 refugees to return to Sudan. According to the UNHCR, as many as 223,720 Suda-
 nese refugees remained in Uganda; some left camps and returned to Sudan in the
 wake of SPLMIA seizure of areas north of the Sudan-Uganda border. Refugees fled
 from Sudan to Ethiopia, Eritrea, and Kenya.
 On September 22, Action Contre le Faim's humanitarian activities were abruptly
 halted by the SPLMIA without explanation on undefined security grounds. The orga-
 nization was forced to leave SPLM-controlled areas within 72 hours.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens had no genuine opportunity to change their government peacefully. The
 NIF retains control of the Government and seeks to ensure that its vision of na-
 tional institutions including, ultimately, a new constitution would prevail.
 The Government established a committee to draft a constitution in July, under
 the leadership of widely respected legal figures.
 In 1989 the RCC abolished all political parties and temporarily detained the
 major party leaders. In 1990 the RCC rejected both multiparty and one party sys-
 tems, establishing 2 years later an entirely government-appointed transitional na-
 tional assembly, based on a Libya-style political structure with ascending levels of
 nonpartisan assemblies. The essentially powerless appointed legislature was re-
 placed following the 1996 elections by an elected National Assembly, in which 125
 of its 400 members were appointed from the National Convention. Opposition par-
 ties boycotted the election.
 The federal system of government was instituted in 1995, and is slowly developing
 a structure of 26 states, which the Government sees as a possible inducement to
 the insurgents for accommodation through a principle of regional autonomy.
 Women are underrepresented in government and politics. The Minister of Health
 is the only woman in the Cabinet. Women have the right to vote. Seats in the Na-
 tional Assembly are set aside for representatives of women's organizations and for
 female student representatives. Twenty-five women are members of the 400-person
 National Assembly.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Due to government restrictions on freedom of association (see Section 2.b.), there
 are no independent domestic human rights organizations; however, individual
 human rights activists operate in anonymity.
 The Human Rights Advisory Council, a government body whose rapporteur is the
 Solicitor General for Public Law, continued its active role in addressing human
 rights problems within the Government. The Advisory Council issued two reports
 in June. One detailed the inadequate results of a judicial commission inquiry into
 events in Juba in 1992 (see Section 1.b.). The other was a report of the special com-
 mission charged with the investigation into allegations of slavery (see Section 6.c.).
 The Government continued efforts begun in 1996 to implement international con-
 ventions and basic human rights practices. U.N. Special Rapporteur on Sudan
 Gaspar Biro visited in January and again in September. However, his January visit
 coincided with insurgent attacks north and south of the Blue Nile, and the Govern-
 
 
 335
 ment stated that it could not ensure his security. He left the country immediately.
 The Government's invitation to the U.N.'s Working Group on Contemporary Forms
 of Slavery remains open.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 A governmental decree prohibits discrimination based on religion or sex. Redress
 is provided through the administrative courts or the Labor Office. The 1992 General
 Education Act stipulates equal opportunity in education for the disabled. Mecha-
 nisms for social redress, especially with respect to violence against women and chil-
 dren, are particularly weak.
 Women.-Violence against women continues to be a problem, although accurate
 statistics on violence against women do not exist. Many women are reluctant to file
 formal complaints against such abuse, although domestic violence is a legal ground
 for divorce. The police do not normally intervene in domestic disputes. Displaced
 women from the south were particularly vulnerable to harassment, rape, and sexual
 abuse. The Government did not address the problem of violence against women, nor
 was it discussed publicly.
 Some aspects of the law and many traditional practices discriminate against
 women. Gender segregation is common in social settings. In keeping with Islamic
 law, a Muslim woman has the right to hold and dispose of her own property without
 interference. Women are ensured inheritance from their parents. However, a daugh-
 ter inherits half the share of a son, and a widow inherits a smaller percent. It is
 much easier for men to initiate legal divorce proceedings than for women. These
 rules apply only to Muslims and not to those of other faiths, for whom religious or
 tribal laws apply. Although a Muslim man may marry a non-Muslim, a Muslim
 woman cannot marry a non-Muslim unless he converts to Islam. Women cannot
 travel abroad without the permission of their husbands or male guardians (see Sec-
 tion 2.d.).
 A number of government directives require that women in public places and gov-
 ernment offices and female students and teachers conform to what it deemed an Is-
 lamic dress code. This, at the least, entailed wearing a head covering. However, en-
 forcement of the dress code regulations was uneven.
 Credible but unconfirmed reports continued that women held in special camps in
 the south were sold to northerners to work as domestic servants (see Section 6.c.).
 Children.-A considerable number of children suffered serious abuse, including
 enslavement and forced conscription in the war zones. There continued to be credi-
 ble but unconfirmed reports of the existence of special camps in the south in which
 people from the north or from abroad came to purchase women and children for
 work as domestic servants (see Section 6.c.)
 Education is compulsory through grade eight. The Government forcibly con-
 scripted young men and boys into the military forces, as did the insurgents. In June
 the Government decreed that young men, typically of ages 17 to 19 must enter mili-
 tary service to be able to receive a certificate on leaving secondary school. Such a
 certificate is a requirement for entry into a university, and the decree effectively
 broadened the conscription base. In September the Government attempted to send
 a number of such youths to combat zones for advanced military training, presum-
 ably for ultimate incorporation into the SPAF. A number of youths fled at the air-
 port, which resulted in considerable public attention and press criticism.
 The Government has operated camps for vagrant children. Police periodically pa-
 trol the streets of Khartoum and other major cities, taking children whom police
 personnel deem homeless to these camps, where they are detained for indefinite pe-
 riods. Health care and schooling at the camps are generally poor; basic living condi-
 tions are often primitive. All the children, including non-Muslims, must study the
 Koran, and there is pressure on non-Muslims to convert to Islam (see Section 2..).
 Teenagers in the camps are often conscripted into the PDF.
 Female genital mutilation (FGM), which is widely condemned by international
 health authorities as damaging to both physical and psychological health, is wide-
 spread, especially in the north. An estimated 90 percent or more of females in the
 north have been subjected to FGM, with consequences that have included severe
 urinary problems, infections, and even death. Infibulation, the most severe type of
 FGM, is also the most common type. It is usually performed on girls between ages
 4 and 7. It is often performed by traditional practitioners in improvised, unsanitary
 conditions, causing severe pain and trauma to the child. No form of FGM is illegal
 under the Criminal Code. However, the health law forbids doctors and midwives
 from performing infibulation. Women displaced from the south to the north report-
 edly are increasingly imposing FGM upon their daughters, even if they themselves
 
 
 336
 
 have not been subjected to it. The Government has neither arrested nor prosecuted
 any persons for violating the health law against infibulation.
 Two local NGO's with funding from the U.N. and a government agency are ac-
 tively involved in efforts to eradicate FGM, which they describe as a "harmful prac-
 tice. A small but growing number of urban, educated, families are completely aban-
 doning the practice. A larger number of families, in a compromise with tradition,
 have adopted the least severe form of FGM as an alternative to infibulation.
 People With Disabilities.-The Government does not discriminate against disabled
 persons but has not enacted any special legislation or taken other steps, such as
 mandating accessibility to public buildings and transportation for the disabled. The
 1992 General Education Act requires equal educational opportunities for the dis-
 abled.
 Religious Minorities.-Muslims predominate in the north, but are in the minority
 in the south, where most people practice traditional African religions or Christian-
 ity. There are 1 to 2 million displaced southerners in the north who practice tradi-
 tional African religions or Christianity. About 500,000 Coptic Christians live in the
 north.
 Government and SPLM/A delegations met with IGAD in September and partici-
 pated in IGAD-mediated peace talks in Nairobi in October and November. The dele-
 gations discussed the role of religion in national affairs and the predominantly non-
 Muslim Southern region's right to self-determination. Further meetings are sched-
 uled for 1998.
 In government-controlled areas of the south, there continued to be credible evi-
 dence of an unwritten policy of Islamization of public institutions. In the past, some
 non-Muslims lost their jobs in the civil service, the judiciary, and other professions.
 Few non-Muslim university graduates found government jobs. Some non-Muslim
 businessmen complained of petty harassment and discrimination in the awarding of
 government contracts and trade licenses. There were also reports that Muslims re-
 ceive preferential treatment for the limited services provided by the Government,
 including access to medical care.
 National/Racial /Ethnic Minorities.-Sudan's estimated population of 27.5 million
 is a multiethnic mix of over 500 Arab and African tribes with scores of languages
 and dialects. The Arab, Muslim culture in the north and central areas and the non-
 Muslim, African culture in the south are the two dominant cultures. Northern Mus-
 lims, who form a majority of about 16 million, have traditionally dominated the Gov-
 ernment. The southern ethnic groups fighting the civil war (largely followers of tra-
 ditional African religions or Christians) seek independence, or some form of regional
 self-determination, from the north.
 The Muslim majority and NIF-dominated Government continued to discriminate
 against ethnic minorities in almost every aspect of society. Citizens in Arabic-speak-
 ing areas who do not speak Arabic experienced discrimination in education, employ-
 ment, and other areas. The use of Arabic as the medium of instruction in higher
 education discriminated against non-Arabs. For university admission, students com-
 pleting high school are required to pass examinations in four subjects: English Lan-
 guage; Mathematics; Arabic Language; and religious studies. Even at the university
 level, examinations in all subjects except English Language were in Arabic lan-
 guage, placing non-native speakers of Arabic at a disadvantage.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The RCC abolished the pre-1989 labor unions,
 closed union offices, froze union assets, forbade strikes, and prescribed severe pun-
 ishments, including the death penalty, for violations of its labor decrees. The Gov-
 ernment dismisseo[ many labor leaders from their jobs or detained them, although
 most of those arrested were later freed.
 The Sudan Workers Trade Unions Federation is the leading blue-collar labor orga-
 nization with about 800,000 members. In 1992 local union elections were held, after
 a delay to permit the government-controlled steering committees to arrange the out-
 comes. The elections resulted in government-approved slates of candidates voted
 into office by prearranged acclamation.
 The U.S. Government in 1991 suspended Sudan's eligibility for trade benefits
 under the Generalized System of Preferences because of its violations of worker
 rights.
 Unions remained free to form federations and affiliate with international bodies,
 such as the African Workers' Union and the Arab Workers' Union.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-A 1989 RCC constitutional
 decree temporarily suspended the right to organize and bargain collectively. Al-
 though these rights were restored to labor organizing committees in 1996, govern-
 ment control of the steering committees meant in practice that the Government
 
 
 dominates the process of setting wages and working conditions. The continued ab-
 sence of labor legislation allowing for union meetings, filing of grievances, and other
 union activity greatly reduced the value of these formal rights. Although local union
 officials raised some grievances with employers, few carried them to the Govern-
 ment.
 Wages are set by a tripartite committee comprising representatives of the Govern-
 ment, labor unions, and business. Specialized labor courts adjudicate standard labor
 disputes.
 In 1993 the Government created two export processing zones (EPa's); it later es-
 tablished a third at Khartoum international airport. During the year, only the EPZ
 at Khartoum International Airport was open. The labor laws do not apply in the
 EPZ's.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Although the law prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor, slavery persists. Acrdng to the report by the U.N. Special
 Rapporteur, reports and information from a variety of sources after February 1994
 indicate that the number of cases of slavery, servitude, slave trade, and forced labor
 have increased alarmingly. The taking of slaves, particularly in war zones and their
 export to parts of central and northern Sudan continued. There also continued to
 be credible, but unconfirmed, reports continue that women and children were sold
 and sent to the north or abroad to work as domestic servants, agricultural laborers,
 and sometimes concubines. The national government did not take any action to halt
 these practices. Credible reports persist of practices such as the sale and purchase
 of children, some in alleged slave markets. In 1996 representatives of Christian Soli-
 darity International arranged the purchase of children. The average price per child
 was reportedly about $300 worth of cattle, or $500 if the purchaser was a West-
 erner.
 Reliable reports indicate the direct and general involvement of the SPAF, the
 PDF, and government-supported armed militias in the abduction and deportation of
 civilians from the conflict zones to the north. These practices all have a pronounced
 racial aspect, as the victims are exclusively black southerners and members of indig-
 enous tribes of the Nuba Mountains.
 In some instances, local authorities took action to stp slavery; in other cases, the
 authorities did nothing to stop the practice. In response to a resolution of the 1995
 U.N. General Assembly, the Government in May 1996 established a Special Com-
 mission to Investigate Charges of Slavery (see Section 1.b.), including the reported
 use of Nuba children as house servants by military officers. In a preliminary report
 issued in June, the Commission concluded that Nubans ar not working as forced
 labor on ranches given to government supporters; and that house servants of mili-
 tary and civilian government officials are paid fixed salaries in accordance with the
 relevant statute.
 Both the Government and rebel factions continued to forcibly conscript men of
 military age into the fighting forces (see Sections 1.f. and 5). For example, in Feb.
 tary a group of national service trainees was unexpectedly taken to Khartoum and
 flown to Juba, where the trainees were expected to serve in combat. Conscripts face
 significant hardship and abuse in military service. The rebel factions continued to
 force southern men to work as laborers or porters.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practies and Minimum Age for Employment.--The law
 prohibits forced child labor; however, the Government does not effectively enforce
 it (see Section 6.c.). The legal minimum age for workersis 16 years, but the law
 is loosely enforced by inspectors from the Ministry of Labor and in the official or
 wage economy. Chile    as oung as 11 or 12 years of age worked in a number of
 factories, particularly outside the capital, including the factories at Um Ruwaba
 that produce edible oils. In addition severe poverty has produced widespread child
 labor in the informal, unregulated economy. In rural areas, children traditionally as-
 sist their families with agricultural work from a very young age.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-yThe legislated minimum wage is enforced by
 the Ministry of Labor, which maintains field offices in most major cities. Employers
 generally respect the minimum wage. Workers who are denied the minimum wage
 may file a grievance with the local Ministry of Labor field office, which is then re-
 quird to investigate and take appropriate action if there has been a violation of
 the law. The minimum wage continues to be approximately $8.25 (14,000 Sudanese
 pounds) per month, which is insufficient to provide a decent standard living for an
 average worker and family. The workweek is limited by law to six 8-hour days, with
 a day of rest on Friday. Although the laws prescribe health and safety standards,
 working conditions were generally poor, and enforcement by the Ministry of Labor
 minima. The law does not address the right of workers to remove themselves from
 dangerous work situations without loss of employment.
 
 
 338