 SUDAN
 On June 30, 1989, in a bloodless coup d'etat, a group of
 brigadiers and colonels in the Sudanese People's Armed Forces
 (SPAF), led by Omar Hassan Ahmed al-Bashir, overthrew Sudan's
 3-year-old democratic government, then headed by Prime
 Minister Sadiq al-Mahdi. The Omar Government controls most of
 Sudan, excluding large areas of the south controlled by the
 Sudanese People's Liberation Army/Movement (SPLA/M), led by
 John Garang. The coup leaders formed a National Salvation
 Revolution Command Council (RCC) of 15 military officers and
 imposed a strict curfew, suspended Sudan's 1985 transitional
 constitution, abrogated press licenses, and dissolved all
 political and trade union institutions. The RCC justified the
 coup by condemning Sadiq's government for corruption and
 ineffectiveness, especially in economic policies and in its'
 failure to end the civil war with the SPLA/M.
 Numbering about 75,000, the SPAF is responsible for Sudan's
 internal and external security. Martial law, in effect in
 government-controlled areas of the south for some time, now
 extends to the north as well. A state of emergency (SOE) that
 permits various arbitrary government actions has been
 periodically renewed outside the south since 1985. Although
 government spokesmen promised removal of the SOE, it remained
 in effect throughout 1990, jointly enforced by the military,
 the police, and the Ministry of Interior. In particular, the
 new Popular Defense Forces, which loosely incorporate
 militia/tribal armed groups, committed many human rights
 abuses in 1990.
 Sudan's economy is primarily agricultural. Although the
 country is trying to diversify its cash crops, cotton and
 cottonseed still account for more than 50 percent of export
 earnings. The economy has been devastated by the civil war,
 which according to official government estimates costs perhaps
 $1 million per day, as well as by high unemployment, up to
 8DO,000 refugees from neighboring countries, and perhaps 3
 million displaced persons am6ng the Sudanese- Using
 government-controlled prices as input, official estimates
 placed inflation at 43.6 percent in the first 6 months of
 1990, but international economic experts believe the real
 inflation rate was about 115 percent.
 Serious human rights violations in Sudan intensified in 1990.
 The RCC continued its suspension of due process, using
 arbitrary arrests and searches, imprisonment without charge,
 and trial of civilians by military courts. Government
 security officials often took harsh measures against
 journalists. The RCC used summary justice in executing 28
 military officers for participation in a coup attempt in
 April. Government security services, often inadequately
 controlle- by higher authorities, as well as unofficial groups
 of security personnel, detained and interrogated numerous
 civilians, including academics, doctors, lawyers, judges,
 trade unionists, and journalists, and tortured- many. There
 were no reported prosecutions in Sudan in 1990 for violations
 of human rights. Some labor organizations were reconstituted
 under government control. The continuation of Islamic law
 (Shari'a) in Sudan remained a major cause of southern
 disaffection, but the implementation of its more severe
 punishments continued to be suspended, as it has been since
 1985.
 The civil war continued unabated in 1990, with many civilian
 casualties   Government forces and government-armed militias
 
 
 380
 SUDAN
 committed many human rights abuses, especially in the south,
 as did the SPLA/M (although reports from SPLA/M-controlled
 areas are more fragmentary). Military operations by both
 sides have left large areas of Sudan largely unpopulated and
 plagued by banditry, especially along the Ugandan, Chadian,
 and Zairean borders. Few of the 3 million displaced persons
 (including I million near Khartoum) were resettled. Many
 still lack proper food, clothing, shelter, and medical care.
 During 1990 the SPAF, its affiliated militias, and the SPLA/M
 interfered with relief efforts and attacked civilians.
 Government suspension of relief flights into the south,
 decreed in November 1989, continued until April 1990, greatly
 hampering relief efforts. At year's end, relief flights were
 still restricted. Both sides delayed resumption of relief
 activities by extensive negotiations on the establishment of
 Operation Lifeline Sudan, Phase II (OLS II). Government
 customs regulations and actions by security forces also
 hindered relief agencies. Despite a request from the French
 Embassy, the Government did not investigate the shooting down
 of a relief airplane in December 1989. In April both sides
 agreed on an OLS II program, but movement of relief supplies
 often was still blocked. At the end of 1990 the prospects for
 mass starvation in Sudan loomed large.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section I Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 Government and unofficial forces were implicated in some
 instances of extrajudicial killing. In March Dr. Ali Fadl
 Ahmed Fadl, an active member of the doctors' union, died in
 the Omdurman military hospital. Although the official autopsy
 found that Dr. Fadl died of cerebral malaria, he had also
 suffered severe head injuries under torture in a safe house
 operated by the "Security of the Revolution," an unofficial
 security organization condoned by the Government and
 reportedly supported by some RCC members. Unconfirmed reports
 also suggested at least one other person died of torture in
 May while in detention, and others interrogated or arrested by
 security officers were threatened with death.
 After an abortive coup in April, at least 28 military
 officers, including 3 retired generals and a brigadier, were
 executed within 24 hours after cursory trials. At least six
 of these officers were in prison at the time of the coup, and
 some human rights observers therefore questioned whether there
 was a real coup attempt. The abolition of Sudan's formerly
 vigorous press hampered reporting of human rights abuses.
 b. Disappearance
 There were a number of reported disappearances. In one case,
 a woman in Juba reportedly disappeared in May after being
 detained by security officials, and the whereabouts of some
 other detainees could not be established. Both tribal
 militias and the SPLA/M were accused of abductions for forced
 labor, and reports also indicated that militias forced
 displaced Dinkas, especially children, into slavery. Other
 reports were received of disappearances, in the civil war
 
 
 SUDAN
 zone, of southerners suspected of supporting the SPLA/M,
 probably at the hands of government-sponsored militia.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Both government and SPLA forces were accused of ill-treatment
 of civilians (see Section l.g.). In 1983 under President
 Nimeiri, the Sudanese government adopted a version of Shari'a
 (Islamic) law that prescribes harsh corporal punishments
 called "Hudud," also known as the "September laws." Similar
 provisions were proposed to the former. constituent assembly in
 1988 after the inclusion of the National Islamic Front (NIF)
 in the Government. The assembly set aside the proposal
 without rejecting it. Hudud punishments include amputation,
 hanging, and beheading, and such sentences were handed down in
 1990.
 Although major Hudud punishments remained officially
 suspended, in August two persons convicted in 1984 of multiple
 murders were hanged and subsequently crucified in Darfur--a
 punishment some authorities considered application of the
 Hudud. Some of those sentenced to Hudud punishments still
 remain imprisoned, although the Government announced a pIan to
 arrange for commutation of sentence on payment of "blood
 money" and did free some prisoners. In a January 1, 1991,
 address General Omar declared he would implement Shari'a, but
 only in Sudan's largely Muslim northern provinces and only
 after a federal system had been implemented. The SPLA/M
 strongly rejected suggestions that national plebiscite on
 Shari'a be held.
 By contrast, sentences of flogging were routinely passed and
 carried out. Reports indicated that the standard sentence for
 drinking alcohol was 40 lashes. Such punishments are often
 inflicted summarily by police or security forces. Numerous
 reports were also received of summary beating and jailing of
 civilians for other minor offenses, such as brewing alcoholic
 drinks (a common economic sideline for southern women) or
 operating sidewalk businesses without a license.
 Formerly uncommon in Sudan, torture and other forms of
 physical mistreatment by official and unofficial security
 forces were widespread in 1990, according to numerous highly
 credible reports. Beginning in late 1989 and extending into
 1990, the Security of the Revolution began using commandeered
 safe houses (in Khartoum, often former union headquarters) tQ
 hold detainees suspected of activity against the Government.
 A similar organization, the "Youth for Reconstruction," also
 reportedly operated in 1990. Those detained included union
 activists, suspected Communists or other 'leftists,"
 university professors, civil servants, and medical
 personnel--the latter especially after a doctors' strike in
 late 1989. Detainees were subjected to varying forms of
 torture, including whipping and clubbing; electric shock;
 extraction of fingernails with pliers; the kicking and
 breaking of ribs or infliction of head injuries; choking with
 ropes; blindfolding for days at a time; deprivation of food,
 water, sleep, and access to toilet facilities; confinement in
 overcrowded and unsanitary quarters; deprivation of medical
 care; and psychological torture, such as mock executions.
 Some military officers and RCC members were identified as
 supporters or members of the Security of the Revolution
 group. However, other officials, especially prison
 authorities, reportedly were shocked at these abuses and
 
 
 382
 SUDAN
 protested to government leaders. Those held by the Security
 of the Revolution were usually detained for several weeks
 while being tortured and interrogated, then turned over to
 regular prisons. Not all, however, were tortured, and some
 were held only for a few days and released without questioning
 as a form of psychological intimidation.
 The Government announced a reorganization of the security
 forces in June, but reports suggested that mistreatment by
 security officers, including torture of detainees, continued
 in numerous locations, including Khartoum, Kosti, and Juba.
 Such mistreatment was also inflicted by some army personnel.
 An army sentry in Khartoum was observed over a 30-minute
 period beating two apparent curfew violators and forcing them
 to assume painful positions.
 Although reports agreed that prison officials did not in
 general participate in mistreatment of prisoners, conditions
 in some prison facilities, especially Shalla prison near El
 Fasher in Darfur, were cruel. Political detainees and
 suspected SPLA/M sympathizers were confined with criminals and
 the mentally ill and subjected to overcrowding, deprivation of
 water under conditions of extreme heat, unsanitary living
 conditions causing typhus and other diseases, lack of medical
 treatment, and denial of access to family and friends.
 Detainees were also held on the roof of security headquarters
 in Khartoum in overcrowded conditions in searing heat with
 limited food and inadequate toilet facilities.
 Security services, often operating with limited control by
 higher authorities, also abused foreigners. Foreigners
 working in Sudan were threatened with death or bodily injury,
 forcibly held without charge, and beaten. In one case,
 members of a Western diplomatic mission in Khartoum were
 attacked by numerous security personnel and beaten.
 Government officials apologized for the incident, blaming it
 on a gang masquerading as security officers.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Sudan's Criminal Code continued substantially unchanged in
 1990. Arrests must be followed by a statement of charges
 within a prescribed time, and the accused is to be brought
 before a court within 48 hours of arrest, informed of the
 charges, and allowed legal counsel. Bail is permitted except
 in some capital cases. But the state of emergency and martial
 law after the coup permit the Government wide powers of arrest
 and preventive detention for an indefinite period.
 Although the Sadiq government held relatively few political
 detainees, the situation changed rapidly after the coup on
 June 30, 1989. The Omar Government suspended legal due
 process and declared a nationwide state of emergency (SOE)
 that gave the Government wide-ranging arbitrary powers. The
 Government initially detained without warrants more than 300
 people. Although many of these were freed by the end of 1989,
 they were replaced by other detainees, especially academics,
 alleged leftists, labor activists, and journalists, some of
 whom were held incommunicado. Government officials made clear
 that they believed unions had been a major source of Sudan's
 problems and that the Government would brook no union
 challenge to its authority. Military authorities in southern
 and western areas reportedly incarcerated numerous persons
 without charge on suspicion of cooperation or sympathy with
 the SPLA/M.
 
 
 383
 SUDAN
 General Omar announced in August that the Government would
 review the cases of detainees and set free many of those
 imprisoned. Despite this statement, which resembled earlier
 commitments by government leaders, there were an estimated 300
 to 500 political detainees in Sudan at year's end; some
 reports placed the number of detainees as high as 1,000.
 Among those in detention at the end of 1990 were approximately
 22 physicians and other medical personnel. About 10 of these
 had been imprisoned since 1989; the others since April/May
 1990. In February, 36 detainees were released but placed
 immediately under house arrest. Since August the Government
 has released at least 70 detainees, including journalists,
 lawyers, and physicians.
 There were no known cases of involuntary exile from Sudan in
 1990, although a report was received of a merchant suspected
 of antiregime activity who was forced to leave Juba, his
 hometown and place of business, and forbidden to return.
 e. Denial cf Fair Public Trial
 Under the Sadiq government, the Sudanese legal system involved
 a variety of courts, including the Supreme Court, civil,
 criminal, and Shari'a (Islamic) courts. The abolition in 1986
 of the executive power to form special state security courts
 ensured that the regular criminal courts would try all
 prisoners. Such proceedings involved extensive guarantees of
 due process, including arrest pursuant to a warrant, public
 trials before a three-judge panel, the right of defendants to
 speak and present evidence on their own behalf and to obtain
 counsel, and appeals through a series of courts to the High
 Court of Appeals. Tribal law continues to be important in
 rural areas, where disputes largely involve land, water, and
 family concerns.                                          I
 Both the judicial system and the judiciary changed after the
 coup. One of the RCC's first decrees on June 30, 1989
 transferred all power over Sudan's constitution and laws to
 the RCC. The same decree also provided that existing laws
 remained valid and that nonpolitical constitutional
 institutions continued in force, although the courts would be
 required to enforce any changes in the laws approved by the
 RCC. The judiciary was transferred to the Ministry of
 Justice, and the Chief Justice, formerly elected by sitting
 judges, was appointed by General Omar. The Criminal Code was
 amended to include RCC decrees as well as the SOE law and the-
 1983 penal statutes (the September laws). Numerous judges
 were removed and replaced by RCC appointees. In September, 60
 judges, several of whom were Coptics, were fired and replaced
 by supporters of Muslim fundamentalists.
 The dual court system developed in 1989 continued to operate
 in 1990. Civilian courts were short of staff and less
 independent of the executive. They applied the 1983 Criminal
 Code to try ordinary criminal offenses, including theft and
 even some capital crimes; civil cases continued to be handled
 largely according to previous laws, generally derived from
 British colonial models. Other courts were established to
 monitor conformity with government-established prices for
 certain goods.
 After experimenting with various forms of special courts, the
 RCC in November 1989 passed the Special Courts Act, which
 established the main form of alternative court. According to
 this Act, the military governors of the regions and the
 
 
 384
 SUDAN
 commissioner of the national capital can form special security
 courts to try persons accused of violations of constitutional
 decrees, emergency regulations, and some sections of the penal
 code, including drug crimes and currency exchange violations.
 The special security courts may be composed of three military
 officers or any three competent persons; those created have
 both military and civilian judges. Attorneys can sit with
 defendants as "friends of the court" and advise them but
 cannot themselves address the court. Sentences are to be
 implemented immediately, except that death sentences must be
 approved by the Chief Justice and the Head of State.
 Defendants may file appeal briefs with the Chief Justice. In
 1990 the Government referred most security cases to these
 courts.
 The special security courts quickly became noted for their
 severe sentences. Several defendants tried before these
 courts for drug crimes or currency violations were sentenced
 to death. Some of those given death sentences in 1989 were
 executed in 1990, often under hasty and confused conditions.
 In September a special court in Port Sudan convicted 16
 defendants of attempted smuggling of rice and flour,
 sentencing 3 to death (although the sentences were not carried
 out) and the remainder to prison terms ranging from 1 to 14
 years. In February a court in Omdurman had 226
 currency-violation cases pending. These courts, however, did
 acquit some defendants, including two defendants in the
 smuggling case and most of those accused in a series of trials
 for possession of antigovernment leaflets.
 An RCC decree on June 30, 1989, allowed the seizure of land,
 money, or commodities for the public welfare without
 reimbursement and the seizure of the property of businesses
 suspected of resisting the Omar Government (pending legal
 determination of the case), as well as the imposition of
 prison terms and fines. This decree was used to enforce price
 controls with little due process. Many merchants convicted
 under this decree received sentences considered unusually
 severe for violations of commercial law.
 In practice, the special courts applied a mix of precoup laws
 and postcoup decrees. The Attorney General's office allegedly
 monitors trials of political prisoners, but it appears to have
 limited interest in or influence over the process.
 In late 1990, the Government began to carry out a number of
 unannounced executions, including at least one person
 convicted of armed robbery in 1986. The circumstances
 surrounding these executions were shrouded in secrecy, and it
 was not known whether political prisoners were included.
 Large areas of the south are controlled by the SPLA/M.
 Reports indicated that a rudimentary system of justice based
 on village leaders was being used in some of these areas, and
 a similar system of justice was authorized by the Government
 late in 1989 for the war-torn province of South Kordofan. In
 SPLA/M-controlled areas, a trusted village elder is appointed
 to adjudicate disputes, as well as to collect taxes and
 recruit soldiers and labor for the SPLA/M. SPLA/M officials
 can be tried and reportedly have been punished for criminal
 offenses. Other portions of the south are outside effective
 judicial procedures, and defendants often are not provided due
 process. Some reports suggest that army units summarily try
 and punish those accused of crimes, especially offenses
 against civil order.
 
 
 885
 SUDAN
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Government surveillance in Sudan, outside the combat zones,
 was rare before the coup. After June 30, 1989, security
 agencies considerably expanded both the scope and intensity of
 their activities. Numerous credible reports were received in
 1990 of petty harassment of civilians and surveillance of
 church services by security officers. Mail is sometimes
 opened and read, and express mail (formerly a common method of
 transmission for journalists) must be read by government
 officials before being sent. Credible reports indicated that
 surveillance of persons, especially suspected dissidents,
 became more widespread in 1990. After their release from
 detention in February, Sadiq al-Mahdi and former Communist
 Party head Mohammad Ibrahim Nugud were confined to house
 arrest, their families were kept under surveillance, and all
 visitors- other than family required government permission.
 After the coup, the Government instituted neighborhood
 "Popular Committees." These groups of volunteers use their
 control over the rationing system for basic commodities to
 monitor household size and composition. They also furnish
 documents essential for obtaining an exit visa from Sudan.
 Searches without warrants, often in nighttime raids, became
 common, particularly in cases of suspected political or
 economic crimes. Security officers conducted a number of
 warrantless searches of the homes of journalists, seizing
 personal papers and money-. In another case, the home of a
 local employee of a U.S.-based nonprofit organization was
 raided without warrant at 2 a.m. Property belonging to the
 organization was seized, and the employee was detained.
 Similar warrantless raids, including confiscation of property,
 were conducted on the premises of foreign-owned companies
 operating in Sudan, often with little or no explanation.
 Security officers made efforts to prevent contact between
 Sudanese and foreigners, including investigation of some
 Sudanese suspected of "excessive" contact with foreigners. In
 May the Government officially protested social contacts
 between the wives of the U.S. and British ambassadors and the
 wives of former politicians. In another incident, a western
 researcher talking in a hotel with a Sudanese was approached
 by a security officer, who told the Sudanese not to have
 further contact with her. The officer then took the
 researcher to a security office for a brief interrogation
 about the conversation and her activities in Sudan, after
 which she was set free. No confirmed reports were received of
 forcible repatriation of refugees in 1990; one alleged
 instance in January appeared to involve the expulsion of
 economic migrants.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian
 Law in Internal Conflicts
 Both government forces and government-affiliated militias as
 well as the SPLA/M used excessive force.
 The Sudanese Air Force (SAF) indiscriminately bombed several
 towns, killing civilians. In February the SAF bombed the town
 of Moyo in Uganda, killing five civilians. Repeating a
 similar incident in June 1989, SAF planes on June 5 dropped
 some 20 bombs on the Eastern Equatoria town of Torit, an
 SPLA/M headquarters and a center for humanitarian relief
 
 
 386
 SUDAN
 activity. The Torit attack killed 17 civilians and wounded at
 least 50, including patients in a hospital (which was badly
 damaged) and primary school students. In late September and
 again in November, the SAF bombed SPLA/M-held towns, including
 Bor, causing civilian casualties and jeopardizing the
 extensive U.N. and International Committee of the Red Cross
 (ICRC) relief activities in those areas. Reports of similar
 bombings were received from Kajo Kaji after its fall to the
 SPLA/M, from Mongalla (north of Juba), and from various towns
 and villages in SPLA/M-controlled areas.
 SPAF soldiers prevented civilians from leaving the besieged
 town of Juba and killed several who attempted to do so,
 effectively making the civilians prisoners in the town. SPAF
 soldiers also took relief vehicles in Juba for military use.
 Government forces and government-armed militias were accused
 of attacking groups fleeing the widening area of the conflict,
 preventing civilians from growing their own food through
 indiscriminate planting of land mines and confiscating relief
 supplies intended for civilians for sale on the black market.
 The Popular Defense Forces (PDF) Act of November 1989 was
 intended to place government-sponsored tribal militias under
 military control as parts of the PDF. Senior military
 officers, however, disclaimed responsibility for the
 militias. Many militia enrolled in the PDF, and the
 Government continued to arm and supply the militias. These
 government-sponsored tribesmen (especially members of the
 Misseria, Fertit, Taposa, and Ruzeigat tribes) frequently
 attacked their longstanding tribal opponents, particularly the
 Dinka, the most important source of support for the SPLA/M.
 Such tribal conflicts reportedly killed hundreds of civilians
 in 1990.
 Some observers considered militia depredations, which often
 included indiscriminate killing and looting, worse than in
 1989. Particularly severe militia attacks on civilians were
 reported from White Nile Province and Kordofan, especially in
 the Nuba Mountains. In one instance, a-priest in a Nuba
 Mountain village reportedly was tortured to death in a militia
 attack, local churches were burned, and the inhabitants were
 killed. Instances of enslavement of displaced persons,
 especially Dinkas, by militia members were reported (see
 Section 6.c.). In a tribal clash at a camp for displaced
 persons near Khartoum in March, Nuer tribesmen who had
 received automatic weapons and anti-Dinka propaganda in the
 PDF program used the firearms in a skirmish with Dinka
 residents, killing 15. Expansion of the PDF to Khartoum and
 other areas outside the civil war zone suggested establishment
 of a politicized force parallel to the regular military and
 police.
 No arrests for violations of humanitarian law were reported.
 Some 69 persons, largely members of the Sabha tribe, were
 arrested for involvement in the massacre of an estimated 1,000
 'Shilluks at El Jebelein in December 1989. All those arrested
 were freed after a reconciliation agreement between the two
 tribes was reached and payments of cattle and money were
 made. Despite a request from the French Embassy, there was no
 government investigation in 1990 into the downing of a light
 plane belonging to Medecins Sans Frontieres (MSF) France over
 Aweil in December 1989, which killed three French citizens and
 one Sudanese. As a result of this incident, MSF France left
 Sudan.
 
 
 387
 SUDAN
 Although information on its operations is more difficult to
 obtain, the SPLA/M also reportedly committed numerous abuses.
 On several occasions SPLA/M forces conducted indiscriminate
 mortar and rocket attacks on the city of Juba, killing more
 than 40 civilians and wounding many others. These attacks,
 which were accompanied by radio broadcasts urging civilians to
 flee, seemed intended to terrorize the inhabitants.
 SPLA/M forces also were accused of planting antipersonnel
 landmines near Juba in areas frequented by noncombatants. The
 SPLA/M issued threats (never acted upon) to shoot down any
 plane, including relief flights, attempting to land at the
 Juba airport.
 SPLA/M abuses were also reported from other locations. The
 SPLA/M reportedly armed tribal militias in the Nuba
 mountains. Reports indicated extensive pillaging and shooting
 of civilians by SPLA/M forces along the Sudan-Ethiopia
 border. An SPLA/M mortar and rocket bombardment of Kajo Kaji
 in January killed at least five civilians and forced thousands
 to flee on foot to Juba. When SPLA/M fighters entered Kajo
 Kaji, they reportedly raped and robbed civilians and tortured
 and killed suspected government informants. In February
 SPLA/M raiders in Malakal kidnaped two physicians from MSF
 Belgium and later released them unharmed. In the aftermath of
 this incident and perceived government hostility, MSF Belgium
 left Sudan.
 Despite a July 1989 peace agreement in El Fasher between the
 Fur tribe and government-armed groups that had been attacking
 them, Darfur in the west was also the scene of humanitarian
 abuses. Government-armed Zaghawa tribesmen reportedly
 attacked the Fur in March, killing 69 people, and similar
 attacks during the year reportedly resulted in the burning of
 numerous Fur villages.
 Both sides in the civil war took prisoners, although-the SPAF
 reportedly held only SPLA/M officers. The ICRC experienced
 difficulties in visiting prisoners, and the number visited was
 only a small portion of the prisoners reportedly held by both
 sides.
 Although both the Government and the SPLA/M interfered with
 relief operations in 1990, government obstructions--often
 using the pretext of security concerns--particularly hindered
 movement of relief supplies. The Government ban on relief
 flights into the south until April virtually suspended relief
 operations for a long period. Even after resumption of relief
 activities under OLS II in April, movements were held up by
 lengthy negotiations between the Government and the SPLA/M
 over apportionment of supplies and government concerns that
 airlifts disproportionately benefited the SPLA/M. Heavy
 mining on some southern roads greatly obstructed movement of
 relief convoys by land. Civilians suffered mistreatment by
 some local townspeople, attacks by armed militias, occasional
 military harassment of relief workers, and lack of
 humanitarian assistance from the army and SPLA/M themselves.
 Movement of food supplies by land to Juba, the largest town in
 the south, was blocked by the SPLA/M, forcing the 300,000
 residents to rely on the uncertainties of an airlift.
 While civilian deaths in the civil war and tribal fighting
 were again high in 1990, interference or failure of both sides
 in the civil war to cooperate with food relief efforts, the
 closure of airspace to relief flights, government corruption
 
 
 388
 SUDAN
 and inefficiency, and lack of medical treatment continued to
 be the major causes of death in the areas affected by the
 civil war in 1990. Reports of starvation were increasing at
 year's end, and demonstrations in several cities because of
 lack of food were suppressed by police, causing several
 civilian deaths. The relief situation remains precarious and,
 at the end of 1990, thousands of civilians were dependent on
 intermittent cooperation by the Government and the SPLA/M with
 each other and with donors and relief agencies.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 From 1986 to 1989, Sudan enjoyed substantial freedom of
 speech, and a diverse and active free press, at least outside
 the war zone, which often if not always reliably reported on
 human rights abuses. Radio, television, and the Sudanese News
 Agency (SUNA) were and remain under government control and
 tend to reflect government policies. Since the coup, freedom
 of speech has been more limited. In March a plainclothes
 security officer reportedly overheard a woman in north
 Khartoum grumbling about a lack of commodities in the shops.
 He took her to the nearest security office, where she was
 fined and given 25 lashes. In September taxi drivers in
 Omdurman reportedly were beaten by police for declaring that
 they had no fuel--a statement interpreted by the police as
 opposition to the Government. Sudanese abroad who made
 statements criticizing the Government were reportedly
 blacklisted and their families threatened. Debate in
 government-sponsored conferences on various issues, however,
 was open and lively and at times at variance with government
 policies.
 The coup on June 30, 1989, radically changed the situation of
 the print media. All newspapers except the Armed Forces
 Journal were initially banned, and licenses for all
 nongovernment publications were canceled. The Government
 later authorized two government-controlled general daily
 newspapers, Modern Sudan and National Salvation. They were
 joined in 1990 by two other government-sponsored publications,
 the weekly English-language newspaper New Horizon and the
 revived English monthly Sudanow. Although these publications
 usually present government views and do not criticize
 government policies, they occasionally go beyond stated
 government positions in their Islamic fundamentalist and
 anti-Western attitudes. In May the Government banned four
 specialized Arabic-language newspapers for going beyond their
 permitted coverage of social and cultural affairs to cover
 political and economic issues. Special courts in 1990
 sentenced people to jail terms for possession of
 antigovernment leaflets. Telex operators reportedly refused
 to send press reports over their lines, fearing loss of their
 licensed facilities. In all, about a dozen journalists were
 detained in Sudan at year's end.
 In 1990 several foreign journalists were able to visit and
 report from Sudan. Some journalists, however, were refused
 visas to enter the country, and security officials detained
 several reporters in Khartoum. Alfred Taban, a part-time BBC
 correspondent of Sudanese nationality, was detained in March
 and remained imprisoned until October. Julian Ozanne, a
 British national and reporter for the Financial Times, was
 detained for 10 days. His hotel room was searched, and
 personal and professional papers were seized. When he was
 
 
 389
 SUDAN
 released, the Government banned him from Sudan. Nizar
 Hindawi, an Egyptian and the local correspondent for Reuters,
 was detained for 5 days and also left Sudan. For several
 months after Taban's detention and Hindawi's departure, no
 correspondents associated with Western media remained based in
 Khartoum.
 The campaign against external media also extended to
 forbidding the import or sale of some foreign newspapers and
 magazines. Early in 1990 the Government accused several
 Egyptian newspapers of conducting a campaign against the
 Sudanese Government and banned them from Sudan. This action
 was followed in September by the banning of all remaining
 Egyptian newspapers and magazines after a number of attacks on
 the Sudanese Government appeared in the Egyptian press.
 Academic freedom in Sudan was generally respected in the past,
 but several incidents in 1990 suggest much tighter government
 control over academic activities. A professor of biology was
 detained and tortured for his "leftist" views, reportedly
 including discussion in class of the theory of evolution.
 Another professor was detained for a month and interrogated
 and beaten, apparently because of his secularist academic
 views. Some academics allegedly were questioned by informal
 security groups about their political opinions. In November
 the Government dismissed numerous academics from their
 positions, most on political grounds. The Goverment tightened
 control over faculties by replacing elected administrators
 with government appointees. These events made many professors
 reluctant to expound their views.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Declaration of the SOE and of martial law on June 30, 1989,
 effectively eliminated the right to protest, and some
 demonstrations in 1990 were forcibly broken up by police.
 Others, including a short protest by families of detained
 persons and a funeral procession by Coptic Christians for a
 deacon hanged for currency violations, were permitted. Before
 the coup, Sudan had many political organizations and parties,
 and professional and business organizations met regularly. On
 June 30, 1989, the RCC dissolved all political parties and
 effectively disbanded all nonreligious groups. Blamed by the
 Government for most of Sudan's problems, political parties
 remained banned in 1990, and RCC officials vowed Sudan would
 never return to the multiparty system. Although
 reregistration of nonprofit voluntary groups proceeded in fits
 and starts, the continued ban on political activity kept such
 organizations from resuming the active political role some had
 played before the coup.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Sudan is a multireligious country in both fact and law. Islam
 and Christianity have been formally recognized as religions of
 Sudan, but adherents of other beliefs are not legally
 restricted. Muslims are a majority in the five northern
 regions and the capital, although the presence in these areas
 of over 3 million displaced persons from the south (an area
 predominantly Christian and animist) has altered this
 balance. Foreign clergy may enter Sudan with certain
 restrictions. They are most likely to be admitted if they
 have certain technical skills, such as publishing, difficult
 to obtain in Sudan. Clergy without special skills are less
 likely to be admitted. In general, clergy are admitted to
 
 
 390
 SUDAN
 serve their own religious communities. Proselytizing by
 Muslims is allowed, as is proselytizing by Christians of
 non-Muslims; but proselytizing of Muslims is discouraged and
 can provoke reactions by the public and the Government.
 Believers are free to engage in religious education and to
 participate in religiously related charitable activities.
 Despite these provisions, Islam has traditionally been favored
 by the Government. Under the Foreign Missionary Society Act
 of 1962, public Christian religious activity is subject to
 close government supervision. Among other provisions, the Act
 forbids the construction-of churches without government
 permits, none of which has been issued for more than 10
 years. The Sudan Catholic Bishops' Conference (SCBC) and the
 Sudan Council of Churches (SCC) persistently protest against
 the Act, whose broad provisions are often capriciously
 interpreted by local officials.
 Christian leaders also protested in 1990 the Government's
 practice of making time on radio and television available for
 Muslim religious programming while severely restricting
 Christian use of broadcast media. In September General Omar
 announced a program of government subsidies restricted to
 Muslim religious leaders. Several incidents exacerbated
 sectarian tension in 1990. Church services in several cities
 were reportedly monitored by security officers. Religiously
 related nongovernmental organizations, especially relief
 associations such as Sudanaid, were repeatedly harassed by
 security, customs, and other government agencies, often to
 force them to turn over equipment to the Government.
 Increasingly rigid government control of alcohol reduced
 access by some churches to communion wine. In March a local
 mob in Dongola that included an off-duty policeman invaded a
 church service, beating some parishioners. The policeman was
 arrested but quickly released.
 In April expatriate Catholic priests were ordered to leave
 several towns in Kordofan. Although the move was allegedly
 for their protection, several of the towns were not in the war
 zone. Removal of the priests severely hampered relief and
 religious services. Later that month, land in the Khartoum
 area belonging to the Catholic Church was arbitrarily
 expropriated by government authorities, apparently to prevent
 construction of a school on the site. In July a Roman
 Catholic priest in Khartoum was questioned about a church
 publication for youth. Although the priest was not detained,
 the publication was discontinued. In November security
 officers canceled on very short notice a conference on peace
 and development planned by the Sudan Council of Churches,
 declaring that the existence of a government position on peace
 made further discussions unnecessary.
 Despite these incidents, most religious organizations
 continued to function essentially as before the coup.
 Although religiously related relief organizations experienced
 difficulties in renewing their government registration,
 churches and similar bodies were exempted from the 1989 law
 requiring reregistration of voluntary organizations.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Freedom of movement in Sudan is hampered by the civil war, a
 limited transportation infrastructure, and government
 restrictions. Exit visas, required to leave Sudan, have been
 
 
 391
 SUDAN
 used to restrict travel abroad. Authorities maintain lists of
 Sudanese citizens not permitted to travel, and security
 officials sometimes make arbitrary decisions on the issuance
 or cancelation of exit visas. A married Sudanese woman must
 have the permission of her husband or another male relative to
 travel abroad, and regulations specify that unmarried Sudanese
 women must travel with a family member or other sponsor. The
 travel restrictions for women, generally ignored before the
 1989 coup, have since been increasingly enforced. Reports
 were received in 1990 of several women who were refused
 permission to board at Khartoum airport because security
 officials did not believe they had the required permission or
 escort. Foreigners must register with the police on entering
 the country, obtain permission to move from one location to
 another, and register again at the new location within 3 days'
 of arrival.
 After the coup, the RCC Government imposed additional travel
 restrictions. A curfew was instituted in much of Sudan, and
 suspected curfew violators are subject to detention or summary
 floggings. Regulations also strictly limit the amount of hard
 currency a traveler may carry out of Sudan. Death sentences
 have been handed down for violators of these regulations.
 Although in practice most Sudanese have experienced little
 difficulty in leaving the country, numerous individual
 citizens and some categories of persons (such as journalists
 or security suspects) are often refused exit visas. Sudanese
 may move about the country freely, although they are required
 to carry identity cards and those found without them at one of
 the numerous checkpoints may be summarily beaten. This
 regulation appeared to be applied especially to southerners in
 northern urban areas. The Omar Government tightened internal
 travel restrictions on foreigners (especially diplomats),
 principally by requiring travel permits that can be very
 difficult to obtain.
 Although information from SPLA/M-controlled areas is more
 limited, some reports suggested greater freedom to travel in
 SPLA/M-dominated Eastern Equatoria. One foreign observer who
 traveled to several towns in that area discovered no security
 checkpoints and found no difficulty in moving from one town to
 another.
 The situation of most displaced persons and refugees changed
 little in 1990, although the numerous obstacles to relief,
 including the long suspension of relief flights, hampered
 efforts to assist the displaced. Inability to resolve the
 civil war left the number of displaced persons at about the
 1989 level of some 3 million, many of whom were concentrated
 in shantytowns and squatter huts in and around Khartoum. When
 it became operational in late April, OLS II was able to move
 relief supplies fairly regularly to several locations,
 although it was hampered by both government and SPLA actions
 throughout the year.
 Groups of displaced persons were removed from the Khartoum
 area from time to time, often involuntarily. In July
 thousands of displaced were strongly encouraged by the
 Government to leave Khartoum for the south, where they were
 falsely promised that food would be available. In late 1990,
 the Government began a campaign to move thousands of displaced
 persons from Khartoum to areas further from the city. In
 October, when authorities arrived to destroy a squatter
 settlement near Khartoum, hundreds of displaced persons
 
 
 392
 SUDAN
 resisted. The police responded by firing tear gas, then live
 ammunition, into the crowd, killing 1 girl and wounding 7 to
 10 others. In November the Government forcibly relocated
 several thousand displaced persons from Bentiu camp near
 Khartoum to a poorly prepared site at Jebel Aulia, an hour's
 travel from the city. The Government apparently has plans but
 no resources to resettle large numbers of the displaced. Many
 refugees and displaced persons existed on limited allowances
 of food and lacked medicine and other necessities. Incidents
 of starvation were rising at the end of 1990.
 Sudan's refugee population (largely composed of Ethiopians,
 Ugandans, and Chadians) was about 800,000 at the end of 1990,
 of whom 386,000 are assisted by the United Nations High
 Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). Sudan has not forced the
 repatriation of refugees and has generally accorded them good
 treatment, although years of influx have nearly exhausted the
 meager resources available for refugee assistance. There is
 frequent harassment of Ethiopian refugees in Khartoum.
 Resettlement of refugees to third countries proceeded more
 smoothly in 1990 than in previous years.
 Large numbers-of refugees have settled in the cities,
 especially the capital area. Like most non-Sudanese, refugees
 are restricted in their freedom to travel, to own real
 property, and to practice certain professions. They also are
 not permitted to become resident aliens or citizens of Sudan,
 regardless of the length of their stay. Urban refugees face
 many problems. Reports are common of police harassment and
 petty thievery against refugees, beatings for minor
 infractions of the law, administrative obstruction and delays,
 and the need for small bribes to obtain everything from work
 permits to food-ration cards. Refugees seldom have recourse
 to the legal system when attacked by policemen.
 Ethiopian Jews (Falashas) are reluctant to identify themselves
 as such when applying for refugee status with the Government,
 probably because of Sudan's history of antipathy toward and
 ill-treatment of Ethiopian Jews. In July the Government
 approved a UNHCR-organized voluntary repatriation to Ethiopia
 of the 54 publicly identifiable Falashas in Sudan. This group
 had been interned in Umrakoba camp since 1984. In contrast to
 the Falashas' previous conditions of internment, UNHCR
 protection officers were allowed access to this group, and
 their nutritional and health conditions were substantially
 improved.
 The Omar Government did not change the policy of the Sadiq
 Government. instituted in 1987, of accepting genuine political
 refugees but refusing refugees from famine. In January,
 several hundred refugees determined to be economic migrants
 were forcibly returned to Ethiopia.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 At the end of 1990, a military regime ruled, and the people of
 Sudan had neither the legal right nor the ability peacefully
 to change their government. Government spokesmen declared
 that this situation will not change soon. In September 1989,
 the RCC issued its "Third Constitutional Decree" establishing
 a new governmental system for Sudan, featuring a head of state
 (General Omar) with sovereign powers. The all-military RCC
 continued as the legislative authority. A cabinet was
 established, consisting of a Prime Minister and other
 
 
 393
 SUDAN
 ministers, all appointed by the RCC. The Cabinet was given
 essentially administrative authority, subject to the Head of
 State and the RCC. The courts were brought under the Head of
 State's supervision, and courts were specifically forbidden to
 review acts of the RCC or the head of state.
 Under the Sadiq government, Sudan enjoyed a multiparty
 democratic system under which deputies were freely elected to
 a unicameral constituent assembly. Most of the major parties
 under this system were religiously based. When they assumed
 power on June 30, 1989, the military leaders justified their
 action largely by citing the ineffectiveness of the democratic
 government. Claiming sectarian bickerinig was harmful to
 Sudan, they abolished all political parties, seized (and later
 distributed) the parties' assets, and detained (albeit in
 relatively mild conditions) the leaders of many precoup
 parties. Most of the political leaders were released in late
 1989 or 1990, but the RCC continued its ban on all political
 activity and political parties, and General Omar and other
 government leaders inveighed against any return to a
 multiparty system. In October the RCC concluded a National
 Dialogue Conference which rejected both a multiparty and
 one-party system in favor of a political structure based on
 ascending levels of nonpartisan assemblies. The
 recommendations parallel ideas of the National Islamic Front.
 Under both the Sadiq and Omar Governments, local and
 provincial officials were appointed by the authorities in the
 capital. Most local officials appointed since the coup have
 been military officers.
 The military Government initially publicly assigned a high
 priority to ending the civil war. However, by the end of 1990
 there had been little movement on the issue, and the
 Government and the SPLA/M remained far apart on peace
 proposals. John Garang, the leader of the SPLA/M, has called
 for a "restructured, unified Sudan, a multinationality
 country." The Government has also supported a unified Sudan,
 but proposed a federal system of government. Major
 differences revolve around the extent of Shari'a law and what
 constitutes "legitimate political forces" in the country. The
 Government insists that only it and the SPLA should
 participate in negotiations; the SPLA wants the officially
 banned political parties and trade unions also to take part.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government has traditionally been sensitive to local and
 foreign criticism of its human rights performance. Local
 human rights activists in Sudan have complained of being
 regarded as subversive. Many of the relatively few activists
 have been detained since the coup, often under very harsh
 conditions. One activist, an American permanent resident of
 Iranian nationality working as a U.N. volunteer, was
 interrogated and threatened by security officials in March and
 subsequently expelled from Sudan. The Government did not
 institute any public investigations of alleged human rights
 abuses in 1990. Before the coup, several organizations
 monitored human rights in the country, including the Sudan
 Human Rights Organization (SHRO), the Sudan Bar Association
 (SBA), the SCBC, and the SCC. The SHRO was dissolved by the
 Government after the coup, and the Sudan Bar Association was
 brought under government control. Neither produced any
 
 
 394
 SUDAN
 reports on human rights abuses in Sudan in 1990, although some
 human rights activists operated clandestinely. The SCBC and
 the SCC still exist and monitor and publicize human rights
 concerns, especially those involving religious
 discrimination. Several Christian leaders in the SCBC and the
 SCC issued a statement in February condemning indiscriminate
 attacks on southern towns by the SPLA/M and government forces.
 Some international human rights groups, especially the ICRC,
 work actively in Sudan. Two members of the RCC received an
 Amnesty International delegation in November 1989, and the
 Government permitted several groups of foreign human rights
 activists to visit Sudan in 1990. Although these delegations
 were able to visit some detainees, they were hampered by
 government restrictions on their activities and were often
 refused requests to visit certain persons or facilities.
 On June 14, the European Parliament passed a "sense of the
 parliament" resolution condemning human rights abuses by the
 Government of Sudan and urging suspension of programmable
 assistance from the European Commission to Sudan. Following
 up on this resolution, a joint delegation from the European
 Community (EC) and the African, Caribbean, and Pacific
 countries related to the EC by the Lome IV Convention
 requested permission to visit Sudan in July to examine the
 human rights situation. The Government reportedly placed
 strict conditions on the visit, and in response the delegation
 canceled the visit. Subsequently, in December a delegation
 from the EC was allowed to study the human rights situation in
 Sudan. Although the delegation did not receive full official
 cooperation, its members were able to meet some human rights
 activitists and were allowed to visit Kober prison in Khartoum.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Sudan's population of 24.5 million (1989) is a multiethnic mix
 of over 500 Arab and African tribes, with scores of languages
 and dialects. In general, Sudan is composed primarily of two
 cultures--Arab in the north and central areas and black
 African in the south. Sudanese governments have historically
 been dominated by northern Muslims (about 16 million). Some
 southern tribal groups, especially non-Arabs and non-Muslims,
 have demanded greater economic and political power and greater
 recognition of Sudan's cultural diversity.
 Discrimination in the north by the Muslim Arab majority
 against displaced persons from the south is common. Many
 reports were received of attacks by Arab tribes against
 non-Arab southerners, especially members of the Dinka tribe.
 Residents of Arabic-speaking areas who do not themselves speak
 Arabic are discriminated against in education, jobs, and other
 opportunities. The University of Khartoum's entrance
 examinations also favor Arabic speakers, and impending
 arabicization of instruction in higher education will add to
 this advantage. Widespread popular attitudes in northern
 areas also stereotype dark-skinned non-Arabs as inferior and
 lazy, leading to much informal discrimination against them.
 Sudanese laws continue to favor men, and men and women
 traditionally have segregated roles. Islamic laws of
 inheritance award additional property to men, while
 concurrently assigning them the duty of caring for their
 extended families. Government regulations in 1990 moved
 
 
 395
 SUDAN
 toward greater segregation of the sexes, including mandatory
 separate seating on public transport.
 Discrimination against women in professional positions also
 reportedly increased, and reports were received of police
 harassment of wometn workers in the informal sector. Education
 is open to both sexes, and many women obtain university
 education, but women traditionally receive less education and
 have fewer opportunities than do men. Some women, however,
 have been active in the professions, the media, and education,
 and government sources note that some 20 women are now serving
 as judges. Although not numerous, women are found in both the
 police and the military; in the military, several have reached
 the rank of colonel. They are also increasingly visible in
 the PDF. Labor laws allegedly do not adequately protect the
 self-employed, who constitute the bulk of the female work
 force. One of the relatively few women's rights activists in
 Sudan noted at an international conference in 1989 that
 Sudanese women often do not avail themselves of the rights and
 opportunities available to them, including access to the court
 system.
 Female genital mutilation (circumcision) is prevalent in
 Sudan. Reports indicate that this practice, although illegal,
 is widespread, especially in the north. Some reports suggest
 that over 90 percent of northern women have been circumcised,
 with consequences that include severe urinary problems,
 infections, and even death. The so-called pharaonic
 (infibulation) circumcision, the severest of the three types,
 is the most common and is usually performed between the ages
 of 4 and 7 years. Few physicians will perform the operation,
 which is most often done by paramedical personnel in
 improvised, often unsanitary conditions, and with severe pain
 and trauma to the child. The operation is expensive-it costs
 approximately $111 for a 10-minute procedure. Southern women
 displaced to the north reportedly are increasingly visiting
 circumcision on their daughters, even if they themselves are
 not circumcised.
 Women refugees are particularly vulnerable to harassment and
 sexual abuse. Sexual favors are reportedly demanded of them
 by some Sudanese officials in exchange for performance of
 official duties. Stories of rape of women refugees by
 policemen are common, and women refugees without a male
 provider are sometimes forced into prostitution to earn a
 living.
 Among certain southern tribes, forcible sexual intercourse is
 common. 'No blame attaches to the practice, although the man
 involved must pay a price (often in livestock) to the woman's
 family if she becomes pregnant. In the same area, wives are
 often received on a trial basis lasting up to 4 years. The
 husband may dissolve the marriage during this time by
 returning the wife to her family, although he must pay a price
 for each child born during this time. Returned wives are
 reportedly often able to contract further marriages and are
 not stigmatized by having been returned.
 Although the extent to which wife beating occurs is difficult
 to document, the practice reportedly is common in Sudan,
 especially in polygamous families. It is not, however,
 discussed as a public issue, and police do not normally
 intervene in domestic disputes. There were no court cases
 involving either circumcision or violence against women in
 1990. However, for a variety of reasons, many women would be
 
 
 396
 SUDA
 reluctant to file a formal complaint of such abuse. The
 Government has not addressed the issue of violence against
 women.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Sudan had a strong labor union movement during the Sadiq
 government, with numerous highly active labor unions and
 professional associations. Sudanese unions lobbied actively
 and participated in international, African, and Arab labor
 organizations. Except for some government employees, strikes
 were legally permissible after exhausting other measures to
 resolve disputes. Even technically illegal strikes were
 common and usually tolerated.
 The RCC's Constitutional Decree Number 1 of June 30, 1989,
 abolished labor unions and forbade strikes. Stiff
 punishments, including the death penalty, were prescribed for
 violations of labor decrees. Union offices were closed, and
 union assets frozen. Government officials condemned union
 activists as "Communists," although most Sudanese unions were
 resolutely anti-Communist. Many labor activists were
 dismissed from their jobs or detained. Although some
 unionists were freed during the year, others (including some
 of those arrested immediately after the coup) remained in
 detention, often in very harsh conditions in Shalla prison and
 elsewhere. An estimated 200 to 300 unionists were detained at
 year's end.
 In September 1989, General Omar announced the legalization of
 preliminary committees to manage union affairs, pending the
 drafting of new laws on union organization. Under this
 rubric, the Sudan Workers Trade Union Federation (SWTUF), the
 leading blue-collar labor organization, was restored with its
 leadership unchanged and its assets returned. Other steering
 committees were established in 1990, often including many of
 the precoup leaders. These committees remained under control
 of the Government, which could and did dismiss their members.
 In April security officers dismissed Mahjoub Zubair, a strong
 advocate of worker rights, from his position as SWTUF Vice
 President. No new labor law was enacted in 1990, and unions
 continued to operate solely by government sufferance.
 Although the Government pledged to respect all labor rights
 required by the International Labor Organization (ILO), it
 continued to forbid strikes, as well as all labor activity by
 unreinstated unions. Many unionists detained in late 1989 and
 early 1990 after a doctors' strike were tortured in safe
 houses (often former union offices) before being confined in
 regular prisons. There were some signs, however, in 1990 of a
 more conciliatory government attitude toward unions. Two
 doctors convicted by a special security court in December 1989
 of organizing the strike, one of whom was sentenced to death
 and the other to 15 years in prison, were pardoned and
 released in May. Other detained unionists were also set free
 during the year--in part because of interventions on their
 behalf by steering committees.
 Government response to labor unrest remained harsh in 1990 but
 less so than in 1989. In May several leaders of the customs
 officials' steering committee in Port Sudan were detained,
 triggering a wildcat protest strike by customs officers.
 After 3 days, the Government released the detained officials.
 
 
 SUDAN
 When members of the railway union steering committee presented
 members' grievances to the Government in May, five committee
 members were detained and the committee was disbanded. Union
 members in the town of Atbara struck in response. The strike
 broke up after the Government threatened to fire the strikers,
 but the five committee members were released. Unions are
 permitted to affiliate with international labor organizations
 of their own type.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Under the 1985 transitional constitution-suspended on June
 30, 1989--workers had the right to organize and to bargain
 collectively, and unions did so actively. There were no
 official constraints on union membership, and labor laws were
 applied uniformly throughout the country (although with little
 effect in the war areas).
 On June 30, 1989, the RCC suspended the right to organize and
 bargain collectively. These rights were restored to
 organizing committees in September 1989. Government control
 of the steering committees, and continued absence of labor
 legislation allowing union meetings, filing of grievances, and
 other union activity, reduced the value of these rights.
 According to a complaint filed by the American Federation of
 Labor-Congress of Industrial Organizations in U.S. trade
 proceedings, the Sudanese Government has arbitrarily suspended
 many committee leaders, replacing them with individuals more
 supportive of government policies. Although local union
 officials raised some grievances with employers, few carried
 them to the Government. A government labor office that
 handled monthly hundreds of employer-employee reconciliations
 before the coup mediated only a handful in 1990. There are no
 export processing zones in Sudan.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Sudanese law prohibits forced or compulsory labor.
 Allegations of slavery, however, persisted in 1990, and the
 issue remained controversial. Slavery reportedly exists in
 those remote areas where government control is weak and where
 displaced persons fleeing the war zones come into contact with
 armed groups. Informed sources suggest there could be some
 thousands of slaves in Sudan, largely women and children doing
 agricultural and domestic work and serving as concubines.
 The revival of slavery is often blamed on economic pressures
 and the civil war, especially the practice of arming tribal
 militias. Many slaves allegedly are Dinkas abducted by Arab
 militias, especially the Rizeigat and Misseriyah. Reports
 have also been received of Dinka children sold into slavery by
 their parents to prevent their possible starvation. A
 Catholic priest in El Obeid spoke with several adolescent
 Dinkas who said they had escaped from their masters, and a
 Dinka network formed to recover children from slavery
 reportedly has located over 100 enslaved Dinka children.
 Reports suggested that the SPLA/M often forced southern men to
 work as laborers or porters or forcibly conscripted them into
 SPLA ranks. In disputed territories this practice was
 implemented through raids, while in SPLA/M-controlled areas it
 was done through the SPLA/M-appointed village leader.
 
 
 398
 SUDAN
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The legal minimum age for workers is 16. This law is enforced
 in the official or wage economy, but poverty in Sudan produces
 widespread child labor in the informal economy. In rural
 areas, children from a very young age assist their families
 with agricultural work.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The workweek is currently limited by law to 6 days and 48
 hours, with 1 day of rest on Friday. Although the Omar
 Government announced it was considering adoption of a 5-day
 week, no-action on this idea was taken in 1990. The
 legislated minimum wage remains at the 1988 level of $67 per
 month at the official exchange rate. This salary is far from
 sufficient for subsistence in urban areas, and workers often
 must rely on farming, second jobs, or help from the extended
 family. Salaries in private industry are generally higher
 than those in the public sector. Laborers receive an extra
 month's pay for each year's labor. Most workers are given
 allowances for transportation, and some receive housing
 allowances. Labor standards are enforced in the public and
 private official economies but not in rural areas or in the
 informal economy.
 Although Sudanese laws prescribe health and safety standards,
 working conditions are generally poor, and enforcement of
 environmental standards minimal. Unemployment and
 underemployment are major problems, especially among young
 people. Even graduates of prestigious schools often have
 difficulty finding employment.
 Sudan limits the legal opportunities for employment for
 refugees to menial or marginally skilled-jobs. Fortunate
 refugees find employment with an international organization,
 but most are forced to take-jobs far below their training or
 abilities. Rural refugees often find work as field laborers,
 earning the equivalent of a few pennies a day. Urban refugees
 find employment as day laborers or domestic help. The lack of
 legal opportunities to earn a living wage forces many into
 illegal activities such as smuggling, black-marketeering,
 moonshining, and prostitution.
 
 
 899
