Sudan
In 1996, events in Sudan shifted gear as a new alliance of northern and southern Sudanese opposition forces launched "Operation Black Fox" against the National Islamic Front (NIF) government, which has held power since a military coup in 1989. The predominantly southern Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA) began coordinated operations with the Sudan Alliance Forces (SAF) and northern political parties, encouraged by neighboring Eritrea, which provided training grounds and access routes. The SPLA claimed to control the border with Ethiopia, while the SAF staged sporadic raids along parts of Sudan's eastern border up to the Red Sea, where the Beja Congress, representing a disaffected Muslim people, has assisted them. Although overthrowing the NIF remains a distant prospect, the advances in political and military cooperation by its opponents certainly brought it into the realm of possibility.
For Sudanese opponents of the NIF, the year began with a key conference in Asmara, Eritrea, headed by M.O. al-Mirghani of the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP), and ended with the escape of Sudan's former Prime Minister, Sadiq al-Mahdi, from virtual house arrest in IGiartoum. (Sadiq joined other members of the exiled National Democratic Alliance — including his Umma Party, the DUP, Sudan Communist Party, SAF and SPLA — in calling for a popular uprising in early 1997, when they opened the eastern war front in earnest.)
As the Khartoum government entered its seventh year, it showed no sign of genuine compromise with its opponents or of significantly amending its attitude toward human rights. It did, however, inject more effort into improving its international image. Amnesty International highlighted this shift in the title of its May 1996 report, Progress or Public Relations? Khartoum began employing Westminster Associates, a UK public relations company whose best-known writer, David Hoile, had made similar efforts on behalf of Renamo in Mozambique and Onita in Angola. Meanwhile, the largest manifestation of political unrest in the capital, Khartoum, in September, was brutally put down by government security forces.
For the United States 1996 was, ostensibly, the year of withdrawal. On January 31, the United States announced the recall of its diplomatic
233
Critique 1996
personnel from Khartoum for reasons of safety. (Two thousand Americans living in Sudan declined the U.S. government's offer of free repatriation.) On the same day, the UN Security Council adopted Resolution 1044, calling on Sudan to hand over three men suspected of involvement in the assassination attempt on Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak in Addis Ababa in 1994.
When the United States announced in late 1996 that it would provide some $20 million in "non-lethal military assistance" to Eritrea, Ethiopia and Uganda, Sudan's eastern and southern neighbors, this was widely taken as a signal of endorsement of the Sudanese government's opponents, both external and internal. Although the supplies have not in themselves driven the opposition's advances, they are the most visible indication of U.S. support for a regional attempt to depose the National Islamic Front.
Against this background, the 1996 State Department report on Sudan appears to have eliminated several of the inaccuracies that had lingered on in previous years. Certainly it has been rewritten in a manner that indicates fresh consideration. With restrained language, it describes the discredited national elections in March as "highly structured" in the, introduction, when it means neither free nor fair (although this is spelled out later). It misses the fact that not all the National Assembly was elected (some were appointees), and misses the opportunity to point out that a state of emergency is still in force. In general it conveys a rather more focused and coherent picture of the political background and the human rights situation than in past years, although there are occasional tangles in the narrative which could confuse an untutored reader.
Often these confusions result from a misguided attempt to compress the material. The opening description of the various peace efforts is written in reverse order of actual significance. Giving priority to the 1995 UNESCO initiative (the least likely to succeed), it ends with a throwaway remark that sidelines the longer-running involvement of the regional Inter-Govemmental Authority on Development (IGAD). It may be essentially true that IGAD played no role in the peace process in the wake of the 1995 government rejection of the IGAD Declaration of Principles, but a little more explanation is needed. IGAD is largely made up of
234
Sudan
countries who feel threatened by Sudan's potential for destabihzing its neighbors. Several of its major players were the recipients of a $20 million U.S. military assistance package. Their role as mediators can arguably be portrayed as compromised. Nonetheless, the IGAD Declaration of Principles, set out in 1995, remains the most realistic independently established marker point for future peace talks. The SPLA, let alone the combined northern and southern opposition, is unlikely to settle for anything less.
IChartoum has rejected the IGAD Declaration of Principles in favor of its own Peace from Within program, including the "Peace Charter" it signed with breakaway factions of the SPLA in April 1996. Since IChartoum had already succeeded in using these forces for its own purposes — to augment the militias it deploys against the SPLA — this charter was less a brealcthrough than confirmation of a trend. The main ex-SPLA signatories of the charter, Riek Machar and Kerubino Kuanyin Bol, were so embittered by John Garang's leadership of the SPLA that they were willing to clutch at the offers dangled by the NIF. Their decision will affect hundreds of thousands of their southern ethnic communities, many living as displaced people on the fringes of northern towns and desperate for the chance to return home in peace which the "Peace Charter" claimed to offer.
The State Department report says, somewhat vaguely, that "the SPLM [Sudan People's Liberation Movement], the major insurgent movement, has regarded the document with suspicion." It does not list any of the SPLM's specific objections. Critics of the Peace Charter acknowledge that its promise of a referendum on self-determination represents an expansion of the vocabulary of negotiation, compared with IChartoum's outright rejection of self-determination in the past. But they question the NIF's commitment to meaningful implementation of this plan, pointing out that the government's "federal system" — which was previously touted as the panacea guaranteed to ensure peace — has been largely a cosmetic affair.
One major fear is that the NIF will be able to set up a "south-south" conflict with Riek Machar and Kerubino Kuanyin Bol as its proxies against the SPLA, in a manner reminiscent of the "black-on-black"
235
Critique 1996
violence fomented by the governments of apartheid-era South Africa. If it can establish sufficient control in the north-south border zone, with its oil fields and fertile agricultural land, the argument goes, the NIF may be content to let the area further south remain in turmoil indefinitely.
Non-specialists could soon get lost in the multiplicity of acronyms, especially those for the various combatant factions. The report refers first to the Sudan People's Liberation Movement (SPLM), some pages later to the SPLA, and eventually the two abbreviations figure in the same paragraph. In between, it refers to the SPLA as the Sudan People's Liberation Army, the military wing of the Movement. This is somewhat disingenuous, since one of the problems with the SPLA/M is that the Movement is far weaker than the Army. And by its own logic, surely the report would have done better to speak of the military abilities of the SPLA rather than the SPLM?
As for the splinter groups, people tend to refer to the South Sudan Independence Movement/Army (SSIIVVA) of Riek Machar as "SSIM" because it can be pronounced (and perhaps because "sim" means poison in Arabic). But despite Dr. Machar's civiUan academic background, the military wing of the SSIM/A far outweighs the movement.
The introduction's paragraph on the security organs of the NIF touches on the parallel police force, the Popular Police, and its role in enforcing bans on alcohol and "immodest dress," but the more profoundly repressive role of these neighborhood-level bodies — in political spying and visa control — is left for later. This is a pity, since outsiders approaching Sudan from an Arabist perspective are often surprised by the relatively lax enforcement of the dress code in Sudan's mixed African-Arab culture (despite numerous government pronouncements). The informer culture encouraged by the NIF brings with it more subtle and less visible abuses of personal freedom.
Attempting a positive note, the report notes that IGiartoum "resumed cooperation with international human rights monitors," without the qualification that in practice this cooperation was very limited. Previous invitations to such bodies have resulted in strictly controlled visits, with littie or no free access for monitors.
236
Sudan
Turning to aid, the report correctly notes the government's repeated interference with the Humanitarian Assistance Air Delivery Program. It also tells of U.S. Congressman Bill Richardson's role in negotiating the release of hostages from an International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) flight which was captured by Kerubino Kuanyin Bol. Kerubino is described as "an insurgent leader allied with the Government," an apparent contradiction in terms when presented without the background history. Although Kerubino was an early member of the SPLA before launching his own splinter group, he had long been acting in concert with the government to deprive the SPLA of territory in Bahr al-Ghazal, operating out of the government army base at Gogrial. A deal with Kerubino — supplies in return for the captives' release — was, in effect, a deal with IChartoum. Richardson and the released foreign captives then flew to Khartoum, where the event was milked for maximum publicity by the NIF.
The abuses of human rights by insurgent groups is fairly presented, with its emphasis on the SPLM/A's continuing violations of citizens' rights, "despite its claim to be implementing a 1994 decision to assert civil authority in areas that it controls, and in many cases, has controlled for many years."
The State Department reports that the SPLWA "was responsible for extrajudicial killings in insurgent zones" as well as "kidnaping, arbitrary detention and forced conscription, and occasional arrest of foreign relief workers without charge." In the next paragraph, the first in Section la, it says there are "[n]o substantiated reports" of extrajudicial killings, but a paragraph later, it admits that insurgent forces "are believed to have committed" such killings, but that details are generally unavailable. Although the reports are credible, the State Department's obfuscation is disappointing.
The laws of war, neglected in previous reports, are mentioned in reference to both parties to the confiict. The ICRC says that the SPLA has begun to observe the laws in a basic fashion, while the government still does not apply them to the civil war, and "takes no prisoners." The report states that the SPLM has taught "courses" to SPLA officers at the ICRC's request, but does not describe their content.
237
Critique 1996
Slavery in Sudan became a topic of considerable debate in the United States in 1996, prompted in part by Minister Lx)uis Farrakhan's remarks that he was unaware of its existence when he visited Sudan and would not believe it until presented with evidence. Two reporters from the Baltimore Sun newspaper were dispatched to Bahr al-Ghazal in southern Sudan, where they "bought" the freedom of children whom an Arab go-between had brought to an SPLA-controlled village. One may debate whether this "proves" slavery, since the children were in fact returned to their families and not sold to a third party. Some critics say that to prove allegations of slave-trading it would be necessary to go to the slave markets that reportedly exist in government territory, where there would be no lingering doubt as to whether the victims were returned hostages or slaves. Others warn that although the phenomenon — a relic of Sudan's past — does indeed exist, one must be wary of assigning all the blame to the current government. Slavery is not demonstrably organized by the government, although the NIF has done nothing to halt its resumption. It re-emerged largely as a result of the arming of militias in border zones by the previous (civilian) government in the 1980s, and is closely linked to the destabilization of Dinka tribal areas seen as sympathetic to the SPLA. This continues to be indirectly useful to the NIF government, whose own policies of Islamization and Arabization of "marginal" peoples are much more ambitious than the incidental slave-taking by its proxy forces to which it turns a blind eye. While the State Department report accepts the evidence obtained by Christian Solidarity International (CSl), which arranged the Baltimore Sun's investigative trip, as "confirmation" of slavery, some caution is in order.
As part of its response to international concerns about slavery, including a resolution by the UN General Assembly in 1995, the Sudanese government established a Committee to Investigate Slavery and Disappearances in the Nuba Mountains. It claims to have interviewed or obtained reliable information about all except three dozen of the 200-plus names of disappeared persons presented by the UN. The State Department report notes this information without pointing out one serious ambiguity: slavery is reported principally in northern Bahr al-Ghazal, not in the neighboring Nuba Mountains. The NIF policy in the
238
Sudan
Nuba Mountains is a far more systematic program of land seizures and assaults on the Nuba people's cultural identity under the "Comprehensive Call" Islamization program.
Although the report makes dear that widespread use of torture by the security forces continues and that no security official has ever been publicly disciplined for it, it also suggests that the use of "ghost houses" is declining. These places became notorious as detention centers where government opponents were held incommunicado outside the supervision of the courts and routinely subjected to torture. The apparent decline in complaints of "ghost houses" is attributed to "the increased control of the NIF regime, which decreased the need to intimidate opposition groups." This conclusion is perhaps too hasty: as the response to the September demonstrations showed, "ghost houses" can re-open at short notice, and intimidation can take many forms. Significantiy, the report notes that the security services, rather than accountable prison guards, supervise the west wing of Kober, Khartoum's main prison, which is reserved for political prisoners.
Surprisingly, the paragraph on prison conditions fails to note the waves of imprisonment on petty charges which have led to serious overcrowding of women's prisons in particular, and to periodic mass releases of prisoners simply to make room for more. Again, condensing the text leads to confusion: "Female prisoners are housed separately from men; rape in prison is reportedly rare." There is no logic in connecting these two statements.
The discussion of SPLM/A and S SIM/A treatment of prisoners is unclear. While the report notes the ICRCs visits to SPLM prisoner of war camps and battlefield prisoners, it refers only to "credible reports of beatings and other punishment. . .." Since these are also attributed to the SSIM/A, which "permits no such visits," the reader is left in the dark about the ICRCs actual findings.	*
In the discussion of Islamic law and civil order, the report underlines the uncertain position of the 10 southern states with regard to the 1991 Criminal Act. Officially exempt from parts of the Act associated with the NIF's interpretation of Islamic Shari'a law, the states may decide to apply them in the future. In 1996 "there were no reports that [Islamic] hudud
239
Critique 1996
punishments, other than lashings, were carried out by the courts in government-controlled areas of the south." Since lashing is a customary punishment in Sudan and is not solely an Islamic hudud punishment, its significance — and the circumstances in which it was carried out — need to be clarified.
Elsewhere the report confuses matters by referring to Nuba people as "Nubians," an entirely different ethnic group in the north of Sudan. It is silent on the crisis affecting the Beja, Muslim people of northeastern Sudan. Otherwise it is a measured and reasonably painstaking account, and a marked improvement on its predecessors.
240
