 SUDAN *
 The 1989 military coup that overthrew Sudan's democratically elected government
 brought to power Lieutenant General Omar Hassan A1-Bashir and his National Sal-
 vation Revolution Command Council (RCC). Bashir and the RCC suspended the
 1985 constitution, abrogated press freedom, and disbanded all political parties and
 trade unions. In 1993 the RCC dissolved itself and appointed Bashir President. In
 1996 Bashir won highly structured national elections as President, while a National
 Assembly with 275 of 400 members popularly elected in a deeply flawed process re-
 placed the transitional national assembly. The opposition boycotted the electoral
 process. Despite the adoption of a new Constitution through a referendum in June,
 the Government continues to restrict most civil liberties. Since 1989 real power has
 rested with the National Islamic Front (NIF), founded by Dr. Hassan al-Turabi who
 became Speaker of the National Assembly in 1996. NIF members and supporters
 continue to hold key positions in the Government; security forces; judiciary;, aca-
 demic institutions; and the media. The supreme political institution, the National
 Congress, which sets national policy guidelines, also is under NIF control. The judi-
 ciary is subject to government influence.
 The civil war, which has resulted in the death of more than 1.5 million Sudanese,
 continued into its 16th year. The principal insurgent faction is the Sudan People's
 Liberation Movement (SPLM), the political wing of the Sudan People's Liberation
 Army (SPLA). The SPLA remains the principal military force in the insurgency. In
 April 1997 the South Sudan Independence Movement/Army which broke away from
 the SPLA in 1991, and several smaller southern factions concluded a peace agree-
 ment with the Government. However, the SPLMISPLA, and most independent ana-
 lysts regard the 1997 agreement as a tactical government effort to enlist south-
 erners on the Governments side. During the year, the SPLMSPLA and its northern
 allies in the National Democratic Alliance (NDA) carried out military offensives in
 areas along the borders with Ethiopia and Eritrea and in large parts of the south.
 As in 1997, neither side appears to have the ability to win the war militarily. There
 was limited progress toward peace during the year. Government and SPLMSPLA
 delegations met with mediators from, the Intergovernmental Authority for Develop-
 ment (IGAD) in Nairobi, Kenya and Addis Ababa, Ethiopia in May and August, re-
 spectively, and participated in IGAD-mediated peace talks. In July the two sides
 agreed on a 3-month humanitarian cease-fire in Bahr al Ghazal, which subsequently
 was extended to January 1999. In November, the Government and the SPLM signed
 * The United States does not have diplomatic representation in Sudan. This report draws in
 part on non-U.S. Government sources.
 
 
 393
 an accord in Rome laying out a framework for the protection of aid workers and in-
 creasing access to parts of the country hit the hardest by the war and famine.
 In addition to the regular police and the Sudan People's Armed Forces, the Gov-
 ernment maintains an external security force, an internal security force, a militia
 known as the Popular Defense Forces (PDF), and a number of police forces, includ-
 ing the Public Order Police (POP) whose mission includes enforcing proper social be-
 havior, including restrictions on alcohol and "immodest dress." In addition to the
 group of regular police forces, there is the Popular Police Force, which is made up
 of nominees from neighborhood popular committees for surveillance and services,
 and which acts with police powers for political and social ends. Members of the secu-
 rity forces committed numerous serious human rights abuses.
 Civil war, economic mismanagement, over 4 million internally displaced persons
 in a country of an estimated 27.5 million persons, and, to a lesser extent, the refu-
 gee influx from neighboring countries have devastated Sudan's mostly agricultural
 economy. Approximately 80 percent of the labor force is engaged in agriculture. Ex-
 ports of gum Arabic, livestock, and meat accounted for more than 50 percent of ex-
 port earnings. Reforms beginning in the early 1990's that aimed at privatizing state
 run firms and stimulating private investment failed to revive a moribund economy
 saddled with massive military expenditures and a huge foreign debt of approxi-
 mately $21.5 billion. Per capita national income is estimated at $900 per year.
 The Government's human rights record remained extremely poor, and it continued
 to commit numerous, serious abuses. Citizens do not have the ability to change their
 government peacefully. Government forces were responsible for extrajudicial killings
 and disappearances. Government security forces regularly tortured, beat, harassed,
 arbitrarily arrested, and detained opponents or suspected opponents of the Govern-
 ment with impunity. Prison conditions are harsh, prolonged detention is a problem,
 and the judiciary is largely subservient to the Government. The authorities do not
 ensure due process and the military forces summarily tried and punished citizens.
 The Government infringed on citizens' privacy rights. The Government still does not
 fully apply the laws of war to the southern insurgency and has taken few prisoners
 of war (POW's).
 The Government continued to restrict severely freedom of privacy, assembly, asso-
 ciation, religion, and movement. However, the Government generally continued the
 easing of restrictions on press freedom that began in 1997. Nevertheless, the Gov-
 ernment warned newspapers not to criticize the new Constitution, and closed sev-
 eral of them briefly. Moreover, all journalists continue to practice self-censorship.
 There are no independent human rights organizations. However, the Government
 resolved the problem of false accusations that it had made against the International
 Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) in 1996 in which it alleged that the ICRC trans-
 ported arms and ammunition. As a result, the ICRC increased operations during the
 year. In the context of the Islamization and Arabization drive, pressure-including
 forced Islamization-on non-Muslims remained strong. Fears of Arabization and
 Islamization and the imposition of Shari'a (Islamic law) fueled support for the civil
 war throughout the country. Discrimination and violence against women and abuse
 of children continued. Prostitution is a growing problem, and female genital mutila-
 tion is widespread. Discrimination against religious and ethnic minorities persisted,
 as did government restrictions on worker rights. Child labor is a problem, and slav-
 ery remains a problem. Government security forces were responsible for forced
 labor, slavery, and forced conscription of children.
 Cooperation with United Nations (U.N.)-sponsored relief operations was mixed.
 Government forces periodically obstructed the flow of humanitarian assistance.
 Problems with relief flights in the south centered on the Government's denial of air-
 craft clearances the U.N.'s Operation Lifeline Sudan (OLS) for aid to Bahr al Ghazal
 in February and March.
 Insurgent groups continued to commit numerous, serious abuses. The SPLM!
 SPLA continued to violate citizens' rights, despite its claim that it was implement-
 ing a 1994 decision to assert civil authority in areas that it controls, and in many
 cases, has controlled for many years. The SPLM/SPLA was responsible for
 extrajudicial killings, beatings, arbitrary detention, forced conscription, slavery, and
 occasional arrests of foreign relief workers without charge. The SPLA/SPLA again
 failed to follow through on its promise to investigate a 1995 massacre. SPLMISPLA
 officials were guilty of, or complicit in, theft of property of nongovernmental organi-
 zations (NGO's) and U.N. agencies operating in the south. The ICRC reported in
 1996 that the SPLA had begun to observe some basic laws of war; it takes prisoners
 on the battlefield and permits ICRC visits to them. However, the SPLA did not
 allow the ICRC to visit prisoners accused by the insurgent group of "treason" or
 other crimes. It released some POW's during the year.
 
 
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-In their attacks on insurgent forces,
 government troops killed a large number of civilians (see Section 1.g.). In the after-
 math of SPLA attacks in late January in Wau, there were credible reports of re-
 nrsal killings of Dinka men by government forces. There were reports of scores of
 odies of dead Dinka men being found in the area, reportedly as a result of either
 reprisal killings or interrogation by government security forces. On at least six occa-
 sions the Government bombed a hospital in the town of Yei, the center of SPLM
 civil administration, killing at least 15 persons (see Section 1.g.).
 University of Khartoum law student Mohamed Abdelsalaam Babeker was found
 dead on October 4 in a university dormitory, after being arrested by NIF security
 forces on October 2. An autopsy indicated that the cause of death was a brain hem-
 orrhage allegedly caused by a head wound. A case was filed against an unknown
 person and the police reportedly conducted an investigation, but released no infor-
 mation.
 One of the persons accused of. the June 30 Khartoum bombings reportedly died
 in custody. The defense counsel has demanded the release of the name of the de-
 ceased, but the prosecution refused.
 On April 2, at the Ailafun conscript camp 15 miles southwest of Khartoum, 52
 conscripts died. The Government states that the conscripts drowned when their boat
 sank during an escape attempt from the camp. However, opposition sources claim
 that 129 were killed, 55 by drowning, and 74 by shooting and from other wounds
 inflicted by government troops during the escape attempt. Eighteen bodies were
 identified and returned to families, and the remainder buried. There was no credible
 investigation of the incident.
 Insurgent forces reportedly committed political and other extrajudicial killings,
 particularly in areas of active conflict; however, details generally were unavailable.
 There are reliable reports that rebel forces that captured villages along the border
 from Ethiopia in 1997 carried lists used to identify leading government figures
 whom they killed summarily. Rebels also killed a large number of civilians during
 their attacks on government forces (see Section 1.g.).
 The SPLM/SPLA again failed to follow through on its promise to investigate a
 1995 massacre.
 b. Disappearance.-There were continued allegations that the Government was re-
 sponsible for the arrest and subsequent disappearance of those suspected of support-
 ing rebels in government-controlled zones in the south and the Nuba mountains.
 Persons arrested by government security forces often were held for long periods
 of time in unknown locations without access to their lawyers or family members.
 In 1996 the Government established a Special Commission to Investigate Slavery
 and Disappearances, in response to a resolution passed by the 1995 U.N. General
 Assembly. The commission still is functioning and formed subcommittees in western
 and southern Sudan. It has not concluded its mission to produce a public report.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Government's official and unofficial security forces continued to torture and
 beat suspected opponents. They tortured youths, student leaders, and others whom
 they deemed opponents of the Government. The Government reportedly harassed,
 detained, and tortured lawyers whom they viewed as political opponents (see Sec-
 tion i.e.). Refugees also were subjected to beatings and mistreatment (see Section
 2.d.). The new Constitution passed by referendum in June prohibits torture; how-
 ever, the new Constitution had not been implemented at year's end.
 Security forces used excessive force, including beatings to disperse unapproved
 demonstrations. In August security forces beat students at the University of Khar-
 toum who were protesting an increase in university fees (see Section 2.b.). In 1997
 the U.N. Special Rapporteur on Torture described torture as a fairly extensive prob-
 lem.
 On June 30, almost a dozen bombs exploded around Khartoum, in an alleged plot
 to mar official celebrations of the 1989 NIF coup. According to Amnesty Inter-
 national, Reverend Lino Sebit reportedly confessed to involvement in the Khartoum
 bombings (see Section 1.d.). His confession was reportedly a result of his torture and
 mistreatment. Defendants in a 1997 case accused of planning to plant bombs in dif-
 ferent areas of the country alleged that they had been tortured.
 The Criminal Act provides for punishments including flogging, amputation, and
 crucifixion-the public display of a body after execution.
 There were reports that security forces continued to torture persons in "ghost
 houses," places where security forces detain government opponents incommunicado
 
 
 395
 under harsh conditions for an indeterminate time with no supervision by the courts
 or other independent authorities with power to release the detainees.
 Conditions in government prisons remain harsh, overcrowded, and life threaten-
 ing. Built before Sudan's 1956 independence, most prisons are poorly maintained,
 and many lack basic facilities such as toilets or showers. Health care is primitive
 and food inadequate. Minors often are held with adults. Female prisoners are
 housed separately from men; rape in prison reportedly is rare. Prison officials arbi-
 trarily denied family visits. While there are no independent domestic human rights
 organizations, international human rights officials have visited prisons in the past.
 High-ranking political prisoners reportedly often enjoy better conditions than other
 prisoners do.
 There are credible reports of beatings and other punishment of prisoners by the
 SPLA rebels, but the only verifications have been reports by the ICRC and others
 who have been to SPLM prisoner war camps in earlier years. Prisoners reportedly
 have died while in SPLA custody due to the poor prison conditions.
 The Government does not permit regular visits of prisons by human rights mon-
 itors, and no human rights observers are known to have visited prisons during the
 year.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Arbitrary arrest and detention remained
 problems. Legal provisions under the 1992 and 1995 National Security Acts and
 Criminal Code effectively set a fairly simple process to detain anyone for 3 months.
 A presidential determination, supported by a magistrate, may serve to detain a per-
 son for an additional 3 months. Allegations continue that some persons are detained
 indefinitely. The new Constitution passed by referendum in June prohibits arbitrary
 arrest and detention without charge; however, the new Constitution had not been
 implemented at year's end.
 The law allows for bail, except for those accused of crimes punishable by death
 or life imprisonment. In theory the Government provides legal counsel for indigent
 persons in such cases. However, reports continue that defendants do not always re-
 ceive this right, and that counsel in some cases only may advise the defendant and
 may not address the court. In some cases, courts have refused to allow certain law-
 yers to represent defendants. For example, in October the court ruled that leading
 human rights lawyer Ghazi Suleiman could not represent the accused in the Khar-
 tum bombings trial.
 Authorities continued to detain political opponents of the Government during the
 year. Although the Government initially declined to name those arrested in the im-
 mediate aftermath of the Khartum bombings, many detainees were prominent op-
 position political leaders. This contributed to a widespread belief that the arrests
 were intended to intimidate the opposition, rather than to prosecute those respon-
 sible for the bombings. On July 10, Ahmed Yusuf, Imam of the Ansar mosque in
 Omdurman, delivered a homily critical of the Government and stated that the Gov-
 ernment had fabricated the June 30 bombings to incriminate the Ansar sect and its
 leaders, several of whom were arrested. Yusuf and three other members of the
 Ansar Shura Council subsequently were arrested. The court acquitted all four de-
 fendants and ordered their immediate release, but reportedly they were rearrested
 immediately without charge and remain in detention.
 Persons arrested by government security forces often were held for long periods
 of time in unknown locations without access to their lawyers or family members.
 Abo Al-Rahman Abdallan Nugdalla and Abo Al-Mahmoud Abbo, both opposition ac-
 tivists were held from June 29 and July 6, respectively, through late October, large-
 ly under such conditions. Catholic priests Reverend Lino Sebit and Reverend Hillary
 Boma, who were arrested on July 29 and August 1, respectively, and charged in con-
 nection with June 30 bombings in Khartoum, were held in unknown locations.
 In May authorities detained for 5 hours Catholic Archbishop Gabriel Zubeir, alleg-
 edly to prevent him from attending IOAD sponsored peace talks in Nairobi, Kenya.
 Authorities also arbitrarily arrested and detained some refugees (see Section 2.d.),
 and detained lawyers whom it viewed as political opponents (see Section i.e.).
 SPLM/SPLA authorities detained a British highway contractor who was working
 on road rehabilitation for relief activities, for approximately 2 months before releas-
 ing him. He allegedly had been involved in dishonest business dealings with some
 SPLM/SPLA authorities.
 The Government does not use forced exile; however, some prominent political
 leaders fled int exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judiciary is not independent and is largely
 subservient to the Government. The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, formeriy
 elected by sitting judges, is appointed. As the senior judge in the judicial service,
 the Chief Justice also controls the judiciary. In February in a rare display of inde-
 pendence, an appellate court overturned a public court conviction of human rights
 
 
 advocate Ghazi Suleiman. Suleiman was detained for 2 weeks and summarily tried
 and convicted allegedly for "destabilizing the peace." His conviction was overturned
 for lack of jurisdiction.
 The judicial system includes four types of courts: Regular courts, both criminal
 and civil; special mixed security courts; military courts; and tribal courts in rural
 areas to resolve disputes over land and water rights and family matters. Parliament
 passed a bill in November to form a constitutional court. The bill passed into law
 in December. The new Constitution passed by referendum in June provides for fair
 and prompt trials; however, the new Constitution had not been implemented at
 year's end.
 The 1991 Criminal Act governs criminal cases, and the 1983 Civil Transactions
 Act applies in most civil cases. Military trials, which are sometimes secret and brief,
 do not provide procedural safeguards, have sometimes taken place with no advocate
 or counsel permitted, and do not provide effective appeal from a death sentence.
 Other than for clemency, witnesses may be permitted to appear.
 Trials in regular courts nominally meet international standards of legal protec-
 tions. For example, the accused normally have the right to counsel, and the courts
 are required to provide free legal counsel for indigent defendants accused of crimes
 punishable by death or life imprisonment. In practice, however, these legal protec-
 tions are applied unevenly. In the June bombings case, leading human rights lawyer
 Ghazi Suleiman was rejected by the court as a member of the defense team, report-
 edly because he had been requested by the defense counsel rather than by the de-
 fendants.
 In 1989 the Special Courts Act created special three-person security courts to deal
 with a wide range of offenses, including violations of constitutional decrees, emer-
 gency regulations, some sections of the Penal Code, as well as drug and currency
 defenses. Special courts, on which both military and civilian judges sit, handle most
 security-related cases. Attorneys may advise defendants as "friends of the court" but
 normally may not address the court. Lawyers complain that- they sometimes are
 -granted access to court documents too late to prepare an effective defense. Sentences
 usually are severe and implemented at once. However, death sentences are referred
 to the chief justice and the Head of State. Defendants may file appellate briefs with
 the Chief Justice.
 The Government dissolved the respected Sudanese Bar Association in 1989 and
 reinstated it with an NIF-controlled readership. In 1997 elections for the leadership
 of the Bar Association, an NIF-associated group won overwhelmingly amid accusa-
 tions of blatant fraud. Lawyers who wish to practice must maintain membership in
 the Bar Association. Human rights monitors report that the Government continued
 to harass, detain, and torture members of the legal profession whom it viewed as
 political opponents.
 The Government officially exempts the 10 southern states, whose population is
 mostly non-Muslim, from parts of the Criminal Act. However, the act permits the
 possible future application of Shari'a law in the south, if the state assemblies so de-
 cide. No reports cited court-ordered Hudud punishments, other than lashings, in
 government-controlled areas of the south. Fear of the imposition of Shari'a law re-
 mained a key problem in the rebellion.
 Parts of the south and the Nuba mountains fell outside effective judicial proce-
 dures and other governmental functions. According to credible reports, government
 units summarily tried and punished those accused of crimes, especially for offenses
 against civil order.
 Suspects in the Khartoum bombings were scheduled to be tried in a military
 court; however, at year's end, the High Court had not yet decided if the case should
 be heard by a military or civilian court. Some accused persons were shown
 confessing on television and implicating other defendants, President Bashir declared
 that the guilty would be subject to Shari'a punishments.
 In April 1997, 19 persons were accused of planning to undermine the Government
 and bomb installations in Khartoum. They were detained for 6 months without
 charge and not allowed to meet with their families. They were charged in September
 1997, and their trials began in criminal court in January. Only 13 persons were
 charged. The six persons released during the investigation became prosecution wit-
 nesses. Ten of the accused were convicted and sentenced to prison terms of from
 5 to 10 years. One of those convicted was a 70-year-old man who was released due
 to his advanced age, in conformity with the 1991 Penal Code.
 On February 27, the Gezira state government announced that a bomb had ex-
 ploded at an electrical transformer. Police arrested four suspects who were tried in
 an ordinary criminal court in April. The prosecutor added 11 more defendants, all
 of whom are oppositionists living outside the country. In November 3 individuals
 were convicted of the bombings and sentenced from 3 years to life in prison. The
 
 
 397
 remaining defendants were acquitted including the 11 defendants charged in
 absentia.
 Magistrates in SPLMISPLA-held areas follow a penal code roughly based on the
 1925 Sudan Code. In rural areas outside effective SPLM control, tribal chiefs apply
 customary laws. In 1996 the SPLM proclaimed a civilian structure to eliminate the
 conduct of secret and essentially political trials such as those conducted by military
 commanders in previous years. However, at year's end, there was no evidence that
 the SPLM held any such civilian trials.
 There are political prisoners in the country, although the Government maintains
 that it holds none. The Government usually charges political prisoners with a crime,
 allowing the Government to deny their status as political prisoners. The press re-
 ported in October that National Congress official Dr. Nutasim Abdelranim stated
 that the National Congress seeks to release the country's political prisoners in 1999.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Government routinely interferes with its citizens' privacy. Security forces frequently
 conducted night searches without warrants. They targeted persons suspected of po-
 litical crimes. In the north they also targeted persons suspected of making alcoholic
 beverages, which are illegal. The new Constitution passed by referendum in June
 provides for the inviolability of communication and privacy; however, the new Con-
 stitution had not been implemented at year's end.
 Security personnel routinely opened and read mail and monitored telephones. The
 Government continued to restrict the ownership of satellite dishes by private citi-
 zens through use of its licensing requirement.
 A Muslim man may marry a non-Muslim, but a Muslim woman cannot marry a
 non-Muslim, unless he converts to Islam (see Section 5). However, this prohibition
 is not observed or enforced universally, particularly in the south and among
 Nubans. Non-Muslims may adopt only non-Muslim children; no such restrictions
 apply to Muslim parents.
 Various government bodies have decreed on different occasions that women must
 dress according to modest Islamic standards (see Sections 1.c. and 5). Non-Muslim
 prison inmates were pressured to convert to Islam (see Section 2.c.).
 The Government continued to raze squatter dwellings in Khartoum during the
 year, but its efforts to implement procedures to grant title and move squatters in
 advance of demolition improved significantly. However, in November, the Govern-
 ment bulldozed a squatter village in an area known as Carton Kassala, leaving at
 least 3,000 persons homeless.
 A wide network of government informants conducted pervasive surveillance in
 schools, universities, markets, workplaces, and neighborhoods. The Government dis-
 banded political parties and prevented citizens from forming new political groups
 (see Section 2.b.). It continued to dismiss military personnel summarily as well as
 civilian government employees whose loyalty it considered suspect. The Government
 committee set up in 1995 to review cases of persons summarily dismissed since the
 1989 coup continued to function in theory. However, it has released no results since
 May 1996.
 Government-instituted neighborhood "popular committees"-ostensibly a mecha-
 nism for political mobilization-served as a means for monitoring households' activi-
 ties. These committees caused many citizens to be wary of neighbors who could re-
 port them for "suspicious" activities, including "excessive contact" with foreigners.
 The committees also furnished or withheld documents essential for obtaining an exit
 visa. In high schools, students sometimes were pressured to join pro-regime youth
 groups.
 Both the Government and rebel factions continued to conscript citizens forcibly,
 including high school age children (see Sections 5 and 6.c.).
 As a result of the prolonged war, approximately 4 million persons are displaced
 internally (see Section 2.d.).
 The insurgent SPLM/SPLA is not known to interfere with privacy, family, home,
 or correspondence in areas that it controls, although correspondence is difficult in
 war zones.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.--Since the civil war resumed in 1983, more than 1.5 million persons have
 been killed, and 4 million displaced internally as a result of fighting between the
 Government and insurgents in the south. Approximately 70,000 civilians died of
 war-related causes in the first half of the year. The civil war continued unabated,
 and all sides involved in the fighting were responsible for abuses in violation of hu-
 manitarian norms. At year's end, the Government controlled virtually all the north-
 ern two-thirds of the country, but was limited to garrison towns in the south. Gov-
 ernment aircraft bombed civilian areas in the south. A number of these bombings
 targeted the town of Yei, the center of SPLM civil administration, causing numerous
 
 
 civilian casualties. On September 28, bombs from aircraft struck the clearly marked
 Norwegian People's Aidrun Hospital. Whatever its intended targets, government
 aerial bombing is so inaccurate that it puts civilians at risk regularly.
 Government forces routinely killed rebel soldiers captured in battle. Only a small
 group of prisoners captured before the 1989 coup and a few soldiers taken early in
 the year reportedly are held as POW's in government-controlled areas. The Govern-
 ment has not granted ICRC access to the POW's.
 Government restrictions in practice limited or denied travel by nongovernmental
 relief organizations to many areas long controlled by- insurgents. The U.N.'s OLS,
 a coalition of relief and aid NGO's, generally was allowed to operate in the south.
 However, in February and March, the Government denied flight clearances to the
 OLS, which exacerbated the humanitarian crisis sparked by the February SPLA at-
 tack on Wau town and resulted in the death of thousands and the malnourishment
 of hundreds of thousands of persons.
 Members of both parties to the conflict in the south raped women. Both routinely
 displaced, and often killed, civilians or destroyed clinics and dwellings intentionally
 during their offensive operations. Bahr Al Ghazal warlord Kerubino Koanyin Bol,
 aligned with the SPLM/SPLA since January, commands forces that were widely re-
 ported to have raped and pillaged among villages in northern Bahr Al Ghazal when
 e was aligned with the Government.
 Insurgent forces along the border with Eritrea laid land mines, which wounded
 civilian travelers as well as military forces. Insurgent shelling of the town of
 Kassala near the Eritrean border reportedly killed and displaced civilians.
 Northern Muslim opposition groups under the 1995 NDA umbrella structure,
 which includes the SPLA, took military action against the Government. The NDA
 attacked government garrisons and strategic points near the Ethiopian and Eritrean
 borders. Its forces also laid land mines indiscriminately on roads and paths that
 killed and maimed both soldiers and civilians. The SPLA has taken a number of
 soners over the years. The ICRC regularly visited many of these prisoners. The
 PLM/SPLA stated that it released many prisoners during the year, but that many
 voluntarily chose to join the insurgent forces or not to return to the north. The
 SPLMISPLA returned 77 POW's to the Government via the ICRO on August 20.
 Prisoners reportedly have died while in SPLA custody due to extremely poor prison
 conditions, although there is no evidence of the massacres alleged by some in the
 north.
 There have been credible reports of SPLA taxation and diversion of relief supplies.
 In recognition of the problem, the SPLM/SPLA cooperated with the OLS to produce
 a joint analysis of the humanitarian crisis in SPLM controlled areas of Bahr Al
 Ghazal and to seek solutions to problems of diversion. In November the Government
 and the SPLM signed an accord in Rome that provided for greater protection for
 aid workers and greater access to the areas hit hardest by war and famine The
 SPLA released some POW's during the year.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Government severely restricts freedom of
 speech and of the press. Government intimidation and surveillance, facilitated in
 part by an informer network, continued to inhibit open, public discussion of political
 issues. Journalists practice self-censorship. The new Constitution passed by referen-
 dum in June provides for freedom of thought and expression, and freedom of press
 "as regulated by law;" however, the new Constitution had not been implemented at
 year's end.
 The Government generally continued the limited easing of press restrictions that
 it began in 1997, and some lively discussions of domestic and foreign policy were
 published in the press. Nonetheless, the Government still exercised control of news
 reporting, particularly of poltical topics. For example, the trials of Reverends Hil-
 lary Boma and Lino Sebit were closed to foreign journalists (see Section 2.c.).
 In July the National Council for Press and Publications ordered that all news-
 papers to refrain from criticzing the new Constitution. It also warned newspapers
 not to "defend or carry out propaganda for acts of opposition against the authorities
 in order to safegard social peace." The order, signed by the council's secretary gen-
 eral, Osman Abu Zadx, instructed newspapers to promote "dialog and national con-
 sensus and to allow the expression of opposition only from those who are not in-
 volved in terrorism or violence."
 Security forces seized editions of private newspapers on several occasions. Police
 reportedly entered the offices of the privately owned Al Shari Al Siyassi twice in
 July and seized the July 4 and July 6 editions. The July 4 edition of Al Rai Al
 Aakhaj and the July 8 editions of Al Rai Al Aam and Al Shari Al Siyassi similarly
 were not placed on the market.
 
 
 399
 All journalists, even in the privately-owned Arabic daily press, still practice self-
 censorship. There are nine daily newspapers, and a wide variety of Arabic and
 English publications are available, but they are subject to censorship.
 Radio and television are controlled directly by the Government and are required
 to reflect government and NIF policies. Sudan television has a permanent military
 censor to ensure that the news reflects official views.
 The Government often charged that the international, and particularly the West-
 ern, media, have an anti-Sudan and anti-Islam bias.
 In spite of the restrictions on ownership of satellite dishes, citizens have access
 to foreign electronic media; the Government does not jam foreign radio signals. In
 addition to its own domestic and satellite television services, Sudan television offers
 a pay cable network of six channels, which directly rebroadcasts uncensored Cable
 News Network (CNN), the London-based, Saudi-owned Middle East Broadcasting
 Corporation (MBC), Duba-TV, and Kuwait-TV. Rebel movements have provided rel-
 atively few opportunities for journalists to report on their activities.
 Academic freedom does not exist. The Government closed public and most private
 universities from January until October 1997 largely as a result of NIF students'
 use of violence to influence the outcome of student government elections. Schools
 were closed again in September, initially for a period of 1 month. The Government
 announced that the closure was intended to allow students to join the war effort.
 All schools had reopened at year's end. Before the closures, the Government used
 political criteria whenever possible in appointing new faculty members.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.--The declaration of the state of
 emergency and of martial law on June 30, 1989 effectively eliminated the right of
 assembly, and the Government severely restricted this freedom. The authorities per-
 mitted only government-authorized gatherings. The Government dispersed several
 unapproved demonstrations during the year, often with excessive force that included
 beatings and teargas. For example, in August security forces beat students at the
 niversity of Khartoum after they protested a rise in University fees. The Govern-
 ment dissolved all political parties in 1989, and prohibited citizens from forming
 new political groups or other associations.
 The Government severely restricted freedom of association. In December imple-
 menting legislation linked to the new Constitution that in theory would allow the
 existence of political parties passed into law. However, the legislation included re-
 strictions that apparently would effectively prohibit traditional political parties,
 which are linked to armed opposition to the Government.
 Professional association members accused the Government of manipulating the
 elections held by many associations. In November 1997, journalists severely criti-
 cized the Government's manipulation of journalists' union elections to ensure victory
 by pro-government candidates. In Bar Association elections for its leadership held
 in December 1997, the NIF-associated group won overwhelmingly amid accusations
 of blatant fraud.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Government has stated that all religions should be
 respected and that freedom of worship is ensured; hoever, the Government re-
 stricts freedom of religion in practice. The Government treats Islam as the state re-
 ligion and has declared that Islam must inspire the country's laws, institutions, and
 policies. The new Constitution passed by referendum in June provides for freedom
 of religion but states that "Shari'a and custom are the sources of legislation;" how-
 ever, the new Constitution had not been implemented at year's end. The 1994 Soci-
 eties Registration Act replaced the Controversial 1962 Missionary Societies Act. It
 theoretically allows churches to engage in a wider range of acitiies than did the
 Missionary Act, but churches are subject to the restrictions placed on nonreligious
 corporations. The Government permits non-Muslims to participate in services in ex-
 isting and otherwise authorized places of worship. The Government continued to
 deny permission to build Roman Catholic churches, but permitted some makeshift
 structures to be used. In February the authorities took full possession of the Catho-
 lic Club afer refusing to allow renewal gf the lease. Government authorities, using
 soldiers for security, have razed approximately 30 religious buildings by bulldozer
 since 1990.
 While non-Muslims may convert to Islam, the 1991 Criminal Act makes apostasy
 (which includes conversion to another religion) by Muslims punishable by death. In
 midyear the Government began prosecution of an apostasy case against Faki Koko,
 a Nubian who was accused of converting from Islam. At year's end, Faki Koko re-
 portedsy remained in prison, but had not been tried.
 Authorities continued to restrict the activities of Christians, foliowers of tradi-
 tional African beliefs, and other non-Mnslims, and there continued to be reports of
 harassmenta a rrest for religious beiefs and activities. Catholic priests report
 that they routinely are stopped and interrogated by police. In MayCatholic Arch-
 
 
 bishop Gabriel Zubeir was detained for hours, apparently to prevent his attendance
 at IGAD. The Government tried Reverend Hillary Boma and Reverend Lina Tyano
 in a military court. It charged them and 18 other persons with some of the June
 30 bombings. If convicted they would face death and post-execution crucifixion. All
 but two of the defendants are southerners.
 Muslims may proselytize freely, but non-Muslims are forbidden to proselytize.
 Foreign missionaries and religiously oriented organizations continue to be harassed
 by authorities, and their requests for work permits and residence visas are delayed.
 Children who have been abandoned or whose parentage is unknown-regardless
 of presumed reigious origin-are considered Muslims and can be adopted only by
 Muslims. Non-Muslims may adopt only other non-Muslim children. No equivalent
 restriction is placed on adoption by Muslims of orphans, or other abandoned chil-
 dren. These children are considered by the State to be both Sudanese citizens and
 Muslims, and therefore can be adopted only by Muslims. In accordance with Islamic
 law, Muslim adopted children do not take the name of their adoptive parents and
 are not automatic heirs to their property.
 PDF trainees, including non-Muslims, are indoctrinated in the Islamic faith. In
 prisons, government-supported Islamic NGO's offer inducements to, and pressure
 non-Muslim inmates to convert. There are reliable reports that Islamic NGO's in
 war zones withhold food and other services from the needy unless they convert to
 Islam. Childre, including non-Muslim children, in camps for vagrant minors are re-
 quired to study the Koran and there is pressure on non-Muslims to convert to Islam
 (see Section 5).
 In rebel-controlled areas, Christians, Muslims, and followers of traditional African
 beliefs generally worship freely.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Government restricted freedom of movement by denying exit visas
 to some categories of persons, including policemen and physicians. The Government
 also maintained lists of political figures and other citizens not permitted to travel
 abroad. The new Constitution passed by referendum in June provides for freedom
 of movement and residence, aid exit from and entry into the country;, however, the
 new Constitution had not been implemented at year's end.
 Women may not travel abroad without permission of their husbands or male
 guardians. Some former political detainees were forbidden to travel outside Khar-
 toum. Movement generally was unhindered for other citizens outside the war zones,
 but travelers who failed to produce an identity card at checkpoints risked arrest.
 Foreigers needed permits, which were difficult to obtain and often were refused,
 for domestic travel outside of Khartum. However, foreign diplomats could travel to
 many locations under government escort. Foreigners must register with the police
 on entering the country, seek permission to move from one location to another, and
 reregister at each new location within 3 days of arrival. Foreign NGO staff some-
 times had problems obtaining entry visas or work or travel permits once they had
 entered the country ....
 Insurgent movements also required that foreign NGO personnel obtain permission
 before traveldig to areas that they control, although they generally granted such
 permission. NGO workers who have worked in government-held territory reportedly
 encountered problems receiving permission to wrk or travel in insurgent-held terri-
 tory.
 Tens of thousands of persons, largely southerners and westerners displaced by
 famine and civil war, continued to live in squatter slums in the Khartum area. The
 Kharteum state government plans to upgrade conditions in some camps, requiring
 the movement of populations to other areas so that roads may be built or enlarged
 and services established. The Khartum state government is in contact with foreign
 NGO's and U.N. agencies concerning this effort. During the year, the Government
 razed thousands of squatter dwellings in Khartoum (see Section 1.f). Many of those
 displaced were moved to "planned" settlement areas, but in most cases those areas
 had no greater services than the squatter camps and were further from areas of eco-
 nomic activity.
 The law include provisions for the granting of refugee or asylee status in accord-
 ance with the 1951 U.N. Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees and its 1967
 Protocol. The Government cooperated with the U.N. High Commissioner for Refu-
 gees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian assistance organizations and accorded refu-
 gees relatively i good treatment. The UNHCR estimated that there were approxi-
 mately 380,000 refgees, with 150,000 in camps and 230,000 scattered in edrban
 areas throughout the country.
 The Government provides first asylum, although no statistics were available for
 the year.
 
 
 There were no reports of forcible repatriation of refugees, regardless of their sta-
 tus. Some reports cited mistreatment of refugees, including beatings and arbitrary
 arrests. Refugees could not become resident aliens or citizens, regardless of their
 length of stay. The Government allowed a large number of refugees to work. Unrest
 in the Democratic Republic of Congo encouraged an estimated 30,000 Sudanese ref-
 ugees to return to Sudan. Nearly 350,000 Sudanese are refugees in neighboring
 countries. Refugees fled from Sudan to Ethiopia, Eritrea, and Kenya.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens had no genuine opportunity to change their government peacefully. The
 NIF retains control of the Government and seeks to ensure that its institutions pre-
 vail.
 A new national Constitution, which provides in theory for a wide range of rights,
 was passed by referendum in June. There was widespread skepticism of the Govern-
 ment's claims that the constitutional referendum passed with 96.7 percent approval
 and 91.9 percent participation. Critics of the new Constitution charged that it nei-
 ther was drafted nor passed with truly national participation. Some critics also ob-
 jected to the statement that "Islamic law" would be among "the prevalent sources
 of law" in regard to amending the Constitution. However, the actual effect of the
 new Constitution remains unclear, since implementing legislation had not been
 passed by year's end, and its provisions remain untested.
 In 1989 the National Salvation Revolution Command Council (RCC) abolished all
 political parties and detained the major party leaders for a short period. In 1990
 the RCC rejected both multiparty and one party systems, establishing 2 years later
 an entirely government-appointed Transitional National Assembly, based on a Liby-
 an-style political structure with ascending levels of nonpartisan assemblies. The es-
 sentially powerless appointed legislature was replaced following the 1996 elections
 by an elected National Assembly in which 125 of the 400 members were appointed
 from the National Congress. Opposition parties boycotted the election.
 The federal system of government was instituted in 1995 and is developing slowly
 a structure of 26 states, which the Government considers a possible inducement to
 the insurgents for accommodation through a principle of regional autonomy. How-
 ever, southerners are underrepresented in government. This underrepresentation
 remained a key problem to ending the rebellion.
 Women are underrepresented in government and politics. The Minister of Man-
 power is the only woman in the Cabinet. There are two female state ministers in
 the Ministry of Social Planning. Women have the right to vote. Seats in the Na-
 tional Assembly are set aside for representatives of women's organizations and for
 female student representatives. A total of 25 women are members of the National
 Assembly.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Due to government restrictions on freedom of association (see Section 2.b.), there
 are no independent domestic human rights organizations; however, individual
 human rights activists operate in anonymity. There are two local NGO's that ad-
 dress health concerns related to the practice of female genital mutilation (FGM) (see
 Section 5). No international NGO's visited the country during the year.
 Government-supported Islamic NGO's pressured imprisoned non-Muslims to con-
 vert to Islam. The Government resolved the problem of false accusations that it had
 made against the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) in 1996 in
 which it alleged that the ICRC transported arms and ammunition. As a result, the
 ICRC increased operations during the year.
 The Human Rights Advisory Council, a government body whose rapporteur is the
 Solicitor General for Public Law, continued its active role in addressing human
 rights problems within the Government. The Advisory Council urged revision of pro-
 cedures that restrict travel of women under 50 years of age outside the country. The
 Government has not reacted. The Advisory Council also urged the Government to
 release political prisoners.
 The U.N. named a new Special Rapporteur on Sudan, Leonardo Franco, in Sep-
 tember. Neither he nor his predecessor, Gaspar Biro, visited during the year. The
 Government's invitation to the U.N.'s Working Group on Contemporary Forms of
 Slavery remains open.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 A governmental decree prohibits discrimination based on religion or sex. Redress
 is provided through the administrative courts or the labor office. The 1992 General
 
 
 Education Act stipulates equal opportunity in education for the disabled. Mecha-
 nisms for social redress, especially with respect to violence against women and chil-
 dren, are particularly weak. The new Constitution passed by referendum in June
 prohibits discrimination based on race, sex, or religious creed; however, the new
 Constitution had not been implemented at year's end.
 Women.-Violence against women continues to be a problem, although accurate
 statistics on violence against women do not exist. Many women are reluctant to file
 formal complaints against such abuse, although domestic violence is a legal ground
 for divorce. The police normally do not intervene in domestic disputes. Displaced
 women from the south were particularly vulnerable to harassment, rape, and sexual
 abuse. The Government did not address the problem of violence against women, nor
 was it discussed publicly. The punishment for rape under the Criminal Act varies
 from 100 lashes and 10 years imprisonment to death. In most cases, convictions are
 not announced, but observers believe that sentences are often less than the maxi-
 mum provided for.
 Some aspects of the law and many traditional practices discriminate against
 women. Gender segregation is common in social settings. In keeping with Islamic
 law, a Muslim woman has the right to hold and dispose of her own property without
 interference. Women are ensured inheritance from their parents. However, a daugh-
 ter inherits half the share of a son, and a widow inherits a smaller percent. It is
 much easier for men to initiate legal divorce proceedings than for women. These
 rules only apply to Muslims and not to those of other faiths, for whom religious or
 tribal laws apply. Although a Muslim man may marry a non-Muslim, a Muslim
 woman cannot marry a non-Muslim unless he converts to Islam. Women cannot
 travel abroad without the permission of their husbands or male guardians (see Sec-
 tion 2.d.).
 Prostitution is a growing problem, although there is no sex tourism industry.
 There are no specific laws regarding sexual harassment.
 A number of government directives require that women in public places and gov-
 ernment offices and female students and teachers conform to what it deemed an Is-
 lamic dress code. This, at the least, entailed wearing a head covering. However, en-
 forcement of the dress code regulations was uneven.
 There are credible reports that the Government and insurgents seized and sold
 women for work as domestic servants (see Section 6.c.).
 Children.-Education is compulsory through grade eight, although local inability
 to pay teachers' salaries reportedly has resulted in declining attendance. Boys and
 girls are treated similarly in the educational system.
 A considerable number of children suffered serious abuse, including enslavement
 and forced conscription in the war zones (see Sections 1.f. and 6.c.). There continued
 to be credible reports that the Government seized children for purposes of forced
 labor (see Section 6.c.).
 The Government forcibly conscripted young men and boys into the military forces,
 as did the insurgents. The Government officially requires that young men, typically
 of ages 17 to 19, must enter military service to be able to receive a certificate on
 leaving secondary school. Such a certificate is a requirement for entry into a univer-
 sity and the decree effectively broadened the conscription base. On April 2, at least
 52 conscripts died while attempting to escape from the Ailafun conscript camp (see
 Section l.a.).
 The Government operates camps for vagrant children. Police typically send home-
 less children who have committed crimes to these camps, where they are detained
 for indefinite periods. Health care and schooling at the camps generally are poor,
 basic living conditions are often primitive. All the children in the camps, including
 non-Muslims, must study the Koran, and there is pressure on non-Muslims to con-
 vert to Islam (see Section 2.c.). Teenagers in the camps often are conscripted into
 the PDF.
 As many as 3,000 Ugandan children, abducted from northern Uganda by the
 Lord's Resistance Army (LRA), an Ugandan armed opposition group, were held in
 the southern part of the country. These children were forced to become soldiers or
 sexual slaves. The Government actively supported the LRA.
 FGM, which is widely condemned by international health experts as damaging to
 both physical and psychological health, is widespread, especially in the north. An
 estimated 90 percent or more of females in the north have been subjected to FGM,
 with consequences that have included severe urinary problems, infections, and even
 death. Infibulation, the most severe type of FGM, is also the most common type.
 It is performed usually on girls between the ages of 4 and 7. It is performed often
 by traditional practitioners in improvised, unsanitary conditions, causing severe
 pain, trauma, and risk of infection to the child. No form of FGM is illegal under
 the Criminal Code. However, the health law forbids doctors and midwives from per-
 
 
 forming infibulation. Women displaced from the south to the north reportedly are
 increasingly imposing FGM on their daughters, even if they themselves have not
 been subjected to it. The Government neither arrested nor prosecuted any persons
 for violating the health law against infibulation.
 Two local NGO's, with funding from the U.N. and a government agency, are in-
 volved actively in efforts to eradicate FGM, which they describe as a "harmful prac-
 tice." A small but growing number of urban, educated families are abandoning the
 practice completely. A larger number of families, in a compromise with tradition,
 have adopted the least severe form of FGM as an alternative to infibulation.
 People With Disabilities.-The Government does not discriminate against disabled
 persons but has not enacted any special legislation or taken other steps, such as
 mandating accessibility to public buildings and transportation for the disabled. The
 1992 General Education Act requires equal educational opportunities for the dis-
 abled.
 Religious Minorities.-MI~uslims predominate in the north, but are in the minority
 in the south, where most citizens practice traditional African religions or Christian-
 ity. There are from 1 to 2 million displaced southerners in the north who practice
 traditional African religions or Christianity. About 500,000 Coptic Christians live in
 the north.
 Government and SPLM/SPLA delegations participated in IGAD-mediated peace
 talks in Nairobi, Kenya, and Addis Ababa, Ethiopia in May and August, respec-
 tively. The delegations continued discussions of the role of religion in national af-
 fairs and the predominantly non-Muslim southern region's right to self-determina-
 tion. Further meetings are scheduled for 1999.
 In government-controlled areas of the south, there continued to be credible evi-
 dence of prejudice in favor of Muslims and an unwritten policy of Islamization of
 public institutions, despite an official policy of local autonomy and federalism. In the
 past, some non-Muslims lost their jobs in the civil service, the judiciary, and other
 professions. Few non-Muslim university graduates found government jobs. Some
 non-Muslim businessmen complained of petty harassment and discrimination in the
 awarding of government contracts and trade licenses. There also were reports that
 Muslims receive preferential treatment for the limited services provided by the Gov-
 ernment, including access to medical care.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Sudan's estimated population of 27.5 million
 is a multiethnic mix of over 500 Arab and African tribes with scores of languages
 and dialects. The Arab Muslim culture in the north and central areas and the non-
 Muslim African culture in the south are the two dominant cultures. Northern Mus-
 lims, who form a majority of about 16 million, traditionally have dominated the Gov-
 ernment. The southern ethnic groups fighting the civil war (largely followers or tra-
 ditional African religions or Christians) seek independence, or some form of regional
 self-determination, from the north.
 The Muslim majority and NIF-dominated government continued to discriminate
 against ethnic minorities in almost every aspect of society. Citizens in Arabic-speak-
 ing areas who do not speak Arabic experienced discrimination in education, employ-
 ment, and other areas. The use of Arabic as the language of instruction in higher
 education discriminated against non-Arabs. For university admission, students com-
 pleting high school are required to pass examinations in four subjects: English lan-
 uage; mathematics; Arabic language; and religious studies. Even at the university
 eve, examinations in all subjects except English language were in the Arabic lan-
 guage, placing nonnative speakers of Arabic at a disadvantage.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The RCC abolished the pre-1989 labor unions, closed
 union offices, froze union assets, forbade strikes, and prescribed severe punish-
 ments, including the death penalty, for violations of its labor decrees. The Govern-
 ment dismissed many labor leaders from their jobs or detained them, although most
 of those arrested later were freed.
 The Sudan Workers Trade Unions Federation is the leading blue-collar labor orga-
 nization with about 800,000 members. In 1992 local union elections were held after
 a delay to permit the government-controlled steering committees to arrange the out-
 comes. The elections resulted in government-approved slates of candidates voted
 into office by prearranged acclamation. In 1997 largely the same leadership was re-
 elected.
 Unions remained free to form federations and affiliate with international bodies,
 such as the African Workers' Union and the Arab'Workers' Union.
 The U.S. Government in 1991 suspended Sudan's eligibility for trade benefits
 under the generalized system of preferences because of its violations of worker
 rights.
 
 
 404
 The new Constitution passed by referendum in June provides for the right of asso-
 ciation for economic and trade union purposes; however, the new Constitution had
 not been implemented at year's end.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-A 1989 RCC constitutional
 degree temporarily suspended the right to organize and bargain collectively. Al-
 though these rights were restored to labor organizing committees in 1996, govern-
 ment control of the steering committees meant in practice that the Government
 dominates the process of setting wages and working conditions. The continued ab-
 sence of labor legislation allowing -for union meetings, the filing of grievances, and
 other union activity greatly reduced the value of these formal rights. Although local
 union officials raised some grievances with employers, few carried then to the Gov-
 ernment. The law does not prohibit antiunion discrimination by employers. The new
 Constitution passed by referendum in June provides for the right of organization for
 economic or trade union purposes; however, the new Constitution had not been im-
 plemented at year's end.
 Wages are set by a tripartite committee comprising representatives of the Govern-
 ment, labor unions, and business. Specialized labor courts adjudicate standard labor
 disputes.
 In 1993 the Government created two export processing zones (EPZ's); it later es-
 tablished a third at Khartoum International Airport. During the year, only the EPZ
 at Khartoum'International Airport was open. The labor laws do not apply in the
 EPZ's.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Although the law prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor, slavery persists, particularly affecting women and children.
 The taking of slaves, particularly in war zones and their transport to parts of cen-
 tral and northern Sudan, continued. There were frequent and credible reports that
 Baggara raiders, supported by PDF and regular government troops, took hundreds
 of women and children slaves during raids in Barr Al Gghazal during April, May,
 and June. The Government did-not take any action to halt these practices. Credible
 reports persist of practices such as the sale and purchase of children, some in al-
 leged slave markets. These practices all have a pronounced racial aspect, as the vic-
 tims are exclusively black southerners and members of indigenous tribes of the
 Nuba mountains. Unlike in past years, there were no reports that local authorities
 took actions to prevent slavery. The Government denies involvement or complicity
 in slavery, and states that hostage taking often accompanies tribal warfare, particu-
 larly in war zones not under government control. The new Constitution passed by
 referendum in June prohibits slavery and forced labor; however, the new Constitu-
 tion had not been implemented at year's end.
 The law prohibits forced and bonded labor by children; however, the Government
 does not enforce it effectively. There continued to be credible reports that the Gov-
 ernment took hundreds of.children as slaves. Approximately 3,000 Ugandan chil-
 dren were forced to become soldiers or sex slaves for the LRA, a Ugandan armed
 opposition group in South Africa, which is actively supported by the Government
 (see Section 5).
 Both the Government and rebel factions continued to conscript men of military
 age forcibly into the fighting forces (see Sections 1.f. and 5). Conscripts face signifi-
 cant hardship and abuse in military service. The rebel factions continued to force
 southern men to work as laborers or porters.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The legal
 minimum age for workers is 16 years, but the law is enforced loosely by inspectors
 from the Ministry of Labor and only in the official or wage economy. Children as
 young as 11 or 12 years of age worked in a number of factories, particularly outside
 the capital, including the factories at Um Ruwaba that produce edible oils. In addi-
 tion severe poverty has produced widespread child labor in the informal, unregu-
 lated economy. In rural areas, children traditionally assist their families with agri-
 cultural work from a very young age. The law prohibits forced and bonded labor by
 children; however, the Government does not enforce it effectively (see Section 6.c.).
 The new Constitution passed by referendum in June provides that the State will
 protect children from exploitation; however, the new Constitution had not been im-
 plemented at year's end.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The legislated minimum wage is enforced by
 the Ministry of Labor, which maintains field offices in most major cities. Employers
 generally respect the minimum wage. Workers who are denied the minimum wage
 may file a grievance with the local Ministry of Labor field office, which then is re-
 quired to investigate and take appropriate action if there has been a violation of
 the law. The minimum wage was raised in March and again in July to approxi-
 mately $13.50 (22,000 LS). However, as a result of the weakening Sudanese pound,
 
 
 this equated to a net decline in wages, and is insufficient to provide a decent stand-
 ard of living for an average worker and family.
 The workweek is limited by law to six 8-hour days, with a day of rest on Friday,
 which generally is respected.
 Legal foreign workers have the same labor rights as Sudanese workers. Illegal
 workers have no such protections and, as a result, typically work for lower wages
 in worse conditions than legal workers.
 Although the laws prescribe health and safety standards, working conditions gen-
 erally were poor, and enforcement by the Ministry of Labor is minimal. The law
 does not address the right of workers to remove themselves from dangerous work
 situations without loss of employment.
