SL;8E (NFIK?)
South Sudan seceded from Sudan on July 9 under the terms of the 2005
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) that ended Sudan’s 22-year civil war.
The split was peaceful but Sudan saw increasing popular unrest and widening
armed opposition in the months that followed. In Khartoum, the capital, government
authorities pursued familiar repressive tactics including harassing, arresting,
detaining, and torturing perceived opponents of the government; censoring
media; and banning political parties.
Volatile areas north of the South Sudan border descended into conflict while a
peace agreement signed by the government and one rebel group did not end
simmering conflict or improve the human rights situation in the western
province of Darfur. At this writing Sudan’s proposed new constitution had not
been adopted amid calls by President Omar al-Bashir to impose a strict version
of Islamic law without exception for religious and ethnic minorities.
New Conflict Near South Sudan Border
The ruling National Congress Party (NCP) and the South’s ruling Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement (SPLM) remained deadlocked on the disputed territory of
Abyei. In May Sudan conducted a military offensive to take over Abyei in which
government forces and allied militia burned and looted homes and other property,
causing more than 100,000 civilians to flee. In June the parties agreed to
demilitarize the area and deploy an Ethiopian peacekeeping force under the
auspices of the United Nations.
In June fighting started in Southern Kordofan between Sudan government forces
and elements of the South’s Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) after weeks
of growing tension over security arrangements and a state election in which
Ahmed Haroun—whom the International Criminal Court (ICC) wants for war
crimes and crimes against humanity in Darfur—narrowly won the governorship
in May.
In Kadugli, the capital of Southern Kordofan, government soldiers and militia
shot civilians and arrested suspected SPLM supporters during house-to-house searches and checkpoint stops, and looted and burned churches and homes. A
report released in August by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights documented patterns of unlawful killings and
widespread attacks on civilian properties that could amount to war crimes and
crimes against humanity.
Sudan bombed indiscriminately across the Nuba Mountains, forcing the population
to seek shelter in caves and mountains where they lacked food, shelter,
and hygiene. The government refused to allow aid groups to affected areas,
effectively blockading much of the Nuba Mountains.
In early September conflict spread to the Blue Nile state, with fighting between
government forces and an armed opposition linked to SPLM-North, the successor
to the SPLM in Sudan. Tens of thousands of civilians fled across the border
to Ethiopia to escape the conflict. The Sudanese government bombed areas
held by opposition forces, and again blocked aid groups from accessing the
area.
Ongoing Conflict in Darfur
In December 2010 and early 2011 a surge in government-led attacks on populated
areas in North and South Darfur killed and injured scores of civilians,
destroyed property, and displaced more than 70,000 people, largely from ethnic
Zaghawa and Fur communities with perceived links to rebel groups. The
fighting followed a break between the government and Minni Minawi, the only
major Sudan Liberation Army (SLA) rebel leader to have signed the 2006 Darfur
Peace Agreement.
Much of Darfur remained off limits to the African Union/UN Mission in Darfur
and aid groups, curtailing the peacekeepers’ ability to protect civilians or monitor
the human rights situation. The vast majority of Darfur’s displaced population,
estimated at 2.5 million people, remained in camps in Darfur and Chad.
On several occasions, security forces carried out violent search-and-cordon
operations, arresting dozens of camp residents. Government forces were also
responsible for sexual violence against displaced women and girls.
A peace agreement signed in July by the Sudanese government and one rebel
group, the Liberation and Justice Movement, did not stop sporadic fighting or
address ongoing human rights abuses and impunity. The government, with support
from AU/UN peacekeepers, pursued controversial plans for a “domestic
political process” to end the Darfur conflict.
Although President al-Bashir announced in March that he would lift the state of
emergency in Darfur, he had not done so at this writing. Authorities relied on
emergency and national security laws to detain perceived opponents for long
periods without judicial review, often subjecting them to ill-treatment or torture
while in detention. Those detained in 2011 included Sudanese employees of
the AU/UN peacekeeping mission and of an international aid group. Four displaced
leaders, held under emergency laws in North Darfur since 2009,
remained in prison.
Crackdown on Protesters
In January in response to demonstrations inspired by the popular uprisings in
Egypt and Tunisia, security forces arrested more than 100 protesters in
Khartoum and Omdurman alone. The National Intelligence and Security Service
(NISS) detained dozens of protesters for several weeks, subjecting them to
beatings, sleep deprivation, electric shock, and other forms of physical and
mental abuse, including death threats and threats of rape.
Throughout the year security forces used violence to disperse peaceful protests
across the country, often at universities where students gathered to protest a
range of government policies and price hikes, and detained many. Security officials
were also implicated in sexual violence and harassment of female
activists, including the brutal rape in mid-February of Safiya Ishaq, a youth
activist who was forced to flee the country after speaking out about her ordeal.
Arrest and Detention of Perceived Opponents
The NISS also targeted opposition party members, activists, and other perceived
opponents. In January officials arrested and detained opposition figure Hassan al-Turabi and members of his Popular Congress Party for four months
after he warned of an uprising if the government refused to make reforms.
In June, when fighting broke out in Southern Kordofan, security forces rounded
up ethnic Nuba suspected to be SPLM members or supporters. Among those
arrested by NISS was Dr. Bushra Gammar Hussein Rahma, a prominent Nuba
human rights activist, who remained in detention without charge at this writing.
In September, when fighting spread to Blue Nile, security forces, including
NISS, arrested more than 100 suspected party members of SPLM-North, including
the well-known Sudanese writer, artist, activist, and former state adviser on
cultural affairs, Abdelmoniem Rahma. Some were released following renunciations
of their political affiliation to the party. In September the government also
banned 17 political parties including SPLM-North citing their southern links.
Media Restrictions
Sudanese authorities continued to stifle the media by arresting, detaining, and
prosecuting journalists reporting on sensitive topics, and by confiscating publications.
Between October 30 and November 2, 2010, NISS arrested a group of Darfuri
journalists and activists affiliated with Radio Dabanga, a news service reporting
on Darfur, and subjected them to beatings and other ill-treatment and torture
while in detention for weeks and months. Seven faced criminal charges, including
espionage, punishable by death.
In May security officials detained and interrogated two Sudanese journalists
because they tried to report on elections in Southern Kordofan. In June and
September security officials arrested Al Jazeera journalists attempting to cover
events in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile.
Two prominent journalists were charged with defamation for their coverage of
the February rape of Safiya Ishag by security officials. Other journalists have
also been harassed or threatened with defamation charges for reporting on the
case.
NISS officials confiscated editions of major newspapers for their coverage of
conflicts or because of articles critical of the ruling party. Authorities also suspended
a dozen newspapers, including opposition paper Ajras al Hurriya, citing
their links to South Sudan.
Justice and Accountability
In 2005 the UN Security Council referred the situation in Darfur to the ICC,
which has issued arrest warrants for three individuals, including President al-
Bashir, on charges of war crimes, crimes against humanity, and genocide.
Sudan continued to refuse cooperation with the ICC in its cases for crimes in
Darfur or to meaningfully prosecute the crimes in its own courts. Despite the
appointment of several special prosecutors for Darfur, Sudan has done little to
promote accountability and made none of the justice reforms recommended by
the AU’s High-level Panel on Darfur, headed by former South Africa President
Thabo Mbeki, in its 2009 report.
Key International Actors
World leaders congratulated Sudan for allowing the South’s secession, but
were largely mute in response to the human rights and laws of war violations in
Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile. Neither the UN nor the AU condemned the
serious violations, despite calls by the Office of the UN High Commissioner for
Human Rights for an investigation into possible war crimes and crimes against
humanity, or took other action to protect civilians from the conflicts.
Three ICC member states—Djibouti, Chad, and Malawi—welcomed al-Bashir to
their territories, flouting their obligation to arrest him. China also welcomed
him.
The European Union, United States, United Kingdom, Germany, and France criticized
the visits and urged Sudan and other states to cooperate with the court,
including in the surrender of ICC suspects. Malaysia cancelled an anticipated
visit by al-Bashir after public outcry.
The Mbeki-led AU Panel mediated between Sudan and South Sudan on critical
outstanding issues, such as oil revenue sharing, border management, and the
status of the contested area of Abyei. Ethiopian Prime Minister Meles Zenawi
and UN and US special envoys played key roles. In June the UN authorized
4,200 Ethiopian peacekeepers for Abyei. The US also played a major role mediating
a new peace agreement for Darfur, signed by the government and one
rebel group at Doha.
However, key international actors did not take a unified approach to addressing
the protection of civilians and ending human rights violations, particularly in
Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile. The mandate of the UN peacekeeping mission
in Sudan (UNMIS) expired in July, effectively ending international monitoring
in Sudan, except in Darfur, where the AU/UN mission continued to face significant
restrictions.
In September the UN’s Human Rights Council renewed the mandate of the UN
expert on Sudan for another year, but the resolution fell short of reflecting the
gravity of the situation on the ground and of calling for an international investigation
or any other meaningful response to the human rights and humanitarian
crisis in Sudan’s border regions of Abyei, South Kordofan, and Blue Nile.