 SENEGAL
 Senegal is a republic with a democratically elected president
 and a unicameral legislature. After acceding automatically to
 the presidency in January 1981, when former President Senghor
 retired, Abdou Diouf was elected in his own right in the
 regularly scheduled general elections of February 1983. A new
 legislature was elected at the same time, with President
 Diouf's Socialist Party (PS) winning 111 of the 120 seats.
 Senegal has longstanding democratic traditions which predate
 independence, and there is wide public interest in, and debate
 on, political matters. While Senegal is a multiparty state
 with 17 legal political parties, the Socialist Party has been
 dominant and controlled the Government since independence from
 France in 1960.
 The Senegalese military (about 12,000 personnel) has a
 well-earned reputation as an apolitical and professional
 organization and is respected by the population. There are
 also about 3,000 paramilitary gendarmes. Civilian security
 forces are fairly well trained and generally respect the laws
 they enforce.
 Although the Government and the ruling party describe the
 national economy as Socialist, recent economic reforms include
 an effort by the Government to reduce its involvement in many
 sectors of the economy. This includes plans to sell off all
 or part of most state-owned enterprises and to encourage
 private initiatives in agriculture and industry. However,
 wages have been frozen for several years while prices for
 agricultural products and consumer goods keep rising. As the
 nation faces general elections in February 1988, there is
 growing concern about the political impact of the economic
 reform program.
 Trends in observance of human rights remain generally
 positive. The legal system is active and effective in
 protecting human rights. Concerns remain about the impact of
 the electoral laws on the fairness of the election process.
 The Government continues to provide strong support to
 Dakar-based and regional organizations which promote respect
 for human rights in Africa and the Third World. In the
 southernmost region of Casamance, a small, armed, ethnic-based
 separatist group intermittently engages in various clandestine
 activities and sporadically attacks military personnel. At
 the end of 1987, three persons who were arrested in late 1986
 for involvement in Casamance unrest awaited trial before the
 Security Court. Over 140 others who had been detained were
 released without charge.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There was no evidence of any killings at government instigation
 or for political motives.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of abduction of individuals by official,
 quasi-official, opposition, or vigilante groups.
 
 
 245
 SENEGAL
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Government officials in Senegal ghnerally adhere to the
 section of the criminal code prohibiting physical abuse.
 There are, however, instances of the use of force by police
 officials in the interrogation of suspected criminals. In
 April seven policemen were found guilty of complicity in the
 1983 death of a suspect from beating. When other policemen
 went on strike to demand the Government release their
 colleagues, the Government reacted firmly, emphasizing that
 the courts were independent of the administration and were
 correctly applying the law. Family members claim-that a delay
 in access to the detainee prevented him from receiving timely
 medical care which might have saved his life.
 In its 1987 Report, Amnesty International stated that, in
 connection with the separatist riots in Casamance in 1982 and
 1983, a number of those~brought to trial were alleged to have
 been tortured or ill-treated after arrest and that at least
 seven prisoners died before the trial. However, no formal
 inquiries into the allegations or inquests were undertaken by
 the authorities,who assert that no complaints were received
 from either friends or family of those allegedly  ortured.
 There have-been no criminal or civil suits resulting from the
 Casamance disorders.
 Harsh brison conditions are partly alleviated by the access to
 prisohdrs'by"cl~rics, friends, and families, who are expected
 to provide food'and amenities.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, Exile, or Forced Labor
 The constitutional-prohibition against arbitrary arrest or
 detention is respected in practice. Persons are not generally
 detained, punished, or tried for the e pression of views
 critidal-of or different from the'Gov nment. There are,'
 however, laws prohibiting personal at acks against the Chief
 of State or the institutions of the epublic. The major
 opposition political leader was-cha ged in March under these
 provisions for comments he made in an intervlew in August
 1985. He was immediately ref~ase_ on bond, and his case is
 still pendin4. He has 'remained olitically active'in the
 meantime.  -
 The Senegalese legal system i's patterned after the French
 system. A.person suspected of a crime may.be legally held
 without:charge f6r 48 houhrs after'arrest and hay be held up to
 72 hours it ordered by a public prosecutor. Temporary
 custody, which.replaced "preventive custody" in 1985, is
 permitted when 6ivil authorities determine that there is a
 threat of civil disturbance or that an individual is a threat
 to himself or others. Temporary custody is initially valid
 for a maximum period of 6 months but may be renewed for
 further 6. month periods if the investigating magistrate
 certifies that additional time is required to complete the
 investigation. These laws are generally respected by law
 enforcement officials, and charges are formally and clearly
 drawn. By law, every person has access to legal counsel
 during every step of the legal process. In practice, persons
 with means will have private legal counsel. The court
 appoints public defenders for indigents charged with.felonies.
 Amnesty International stated in its 1987 Report that further
 arrests took place in the Casamance region in November and
 
 
 246
 SENEGAL
 December 1986. At the end of 1987, three persons were
 awaiting trial for separatist activities committed in 1986.
 There is no forced or compulsory labor in Senegal.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Senegal has an active and well-trained judiciary, which is
 constitutionally independent of the executive, the
 legislature, and the military. Court officials are lawyers
 who have completed a number of years b-f- required
 apprenticeship. Trials are open to the public, and defendants
 have the right to a defense attorney. Ordinary courts hold-
 hearings which are presided over by a panel of judges and, in
 the case of criminal charges, include a panel of citizens as a
 form of jury. Magistrates are appointed by decree, and judges
 are not subject to governmental supervision. However, there
 are recurrent allegations that the courts are not immune to
 government pressure, and that some judges have been removed
 from cases when they proved too independent-minded.
 There are four categories of special courts: the High Court
 of Justice, the Security (or *political") Court, the Court for
 the Repression of the Unlawful Accumulation of Wealth, and the
 military courts. The High Court of Justice, which was created
 for the sole purpose of trying high government officials for
 treason or malfeasance, has never met. The Security Court,
 which consists of a judge and two assessors, has jurisdiction
 over cases involving politically motivated crimes, such as the
 Casamance separatist cases. The "Illegal Enrichment" Court
 has only judged three cases since it was created 6 years ago
 and is not presently active. The military court system has
 jurisdiction over offenses committed by members of the armed
 forces during peacetime. In wartime, courts-martial may be
 convened. Civilians may not be tried by military courts.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence.
 The Senegalese bureaucracy, patterned after the French system,
 is highly centralized and requires of Senegalese citizens a
 fairly extensive array of documentation for purposes of
 education and obtaining social security and other benefits.
 The intent, however, is not coercive, and there is otherwise
 little government interference in the private lives of
 citizens.
 There is no evident pattern of monitoring the private written
 or oral communications of Senegalese citizens. There are
 constitutional safeguards against arbitrary invasion of the
 home. Search warrants are required and may be issued only by
 judges and in accordance with procedures established by law.
 While there is no evidence that security forces systematically
 violate the law in this regard, searches without warrants do
 occasionally take place.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and press is protected constitutionally and
 is generally respected in practice. Full academic freedom
 exists. As noted above, however, there are laws which
 restrict personal attacks on the presidency and governmental
 institutions.
 
 
 247        -
 SENEGAL
 Publications are neither censored nor banned in Senegal.
 Publishers are required to register with the Central Court
 prior to starting publication, but such registrations are
 routinely approved. Laws establish standards for journalists
 and publishers. There are dozens of magazines and newspapers
 which reflect a broad range of opinion from conservative to
 Marxist. The country's most professional and informative
 newspaper is controlled by, and supports, the majority
 Socialist Party. Foreign publications circulate freely in
 Senegal without censorship.
 Notwithstanding the broad range of views available to the
 public, it is clear that in the official media (including the
 government-controlled radio and television) the activities of
 the ruling party are always covered, while the opposition
 parties are mentioned only occasionally at best. Even when
 the opposition is mentioned, it is done selectively, e.g.,
 communiques are not read in their entirety and certain
 factions are excluded in favor of others less hostile to the
 Government. Events which affect and interest Senegalese are
 sometimes ignored completely, as was the case when rioting
 broke out on the university campus in January, and students
 went on strike for over a month.
 There are also legal limits on access to, and use of, the
 official media during election campaigns. The ruling party
 and its allies are entitled to 50 percent of the time allotted
 to political broadcasts, while the opposition parties divide
 the remaining 50*percent. Since one party holds the
 Government while some 15 oppose it, the opposition has
 demanded more equitable access to the airwaves.
 A recent law restricts the subject, timing, and publication of
 opinion polls, especially during campaign periods, effectively
 prohibiting them from covering political or electoral
 questions. A national commission must review all movies prior
 to public exhibition, and films which offend Senegalese
 sensibilities, e.g., gratuitous violence, or which deal with
 certain politically sensitive topics are prohibited.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Senegalese frequently exercise their constitutional right of
 assembly, within certain restrictions aimed at protecting
 public order. Prior authorization for public demonstrations
 is required, and demonstrations or protest meetings against
 government policies are closely monitored by security
 services. Many opposition party activities are hindered or
 delayed because rallies or meetings can be banned by a local
 police official. On at least one occasion, a decision by a
 cabinet minister in the capital was required to overrule the
 ban. The opposition claims that these techniques are used to
 limit their access to the people.
 In April policemen walked off their jobs in Dakar and
 demonstrafed in the streets. Since by law the police are
 prohibited from striking, the Government fired first the
 Interior Minister and his senior advisors and subsequently the
 entire police force. After a review of all their files,
 policemen found responsible for the illegal strike, as well as
 those involved in corruption or abuse of power, were not
 rehired. A large demonstration by labor union members outside
 the National Assembly in July to manifest their concern over
 revisions to the labor code under consideration by the
 Assembly took place peacefully without arrests.
 
 
 248
 SENEGAL
 Workers have the right to organize and bargain collectively
 and to strike if negotiations are unsuccessful. Less than 25
 percent of the labor force is unionized. Economic and
 work-related issues are the principal concerns of Senegalese
 workers. In the past, the Government has cracked down on
 wildcat strike actions, such as in the case of the transport
 workers in 1985. The President amnestied in 1986 Moustapha
 Toure, a leader of the transport workers, and nine others
 sentenced to prison terms after that action.
 The major trade union confederation, the National
 Confederation of Senegalese Workers (CNTS), is affiliated with
 the ruling Socialist Party. There are also several small,
 sometimes radical, independent trade unions representing some
 workers in sectors important to the economy. The independent
 unions are not afforded the same access to workers or the
 media as CNTS and are sometimes excluded from activities such
 as the traditional workers' May Day parade. The CNTS is
 entitled by the Socialist Party to a ministerial post, but the
 Secretary General of the CNTS has declined to accept the post,
 stating that he wishes to avoid divided loyalty between the
 workers and the party.
 In July 1987, the Government, in an attempt to comply with
 World Bank requirements aimed at making Senegal more
 attractive to investors, introduced new labor legislation
 designed to allow employers to hire workers for an unlimited
 number of yearly contracts. The law required that an
 employer, after signing two limited-term contracts with an
 employee, must hire the employee full time and give the
 employee full benefits and an unlimited duration contract.
 The CNTS demonstrated and lobbied successfully for an
 amendment to the government-sponsored bill which, in a final
 review, made the new legislation almost exactly the same as
 the former legislation. The CNTS officially is nonaligned
 with any international labor body but is affiliated with the
 Organization of African Trade Union Unity.
 c. Freedom of Religion.
 Senegal is constitutionally a secular state, and freedom of
 religion is a legal right which exists in practice. Islam is
 the religion of over 85 percent of the population. Other
 religions, primarily Catholicism, are freely exercised.
 Missionary activity is permitted, and foreign Protestant
 missionaries are active in several regions of the country.
 Conversion is permitted, and there is no discrimination
 against minority religions. Adherence to a particular
 religion confers neither advantage nor disadvantage in civil,
 political, economic, military, or other sectors.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Constitution states that all citizens have the right to
 move and establish themselves freely anywhere in Senegal, a
 right respected in practice. Since 1981 exit visas are not
 required for travel outside the country. There is no
 restriction on emigration, and repatriates are not officially
 disadvantaged on return to Senegal.
 Senegal is host to 5,140 recognized and assisted refugees.
 Prior to the April 3, 1984 coup in Guinea, there were an
 estimated 500,000 Guineans in Senegal, most of whom were not
 officially recognized as refugees. Most of them have since
 
 
 249
 SENEGAL
 returned to Guinea. There is a regional office of the United
 Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in Dakar. Senegal
 continues to make places available for refugee students from
 other countries at the University of Dakar and other
 educational institutions.
 Section'3' Respect for'Political Rights: The Right of.Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Senegal is a functioning democracy with universal suffrage for
 all citizens over 21. Political life throughout the
 postindependence period has been dominated by the Socialist
 Party. There are currently 17 legally registered parties
 ranging in ideology from conservative to Trotskyite. Parties
 may not be based on divisive factors such as language,
 religion, or ethnic group. Presidential and legislative
 elections were last held in February 1983, with rural and
 municipal elections in November 1984. The next general
 elections are scheduled for February 1988.
 In the general elections of 1983, the PS won the presidency
 and 111 of the 120 legislative seats under a combination of
 direct constituency elections and proportional representation
 which was developed to assure at least some opposition
 presence.. Opposition parties at that time charged that recent
 changes in the electoral code had favored the ruling party by
 removing the'requirements for voter identification, a secret
 ballot, and opposition representation when votes were
 counted. Because of these objections, the leading opposition
 party, which won eight seats in the legislature, decided to
 boycott the municipal and rural elections the following year.
 In preparation for the February elections, several of the
 opposition parties are'attempting to pressure the Government
 to modify the electoral code by threatening to boycott again.
 The Government has shown no sign of flexibility on this
 subject, and it appears the opposition will campaign even if
 no changes are made.
 Section 4 Governmental. Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of-Human Rights
 Senegal maintains a dialogue with organizations such as
 Amnesty International (AI), which has an active chapter in
 Dakar, and has permitted numerous AI missions to investigate
 reports of human rights abuses in Senegal. Senegal is a
 leader among'African countries in the establishment and
 promotion of international standards for human rights
 practices. Senegal was the original sponsor of the African
 Charter of Human and Peoples' Rights of the Organization of
 African Unity (OAU). In June 1987, Senegal organized a
 colloquium to discuss the role and function of the African
 Human Rights Commission to be set up under that Charter, and a
 member of Senegal's Supreme Court was among the 11 African
 jurists chosen by the OAU's annual summit meeting, in July, to
 be on that Commission. Senegal is also an active member of
 the U.N. Human Rights Commission. A Senegalese was recently
 elected Vice President of the International Court of Justice
 in The Hague. Dakar is the headquarters of several
 institutions which foster the spread of human rights and
 democratic pluralism in Africa.
 
 
 250
 SENEGAL
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Sex, Race, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 While in general there is no official discrimination in
 Senegal based on race, religion, or language, the country is
 predominantly Muslim, and Islamic customs including polygamy
 and the rules of inheritance generally prevail, especially in
 the rural areas. Women are active participants in the
 political process, and several parties, including the dominant
 Socialist Party, have sections promoting women's rights.
 Twelve women are deputies in the National Assembly, and there
 are 3 women in President Diouf's Cabinet. In addition, a
 number of government ministries employ women in key positions,
 e.g., the Political Director of the Ministry of Foreign
 Affairs. In other ministries key agronomists, statisticians,
 and economists are women. Women may not serve in the armed
 forces. As a result, the new requirement that all police
 recruits have prior military service has the side effect of
 barring women from service in the police force.
 A subtle form of discrimination based on social status does
 exist, although it has been officially outlawed for several
 years. It concerns those families "of caste," who were
 traditionally occupied with menial or dirty jobs in the
 community--tanners, blacksmiths (and by extension, gold and
 silversmiths), wood carvers, some fishermen, etc. Although it
 is against the law to even mention the caste of a Senegalese,
 in fact virtually all citizens of the country know where each
 person fits in the social hierarchy. Articles in the press
 have described frictions which result from this social
 stratification. For example, a family may refuse to permit
 the marriage of a daughter to a young man of caste because it
 would lower her status.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 The National Confederation of Senegalese Workers (CNTS)
 has been a major force in establishing, through collective
 bargaining over the years, regulations and guidelines for
 minimum employment age (16), occupational safety and health
 standards, minimum wage, and limits on work hours. In a
 majority of the larger companies and enterprises which can be
 easily monitored, the standards are closely followed. The
 minimum wage is approximately $0.66 per hour for a minimum of
 3 hours' work. Yet the informal work sector, faced with a
 worsening economic situation, has ignored many of these
 regulations. It is extremely difficult to monitor, let alone
 enforce, the minimum age requirement, working hour limits, and
 work place conditions within the informal work sector, and no
 effort is made in the large agricultural sector.
 
 
 251