 SENEGAL
 Senegal, which attained independence from French colonial rule
 in 1960, is a republic with a democratically elected President
 and a unicameral Parliament. Abdou Diouf acceded to the
 Presidency when former President Leopold Senghor retired in
 January 1981; Diouf was elected in his own right in freely
 contested elections in February 1983. A new Parliament was
 elected at the same time; the Socialist Party, of which
 President Diouf is Secretary General, won 11 of the 120
 seats. While the Senegalese Government defines the country's
 economy as socialist--and the Socialist Party is a member of
 the Socialist International--the private sector plays an
 important role. Private sector participation in agriculture,
 on which the Senegalese economy is based, is being encouraged.
 Senegal has longstanding democratic traditions which predate
 independence, and there is wide public interest in, and debate
 on, political matters. The post-independence political scene
 has been dominated by the Socialist Party, but Senegal is a
 multi-party state and has 15 legal political parties.
 The Senegalese military has a reputation as an apolitical and
 professional organization, respected by the population. The
 civilian security forces are also generally well trained and
 disciplined and respect the laws which they enforce. The
 legal system is active and effective in protecting human
 rights.
 Long- and short-term trends, in the human rights context,
 remain positive. Some concern raised by opposition party
 leaders about the fairness of present electoral laws colored
 the campaign leading into the November 1984 municipal and
 rural elections, but the opposition admits that the original
 intent of these laws was to broaden the base of the electorate
 and remove unreasonable restrictions. Two continuing
 tendencies which remain potentially worrisome for their effect
 on the human rights climate are the growth of Islamic
 fundamentalism and the increase in the crime rate. However,
 there were no credible reports of human rights violations in
 1984. The Government, which has a designated senior official
 at the Presidency to follow human rights matters, has
 encouraged the work of Dakar-based human rights organizations
 in organizing conferences and other human rights activities in
 Africa. The Government of Senegal has given official sanction
 and the promise of some material support to the holding of a
 second World Congress on.Human Rights in Dakar in June-July
 1985.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There is no evidence of any instances of killings at
 government instigation or for political motives.
 b. Disappearance
 There have been no reports of abduction of individuals by
 official, quasi-official, opposition, or vigilante groups.
 
 
 267
 SENEGAL
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Government officials in Senegal generally respect the
 constitutional provision that the person is sacred and will be
 protected by the state, and they adhere also to the section of
 the criminal code prohibiting physical abuse. There have
 been, however, reported instances of the use of force by lower
 level police officials in the interrogation of suspected
 criminals. Prison conditions are characterized by
 overcrowding and sparse victualing--direct results of
 Senegal's serious economic difficulties. Harsh prison
 conditions are to some extent alleviated by the access to
 prisoners by clerics, friends, and families who are permitted
 to provide amenities.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The constitutional prohibition against arbitrary arrest or
 detention is respected in practice. Persons are not detained,
 punished, or tried for the expression of views critical or
 different from those of the Government. The Senegalese legal
 system is patterned after the French one and does not include
 habeas corpus. A person suspected of a crime may legally be
 held without charge for 48 hours after arrest, or up to 72
 hours if ordered by a public prosecutor. The limitations of
 this provision of law are respected, and charges are formally
 and clearly drawn. Preventive detention is permitted when
 civil authorities determine that there is a threat of civil
 disturbance or the person is a danger to himself or others.
 Some opposition party charges of abuse of the preventive
 detention provisions of the law were leveled following the
 December 1983 violent riots in Ziguinchor, the provincial
 capital of the Casamance. The opposition charged that some
 detainees, ultimately found to be innocent, were held for
 several months. The Government held that the violence was so
 serious and involved so many arrests that the legal processes
 may have taken longer than usual, but were strictly observed.
 By law every citizen has access to legal counsel of his choice
 in every aspect of legal procedure. In practice, persons with
 means will have private legal counsel, and the law makes
 provision for public defenders for those without means.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Senegal follows the French legal system. It has an active,
 independent, and well-trained judiciary. The judiciary is
 constitutionally independent of the executive, the
 legislature, and the military. Court officials are trained
 lawyers who have completed a number of years of required
 apprenticeship. Trials are open to the public, and defendants
 have the right to a defense counsel, many of whom are often
 very skilled and aggressive in the protection of their
 clients. Ordinary courts hold hearings which are presided
 over by a panel of judges and, in the case of criminal
 charges, include a jury. There are three other categories of
 courts: the High Court of Justice, the Security ('political')
 Court, and the military courts.
 The High Court of Justice was created for the sole purpose of
 trying high government officials for treason or for
 malfeasance. This court has not been convened since the early
 1970's. The Security (or 'political") Court consists of a
 judge and two assessors. It has jurisdiction over cases
 
 
 268
 SENEGAL
 referred to it by the Government when it is suspected that a
 crime has been committed for a political motive. The Court
 was activated following December 1982 demonstrations and riots
 in the Casamance provincial capital of Ziguinchor. The
 demonstrators' goal was the secession of the Casamance, and
 foreign instigation was a suspected factor. In December 1983,
 even more violent riots occurred, and over 100 arrests were
 made in Ziguinchor and the surrounding area. The security
 court released a large number of the arrestees on bail, or put
 them on probation, after both sets of incidents. Sentences
 passed on those judged guilty consisted of jail terms ranging
 from a few months to several years.
 The military court system has jurisdiction over offenses
 committed by members of the armed forces during peacetime (in
 wartime, courts martial could be convened). Civilians may not
 be tried by military courts.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Senegalese Government bureaucracy, patterned after the
 French system, is highly centralized and requires of
 Senegalese citizens a fairly extensive amount of documentation
 for purposes of education, obtaining social security benefits,
 etc. The intent, however, is not coercive and there is
 otherwise little governmental interference in the private
 lives of Senegalese citizens. There is no coercion to join a
 particular political party or to participate in political
 demonstrations. A wide variety of political expression is
 evident and not subject to government restrictions other than
 those relating to public order. There is no evident pattern
 of monitoring the private written or oral correspondence of
 Senegalese citizens. In the past, foreign publications
 containing materials considered slanderous to Senegalese
 officials have not been permitted to be sold, but there have
 been no reported instances of such bans since 1979. There are
 constitutional and legal safeguards against arbitrary invasion
 of the home which are considered inviolable. Search warrants
 are required and may be issued only by judges and in
 accordance with procedures established by law. There is no
 evidence that public security forces do not respect the law in
 this regard.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Senegal enjoys freedom of speech and press in theory and in
 practice. The Constitution guarantees the right of each
 individual to express and disseminate his opinions freely.
 There are several regularly published newspapers and magazines
 and a number of publications which appear sporadically,
 reflecting a broad range of opinion from religious-conservative
 to Marxist-Leninist. The country's most professional and
 informative newspaper is controlled by the majority Socialist
 Party and therefore tends to support government policies.
 Articles critical of government policies and officials,
 however, regularly appear even in this newspaper. Other
 publications are sometimes vociferously critical of the
 Government. Academic freedom is enjoyed without hindrance by
 the schools and the country's sole university.
 
 
 269
 SENEGAL
 Television and radio stations are owned by the Government;
 thus the Government can control what is broadcast. However,
 coverage is given to the activities of opposition political
 parties.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Senegalese freely and frequently exercise their constitutional
 right to assembly. Demonstrations or protest meetings against
 government policies are closely monitored by the security
 services to ensure that public order is not unreasonably
 disturbed. In late September 1984, the first known instance
 in recent years of government refusal to permit an assemblage
 by opposition political parties occurred in Dakar. A meeting
 called by seven extreme leftist parties to protest price rises
 on certain consumables was initially approved by the
 Government, but later cancelled.   The Government's action was
 legal, and the potential for disturbances existed, but it was
 highly unusual.
 Both the major trade union confederation, which is a
 governmental organization, and the small independent trade
 unions play an important role in the society and economy of
 Senegal. Trade unions are free to organize, negotiate, and
 strike; less than 25 percent of the labor force is organized.
 The trade union confederation is entitled, by law, to two
 ministerial posts, but no longer accepts these positions
 because of potential conflict of interest. In the past, the
 Government has used its connection with the confederation as a
 useful means of informing workers of government policies,
 gaining better understanding of worker grievances, and
 ensuring that strikes are legal and staged for significant
 reasons. Severe infighting between two rival factions of the
 confederation in 1984 did some damage to its relations with
 the Government and to the confederation's effectiveness with
 its membership. The smaller independent trade unions function
 freely without a direct government link. Union activity in
 Senegal has been mainly focused on economic and work-related
 issues.
 Economic concerns intensified in 1984 as wages remained
 relatively stagnant while prices continued to rise. The
 International Labor Organization maintains a regional office
 in Senegal.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Senegal is constitutionally a secular state, and freedom of
 religion is a legal right which exists in fact. Islam is the
 religion of upwards of 85 percent of the population. Other
 religions, primarily Catholicism, are freely practiced.
 Missionary activity is permitted, and foreign Protestant
 missionaries are active in several regions of the country.
 Conversion is permitted; there is no discrimination against
 minority religions; and adherence to a particular religion
 confers neither advantage nor disadvantage in civil,
 political, economic, military, or other secular status.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Senegalese Constitution states that all citizens of the
 republic have the right to move and establish themselves
 freely anywhere in Senegal, a right that is respected in
 
 
 SENEGAL
 practice. In 1981, the Government abolished a requirement for
 exit visas to travel outside Senegal. There is no restriction
 on emigration, or sanctions, official or otherwise, against
 intending emigrants. Repatriates are not officially
 disadvantaged on return to Senegal. The U.N. High
 Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) regional office in Dakar
 recognizes and assists about 5,000 persons as refugees. There
 have been no known cases of refugees being forced to return to
 countries from which they have fled or in which they fear
 persecution. Senegal is also host to 500,000-600,000 persons
 from Guinea and Guinea-Bissau, few of whom are recognized as
 refugees partly because of Senegal's desire to maintain good
 relations with its neighbors. UNHCR officials believe that
 many of the Guinean residents plan to return to Guinea since
 the change of regime there in 1984.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Senegal is a functioning multi-party democracy. There are
 currently 15 legally registered political parties, ranging
 from conservative to Marxist and Trotskyite. Presidential and
 parliamentary elections were last held in February 1983, and
 rural and municipal elections were held in late November
 1984. while there is a long tradition of democracy in
 Senegal, political life has been dominated by the Socialist
 Party throughout the post-independence period. This party won
 by a large majority in the 1983 elections amid some complaints
 by opposition parties of voting irregularities. While the
 consensus was that the elections were on the whole free and
 fair, the largest opposition party maintains that the lack of
 stricter controls on identification of voters and over voting
 sites made some of the results questionable.
 Senegal has universal suffrage. Women are active participants
 in the political process, and several parties, including the
 dominant Socialist Party, have sections promoting women's
 rights. There are 12 women deputies in the National Assembly
 and 4 women in President Diouf's cabinet.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Senegal is a leader among African countries in the
 establishment and promotion of international standards for
 human rights practices. It was the original sponsor of the
 Organization of African Unity (OAU) Human Rights Charter.
 Senegal is also an active member of the Human Rights
 Commission. Dakar is the headquarters of the African Bar
 Association's Institute of Human Rights, an organization which
 trains lawyers and judges in translating general human rights
 principles into practical judicial/legal procedures. Senegal
 hopes to host a second World Congress on Human Rights in Dakar
 in 1985. The preparatory committee is headed by a prominent
 Senegalese lawyer. Senegal has not been the subject of human
 rights investigations by outside organizations. Amnesty
 International did not include Senegal in its 1984 report.
 Freedom House rates Senegal 'partly free.'
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 During the past few years, Senegal has suffered significant
 economic reverses. The quality of life has been affected by
 
 
 271
 SENEGAL
 poor performance in the agricultural sector, which provides a
 livelihood for over 80 percent of Senegal's population, and a
 steady decline in the local currency's dollar value has
 directly affected the economy, despite only modest trade
 linkages with the U.S. Approximately 40 percent of Senegal's
 foreign debt and all of its oil and gas purchases are
 denominated in dollars. Payments on external debt and the
 energy import bill consume almost the entire amount of foreign
 currency earnings accumulated annually.
 In 1983, drought severely reduced yields of groundnuts
 (peanuts), Senegal's traditional major cash crop and foreign
 currency earner. Drought cut back subsistence crop production
 as well. In 1984, rains were inadequate in many regions of
 Senegal, and agricultural production was again low. The
 effects of the second bad harvest in two consecutive years are
 deeply felt by all Senegalese. Senegal's economic production
 also lags because of long-term deficiencies in the
 Government's agricultural policies, including its commodity
 pricing policy and a reliance on inefficient and ineffective
 state-owned rural development agencies. If population
 continues to grow at the annual rate of 3.2 percent (1984) and
 agricultural production stagnates or falls, the quality of
 life in Senegal will continue to deteriorate despite the heavy
 influx of foreign food aid assistance.
 An increase in crime resulting from depressed economic
 conditions could eventually degrade the climate of security
 based on respect for the law in which human rights have
 flourished in Senegal.
 Due to heavy public sector needs, credit facilities for the
 private sector are severely limited. After repeated
 rescheduling of foreign government and commercial debt,
 international sources of credit have also dried up. The
 Senegalese Government has remained solvent since 1980 through
 assistance from bilateral donors and the International
 Monetary Fund (IMF), and through debt rescheduling.
 The Government introduced austerity measures in August 1983,
 putting a halt to unrestrained budget increases, restricting
 credit, capping the growth of public sector employment, and
 reducing government agriculture sector subsidies and principal
 consumer commodity subsidies. Significant price increases for
 sugar, cooking oils, rice, and petroleum products occurred in
 1983. Cooking oil prices were increased again in 1984, this
 time by 50 percent, and petroleum prices rose. Following
 intensive negotiations with the IMF and a further increase in
 the price of rice, a new standby agreement became effective in
 January 1985. The belt-tightening measures are having a
 direct impact on the population at large, and have placed
 strains on the institutions which have enabled the Senegalese
 to enjoy broad exercise of their human rights. On the other
 hand, Senegal's economic progress in the two decades since
 independence has been sufficiently continuous to provide a
 certain assurance of stability within the country.
 World Bank statistics indicate Senegal provided 95 percent of
 the FAO-established minimum caloric requirement per capita in
 1977. The per capita GNP reached $486 in 1982. Senegal has a
 road and transportation network capable of quickly
 distributing imported food supplies in times of acute local
 shortage. Health conditions have also improved over the past
 decade. Over a third of Senegal's population now has access
 
 
 272
 SENEGAL
 to safe water. The number of physicians and nursing personnel
 per 100,000 population has doubled since 1960. Infant
 mortality has declined from 159 deaths per 1,000 in the first
 year of life in 1972 to 103 per 1,000 in 1984. Life
 expectancy at birth has risen from an estimated 40 years in
 1969 to 45 years in 1984. Due to reduced mortality rates and
 improvements in water supply systems and health care services,
 the population is increasing at a rapid pace, growing by an
 estimated 3.2 percent annual rate in 1984 to a total of over
 6.5 million people. This rapid growth poses a severe problem
 for already overloaded public services as surplus population
 migrates to the urban centers.
 The Government is continuing its efforts to increase
 enrollment in primary and secondary schools and find
 employment for school graduates. Almost 58 percent of primary
 school-aged males and 38 percent of females in the same age
 group are presently enrolled in primary education, and
 approximately 12 percent of secondary school-aged minors
 attend school. Adult illiteracy remains high, however,
 especially in the rural areas.
 Traditional values, both societal and religious (chiefly
 Islamic), have limited women's access to certain types of
 employment and higher education, thus inhibiting them from
 obtaining greater prominence in political life. There are,
 however, no legal hindrances to advancement for women and they
 are present in respectable numbers in the government and
 private sectors. Women are prominent among Senegal's
 intellectual elite, including several professors at the
 University of Dakar. A number of government ministries employ
 women in key positions such as the Political Director of the
 Ministry of Foreign Affairs; several key agronomists,
 statisticians, and economists in other ministries are women.
 Senegal also has several active organizations promoting
 women's rights, including the Federation of Women's
 Associations which held a two-week conference in March 1984.
 The Federation has ties to a number of women's groups in
 Africa and, since 1979, has been a sister organization of the
 National Council of Negro Women in the United States.
 
 
 273
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: SENEGAL
 1982     1983    1984
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...       30.9     33.1    51.2
 LOANS ..............       7.0      7.0     0.0
 GRANTS ......... ,...     23.9     26.1    51.2
 A.AID  .................      16.2     19.1    34.6
 LOANS ..............       0.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS .............      16.2     19.1     34.6
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSST.)...        0.0     5.0     10.0
 B.FOOO FOR PEACE .......      12.7     12.2     14.7
 LOANS ..............       7.0      7.0     0.0
 GRANTS .............       5.7      1.2     14.7
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........       7.0      7.0     0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....       7.0      7.0     0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....       0.0      0.0     0.0
 TITLE 11-TOTAL .........       5.7      5.2     14.7
 E.RELIEF.EC.OEV & WFP.        0.6      0.3     9.3
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....       5.1      4.9     5.4
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...        2.0      1.8      1.9
 LOANS ..............       0.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS .............       2.0      1.8      1.9
 PEACE CORPS ......       2.0      1.8      1.9
 NARCOTICS ........       0.0      0.0     0.0
 OTHER ............    . 0.0       0.0     0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        0.3     0.4      2.5
 LOANS ..............       0.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS .............       0.3      0.4      2.5
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........       0.0      0.0     2.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING....        0.0      0.0     0.0
 C.INTL MIL.E.TRNG....        0.3      0.4     0.5
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...        0.0      0.0     0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS .......        0.0      0.0     0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...       31.2     93.5    53.7
 LOANS ..............       7.0      7.0     0.0
 GRANTS .............      24.2     26.5     53.7
 OTHER US LOANS ..........       0.0      0.0     0.0
 EX-IN BANK LOANS .......       0.0      0.0     0.0
 ALL OTHER ..............       0.0      0.0     0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1982     1983    1984     1946-84
 ---------------------------------------------------------
 TOTAL ........    36.4    63.9     78.3    865.3
 IBRO              0.0      0.0      0.0    158.9
 IFC               0.0      0.0      3.2    36.0
 IDA               19.5    32.2     62.1    348.6
 1OB               0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0
 ADB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFDB               2.9    12.8     13.0     59.5
 UNOP               4.0     6.7      0.0     42.3
 OTHER-UN           0.0     1.2      0.0      7.4
 EEC              10.0     11.0      0.0    212.6
 
 
 274
