 SENEGAL
 Senegal is a republic with an elected president, unicameral
 legislature, and governmental institutions modeled on French
 lines. Although Senegal has 17 legal political parties, the
 Socialist Party has dominated the political scene and
 controlled the Government since independence from France in
 1960. Prime Minister Abdou Diouf automatically succeeded the
 retiring President Leopold Senghor in January 1981. Diouf was
 elected President in his own right in the regularly scheduled
 elections 2 years later, and his Socialist Party won ll of
 120 National Assembly seats. In the hotly contested
 presidential elections of February 1988 (the results of which
 continue to be disputed by the opposition), Diouf was declared
 reelected with 73 percent of the vote. In the concurrent
 National Assembly elections, the Socialist Party took 103
 seats and the opposition Senegalese Democratic Party (PDS) 17
 seats.
 The Senegalese armed forces (about 15,000 men, including the
 paramilitary gendarmerie) are a professional, disciplined
 organization which traditionally maintains an aloofness from
 .politics and is respected by the population. Due to
 heightened tensions with Mauritania, the armed forces assumed
 a higher profile in 1989, e.g., in restoring order in the
 Dakar area under the state of emergency declared in
 April-May., Civilian security forces are fairly well trained
 and generally respect the laws they enforce; those who do not
 face criminal prosecution.
 Senegal has a mixed economy with a substantial private
 sector. Since June 1983, Senegal has actively pursued a
 structural adjustment program, with the support of the
 International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, and major
 bilateral donors, designed to liberalize the economy and
 stimulate economic growth. There is concern, however, about
 the short-term political impact of the austerity reforms,
 particularly in Dakar, where high unemployment and
 deteriorating social conditions contributed to marked
 opposition gains and civil unrest in the 1988 elections. The
 economy remained fragile at Xhe end of 1989.
 Events in 1989 subjected Senegal's democracy and its generally
 creditable human rights record to its most sustained test
 since independence, particularly the mass violence against
 ethnic Maurs origin. Strikes plagued the edycation sector
 during the first quarter of the year. The leader of the
 Senegalese Democratic Party, Secretary General Abdoulaye Wade,
 returned to Senegal in March after a long absence abroad.
 Wade, who disputes the legality of President Diouf's
 reelection in 1988, held party rallies and called for mass-
 antigovernment demonstrations, which wpre promptly banned by
 the authorities. Some demonstrators turned out anyway, and
 street violence and vandalism broke out in Dakar on March 14
 and on National Day, April 4. Subsequently, touched off by a
 fatal border shooting on April 9, there were several waves of
 violence directed against Mauritanians resident in Senegal and
 the declaration of .a state of emergency. The violence
 resulted in scores dead in Senegal (and a similar rash of
 killings in Mauritania), the destruction of the greater part
 of Senegal's Maur-dominated small retail trade sector, a
 massive- repatriation of populations by both countries, and
 both armies arrayed along their 500-mile border. Differences
 with other neighbors--a maritime border dispute with
 Guinea-Bissau and the breakup of the confederation with The
 Gambia--further raised the political temperature.
 
 
 298
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There was no evidence of any killings for political motives.
 However, government actions in both Senegal and Mauritania
 fueled the April unrest involving citizens of both countries.
 Senegalese authorities were slow to comprehend the scale of
 the violence directed against Maurs and their property. There
 has been no definitive public accounting of casualties, but
 senior Ministry of Justice officials estimated the number of
 dead at 80. Order was not restored until the army was called
 out, and a state of emergency imposed in the Dakar region.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Government and police officials in Senegal generally respect
 the section of the Criminal Code prohibiting physical abuse.
 Nevertheless, there are periodic accounts of occasional abuse
 (including beatings and denial of food, water, and clothing to
 prisoners) under interrogation during the period of custody
 ("guard a vue") between arrest and appearance before a
 magistrate.
 Amnesty International (AI), with the consent of the
 Government, sent a team to Senegal in October to discuss
 charges of alleged torture of suspected Casamance separatists
 during the period 1982-1988. The Government refused to accept
 the delegation's suggestion that a special committee be
 established to investigate human rights abuses, saying that
 existing legal mechanisms were sufficient. The Government,
 however, publicly reaffirmed its opposition to torture and
 promised to improve oversight procedures in the courts and
 security forces to prevent abuses. AI's 1989 report notes
 that ill-treatment of prisoners by police in 1988 resulted in
 at least one death.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The -constitutional prohibition against arbitrary arrest or
 detention is generally respected in practice. The Senegalese
 legal system is patterned after the French. A person
 suspected of a crime may be legally held without charge for 48
 hours after arrest and may be held up to 72 hours if ordered
 by a public prosecutor. In fact this period of detention,
 during which the prisoner has no access to family or attorney,
 may be much longer.
 Temporary detention or custody is permitted when civil
 authorities determine that there is a threat of civil
 disturbance or that a person is a threat to himself or
 others. Temporary custody is valid for a maximum period of 6
 months, but it may be renewed for additional 6-month periods
 if the investigating magistrate certifies that this time is
 required to complete the investigation. There is no limit to
 the number of times it may be renewed. These laws are
 generally respected by law enforcement officials, and charges
 
 
 299
 are formally and clearly drawn. By law, every person has
 access to legal counsel during every step of the legal process
 from the time his case is presented to a magistrate. Persons
 with means will have private attorneys. The court may appoint
 public defenders for indigents charged with felonies; in
 practice, however this rarely happens. The Association of
 Young Senegalese Attorneys provides free legal counsel to
 accused indigents.
 During the state of emergency from April 28 to May 19, the
 Government had the authority to order house arrests and
 administrative internment for up to 2 months and to hold
 suspects for up to 8 days before charging them. However, with
 the exception of the curfew, no extraordinary powers were
 exercised, and such arrests as were made (all for crimes
 against property) were under the ordinary penal code.
 However, the Government used its detention and other legal
 powers broadly in 1988 and 1989 to strike at critics,
 including journalists (see Section 2.a.). In judicial cases
 which are tried before the State Security Court, 23 persons
 remained under indictment for membership in an illegal
 organization, the Movement of Democratic Forces of the
 Casamance (MFDC), which advocates violent means to secure the
 independence of. Senegalls southernmost region. All but five
 of these were free at year's end while awaiting trial; those
 still incarcerated are also accused of plotting against the
 security of the state. The five were arrested after having
 tried to solicit money and arms from Guinea-Bissau security
 officials to support guerrilla operations in the Casamance.
 Three men remained in detention awaiting trial for involvement
 in the fire-bombing of an official vehicle, allegedly for
 political motives, in December 1988. Seven members of the
 opposition PDS also were arrested, on the basis of an
 anonymous tip, in connection with the same incident. They
 soon were granted provisional liberty, and, although charges
 had not been formally dropped, the case appeared to be
 inactive at the end of 1989. In addition, 11 Maurs were being
 held at the end of 1989 for alleged espionage.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Senegal has an active and well-trained judiciary, which is
 constitutionally independent of the executive, the
 legislature, and the armed forces. Court officials are
 lawyers who have completed a number of years of required
 apprenticeship. Trials are public, and defendants have the
 right to a defense attorney from the time the case is
 presented before an examining magistrate. Ordinary courts are
 presided over by a panel of judges which in criminal cases
 includes a panel of citizens as a form of jury. Magistrates
 are appointed by decree and in principle are not subject to
 government supervision; however, low pay, poor working
 conditions, and family and political ties may make magistrates
 vulnerable to gutside pressures.
 There are four categories of special courts: the High Court
 of Justice, the State Security Court, the Court for the
 Repression of the Unlawful Accumulation of Wealth, and the
 military courts. The High Court of Justice, created for the
 sole purpose of trying high government officials for treason
 or malfeasance, has never met. The State Security Court,
 consisting of a judge and two assessors, has jurisdiction over
 cases involving politically motivated crimes. The "illegal
 enrichment" Court, which has only judged three cases since it
 
 
 300
 SEEAL
 was created in 1981, it not presently active. The military
 court system has jurisdiction over offenses committed by
 members of the armed forces during peacetime. Civilians may
 not be tried by military courts.
 There were no reports of political prisoners in Senegal at the
 end of 1989. However, a military Board of Enquiry in April
 1989 disciplined three officers, including the former armed
 forces chief of staff, for allegedly plotting a coup durihg
 the turbulent events surrounding the 1988 elections. Early in
 1989, the Government indicated its intention to appeal a
 judge's dacision of November 1988 in Louga which dismissed
 charges against members of two opposition political parties
 for unlawful assembly and inciting a riot; no appeal, however,
 had been entered at the end of 1989.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 There is relatively little government interference in the
 private lives of Senegalese citizens, particularly in rural
 areas. There are constitutional safeguards against arbitrary
 invasion of the home. Search warrants are required and under
 normal circumstances may be issued only by judges and in
 accordance with procedures established by law. In practice,
 searches without warrants occasionally take place. There is
 no evident pattern of monitoring the private written or oral
 communications of Senegalese citizens. There are reports,
 however, of active supporters of the political opposition
 being subject to wiretaps, unusually close scrutiny of tax
 records, and other forms of petty harassment.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and press is protected in the Constitution
 and is generally respected in practice. Subject to
 restrictions relating to public order, a wide variety of
 political expression is possible. While Senegal's only daily
 newspaper is controlled by the ruling Socialist Party, there
 are many regularly published magazines and newspapers
 reflecting a broad range of political opinion from
 conservative to Marxist. The independent press often breaks
 stories ignored by the establishment daily newspaper (e.g.,
 the trial of military officers accused of planning a coup
 d'etat) and the opposition newspaper, Sopi, regularly
 denounces the Government as illegitimate and calls on
 President Diouf to resign.
 Notwithstanding this diversity, the official media (including
 the government-controlled radio, which is by far the most
 important medium of news dissemination), are subject to
 controls over their news coverage. Activities of the ruling
 party are always covered, while the opposition parties are
 mentioned only occasionally and selectively, e.g., communiques
 are not read in their entirety, or certain factions are
 excluded in favor of others less hostile to the Government.
 More equitable access to the media emerged as a principal
 opposition demand during and after the 1988 elections. The
 National Assembly in October enacted a new law, which must
 still be implemented by decree, regulating access to
 television and radio by "regularly constituted political
 parties." It is not yet clear whether the law will result in
 more transmision and air time to the Government's opponents.
 
 
</pre>
<pre>
 301
 SENEGAL.
 There are laws prohibiting personal attacks against the Chief
 of State or the institutions of the Republic, and a 1965 law
 prohibiting the dissemination of "false news" has been
 criticized for having a possible chilling effect on
 journalists. The Government used these legal powers in 1989.
 A university professor, who wrote an article in an independent
 newspaper on January 5, 1989, on the Senegalese police strike
 of 1987, was threatened with charges that he tried to
 discredit the-institutions of Senegal; the case was dropped by
 the end-of the same month. The publication director for Sopi
 was convicted on December 16 of spreading false news and
 discrediting public institutions. The charges arose from an
 article-he.had written in .the ppring claiming that agents of
 the Government had'falsified the 1988 presidential election
 returns--certified as authentic by the Supreme Court--and
 publishing what were purported to be the true figures, showing
 PDS candidate Wade a clear winner. The director appealed the
 verdict and was released from custody until the appeal is
 heard. On September 12 and 13, four Sopi journalists and the
 chairman of the PDS parliamentary delegation were indicted for
 a series of Sopi articles attacking a' senior member of the
 Government and exposing alleged equipment deficiencies in the
 armed forces. Immediately after charges were filed, all were
 granted conditional liberty (requiring the accused to keep the
 authorities advised of their whereabouts). The cases were
 still pending at year's end.
 Publishers are required to register with the Central Court
 prior to starting publication, but such registrations are
 routinely approved. Publications, including foreign
 publications, are almost never censored or banned in Senegal.
 An exception occurred in February 1989 when Salman Rushdie's
 "Satanic Verses" was banned. The action came after the
 Organization of Islamic Conference (of which Senegal is a
 member) called on member states to ban the book and all others
 published by Viking/Penguin until the publishers withdrew the
 offending title. However, no other Viking/Penguin books were
 withdrawn, and foreign periodicals reporting on the Rushdie
 affair and quoting the book's controversial passages continued
 to circulate freely in Senegal.
 In general, academic freedom is enjoyed by the schools and
 Senegal's sole university.
 A National Commission reviews all films prior to public
 showing. Movies deemed offensive to Senegalese moral
 sensibilities are censored or banned. No instances are known
 of films being banned because of offensive political content.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 In general, Senegalese freely exercise their constitutional
 rights of assembly and association. However, prior
 authorization for public demonstrations is required, and
 demonstrations, or protest meetings against government policies
 are closely monitored by security services. The Ministry of
 Interior refused permission for the opposition PDS to hold
 mass demonstrations in Dakar March 14 and April 4 (National
 Day) on the grounds that public safety-was threatened by the
 vandalism and random street violence which increasingly has
 accompanied such political demonstrations. Senegalese wishing
 to form associations must register them with the Ministry of
 Interior (except for business-related associations, which are
 registered with the Ministry of Commerce). By law and in
 practice, the Ministry is obliged to register such groups, so
 
 
 302
 long as the objectives of association are clearly stated and
 not in violation of the law.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Senegal is constitutionally a secular state, and freedom of
 religion is a legal right which exists in practice. Islam is
 the religion of over 85 percent of the population, but no
 attempt has been made by the Government to introduce Shari'a
 (Islamic) law. Other religions, the major one of which is
 Roman Catholicism, are freely practiced. Missionary activity
 is permitted, and foreign Protestant missionaries are active
 in several regions of the country. Conversion is permitted,
 and there is no discrimination against minority religions.
 Adherence to a particular religion confers no official
 advantage or disadvantage in civil, political, economic,
 military, or other sectors. Both Islamic and Christian
 organizations publish periodicals. Koranic and Catholic
 schools exist alongside the public schools system, and the
 Mouride Brotherhood is constructing an Islamic University in
 its headquarters city of Touba.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Constitution states that all citizens have the right to
 move and establish themselves freely anywhere in Senegal, a
 right that is respected in practice. Exit visas are not
 required for travel outside the country. There is no
 restriction on emigration, and repatriates are not officially
 disadvantaged on return to Senegal. A nighttime curfew was
 imposed throughout the Dakar region during the state of
 emergency which lasted from April 28 to May 19. A Senegalese
 citizen by birth may not have his citizenship annulled for any
 reason. A naturalized citizen may have his citizenship
 revoked if it is proved in a court of law that he obtained his
 citizenship fraudulently or--if he has been a citizen less
 than 15 years--if convicted of a crime.
 Although Senegal's tolerant political and economic environment
 has att-racted Africans from other countries, Senegal has
 -hosted few official refugees. According to the United Nations
 -High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), there were less than
 .200 registered and assisted refugees in the country at the
 beginning of 1989. However, in 1989 the refugee/displaced
 person situation changed dramatically with the ethnic violence
 .which erupted in Senegal and Mauritania in April and May.
 Unable initially to protect Maurs resident in Senegal, the
 'Government--in agreement with the Government of
 Mauritania--began repatriating many of them by air and by
 land; and eventually some 100,000 persons were returned to
 Mauritania. Many of these lost their property in Senegal, and
 some were stripped of personal belongings and papers by
 Senegalese authorities--allegedly in retaliation for similar
 treatment dealt to Senegalese departing Mauritania. Prior to
 the unrest, some estimates placed the-number of Mauritanians
 living in Senegal at 300,000, although no firm figures are
 available.
 These civil disturbances in turn led to a massive return to
 Senegal of persons from Mauritania.. By September
 approximately 90,000 Senegalese, mostly skilled and
 
 
 S03
 SENEGAL
 semiskilled workers and fishermen, had been repatriated from
 Mauritania. In addition, some 44,000 black African
 Mauritanian citizens and 16,000 Senegalese uprooted from their
 traditional homes on the right (Mauritania) bank of the
 Senegal River had taken refuge in Senegal. Some had been
 forcibly expelled from Mauritania, while others fled a
 climate of intimidation and violence. Almost overnight,
 Senegal faced a massive and unanticipated refugee/displaced
 persons problem, but by.,the end of 1989 most of th6 90,000
 repatriated Senegalese had been absorbed into.their families
 and communities throughout the country, although their
 integration into Senegal's fragile economy remained a serious
 problem. In contrast, the 60,000 Mauritanian and Senegalese
 uprooted'from their communities in Mauritania have been
 sheltered in refugee camps and in Senegalese villages  near the
 river frontier. For the most part the Senegalese, working
 with the UNHCR and other international agencies,
 organizations, and doior countries, have been generous in
 assisting these refugee/displaced persons, many of whom have
 strong ethnic and family ties in Senegal.
 There ;were no known instances'of refugees or displaced persons
 being refused entry into Senegal or forcibly returned to
 Mauritania. However, the Government admitted that some
 Senegalese citizens might have been inadvertently transferred
 to Mauritania during the exchange of populations and has said
 Senegal will take back any citizens who wish to return.
 According to UNHCR estimates, up to 22,000 Senegalese citizens
 may havO'been'among those transferred to Mauritania. The
 Mauritanian GQveinmen claims that upwards of..200,000 'of its
 citizens are still being held hostage in Senegal. The
 Senegalese Governd'ent disputes this charge. However, a
 mechanisdfor identifying such Mauritanians in Senegal and
 Senegalese.Among the displaced population in Mauritania and
 facilitatieg their return to Mauritania and Senegal had not
 been established by year's end.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Senegal is a functioning multiparty democracy, but the
 legitimac of its 1988 election results was sharply challenged
 by the opposition. The Socialist Party has dominated
 Senegalese political life since independence. Presidential
 and legislative elections, with universal suffrage for all
 citizens over 21, are held concurrently every 5 years.
 Following the 1988 elections, opposition leaders claimed
 widespread fraud and continued in 1989 to dispute publicly the
 legitimacy of the announced results. Sixteen of the 17
 elected opposition deputies did take their seats in the
 National Assembly and participated in parliamentary
 activities. Opposition leaders demand electoral reforms,
 including a tightening of the voter identification card system
 and protection of the' scret ballot. Legislation along these
 lines was enacted by the National Assembly in October. The
 new electoral law failed to address the opposition demand for
 a neutral national commission to supervise elections, a task
 now carried out by civil servants and the Supreme Court.
 
 
 SENEGAL
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental-Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government allows human rights groups such as Amnesty
 International to investigate allegations concerning human
 rights abuses in Senegal and responds to requests for
 information about those allegations. The�ICRC, with the
 approval of the Government, opened an office in Dakar in May
 1989 with a mandate to monitor prisoner conditions.
 Senegal is a leader among African countries in the promotion
 of international standards for human rights practices. For
 example, it sponsored the African Charter on Human and
 People's Rights of the OAU and was a founder of the OAU's
 African Human Rights Commission in 1987. Its officials serve
 in a variety of.pertinent bodies-; its representative was
 chairman of-the U.N. Human Rights Commission in 1988 and
 played a key role in organizing and leading a mission to
 inyestigate the human rights situation in Cuba. Dakar is the
 headquarters of several institutions which foster human rights
 and democratic pluralism in Africa and frequently is the site
 of conferences related to human rights.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 While -fficially there is no discrimination inSenegal based
 on race, religion, or language, the country is predominantly
 Muslim, and Islamic customs, including polygamy and the rules
 of inheritance, generally prevail, especially in the rural
 areas. Article 7 of the Constitution states, "men and women
 shall be equal in law." The status of women has steadily
 improved under government encouragement and through increased
 educational opportunities. Modifications of the family code
 adopted by the National Assembly in 1988 reinforced women's
 rights to divorce, alimony, and child support.
 However, Islamic and Senegalese customs persist, and women are
 still confined largely to traditional roles, notably in the
 large subsistence agricultural sector. Women usually marry
 young (the majority by age 16), average about 7 live births,
 and die relatively young. Sixty-seven percent of women aged
 40 to 45 live in polygamous unions.
 Violence against women, usually wife beating, occurs,
 particularly in rural areas, but there are no accurate
 statistics, and the extent of the problem is not known.
 Police do not normally intervene in domestic disputes, and
 women are reluctant to go outside the family for redress.
 Infibulation, the most severe and dangerous form of female
 genital mutilation, frequently is performed on girls aged 10
 to 14 in the Fleuve, Casamance, and Senegal Oriental regions;
 the practice is deeply rooted in ethnic tradition and cuts
 across religious lines. There are no laws or regulations
 prohibiting this practice. However, the Minister of Social
 Development (a female dentist) has taken a personal interest
 in the issue and has formed a group to study the practice and
 warn village women of its hazards. The semiofficial daily
 newspaper Le Soleil carried a lengthy World Health
 Organization report in December about the harmful physical and
 psychologicial effects of excision and infibulation.
 
 
 .305
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 A minimum of seven people, each having worked within their
 profession for at least 1 year, are free to form a union by
 submitting a list of members and a charter to the Ministry of
 Interior. A union can be disbanded by the Ministry if the
 union's activities deviate from the charter. Even though they
 represent a small percentage of the overall population, unions
 wield a significant amount of political influence, primarily
 because of their ability to disrupt essential services.
 At least 75 percent of the working population are engaged in
 rural dctivities such as cultivation, herding, and fishing.
 There are approximately 323,000 workers in the fcrmal wage
 sector, of which approximately 100,000 belong to various
 unions. Of these, approximately 70,000 workers in 61 unions
 belong to the National Confederation of Senegalese Workers
 (CNTS), which is affiliated with the ruling Socialist Party.
 Although the CNTS was established in 1969 as the sole trade
 union central, with affiliation to the sole legal party,
 political and trade union pluralism was reestablished after
 1976. The principal rival organization to the CNTS is known
 as the.pemocratic- Union of Senegalese Workers (UDTS) and
 various independent unions exist in health, education, and
 transportation sectors.
 While ostensibly an independent umbrella organization, the
 CNTS has supported government policies. During 1969 strains
 developed in this relationship, and the CNTS leadership has
 publicly opposed government policies on structural adjustment,
 modification of the labor code, and liberalization of the
 economy. Although CNTS remains Senegal's largest and most
 powerful labor confederation, it faces increased competition
 from independent unions.-
 Unions have the right to strike, and 1988/1989 saw strikes by
 the teacher/professor, electrical, banking, and health worker
 unions which were resolved in bargaining with the Government.
 Senegalese unions are active in international labor
 organizations. The CNTS and the small Union of Free Workers
 of Senegal (UTLS) belong to the Organization of African Trade
 .Union Unity. The UTLS is also listed as an affiliate of the
 communist-controlled WFTU.
 For several years the Committee of Experts of the
 International Labor Organization has requested an amendment to
 the Senegalese law covering seditious associations to ensure
 that the Government cannot dissolve a trade union which it
 regards as disrupting the constitutional order by unlawful
 means.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Senegalese unions have the right by law to organize and to
 bargain collectively, and these rights are protected in
 practice. There are no known instances of workers being
 forcibly discouraged from exercising these rights. In recent
 years, as the economic situation worsened and factories and
 businesses closed down, collective bargaining has succeeded in
 several instances in ensuring extended benefits for laid-off
 workers, e.g., the airline workers' union in negotiations with
 the Government and the new management of Air Afrique
 
 
 306
 SEEAL
 respectively. The CNTS has been a major force in pressuring
 employers and the Government to establish regulations and
 guidelines for the well-being of workers. The Government will
 intervene in labor/management disputes when requested and
 plays a mediation and arbitration role in private and
 state-enterprise sectors.
 An export free zone exists in Dakar into which goods may be
 imported for manufacture and reexported without payment of
 duty. Senegalese labor laws apply uniformly throughout the
 country, including in this zone.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 There were no reports of forced labor in Senegal, which is
 prohibited by law.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The minimum age for employment in Senegal is 16 for
 apprenticeships and 18 for all other types of work. These
 restrictions are closely monitored and strictly enforced
 within the formal wage sector, that is, the area of the
 economy over which the Government can exercise some
 supervision such as state agencies, large private enterprises,
 or farmers gathered into cooperatives. On the other hand,
 children under 16 are employed in the traditional sector, and
 minimum age and other workplace regulations on family farms in
 rural areas and in small, privately owned businesses are not
 seriously enforced.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The CNTS has been very successful, within the formal economic
 sectorpin obtaining acceptable conditions of work, including
 standard workweeks (40 to 48 hours per week for most
 professions), holiday/annual leave benefits (usually 1 month
 per year), and a variety of health and safety regulations.
 These regulations are incorporated into the Labor Code
 approved by the National Assembly and are supervised by
 Ministry of Labor inspectors. Enforcement, however, appears
 to be uneven, especially outside the formal wage sector.
 Recent CNTS efforts have concentrated on raising the minimum
 wage, currently approximately $0.82 an hour, which, according
 to Senegalese unions, is not considered sufficient to maintain
 a decent standard of living. Workers must frequently
 supplement incomes through second jobs and reliance on the
 extended family.
 
 
 307
