 SENEGAL
 Senegal is a republic with an elected president and a unicameral legislature.
 There are 20 legal political parties, although the Socialist Party (PS) has dominated
 politics and controlled the Government since independence from France in 1960.
 B    a's elected National Assembly generally does not act on its own and almost
 always follows instructions dictated to it by the President. Of the National Assem-
 bly's 120 seats, the governing PS holds 107. Abdou Diouf, who has been President
 since 1981, was declared reelected with 73 percent of the vote in the hotly contested
 elections of 1988 (the results of which have been disputed cntinuallyby the main
 opposition party). In April 1991, two oposition parties joined the Government to
 form the "enargd p resldential majority. This Government remained in p lace until
 August 1992. Presidential elections are scheduled for February 1993, and  alative
 elections for May 1993. The 1993 elections will be the first test of Senegal's new
 electoral code which was revised in 1991.
 The Senegalese armed forces (about 19,000 men) is a professional, disciplined or-
 ganization which traditionally remains aloof from politics and is respected by the
 population. Theparamilitry gendarmerie, included in the 19,000, is less profes-
 sional and less disciplined. In early 1992, Senegal sent 1,500 troops to Liberia as
 part of a combined pacekeeping force of the Economic Community of West African
 States (ECOWAS). In August the army and gendarmeries were redeployed in the
 Casamance region in an attempt to end the volence attributed to bandits and the
 two factions ofa proindependence rebel movement known as the Democratic Forces
 of the Casamance (MFDC). Total military expenditures for 1989, the last year for
 which the US. Arms Control and Disarmament Agen" conducted a detailed analy-
 sis, were $90 million. There is no indication that eforts will be made to reduce
 these expenditures in the near future. In over 77 incidents reportedly involving the
 MFDC, at least 174 people have been killed, and an unknown number of people in-
 jured. Additionally the banditry and violence caused roughly 12,000 people to take
 refuge in Guinea-Bissau and 3,000 in The Gambia. In general civilian security
 forces are considered fairly well trained and usually resvect the laws they enforce.
 
 
 218
 Senegal has a mixed economy; it is overwhelmingly agricultural, with more than
 70 percent of the labor force engaged in farming, largely in peanut production. Since
 1953 Senegal has pursued a structural adjustment progran, supported by the Inter-
 national Monetary Fund, the World Bank, and major bilateral donors, and intended
 to reduce the role of government, encourage the private sector, and stimulate eco-
 nomic growth. The economy remains fragile.
 For fear of breaking the May 1991 cease-fire agreement the Government made
 no attempt to stop the lawlessness reportedly caused by MFDC elements and ban-
 dits in the Casamance during the first half of 1992. The MFDC and marauding ban-
 dits reportedly were responsible for torture, beatings, and extrajudicial killing of vil-
 lagers in the Casamance. In many instances, it was impossible to determine wheth-
 er factions of the MFDC or bandits committed acts of violence. In some cases, ban-
 dits claimed they were acting on behalf of the MFDC. When gendarme and army
 elements finally were redeployed in August, they were unable to stop rebel attacks
 on civilians. The army and gendarmerie killed civilians through indiscriminate
 shelling and burning of villages thought to harbor MFDC rebels. Other human
 rights problems include certain restrictions on freedom of the press and domestic
 violence against women.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-See Section 1.g. for details on
 killings connected with separatist-related violence in the Casamance. At least five
 people were killed in interparty violence between different factions of the ruling So-
 cialist Party. To date, no charges have been brought in the December 1991 killing
 of two Socialist Party figures in the Casamance in what appeared to be assassina-
 tions.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 However one independent newspaper on September 18 carried an account of the
 aftermath of the battle between the army and MFDC rebels at Kaguite which said
 that two men, Ibou Sagna (age 50) and Famara Bodian (age 24), disappeared after
 being detained by the army. There has been no further information on this incident.
 The press also reported that Djamil Sane, a local religious leader, was kidnaped
 by rebels on December 23 and has not been heard from since.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or De.rading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The authorities generally respect the legal prohibition on physica abuse, but detain-
 ees reportedly are sometimes subjecte[ to mistreatment, often during the "garde a
 vue" (detention) period between arrest and appearance before a magistrate. This
 abuse often consists of beatings and denial of food, water, and clothing to prisoners.
 Senegalese army forces in the Casamance abducted a Gambian gendarme, brought
 him into Senegal, and beat him. This was in retaliation for a similar action by Gan-
 bians in the Casarnance area. The Senegalese army headquarters admitted that the
 action took place and that it was sanctioned by the southern zone commander. No
 disciplinary action was taken.
 There were at least 14 credible reports of torture by factions of the MFDC. These
 usually consisted of beatings with sticks, gun butts, and bicycle chains and resulted
 in several deaths. Some of the MFDC violence was aimed at those carrying out elec-
 toral activities. In one incident, members of a faction of the MFDC rebel group alleg-
 edly cut off an ear of the president of a rural community. Torture was a regular
 feature of village raids conducted by rebels to obtain supplies, recruits, women, and
 allegiance for their cause. In the first half of the year, women reportedly were fre-
 quently raped in MFDC attacks on villages. According to government officials, it
 was the widespread rebel practice of rape that led villagers to retaliate violently
 against factions of the MFDC In May and June 1992 (see Section 1.g.).
 Some violence in the Casamance was attributable to interethnic conflicts designed
 to frighten non-Diola ethniq groups out of the region. On one occasion in August
 which received wide publicity, three members of a minority ethnic goup had both
 hands cut off, allegedly by the MFDC, and one man died when nails were driven
 into his head. In the northern Casamance interethnic torture was usually under-
 taken to frighten people off arable land and resulted in hundreds of refugees fleeing
 to The Gambia.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution prohibits arbitrary ar-
 rest and detention, and in practice, this generally is respected. Warrants, issued by
 judges, are required for arrests. A person suspected of a crime may legally be held
 without charge for 48 hours after arrest and may be held up to 72 hours if ordered
 by a public prosecutor, this period may be doubled legally in the case of crimes
 against the security of the State.
 
 
 During temporary detention, the prisoner has no access to family or attorney; but
 after a charge is lodged, both family and attorney may visit. Extended temporary"
 detention or custody is permitted when civil authorities determine that there is a
 threat of civil unrest or that a person is a threat to himself or others. Courts may
 review decisions of extended detention or custody. Temporary custody is valid for
 a maximum period of 6 months, but it may be renewed for additional 6-month peri-
 ode if the investigating magistrate certifies that more time is required to complete
 the investigation. There is no limit to the number of times temporary detention can
 be extended.. Arrest and detention laws generally are respected by enforcement offi-
 cials in ordinary cases.
 Exile is not used as a means of political control.
 e. Denia ofFair Public Ta.--Senegal has an active and welltrained judiciary,
 which is constitutionally independent of the executive, the legislature, and the
 armed forces. Court officials are lawyers who have completed several years of re-
 quired apprenticship. Defendants are presumed innocent until proven guilty. Trials
 are public, and defendants have the right to a defense attorney from the time the
 case is p resented before an examining magistrate. Despite a provision for defend-
 ants to have a lawyer at public expense, lack of government funds causes defend-
 ants without means to go to court unrepresented. Defendants have the right to be
 present in court, to confront witnesses and to present evidence.
 Ordinary courts are presided over by a panel of judges which in criminal cases
 includes citizen members. Magistrates are appointed by decree and in principle are
 not subject to government or political intervention; however, low pay, oor working
 conditions, and family and political ties make magistrates vulnerable to outside
 pressures. In May 1992, the National Assembly, in accordance with Senegarls new
 election code, abolished the Supreme Court and replaced it with three separate
 courts: the Council of State for Administrative Questions, a Constitutional Council
 for matters relating to the Constitution, and a Court of Appeals. The judicial re-
 forms also eliminated the State Security Court, which had jurisdiction over politi-
 cally motivated crimes, including those of Casamance separatists.
 There are three other categories of seal courts: the High Court of Justice, the
 Court for the Repression of the Unlawfil Accumulation of Wealth, and the military
 court systm. The High Court of Justice, created for the sole purpose of tryng sen-
 ior government officials for treason or malfeasance, has never met. The aillegal en-
 richnent Court, which has judged only three cases since it was created in 1981,
 is not currently active. The military court system has jurisdiction over offenses com-
 mitted by members of the armed forces during peace time. Civilians may not be
 tried by military courts. The right of appeal exists in all courts except military
 courts and that concerned with illegal enrichment. There were no political pris-
 oners at the end of 1992.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution prohibits arbitrary invasion of the home, and there is relatively little
 government interference in the private lives of Senegalese citizens, particularly in
 rural areas. Search warrants normally are required and may be issued only by
 judges and in accordance with procedures established by law. In practice, however,
 searches without warrants occasionally take place.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 licts.-In October and November, the   and gendarmerie shelled several south-
 ern Casamance villages suspected of harboring eaDC rebels. Several redible re-
 ports said that children and civilian adults were killed and injured in these attacks.
 A school near Oussuye in the Southeast was destroyed by the shelling. Other re-
 ports said that the army killed civilians in its assaut on Kaguite on September 1.
 There were several reports in 1992 of extrajudicial killings by factions of the
 MFDC of villagers who refused to provide food and sup plies. Although it was dif-
 ficult to veriy the reports, MFDC rebels allegedly killed 68 civilians in 1992. At-
 tacks on the Casamance villages of Tambacounda, Counbanaou, Tankoro, Kaur, Cap
 Skirring and Pointe Saint George were almost certainly carried out by the MDC.
 In May, Casamance villagers began retaliating against the attacks, and in incidents
 at Kabadio, Kangoudi, Tankoro, and Kaur, at least 42 rebels or bandits were killed.
 No one has been charged in any of the above killings. The biggest attack came on
 October 26, when men presumed to belong to one faction of the MFDC attacked and
 burned the fishing village of Cap Skirring, killing 31 people singled out as not being
 from the Diola ethnic group.Most  FDC suppoe     are Diola, the major ethnic
 rup in the Casamane. n a similar attack onon the village of
 Pointe Saint George, presumed MFDC rebels killed eight people identified as not
 being Diola.
 
 
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Freedom of speech and press are protected in
 the Constitution, although journalists' activities are circumscribed by legal restric-
 tions against expressing views which discredit the State, incite the population to
 disorder, or disseminate "false news." While Senegal's only daily newspaper is con-
 trolled by the ruling Socialist Party, its coverage of the activities of opposition par-
 ties expanded considerably in 1991 and has developed into almost daily news cov-
 erage in 1992. A broad spectrum of thought and opinion from conservatism to Marx-
 ism is widely available through regularly published magazines and weekly news-
 papers. The wide variety of political views expressed in the independent press is
 often critical of the Government and its programs; government officials, politicians,
 and the political parties participating in the Government are not immune. Publish-
 er are required to register with the Central Court prior to starting publication, but
 such registrations are routinely approved. Publications, including foreign publica-
 tions critical of the Government, are rarely censored or banned in Senegal.
 More equitable access to the electronic media emerged as a principal opposition
 demand during and after the 1988 elections. In April 1991, a National Advisory
 Commission for Broadcasting was established to oversee radio and television cov-
 erage of political party activities. At the same time, two opposition political parties
 formally joined the Government. Since then, news coverage of political parties both
 within and outside of the "enlarged" Government has continued to expand however,
 the only direct access given in the electronic media to political parties has been brief
 periods divided among all parties once a week in off-peak hours. Liberalization of
 the state-controlled broadcast media included changes in the statutes governing tel-
 evision, altering television's status as a government entity and providing somewhat
 greater managerial independence. Direct competition with the government-con-
 trolled Senegaese broadcast media continues to grow. Both Radio France Inter-
 national and~frica Number One started retransmitting their shortwave broadcasts
 on FM frequencies in Dakar in 1992.
 While the independent press reports fully on events in Casamance, there is a de
 facto blackout of such news in the Government press.
 Schools and universities enjoy academic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Assoiation-In general, Senegalese freely
 exercise their constitutional rights of assembly and association, although demonstra-
 tions or protest meetings against government policies are monitored closely by secu-
 rity services. Prior authorization Yor public demonstrations is required. There were
 three attempted political demonstrations in 1992, and all were denied permission
 to be held: the And-Jef Party wanted to demonstrate against creating a vice presi-
 dential position and against changes in the Supreme Court, and a group of opposi-
 tion parties wanted to demonstrate in solidarity with striking students.
 Senegalese wishing to form associations must register with the Ministry of Inte-
 rior (except for business-related associations, which are registered with the Ministry
 of Commerce). By law and in practice, the Interior Ministry is obliged to register
 such groups, so long as the objectives of association are clearly stated and are not
 in violation of the law.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Constitutionaly, Senegal is a secular state, and freedom
 of religion is a legal right which exists in practice. Islam is the religion of 94 percent
 of the population, but the Government has made no attempt to introduce Shari'a
 law. Other religions are practiced freely Catholicism attracts the second largest
 number of worsirs. Missionary activity is permitted, and foreign Protestant mis-
 sionaries are active in several regions of the country. Conversion is permitted, and
 there is no discrimination against minority religions. In theory, adherence to a par-
 ticular religion confers no official advantage or disadvantage in civil, political, eco-
 nomic, military, or other sectrs. However, some believe that, in practice, member-
 ship in an Islamic sect affords certain political and economic rivileges. Both Islamic
 and Christian organizations publish periodicals. Koranic and Catholic schools exist
 alongside the public school system, and the Mouride brotherhood, an Islamic sect,
 is constructing an Islamic university in its hea rs city of Touba.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the County, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides all citizens the right to travel and establish
 themselves freely anywhere in Senegal, a right respected in practice. Exit visas are
 not required for travel outside the country. There is no restriction on emigration,
 and repatriates are not disadvantaged on their return to Senegal. A Senegales citi-
 zen by birth may not have his citizenship annulled for any reason. A naturalized
 citizen may have his citizenship revoked if it is proved in a court of law that he
 obtained his citizenship fraudulently or if he has been convicted of a crime and has
 been a citizen less than 16 years.
 
 
 In 1989 ethnic violence between Senegal and Mauritania resulted in a flood of ref-
 ugees enteng Senegal. In November the United Nations High Commissioner for
 Refugees (UNHCR) recorded 54,230 registered refugees in 275 Senegalese sites
 along the river border with Mauritania. The refugees have freedom of movement
 and are not subject to forced repatriation. Diplomatic relations between Senegal and
 Mauritania were renewed in April, and several border crossings between the two
 countries were established. Monetary problems and identification requirements pre-
 vented many Mauritanian refugees from returning. The Governments of Senegal
 and Mauritania are continuing quiet discussions on indemnification. The two coun-
 tries still have not discussed the return of the refugees to Mauritania. The
 Mauritanian Government reportedly refuses to recognize the previously documented
 citizenship of those refugees who belong pmarily to the Peulh ehni  up.
 Because of violence and instability in the Casamance, approximately 12,000 Sen-
 egalese refugees were in Guinea-Bissau and 3,000 in The Gambia at the end of
 1992. Also, several thousand villagers have been displaced because of MFDC rebel
 activity and interethnic violence.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Senegalese have the constitutional right to change their government through peri-
 odic multiparty elections. However, the domination of Senegalese political life by the
 Socialist Party, which has held power since independence, has called into question
 the extent to which citizens have been able to exercise that right. President Abdou
 Diouf was declared reelected in 1988 with 73 percent of the votes in an election
 which many people in Senegal still believe was fraudulent.
 With the 1991 revision of the Electoral Code the voting age was reduced to 18
 years and the secret ballot, which had previously been optional, was made manda-
 tory. P'residential elections, which had been held every 5 years, will take place every
 7 years, following the scheduled February 1993 elections. There are 20 political par-
 ties in Senegal, and 7 declared candidates for the presidency. The Government is
 committed to reform of the political process, but some elements of the ruling Social-
 ist Party have been less enthusiastic.
 Opposition parties and others criticized the Government's implementation of the
 1991 electoral code. Issuance of national identity cards, which are required in order
 to register to vote, was slow, and many people did not receive their cards. The Gov-
 ernment cited financial and human resources shortages to explain the difficulties.
 Critics accused the Government of manipulating the process in an attempt to give
 the cards only to government suporters.
 Tensions within the Socialist P art have led to interparty violence (see Section
 L.a.). The security situation in the Casamance is a cause for concern in planning
 the February 1993 elections; one faction of the rebel MFDC, which clings to the idea
 of independence for the region, opposes elections and has resorted to violence
 against those attempting to take part in the registration process.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are at least eight Senegalese human rights associations, including the Asso-
 ciation of African Jurists and the Association of Young Senegalese Lawyers. All are
 free to criticize the Government publicly, although none has done so directly. None
 of these organizations is extremely active.
 The Government allows human rights groups, such as Amnesty International, to
 investigate allegations concerning human rights abuses in Senegal and responds to
 requests for information about those allegations. The International Committee of
 the Red Cross maintains an office in Dakar. Senegal actively promotes international
 standards for human rights practices; it sponsored the Organization of African Uni-
 ty's (OAU) Charter on Human and People's Rights and was a founder of the OAU's
 African Human Rights Commission in 1987.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution states that "men and women shall be equal in law." Officially
 there is no discrimination in Senegal based on race religion or language. The domi-
 nant religion in Senegal is Islam, and Islamic customs, including polygamy and Is-
 lamic rules of inheritance, are practiced, especially in the rural areas. Despite gov-
 ernment encouragement and increased educational opportunities, females still get
 less than one-third of the schooling received by males. Modifications of the Family
 Code adopted by the National Assembly in 1988 reinforced women's rights to di-
 vorce, alimony, child support, and employment. However, Islamic and Senegalese
 customs persist, and women are still confined largely to traditional roles, notably
 engaging in subsistence farming. Traditional inheritance and land tenure practices
 
 
 222
 make it difficult for women to own land and to acquire sufficient collateral to obtain
 bank credit. Women usually marry younp (the majority by age 16 in rural areas),
 average about seven live births, and die relatively young. About 67 percent of
 women between the ages of 40 and 45 live in polygamous unions.
 Violence against women, usually wife beating, is not uncommon, particularly in
 rural areas;however, there are no accurate statistics. Police do not normally inter-
 vene in domestic disputes, and women are reluctant to go outside the family for re-
 dress. Persons convicted of rape may be sentenced for up to 10 years in prison, and
 more if the victim is a minor.
 In mid-1992, there were numerous reports of women being kidnaped and raped
 in the Casamance in connection with MFDC or bandit-related violence. Female geni-
 tal mutilation (circumcision) is not practiced by Senegal's largest ethnic group, the
 Wolofs, but it is performed on girls belonging to other ethnic groups. According to
 an independent expert in the field, the percentage of Senegalese women who have
 undergone this procedure may. be as high as 50 percent. Genital mutilation gen-
 erally occurs at the age of 9. nfibulation, the most extreme and dangerous form of
 genital mutilation, is practiced only by the Toucouleur and Peulh ethnic groups.
 Perhaps 6 percent of  negalese women have undergone this procedure. There are
 no laws or regulations prohibiting female genital mutilation. However, in 1990
 President Diou f established a new ministerial-level office responsible for the welfare
 of women and children. The incumbent, one of three women ministers, has promoted
 programs to educate village women to the dangers of genital mutilation.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The rights of workers in the formal sector are pro-
 tected by a rigorous Labor Code. All workers have the right of association and are
 free to form or join unions. A minimum of seven persons, each having worked within
 the profession for at least 1 year, may form a trade union by submitting a list of
 memers and a charter to the   finistry of Interior. A union can be disbanded by
 the Minist   if the union's activities deviate from the charter. Although unions
 sometimes fail to obtain initial recognition, once received, recognition is virtually
 never withdrawn. Even though they represent a small percentage of the working
 population, unions wield significant political influence because of their ability to dis-
 rupt vital sectors of the economy. The industrial component of the total work force
 of 3.9 million is almost totally unionized; mere than 70 percent of the labor force
 is engaged in agriculture. There are no unions in the agrarian sector except for the
 CSS sugar monopoly; CSS is the only plantation in Senegal, and it offers its employ-
 ees about the same standard of living as those in industry.
 The National Confederation of Senegalese Workers (CNTS), the largest union or-
 ganization, has close ties to the ruling Socialist Party (PS) and has a considerable
 number of government positions. Whife ostensibly an independent organization, the
 umbrella CNTS has supported government policies. The CNTS Secretary-General is
 a National Assembly Vice President, a member of the PS Politburo, and one of
 President Diours key advisers. The rival to CNTS is the National Union of Autono-
 mous Syndicates of Senegal (UNSAS). UNSAS is a growing federation of strategi-
 cally important unions, such as those of electricians, telephone and telegaph work-
 ers, teachers, hospital and railroad workers, and sugar producers. UNSAS has no
 political orientation, and its increasing membership is challenging CNTS. There also
 are two smaller organizations: the Democratic Union of Senegalese Workers, which
 is composed mostly of manual laborers in the private sector, and the Coordination
 of Autonomous Trade Unions composed of teachers, urban transit workers, and two
 smaller organizations.
 The right to strike is provided in the Constitution. In 1992 a strike by bus drivers
 was quickly broken when the army replaced the drivers. UNSAS-affiliated hospital
 employees were on strike 3 days a week from August to October, leaving rural and
 urban hospitals with limited services. In solidarity with the hospital workers, the
 UNSAS electricity workers union went on strike for 3 days in October, leaving
 Dakar and most of the county without power and water. The Government said the
 electrical workers sabotaged the generators, but the union denied it. UNSAS threat-
 ened a general strike, but called it off when the Government agreed to negotiate
 with them.
 The CNTS is active in regional and international labor organizations and is the
 dominant Senegalese member of the Organization of African Trade Union Unity.
 UNSAS is not affiliated with any regional or international labor organization.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Co/!ectively.--Senegalese unions have the
 right by law to organize and to bargain collectively, and these rights are protected
 in practice. There are also legal prohibitions governing discrimination by employers
 against union members and organizers. During 1992, there were no known in-
 
 
 stances of workers being forcibly discouraged from exercising the right to organize
 and bargain collectively. The Ministry of Labor will intervene in disputes between
 labor and management when requested, and it plays a mediation and arbitration
 role in the private and state-enterprise sectors.
 Senegalese labor laws apply in principle to all industrial firms, including those
 in the export f         in Dakar. However, firms operating in the free zone and
 those eligible for benefits under the Investment Code enjoy certain exceptions to the
 1989 Labor Code. These firms do not need prior government authorization to dis-
 miss employees which all other businesses in the formal sector do, and may hire
 workers on the basis of temporary contracts for a period of up to 5 years.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-There were no reports of forced
 labor in Senegal, and it is prohibited by law.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum ae for employment
 is 16 years for apprenticeships and 18 for all other types of work. Inspectors from
 the Ministry of Labor closely monitor and enforce these restrictions within the for-
 mal wage sector, which includes state-owned corporations, large private enterprises,
 and cooperatives. On the other hand, children under 16 are frequently employed in
 the much larger traditional or informal sector, and minimum age and other work-
 place regulations are not seriously enforced on family farms in rural areas and in
 small, privately owned businesses.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Legislation mandating a monthly minimum
 wage has been in force since independence in 1960. The actual rate is determined
 by the Ministers of Labor and Finance after negotiating with the union and man-
 agement councils. Recent CNTS efforts have concentrated on raising the minimum
 wage for unskilled laborers which, according to the unions, is not sufficient to main-
 tain a decent standard of living. Workers must frequently supplement incomes
 through second jobs and reliance on the extended family.
 Within the formal economic sector, Senegalese law mandates: a standard work-
 week of 40 to 48 hours for moat prfessions; 1 month per year of annual leave; and
 a variety of health benefits and safety standards. These regulations are incorporated
 into the 1989 Labor Code approved by the National Assembly and are supervised
 by inspectors from the Ministry of Labor. Enforcement, however, appears to be un-
 even, especially outside the formal wage sector. In March Senegal suffered its worst
 industrial accident ever when a tank truck of liquid ammwnia exploded at Dakars
 SONACOS. peanut oil factory, .killing over 100 and injuring hundreds more. News-
 papers and the CNTS reported that the tank had been overfilled by an untrained
 person. The disaster initially prompted outcries for the enforcement of safety regula-
 tions already on the books and the enactment of others, but since then little has
 happenedt y
 heLnor Code does not a pply to the informal and agricultural sectors. There are
 no explicit legal protections or1 workers who tfie complaints about unsafe conditions.
 There was an initial move to tighten enforcement of regulations on working condi-
 tions following the SONACOS explosion, but it has lost momentum. While there are
 regulations on the books concerning workplace safety, they are often not enforced.
