 SENEGAL
 Senegal is a republic with an elected president, Abdou Diouf, who has been in of-
 fice since 1981, and a unicameral legislature dominated by the President's Socialist
 Party (PS) since independence from France in 1960. During the year, the Govern-
 ment decentralized its regional and local administrations. The stability brought
 about by the entry of the principal opposition party into government in 1995 contin-
 ued, with the smaller parties choosing to remain in government while contesting the
 elections. The judiciary is independent although subject to governmental influence
 and pressure.
 The armed forces are professional and generally disciplined. They traditionally re-
 main aloof from politics and are firmly under civilian control. The paramilitary gen-
 darmerie and the police are less professional and less disciplined. Some members
 of the gendarmerie and the police continued to commit serious human rights abuses.
 Senegal is predominantly agricultural with more than 70 percent of the labor
 force engaged in farming, largely peanut production. Since the devaluation of the
 cfa franc in 1994, the Government implemented a series of economic policy reforms
 to enhance competitiveness, and is phasing out most qualitative restrictions on im-
 ports, dismantling monopolies, liberalizing the labor market, and privatizing several
 important state-owned industries. Supported by the international donor community,
 Senegal remains dependent on foreign assistance as an important part of its na-
 tional budget.
 The Government generally respected the human rights of its citizens, however,
 there were serious problems in some areas, particularly torture by police of suspects
 during questioning, arbitrary arrest, and lengthy pretrial detention. The Govern-
 ment tried or punished few military, gendarmes, or police for previous human rights
 abuses, particularly for those in the Casamance. The Socialist Party's domination
 of political life, including irregularities and fraud in the 1996 regional and local elec-
 tions, calls into question the extent to which citizens can meaningfully exercise their
 right to change the government. Poor prison conditions, a judiciary subject to gov-
 
 
 ernment influence and pressure, domestic violence and discrimination against
 women, and some abuse of children are also problems.
 Although there were credible reports of infrequent human rights abuses per-
 petrated by Casamance rebels, a cease-fire during the year effectively restored the
 security and safety of the Casamance.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no confirmed reports of
 political or extrajudicial killings by government officials.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 There are credible reports that police and gendarmes often beat suspects during
 questioning and pretrial detention, in spite of constitutional prohibitions against
 such treatment. Torture perpetrated by police, usually beatings, remains an embar-
 rassing public issue for the Government, and is regularly reported in the press. In
 April two police officers were arrested for torturing a suspectby sp raying paint thin-
 ner on his buttocks and igniting it. At year's end, the accusedofficers were on bail
 pending trial. The Government proposed and Parliament is reviewing a law de-
 signed to strengthen legal provisions forbidding torture.
 Prison conditions are poor. Prisons remain overcrowded, and food and health care
 are inadequate. However, there have been no reported deaths in prison due to these
 conditions.
 During the year, a cease-fire was in effect between the Government and the Move-
 ment of Democratic Forces in the Casamance (MFDC). The very few incidents which
 seemed to involve the MFDC were directed against civilians. Although precise data
 are lacking, the cease-fire has apparently reduced the numbers of persons displaced
 in the Casamance.
 The Government permits visits by government, nongovernmental, and inter-
 national human rights monitors.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution prohibits arbitrary ar-
 rest and detention, however, authorities at times violate these constitutional prohi-
 bitions.
 The law specifies that warrants, issued by judges, are required for arrests. How-
 ever, laws a so grant the police broad powers to detain prisoners for lengthy periods
 of time. Police may legally hold without charge a person suspected of a crime for
 48 hours after arrest and for up to 72 hours if ordered by a public prosecutor. This
 period may be doubled in the case of crimes against the security of the state. The
 prosecutor decides whether to forward the case to an investigating judge who may
 open an investigation. At this point, the suspects are preliminarily charged and may
 be held or released on their own recognizance. There is a system of bail, but it is
 rarely used. During temporary detention the accused has no access to family or an
 attorney but has the right to demand a medical exam. Once charged, a prisoner is
 permitted visits by both family and legal advisors. The accused may be held in cus-
 tody for 6 months, and the investigating magistrate can certify that an additional
 6 month extension is required. Such extensions may be reviewed by a court on ap-
 peal from the accused's attorney.
 Police are rarely prosecuted for violations of arrest and detention procedures, and
 the authorities may detain a prisoner for long periods of time while they investigate
 and build a case against a suspect. The authorities may and routinely do hold pris-
 oners in custody unless and until a court demands their release. Despite the 6-
 month limitations on detention, the time between the charging phase and trial aver-
 ages 2 years. In a particularly egregious case, in October three defendants were ac-
 quitted by a court after 5 to 7 years of detention.
 In January the Government released from house arrest MFDC leader Abbe
 Diamacoune Senghor and four military/political advisors who had been extradited
 from Guinea-Bissau in 1994. The individuals had been charged but not convicted
 of compromising the security of the state.
 Approximately 120 suspeted MFDC members remained in political detention at
 year's end. Throughout the year, the Government released small groups of MFDC
 members to suggest good faith in negotiations.
 The Constitution prohibits exile and it is not used.
 e. Denial of Fair Public TriaL-The Constitution provides for a judiciary inde-
 pendent of the executive, the legislature, and the armed forces. However, mag-
 istrates are vulnerable to outside pressures due to low pay, poor working conditions,
 and family and political ties. Also, the Minister of Justice and subordinate authori-
 ties have extensive authority to influence judicial procedures, e.g., in keeping the
 
 
 235
 
 accused in pretrial detention. Political and governmental pressure reportedly came
 to bear on the court when it fined Sud Communication, a privately owned media
 group, an unprecedented $1 million and sentenced five of its journalists to jail for
 defamation. Sud Communication and the journalists are appealing the decisions.
 The legal system is based on French civil law and is composed of ordinary courts
 and a number of higher and special courts, including the three created in May 1992
 to replace the Supreme Court: The Council of State for Administrative Questions,
 the Constitutional Council, and a Court of Appeal. These Courts remain under-
 staffed, and many of the special courts, including the Unlawful Enrichment Court
 and special courts to try government officials for treason and malfeasance, are dor-
 mant. Muslims have the right to choose customary law or civil law for certain civil
 cases, such as those concerning inheritance and divorce. However, customary law
 decisions are rendered by civil court judges. There is a separate system of military
 courts for members of the armed forces and the gendarmerie. The right of appeal
 exists in all courts except military courts and the special "illegal enrichment" court.
 Military courts may not try civilians.
 In prnciple the accused is innocent until proven guilty, and when brought to trial
 it i he State's burden to prove that the accused is guilty of the charges. Trials are
 public, and defendants have the right to be present in court, to confront witnesses,
 to present evidence, and to have an attorney. In practice, however, some defendants
 are denied legal assistance at public expense due to lack of funding. Evidentiary
 hearings may be closed to the public and the press. A panel of judges presides over
 ordinary courts for both civil and criminal cases; in criminal cases citizens also serve
 on the panel.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution prohibits arbitrary invasion of the home, and there was little govern-
 ment interference in the private lives of citizens, particularly in rural areas. The
 law requires search warrants, and only judges may issue them. During high-profile
 or politically charged investigations, police often proceed without the required
 search warrants.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and press, and the Government generally respects these rights in practice. Laws
 prohibit the press from the expression of views that "discredit" the State, incite the
 population to disorder, or disseminate "false news." However, the Government did
 not prosecute any groups or persons under these statutes during the year.
 Abroad spectrum of thougt and opinion is available to the public through maga-
 zines and newspapers, including foreign publications, and numerous independent
 radio stations. Political and economic views expressed in the independent press are
 often critical of the Government and its programs. While publishers are required to
 register prior to starting publication, the Government routinely approves such reg-
 istrations. A government monopoly controls local television, an important source of
 news. French-owned pay television is available but offers no local news.
 Academic freedom is res pted.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful ssembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 these rights, and the Government generally respects them in practice. The Govern-
 ment requires prior authorization for public demonstrations, which it usually
 grants. After permitting large gatherings earlier in the year, the Government lifted
 its formal ban on the Moustarchidine movement in the fall.
 Citizens wishing to form associations must register with the Ministry of Interior.
 Business-related associations register with the Ministry of Commerce. By law and
 in practice, the Ministry of Interior must register such groups so long as the objec-
 tives of the association are clearly stated and they do not violate the law.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for these rights, and the Government gen-
 erally respects them in practice. Certain public employees must obtain government
 approval before departing Senegal.
 The Government cooperates with the Office of the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in assisting ref-
 ugees. More than 60,000 Mauritanian refugees resident in Senegal since 1989 as the
 country of first asylum, and members of other refugee groups, may move freely
 throughout the country. In 1996 Senegal offered first asylum to many residents of
 Liberia who were forced to flee the fighting in that country. All either returned to
 
 
 236
 Liberia or settled in other countries by the end of the year. There were no reports
 of forced return of persons to a country where they feared persecution.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have the constitutional right to change their government through peri-
 odic multiparty elections. However, the Socialist Party's domination of political
 life-it has held power since independence-and irregularities and fraud in the re-
 gional and local elections have called into question the extent to which citizens can
 meaningfully exercise this right.
 The PS holds a 73 percent majority in Parliament with 88 parliamentary seats,
 2 more than in 1995 due to opposition member defections. The opposition holds 32
 seats. There are 25 legal opposition parties. Five members of the leading opposition
 party, the Senegalese  emocratic Party (PDS), and 4 independent and/or minor op-
 position members are in President Dioufs 33-member cabinet.
 Despite its preeminent position, the PS continued to suffer extensive factional in-
 fighting during the first part of the year, which in some cases resulted in serious
 injuries. This internal PS conflict was responsible, at least in part, for the Govern-
 m ent's decision to cancel the November 1995 municipal elections and reschedule
 them to coincide with the November 1996 rural elections. There were credible alle-
 gations that the Government engaged in gerrymandering, illegal fundraising, voter
 list manipulations, and other irregularities in its manipulation of the electoral proc-
 ess prior to the November elections.
 The regional and local elections held on November 24 and 27 were marked by al-
 legations of fraud and many serious procedural and other irregularities. Many poll-
 ing places in the capital opened late or not at all. There were reports of similar
 problems elsewhere, au aparently not on the same scale as in Dakar. One million
 extra blank voter's identification cards were printed, an amount far exceeding the
 legal limit. Although 500,000 of the extra cards were publicly burned allegations
 remained that 300,000 blank cards were not accounted for. Almost all opposition
 politicians and civic leaders renewed their calls for the creation of an independent
 national electoral commission to administer elections. In spite of strong sentiment
 supporting such a measure, the Government refused to create an iandenent elec-
 toral commission.
 Women are underrepresented in the political process. While there are no legal im-
 pediments to their participation in government and politics, cultural and edu-
 cational factors hamper them. Only 3 of the 33 ministers who comprise the Presi-
 dent's Cabinet are women, and there are only 2 in the 19-member Economic and
 Social Council, the Government's quasi-policymaking body. Women won two may-
 oralty elections and one rural commune in the November local elections. There are
 no women beading political parties, and oaly 14 female Deputies in the 120-member
 National Assembly. Women's lower representation reflects not only disparity in edu-
 cation (see Section 5), but also cultural pressures. Political parties often rank
 women low on party lists, making it difficult for them to be elected to the National
 Assembly or be appointed ministers.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vest igation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A wide variety of human rights groups operate without government restriction,
 investigating and publishing their findings on human rights cases. Government offi-
 cials are generally cooperative and receptive to their views.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution states that "men and women shall be equal in law" and prohibits
 discrimination based on race, religion, sex, class, or language. However, de facto dis-
 crimination against women is pervasive, and the Government frequently does not
 enforce antidiscrimination laws.
 Women.-There are credible reports that violence against women, usually wife
 beating, is common, particularly in rural areas. The Government and cooperative
 newspapers led ayearlong media campaign against spouse abuse. Police do not usu-
 ally intervene in domestic disputes, and most people are reluctant to go outside the
 family for redress. The law and society view rape as a very serious crime, and the
 law stipulates that persons convicted of rape may be imprisoned up to 10 years,
 e         victim is a minor. Rape trials often result in convictions. In the past,
 vigilante action was often meted out to the accused before the police were able to
 arrest rape or family violence suspects.
 Despite constitutional protections, women face extensive societal discrimination,
 especially in rural areas where Islamic and Senegalese customs, including polygyny
 
 
 and Islamic rules of inheritance, are strongest, and women are generally confined
 to traditional roles. In the countryside, women perform much of the subsistence
 farming and childrearing and have limited educational opportunities. Although the
 Government has committed itself to equalizing male/female primary school enroll-
 ment, there is still much social and official discrimination against women in edu-
 cational opportunities. Only 19 percent of females over 15 years of age are literate,
 while the rate for males over age 15 is 30 percent.
 According to the U.N. only 20 percent of women are engaged in paid employment.
 Traditional practices, moreover, make it difficult for women to obtain bank credit.
 Women usually marry young (the majority by age 16 in rural areas), and average
 6 live births (down from 7 in 1995). About half of all women live in polygynous
 unions.
 In urban areas women encounter somewhat less discrimination and are active in
 government, political life, the legal profession, and business. About 14 percent of
 lawyers are women. Urban women are more likely to take advantage of the Govern-
 ment's efforts to increase respect for women's legal rights to divorce, alimony, and
 child support, and to seek education and employment. In general, urban women re-
 ceive equ  pa for equal work.
 Children.-The Ministry of Women, Children, and the Family, established in
 1990, is responsible for promoting children's welfare. Numerous organizations assist
 the Ministry in support of children's rights, including the Ministry of Health which
 maintained a nationwide effort focusing on child survival. Organized street begging
 by children who are Koranic students results in a significant interruption of their
 education. The Government continues to increase the number of classrooms and en-
 courage more children, particularly females, to enter and stay in school.
 There are no laws or regulations concerning female genital mutilation (FGM),
 which is widely condemned by international health experts as damaging to both
 physical and psychological health. However, the Ministry of Women, Children, and
 the Family sponsors programs to educate women to the dangers of FGM. FGM is
 not practied by Senegal's largest ethnic group, the Wolofs (representing 43 percent
 of the population), bu  t is performed on girls belonging to some other ethnic
 groups. Infibulation, the most extreme and dangerous form of FC-M, is practicd by
 mebers of the Toucouleur and Peulh ethnic groups, particularly those in rural
 areas. Unsubstantiated recent studies estimate t at etween 5 and 20 percent of fe-
 males undergo the procedure.
 People With Disabilitief-There is no official discrimination against disabled per-
 sons. There are no laws that mandate accessibility for the disabled, and in practice
 most persons with disabilities are generally unable to participate in many occupa-
 tions due to physical barriers and a lack of equipment and training opportunities
 that would make such participation possible.
 Religous Minorities.-Approximately 92 percent of the population are Muslim.
 There are small Christian (2 percent) and indigenous (6 percent) religious commu-
 nities. Officially, adherenc to a particular reigion confers no advantage or dis-
 advantage in civil, political, economic, military, or other matters. In practice, how-
 ever, membership in an Islamic subgroup may afford certain political and economic
 protections and advantages.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution and the Labor Code provide all
 workers with the right of association, and they are free to form or join unions. A
 minimum of seven persons, each having worked in the trade for at least i year, may
 form a trade union by submitting a list of members and a charter to the Ministry
 of Interior. While the Ministry does not always grant initial recognition to a union,
 once it gives recognition, the Ministry virtually never withdraws it. It may, however,
 disband a union if its activities deviate from its charter. The Labor Code does not
 apply to the informal and agricultural sectors where most people work.
 Although they represent a small percentage of the working population, unions
 wield significant political influence because of their ability to disrupt vital sectors
 of the econom. h  e small industrial component of the total work force of 4 million
 is almost totally unionized. The only union in the agrarian sector is one represent-
 ing workers at a privately owned sugar company. Some farmers are organized into
 the National Farming Association, an advocacy organization.
 The National Conederation of Senegalese Wor ers (CtS), the largest union or-
 ganization, has close ties to the ruling Socialist Party, and union members hold a
 considerable number of government positions. One is a PS minister, and four others
 hold PS seats in Parliament. While ostensibly an independent organization, the um-
 brella CNTS consistently supports government policies.
 
 
 238
 The rival to the CNTS is the National Union of Autonomous Labor Unions of Sen-
 egal (UNSAS). UNSAS is a federation of strategically important unions such as
 those of electricians, telecommunication workers, teachers, water technicians, and
 hospital, railroad, and sugar workers.
 The Constitution and the Labor Code provide for the right to strike, but with re-
 strictions. Unions representing members of the civil service must notify the Govern-
 ment of their intent to strike no less than 1 month in advance, and private sector
 unions must make a similar notification 3 days in advance. The Government or the
 employer can use the time to seek a settlement to the dispute but cannot stop the
 strike. There were numerous legal-but no illegal-strikes in 1996. Regulations pro-
 hibit employers from retaliating against legal strikers, and these regulations are en-
 forced through the Labor Court.
 The Labor Code permits unions to affiliate with international bodies. The CNTS
 is active in regional and international labor organizations and is the dominant Sen-
 egalese member of the Organization of African Trade Union Unity.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The law provides unions with
 the right to organize and to bargain collectively, and these rights are protected in
 practice. There are also legal prohibitions governing discrimination by employers
 against union members and organizers. Employers found guilty of antiunion dis-
 crimination are required to reinstate workers. There were no known instances in
 which workers were prevented from exercising the right to organize and bargain col-
 lectively. The Ministry of Labor can intervene in disputes between labor and man-
 agement if requested, and it plays a mediation role m the private and state enter-
 prise sectors.
 Labor laws apply to all industrial firms including those in the Dakar Industrial
 Free Trade Zone.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-There were no reports of forced
 labor, which is prohibited by law.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum age for employment
 is 16 years for apprenticeships and 18 for all other types of work. Inspectors from
 the Ministry of Labor closely monitor and enforce these restrictions within the small
 formal wage sector, which includes state-owned corporations, large private enter-
 prises, and cooperatives.
 However, children under the age of 16 frequently work in the much larger tradi-
 tional or informal sectors, such as family farms in rural areas or in small busi-
 nesses,. where the Government does not enforce minimum age and other workplace
 regulations.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Legislation mandating a monthly minimum
 wage has been in force since the country's independence in 1960. The Ministries of
 Labor and Finance determine wage rates after negotiating with the unions and
 management councils. The minimum wage of less than $.40 (202 cfa francs) per
 hour, last negotiated in 1989, is not adequate to support a worker and a family.
 Within the formal sector, the law mandates: a standard workweek of 40 to 48
 hours for most occupations, with at least one 24-hour rest period and 1 month per
 year of annual leave; enrollment in government systems for social security and re-
 tirment; safety standards; and a variety of other measures. These regulations are
 incorporated into the Labor Code and are supervised by inspectors from the Min-
 istry of Labor. However, the authorities' enforcement is uneven, especially outside
 the formal sector. There is no explicit legal protection for woriers who file com-
 plaints about unsafe conditions. While there are legal regulations concerning work-
 place safety, government officials do not often enforce them.
 In theory workers have the right to remove themselves from unsafe working con-
 ditions, but in practice the right is seldom exercised in circumstances of high unem-
 ployment and a slow legal system.
