 SENEGAL
 Senegal is a republic with an elected president, Abdou Diouf, who has been in of-
 fice since 1981, and a unicameral legislature dominated by the President's Socialist
 Party (PS) since independence from France in 1960. During the year, the Govern-
 ment installed new decentralized regional and local administrations. The stability
 brought about by the entry of the principal opposition party into government in
 1995 continued, with the smaller parties choosing to remain in government while
 contesting the elections. A renewal of fighting in the Casamance area in the south-
 ern part of the country between the Government and the secessionist Movement of
 Democratic Forces in the Casamance (MFDC) caused many civilians to flee their vil-
 lages. MFDC rebel forces reportedly were responsible for killings, disappearances,
 and torture. The judiciary is independent, although subject to governmental influ-
 ence and pressure.
 The armed forces are professional and generally disciplined. They traditionally re-
 main aloof from politics and are firmly under civilian control. The paramilitary gen-
 darmerie and the police are less professional and less disciplined. Some members
 of the gendarmerie and the police continued to commit serious human rights abuses.
 Senegal is predominantly agricultural with more than 70 percent of the labor
 force engaged in farming, largely peanut production. Since the devaluation of the
 cfa franc in 1994, the Government implemented a series of economic policy reforms
 to enhance competitiveness and is phasing out most qualitative restrictions on im-
 ports, dismantling monopolies, liberalizing the labor market, and privatizing several
 important state-owned industries. Supported by the international donor community,
 Senegal remains dependent on foreign assistance as an important part of its na-
 tional budget.
 The Government generally respected the human rights of its citizens, however,
 there were serious problems in some areas, particularly reports of extrajudicial
 killings and disappearances, torture by police of suspects during questioning, arbi-
 trary arrest, and lengthy pretrial detention. The Government tried or punished no
 military, gendarmes, or police for previous human rights abuses. A National Observ-
 atory of Elections was created in August; its effectiveness is expected to be tested
 during the national parliamentary elections in May 1998. The Socialist Party's con-
 tinued domination of Senegalese political life calls into question the extent to which
 citizens can meaningfully exercise their right to change the government. Poor prison
 conditions, a judiciary subject to government influence and pressure, domestic vio-
 lence and discrimination against women, some abuse of children, child labor, and
 mob violence are also problems.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-While there were no confirmed re-
 ports of political or extrajudicial killings by government officials during the resur-
 gence of violence in the southern Casamance region, government forces were sus-
 pected of responsibility for many civilian deaths. In August a leader of the MFDC,
 Sarani Badiane, was found murdered near Ziguinchor. While no grou has claimed
 responsibility for the killing and no direct proof of guilt has emerged, the Senegalese
 human rights organization African Meeting for the Defense of Human Rights
 (RADDHO) and Amnesty International (Al) attributed responsibility for Badiane's
 death to the Government.
 A report by Al issued in September alleged "tens" of civilian deaths in the
 Casamance. A report by RADDHO released in the same month listed 16 individuals
 including Sarani Badiane, who had been killed in the conflict. Of the 16, RADDHO
 stated that 3 were killed by the army and 12 by the MFDC.
 On December 30, thre relatives of MFDC military leader Salif Sadio and one
 other person were murdered by unknown persons.
 Guerrillas of the rebel Movement of Democratic Forces of the Casamance (MFDC)
 were suspected of being responsible for killing many civilians during the fighting in
 the Casamance. The RADDHO report listed 12 individuals killed by the MFDC.
 One person in the RADDHO report was listed as killed by "unidentified armed
 elements." In addition RADDHO reported the massacre of four members of an
 unnamed family in Mandina Wandifa in September, but did not identify the per-
 petrators.
 On many occasions in other parts of the country, vigilante groups and mobs
 lynched suspected thieves. In August a wave of hysteria about the thet of male sex-
 ual organs resulted in the deaths of 30 people from mob violence.
 
 
 b. Disappearance.-A report by AI in September alleged 30 disappearances in the
 Cassamance. The RADDHO report released in September listed six individuals who
 allegedly disappeared while in the custody of the armed forces.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The report by RADDHO of alleged human rights violations in the Casamance issued
 in September accused the armed forces and the MEDC of torture. RADDHO identi-
 fied two victims who survived such torture, as well as two other persons (including
 Sarani Badiane) who allegedly were tortured first and then killed.
 There are credible reports that police and gendarmes often beat suspects during
 questioning and. p retrial detention, in spite of constitutional prohibitions against
 such treatment. Torture-perpetrated by police, usually beatings, remains an embar-
 rassing public issue, and is regularly reported in the press. Two police officers ar-
 rested in 1996 for torturing a susect by spraying paint thinner on his buttocks and
 igniting it were still on bail pen ing trial at year's end. In 1996 the Government
 proposed -and Parliament strengthened legal provisions forbidding torture which
 came into effect in August.
 Prison conditions are poor. Prisons remain overcrowded, and food and health care
 are inadequate. However, there have-been no reported deaths in prison due to these
 conditions.
 The Government permits visits by government, nongovernmental, and inter-
 national human rights monitors.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution prohibits arbitrary ar-
 rest and detention; however, authorities at times violate these constitutional prohi-
 bitions.
 The law specifies that warrants, issued by judges, are required for arrests. How-
 ever, laws a so grant the police broad powers to detain prisoners for lengthy periods
 of time. Police may legally hold without charge a person suspected of a crime for
 48 hours after arrest and for up to 72 hours if ordered by a public prosecutor. This
 period may be doubled in the case of crimes against the security of the state. The
 prosecutor decides whether to forward the case to an investigating judge who may
 open an investigation. At this point, the suspects are preliminarily charged and may
 be held or released on their own recognizance. There is a system of hail, but it is
 rarely used. During temporary detention, the accused has no access to family or an
 attorney but has the right to demand a medical exam. Once charged, a prisoner is
 permitted visits by both family and legal advisors. The accused may be held in cus-
 tody for 6 months, and the investigating magistrate can certify that an additional
 6-month extension is required. Such extensions may be reviewed by a court on ap-
 peal from the accused's attorney.
 Police are rarely prosecuted for violations of arrest and detention procedures, and
 the authorities may detain a prisoner for long periods of time while they investigate
 and build a case against a suspect. The authorities may and routinely do hold pris-
 oners in custody unless and until a court demands their release. Despite the 6-
 month limitations on detention, the time between the charging phase and trial aver-
 ages 2 years. In an effort to improve the administration of justice, the Government
 recruited 48 law school graduates to be trained as magistrates over a period of 2
 years.
 Approximately 150 suspected MFDC members remained in political detention at
 year's end.
 The Constitution prohibits exile, and it is not used.
 e. Denial of Fair Public TriaL-The Constitution provides for a judiciary inde-
 pendent of the executive, the legislature, and the armed forces. However, mag-
 istrates are vulnerable to outside pressures due to low pay, poor working conditions,
 and family and political ties. Also, the Minister of Justice and subordinate authori-
 ties have extensive authority to influence judicial procedures, e.g., in keeping the
 accused in pretrial detention. In June the Court of Appeals upheld a lower court
 decision fining Sud Communication, a privately owned media group, an unprece-
 dented, punitive $1 million for defamation. Sud Communication is appealing the de-
 cision to the Court of Appeal.
 The legal system is based on French civil law and is composed of ordinary courts
 and a number of higher and special courts, including the three created in May 1992
 to replace the Supreme Court: the Council of State for Administrative Questions;
 the Constitutional Council; and a Court of Appeal. These courts remain under-
 staffed, and many of the special courts, including the Unlawful Enrichment Court
 and special courts to try government officials for treason and malfeasance, are dor-
 mant. Muslims have the right to choose customary law or civil law for certain civil
 cases, such as those concerning inheritance and divorce. However, customary law
 decisions are rendered by civil court judges. There is a separate system of military
 courts for members of the armed forces and the gendarmerie. The right of appeal
 
 
 exists in all courts except military courts and the special Unlawful Enrichment
 Court. Military courts may try civilians only if they are involved in violations of
 military law committed by military personnel.
 In principle the accused is innocent until proven guilty, and when brought to trial
 it is the State's burden to prove that the accused is guilty of the charges. Trials are
 public, and defendants have the right to be present in court, to confront witnesses,
 to present evidence, and to have an attorney. In practice, however, some defendants
 are denied legal assistance at public expense due to lack of funding. Evidentiary
 hearings may be closed to the public and the press, but the defendant and his law-
 yer have access to all evidence presented and can introduce their own evidence be-
 fore the investigating judge decides to refer the case to the prosecutor for trial. A
 panel of judges presides over ordinary courts for both civil and criminal cases; in
 criminal cases citizens also serve on the panel.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution prohibits arbitrary invasion of the home, and there was little govern-
 ment interference in the private lives of citizens. The law requires search warrants,
 and only judges may issue them. During high-profile or politically charged investiga-
 tions, police often proceed without the required search warrants.
 During the first part of the year, a cease-fire was in effect between the Govern-
 ment and the MDFC. However, beginning in July, a series of violent clashes caused
 many civilians to flee their homes in the Casamance.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and the press, and the Government generally respects these rights in practice. Laws
 prohibit the press from the expression of views that "discredit the State, incite the
 population to disorder, or disseminate "false news." In June the Dakar Prosecutor
 General charged the publisher and three journalists of Sud Quotidien, a privately
 owned daily newspaper, with "disseminating false news and "insulting the Head of
 State." The paperhad criticized President Diouf for attempting to influence the judi-
 ciary by holding a nationally televised awards ceremony to honor two businessmen
 5 days before the Court of Appeals was due to return its decision on a prior defama-
 tion case those businessmen had brought against the newspaper's parent company,
 Sud Communication. At year's end, the journalists are free on bail pending their
 trial.
 A broad spectrum of thought and opinion is available to the public through regu-
 larly published magazines and news a ers, including foreign publications, and nu-
 merous independent radio stations. Political and economic views expressed in the
 independent press are often critical of the Government and its programs. While pub-
 lishers are required to register prior to starting publication, the Government rou-
 tinely approves such registrations. A government monopoly controls local television,
 an important source of news. French-owned pay television is available but offers no
 local news.
 In August the Government suspended the operation of three independent radio
 stations for nonpayment of licensing fees in arrears to the state radio and television
 company. Although a competitor of the private companies, the state radio and tele-
 vision company retains a monopoly in the allocation of frequencies and licensing of
 independent radio and television stations. Independent radio operators claim that
 the legal obligation of private stations to pay fees t  the state company infringes
 on the principle of free competition. Although they had previously agreed to pay the
 fees, the private companies also argued these were unreasonably high. The stations
 returned to the air upon payment of the arrearages. In December a new independ-
 ent radio station owned by the newspaper Wal Fadjri began broadcasting. The Brit-
 ish Broadcasting Corporation and R~adio France Internationale also opened radio
 stations during the year.
 Academic freedom is respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 these rights, and the Government generally respects them in practice. The Govern-
 ment requires prior authorization for public demonstrations, which it usually
 grants. Meetings by students on the academic campus of the University in Dakar
 are informally banned, but this prohibition does not extend to the dormitory areas
 of the camp us or the University in Saint-Louis.
 During the year, the Government from time to time denied authorization for pub-
 lic demonstrations by unions or political parties. In May the Government refused
 to permit one march by a labor union controlled by the Party of Independence and
 Labor (PIT). In March police forcibly dispersed a peaceful rally held by students on
 
 
 290
 the capital's university campus. Police raided students' dormitories, beat residents,
 and detained dozens of them for short periods of time.
 Government authorities harassed a- dissident faction within the ruling Socialist
 Party (PS), the Current of Democratic Renewal. The city of Dakar refused to allow
 the group to hold its first rally in the main square. In November government offi-
 cials persuaded managers of two Dakar hotels not to allow the dissidents to hold
 a news conference in their buildings. At the same time, the police questioned the
 group's leaders about their compliance with a ban on their political activities im-
 posed by the PS. Authorities also broke up a.dissident rally in Kaolack in Novem-
 ber. The official explanation that the PS had scheduled a rally for the same place
 was put into question when a PS leader in Kaolack told a radio interviewer the Cur-
 rent of Democratic Renewal would never be allowed to holda rally in his town.
 Citizens wishing to form associations must register with the Ministry of Interior.
 Business-related associations register with the Ministry of Commerce- By law and
 in practice, the Ministry of Interior must register such groups so long as the objec-
 tives of the association are clearly stated and they do not violate the law.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for these rights, and the Government gen-
 ,erally-respects them in practice. Certain public employees must obtain government
 approval beore departing the country.
 Although the leader of the MFDC, Abbe Augustine Diamacoune Senghor, -re-
 mained free from house arrest, his movements were controlled by the Government.
 Ihe Government reportedly blocked a trip by Diamacoune to France to meet with
 the leader of the MFDC's external wing to coordinate policy in- peace talks with the
 Government. After the killing of Sarani Badiane in August, two of Diamacoune's re-
 maining lieutenants sought refuge with Diamacoune who remains in government
 custody at a church in Ziguinchor. The-Government did not attempt to hinder their
 .joining Diamacoune, but in October expelled them from Diamacoune's quarters.
 In December immigration officials refused to allow Djibo Ka, the leader of the dis-
 -sident Current of Democratic Renewal faction of the PS, to board a flight to Paris,
 claiming that Interior Minister Abdourahime Sow had summoned him. Ka left the
 country the day after meeting with Sow-and returned without incident.
 Since 1989 as a country of first.asylum, Senegal has hosted Mauritanian refugees
 -who reside primarily in villages located along the length of the border with Mauri-
 tania. The Government cooperates with the-United Nations.High Commissioner for
 Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in .providing assistance
 for refugees. The UNHCR reported no significant protection problems for refugees
 during the year and began to reduce its assistance to the Mauritanian refugees as
 they became more  self-sufficient, and either returned to Mauritania or integrated
 into Senegalese society. No repatriation agreement-exists between the Government
 and the      CR, but the Government announced its willingness to cooperate with
 a formal repatriation program directed by the UNHCR. A number of refugees have
 returned to Mauritania. and  current U CR estimates put the refugee population
 at 55,000.
 There were no reportsT of forced return of persons to a country where they feared
 persecution.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have the constitutional right to change their government through peri-
 odic multiparty elections. However, the Socialist Party s domination of political
 life-it has held power since independence-and irregularities and fraud in elections
 have called into question the extent to which citizens can meaningfully exercise this
 right.
 The PS holds a 73 percent majority in Parliament with 88 parliamentary seats,
 2 more than in 1995 due to opposition member defections. The opposition holds 32
 seats. There are 27 legal parties. Five members of the leading opposition party, the
 Senegalese Democratic- Party (PDS), and 4 independent or minor opposition mem-
 bers are in President Diouf's 33-member cabinet. In -January new regional and local
 councils created by the law on decentralization of internal administration assumed
 office. The PS gained control of the 10 newly created regional governments, while
 opposition parties won seats in all local governments. Following serious allegations
 of fraud and many serious procedural and other irregularities in the 1996 regional
 and local elections, an alliance of as many as 19 opposition parties demanded the
 creation of an independent national electoral commission, a demand that the PS re-
 jected.
 
 
 In February President Diouf set up a consultative forum of all parties to work out
 proposals for electoral reform. When the parties failed to reach a compromise, the
 President made his own proposal in August to create a National Observatory of
 Elections (ONEL). Later in August, the National Assembly adopted this proposal
 with a number of amendments from the opposition.
 The National Observatory of Elections (ONEL) created by the new law is to super-
 vise and oversee the elections. The ONEL is an independent oversight body empow-
 ered to order bureaucrats to obey the law and to take legal action against individ-
 uals and parties who violate the law. The Interior Ministry, however, remains re-
 sponsible for the actual organization and implementation of the elections. A newly
 created General Directorate of Elections within the Ministry of the Interior is to
 centralize the hitherto dispersed responsibility for administering elections. The over-
 whelming majority of opposition leaders regard the reform as a significant step to-
 ward greater electoral transparency.
 Women are underrepresented in the political process. While there are no legal im-
 Faediments to their participation in government and politics, cultural and education
 ctors hamper them. Only 3 of the 33 ministers who comprise the President's Cabi-
 net are women, and there are only 2 women in the 19-member Economic and Social
 Council, the Government's quasi-policymaking body. Women won two mayoralty
 elections and one rural commune in the November 1996 local elections. No women
 head political parties, and only 14 female Deputies hold seats in the 120-member
 National Assembly. Women's lower representation reflects not only disparity in edu-
 cation (see Section 5), but also cultural pressures. In addition political parties often
 rank women low on party lists, making it difficult for them to be elected to the Na-
 tional Assembly or to be appointed ministers.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A wide variety of human rights groups operate without government restriction,
 investigating and publishing their findings on human rights cases. Government offi-
 cials are generally cooperative and receptive to their views. In March the Govern-
 ment enacted a law to strengthen the National Committee on Human Rights. The
 Committee includes members from the Government and civic organizations, includ-
 ing private human rights groups. It may on its own initiative, among other actions,
 investigate human rights abuses, including torture, but did not investigate any
 cases of abuse in 1997.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution states that "men and women shall be equal in law" and prohibits
 discrimination based on race, religion, sex, class, or language. However, de facto dis-
 crimination against women is pervasive, and the Government frequently does not
 enforce antidiscrimination laws.
 Women.-There are credible reports that violence against women, usually wife
 beating, is common, particularly in rural areas. Police do not usually intervene in
 domestic disputes, and most people are reluctant to go outside the family for re-
 dress. The law and society view rape as a very serious crime, and the law stipulates
 that persons convicted of rape may be imprisoned for up to 10_years. If the victim
 is a minor, her age is considered an aggravating circumstance. Rape trials often re-
 sult in convictions.
 Despite constitutional protections, women face extensive societal discrimination,
 especially in rural areas where Islamic and Senegalese customs, including polygyny
 and Islamic rules of inheritance, are strongest, and women are generally con fined
 to traditional roles. In the countryside, women perform much of the subsistence
 farming and child rearing and have limited educational opportunities. Although the
 Government has committed itself to equalizing male/female primary school enroll-
 ment, there is still much social and official discrimination against women in edu-
 cational opportunities. Only 23 percent of females over 15 years of age are literate,
 while the rate for males over age 15 is 30 percent.
 According to the U.N. only 20 percent of women are engaged in paid employment.
 Traditional practices, moreover, make it difficult for women to obtain bank credit.
 Women usually marry young (the majority by age 16 in rural areas), and average
 6 live births (down from 7 in 1995). About half of all women live in polygynous
 unions.
 In urban areas, women encounter somewhat less discrimination and are active in
 overnment, political life, the legal profession, and business. About 14 percent of
 awyers are women. Urban women are more likely to take advantage of the Govern-
 ment's efforts to increase respect for women's legal rights to divorce, alimony, and
 
 
 292
 child support, and to seek education and employment. In general urban women re-
 ceive equal pay for equal work.
 Children.-The Ministry of Women, Children, and the Family, established in
 S1990, is reaponsible for promoting children's welfare. Numerous organizations assist
 the Ministry in support of children's rights, including the Ministry of Health, which
 maintained a nationwide effort focusing on child survival. Organized street begging
 by children who are Koranic students results in a significant interruption of their
 education. The Government continues to increase the number of classrooms and en-
 courage more children, particularly females, to enter and stay in school.
 There are no laws or regulations concerning female genital mutilation (FGM),
 which is widely condemned by international health experts -as damaging to both
 physical and psychological health.-However, the Ministry of Women, Children, and
 the Family sponsors programs to educate women -to the dangers. of FGM. FGM is
 not practiced by Senegal's largest ethnic group, the Wolofs (representing 43 percent
 of the population), but it is performed on girls belonging to some other ethnic
 groups. Infibulation, the most-extreme and dangerous form of FGM, is practiced by
 members of the Toucouleur and Peulh ethnic groups, particularly those in rural
 areas. Unsubstantiated recent studies estimate that between 5 and 20 percent of fe-
 males undergo the procedure.
 In July the village of Malicounda Bambara decided to ban FGM among its 3,000
 inhabitants despite strong support for the practice by the predominant group in the
 village, the Bambara. The local religious leader endorsed the villagers' decision. In
 November President Diof publicly endorsed this decision and called for debate in
 every village on ending FGM.
 People With Disabilities.-There is no official discrimination against disabled per-
 sons. There are no laws that mandate accessibility for the disabled, and in practice
 -most persons with disabilities are generally unable to participate in many occupa-
 tions due to physical barriers and a lack of equipment and training opportunities
 that would'make such participation possible.
 Religious Minorities.-Approximately 92 percent of the population are Muslim.
 There are small Christian (2 percent) and indigenous (6 percent) religious commu-
 nities. Officially, adherence to a particular religion confers no advantage or dis-
 advantage in civil, political, economic, military, or other matters. In practice, how-
 -ever, membership in an Islamic subgroup may afford certain political and economic
 protections and advantages.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of. Association.-The Constitution and the Labor Code provide all
 workers with -the right of association, and they are free to form or join unions. Any
 group of workers in the same occupations, similar trades, or the same professions
 may form a union. While the Ministry does not always grant initial recognition to
 a union, once it gives recognition, the Ministry virtually never withdraws it. It may,
 however, disband a union if its activities deviate from its charter. The Labor Code
 does not, apply to the informal and agricultural sectors where most people work.
 Although they represent a small percentage of the working population, unions
 wield significant political influence because of their ability to disrupt vital sectors
 of the economy. The small industrial component of the total work force of 4 million
 is almost totally unionized. The only union in the agrarian sector is one represent-
 ing workers at a privately owned sugar company. Some farmers are organized into
 the National Farming Association, an advocac or anization.
 The National Confederation of Senegalese orkers (CNTS), the largest union or-
 ganization, has close ties to the ruling Socialist Party, and union members hold a
 considerable number of government positions. One is a PS minister, and four others
 hold PS seats in the Parliament. While ostensibly an independent organization, the
 umbrella CNTS consistently supports government policies.
 The rival to the CNTS is the National Union of Autonomous Labor Unions of Sen-
 egal (UNSAS). UNSAS is a federation of strategically important unions such as
 those of electrical workers, telecommunication workers, teachers, water technicians,
 and hospital, railroad, and sugar workers.
 The Constitution and the Labor Code provide for the right to strike, but with re-
 strictions. Unions representing members of the civil service must notify the Govern-
 ment.of their intent to strike no less than 1 month in advance, and private sector
 unionsmust make a similar notification 3 days in advance. The-Government or the
 employer can use the time to seek a settlement to the dispute but cannot stop the
 strike. There were numerous legal-but no illegal-strikes this year. Regulations
 prohibit employers from retaliating against legal strikers, and these regulations are
 enforced through the Labor Court.
 
 
 The Labor, Code permits unions to affiliate with international bodies. The CNTS
 is active in regional and international labor organizations and is the dominant Sen-
 egalese member of the Organization of African Trade Union Unity.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The law provides unions with
 the right to organize and to bargain collectively, and these rights are protected in
 practice. There are also legal prohibitions governing discrimination by employers
 against union members and organizers. Employers found guilty of antiunion dis-
 crimination are required to reinstate workers. There were no known instances in
 which workers were prevented from exercising the right to organize and bargain col-
 lectively. The Ministry of Labor can intervene in disputes between labor and man-
 agement if requested, and it plays a mediation role in the private and state enter-
 prise sectors.
 Labor laws apply to all industrial firms including those in the Dakar Industrial
 Free Trade Zone.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-There were no reports of forced
 labor, which is prohibited by law. The Constitution prohibits child labor of all kinds,
 and the Government enforces this ban in the formal sector. There is no evidence
 that forced or bonded child labor takes place in the informal or agricultural sectors.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The Gov-
 ernment has written a ban on child labor of all kinds into the Constitution. The
 Government enforces this ban in the formal sector, which is under the purview of
 the labor law. There is no evidence that forced or bonded child labor takes place
 in the informal or agricultural sectors (see Section 6.c.). However, in lieu of being
 able to attend school, many children work in their family's fields.
 The minimum age for employment is 16 years for apprenticeships and 18 for all
 other types of work. Inspectors from the Ministry of Labor closely monitor and en-
 force these restrictions within the small formal wage sector, which includes state-
 owned corporations, large private enterprises, and cooperatives.
 However, children under the age of 16 frequently work in the much larger tradi-
 tional or informal sectors, such as family farms in rural areas or in small busi-
 nesses, where the Government does not enforce minimum age and other workplace
 regulations.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Legislation mandating a monthly minimum
 wage has been in force since the country's independence in 1960. The Ministries of
 Labor and Finance determine wage rates after negotiating with the unions and
 management councils. The minimum wage of less than $.34 (209.1 cfa francs) per
 hour is not adequate to support a worker and a family.
 Within the formal sector, the law mandates: a standard workweek of 40 to 48
 hours for most occupations, with at least one 24-hour rest period and 1 month per
 year of annual leave; enrollment in government systems for social security and re-
 tirement; safety standards; and a variety of other measures. These regulations are
 incorporated into the Labor Code and are supervised by inspectors from the Min-
 istry of Labor. However, the authorities' enforcement is uneven, especially outside
 the formal sector. There is no explicit legal protection for workers who file com-
 plaints about unsafe onditions. While there are legal regulations concerning work-
 place safety, government officials do not often enforce them.
 In theory workers have the right to remove themselves from unsafe working con-
 ditions, but in practice the right is seldom exercised in circumstances of high unem-
 ployment and a slow legal system.
