 SENEGAL
 Senegal is a republic with an elected president, Abdou Diouf, who has been in of-
 fice since 1981, and a unicameral legislature dominated by the President's Socialist
 Party (PS)since independence from France in 1960. The Prlesident appointed six
 members of the opposition party, the Democratic Party (PDS), and three independ-
 ents to his Cabinet in March. He subsequently fired two independents in September
 after their party accused the Government of incompetence.
 The Senegalese armed forces are professional and generally disciplined. They tra-
 ditionally remain aloof from politics and are firmly under civilian control. The para-
 military gendarmerie and the police are less professional and less disciplined. The
 military continued to be engaged in clashes with separatists in the Casamance re-
 gion of southern Snegal, with reported abuses on both sides, especially by the
 rebels. The police committed numerous human rights abuses.
 Senegal is predominantly agricultural with more than 70 percent of the labor
 force engaged in farming, largely peanut production. Since the devaluation of the
 CFA franc in 1994, the Government has implemented a series of economic policy
 reforms to enhance competitiveness and is phasing out most qualitative restrictions
 on imports, dismantling monopolies, liberalizing the labor market, and privatizing
 several important state-owned industries. Supported by the international donor
 community, Senegal remains dependent on foreign assistance as an important
 source of national income.
 The Government generally respected the human rights of its citizens. However,
 there were serious problems in some areas, particularly torture by police of suspects
 during questioning and lengthy pretrial detention. Soenegalese armed forces report-
 edly committed human rights abuses against Casamance rebel prisoners and sym-
 pathizers. The Government tried or punished few military, gen arme, or police for
 human rights abuses. It promoted a senior official widely accused of involvement in
 a major 1994 torture case. Poor prison ondiara s, ti, sic violence and discrimina-
 tion against women, and some abuse of children are also problems. There were cred-
 
 
 220
 ible reports of serious human rights abuses perpetrated by Casamance rebels
 against citizens and government officials.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no confirmed reports of
 litical or extrajudicial killings by government officials. The Government did not
 ring charges or further investigate the 1994 killing in police custody of
 Moustarchidine religious sect activist Lamine Samb.
 There were reports by human rights groups that soldiers killed captured Move-
 ment of Democratic Forces of the Casamance (MEDC) rebels. MFDC guerrillas took
 credit for a handful of political killings in the Casamance, particularly the murders
 of government officials. Starting in February, MFDC guerrillas violated the 1993
 cease-fire and proceeded to intimidate and murder officials and politicians who
 maintained loyalty to the central Government. The rebels murdered or displaced nu-
 merous civilians viewed as uncooperative by the MFDC.
 While precise data are lacking, there were an estimated 50 civilian deaths due
 to fighting in the Casamance, and approximately 15,000 persons displaced. Also, 58
 soldiers and an estimated 200 MFDC guerrillas have been killed in the conflict.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 There are credible reports that police and gendarmes often beat suspects during
 questioning andpretrial detention, in spite of constitutional prohibitions against
 such treatment. Police perpetrated torture, usually beatings, has become an embar-
 rassing public issue for the Government and is regularly treated in Senegal's lively
 press. Nevertheless, the authorities promoted the gendarme commander who is
 widely believed responsible for the torture of parliamentarian Mody Sy while Sy was
 in custody on trumped up charges of murdering Judge Babacar Seye in 1993. How-
 ever, in September prosecutors decided to detain and prosecute a police commis-
 sioner and two police officers accused of torturing, molesting, and raping a female
 pretrial detainee at a Dakar area police station.
 Prisons remain overcrowded, and food and health care are inadequate. However,
 there have been no reported deaths in prison due to these conditions. The Govern-
 ment permits visits by government, nongovernmental (NGO), and international
 human rights monitors.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution prohibits arbitrary ar-
 rest, detention, or exile; and the Government does not systematically violate these
 constitutional prohibitions. There were no new incidents of the Government arrest-
 ing opposition party leaders on questionable grounds.
 The law specifies that warrants, issued by judges, are required for arrests. How-
 ever, laws also grant the police broad powers to detain prisoners for lengthy periods
 of time. Police may legally hold without charge a person suspected of a crime for
 48 hours after arrest and for up to 72 hours if ordered by a public prosecutor. This
 period may be doubled in the case of crimes against the security of the State. The
 prosecutor decides whether to forward the case to an investigating judge who may
 open an investigation. At this point, the suspects are preliminarily charged and may
 be held or released on their own recognizance. There is no system of bail. During
 temporary detention, the accused has no access to family or an attorney but has the
 right to request examination by a physician. Once charged, a prisoner is permitted
 visits by both family and legal advisors. The accused may be held in custody for 6
 months, extendable for 6 additional months if the investigating magistrate certifies
 an extension is required. Such extensions may be reviewed by a court on appeal
 from the accused's attorney.
 In principle, the accused is innocent until proven guilty, and when brought to trial
 it is the State's burden to prove that the accused is guilty of the charges. However,
 police are rarely prosecuted for violations of arrest and detention procedures, and
 the authorities may detain a prisoner for long periods of time while they investigate
 and build a case against a suspect. The authorities may and routinely do hold pris-
 oners in custody unless and until a court demands their release. Despite the 6-
 month limitations mentioned above, the time between the charging phase and trial
 averages 2 years.
 Exile is not used.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for a judiciary inde-
 pendent of the executive, the legislature, and the armed forces. However, mag-
 istrates are vulnerable to outside pressures due to low pay, poor working conditions,
 and family and political ties. Also, the Minister of Justice and subordinate authori-
 
 
 221
 ties have extensive authority to influence judicial procedures, e.g., in keeping the
 accused in pretrial detention.
 The legal system is based on French civil law and is composed of ordinary courts
 and a number of higher and special courts, including the three created in May 1992
 to replace the Supreme Court: The Council of State for Administrative Questions,
 the Constitutional Council, and a Court of Appeal. These Courts remain
 understaffed, and many of the special courts, including the Unlawful Enrichment
 Court and special courts to try government officials for treason and malfeasance, are
 dormant. Aluslims have the right to choose customary law or civil law for certain
 civil cases, such as those concerning inheritance and divorce. However, customary
 law decisions are rendered by civil court judges. The right of appeal exists in all
 courts except military courts and the special "illegal enrichment" Court. Military
 courts may not try civilians.
 Trials are public, and defendants have the right to be present in court, to confront
 witnesses, to present evidence, and to have an attorney. In practice, however, some
 defendants are denied legal assistance at public expense due to lack of funding. Evi-
 dentiary hearings may be closed to the public and the press. A panel of judges pre-
 sides over ordinary courts for beth civil and criminal cases; in criminal cases citi-
 zens also serve on the panel.
 There were no reports of political prisoners. However, the Government held self-
 proclaimed MFDC rebel leader Abbe Diamacoune and four military/political advis-
 ers, extradited from Guinea-Bissau in 1994, under house arrest in lieu of being tried
 for treason as the Government works to negotiate an end to the separatist conflict.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution prohibits arbitrary invasion of the home, and there was little govern-
 ment interference in the private lives of citizens, particularly in the rural areas.
 Under the law, search warrants are required, and only judges may issue them. Dur-
 ing high-profile or politically charged investigations police often proceed without the
 required search warrants.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-TIThe Constitution provides for freedom of
 speech and press, and the Government generally respects these rights in practice.
 Laws prohibit the press from the expression of views that "discredit" the State, incite
 the population to disorder, or disseminate 'Talse news." However, the Government did
 not prosecute any groups or persons under these statutes during the year.
 A broad spectrum of thought and opinion is available to the public through regu-
 larly published magazines and newspapers, including foreign publications, and nu-
 merous independent radio stations. Political and economic views expressed in the
 independent press are often critical of the Government and its programs. While pub-
 lishers are required to register prior to starting publication, the Government rou-
 tinely approves such registrations. A government monopoly controls local television,
 an important source of news. French-owned pay television is available but offers no
 local news.
 Academic freedom is respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 these rights, and the Government generally respects them in practice. The Govern-
 ment requires prior authorization for public demonstrations which it usually grants.
 In  early  1995, it declined to issue public demonstration permits to the
 Moustarchidine Islamic sect, one of the groups the Government holds responsible for
 the February 1994 riots that resulted in the death of eight persons. However, by
 April the Government began permitting large Moustarhidine gatherings, even
 though the group technically remains banned.
 Senegalese wishing to form associations must register with the Ministry of Inte-
 rior. Business-related associations are registered with the Ministry of Commerce. By
 law and in practice, the Ministry of Interior must register such groups so long as
 the objectives of the association are clearly stated an dthey do not violate the law.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for these rights, and the Govenent gen-
 erally respects them in practice. Certain public employees must obtain government
 approval before departing Senegal.
 The Government cooperates with the United Nations High Commissioner for Ref-
 ugees and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees. There were no re-
 ports of forced expulsions of those having a valid claim to refugee status. The more
 than 60,000 Mauritanian refugees resident in Senegal, and other refugee groups,
 move freely throughout the country.
 
 
 222
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have the constitutional right to change their government through peri-
 odic multiparty elections. However, the Socialist Partys domination of political
 life-it has held power since independence-has called into question the extent to
 which citizens can exercise this right.
 The PS holds a large majority in Parliament with 86 parliamentary seats. The
 opposition holds 34 seats. There are 20 legal opposition parties. Six members of the
 leading opposition party, the Democratic Party (PDS), and three independents
 joinedPresident Dioufs 33-member Cabinet on March 15. In September he fired two
 of the independents after their party accused the Government of incompetence.
 Despite its preeminent position, the PS faced extensive factional in-fighting dur-
 ing the year in one instance resulting in the deaths of six PS supporters. This inter-
 nal PS conflict was responsible, at least in part, for the Government canceling the
 November 1995 municipal elections and rescheduling them to coincide with the No-
 vember 1996 rural elections. Although the Government characterized the delay as
 an efficiency/cost-cutting measure, opposition parties charged that the postponement
 was a manipulation of the electoral law, giving the PS more time to prepare for elec-
 tions.
 Women are underrepresented in the political process. While there are no legal im-
 pediments to their participation in government and politics, several de facto impedi-
 ments exist. Only 3 of the 33 Ministers who comprise the President's Cabinet are
 women, and there are only 2 in the 19-member Economic and Social Council, the
 Government's quasi-policymaking body. There are no women heading political par-
 ties, and only 14 female Deputies in the 120-member National Assembly. Their
 lower representation reflects not only disparity in education (see Section 5), but also
 cultural pressures. In addition, political parties often rank women low on party lists,
 making it difficult for them to be elected to the National Assembly or be appointed
 ministers.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A wide variety of human rights groups operate without government restriction,
 investigating and publishing their findings on human rights cases. Government offi-
 cials are generally cooperative and receptive of their views. However, while the Gov-
 ernment has made no apparent attempts to suppress criticism, it has not responded
 to reliable reports of human rights abuses by government forces involved in the
 MFDC conflict in the Casamance.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution states that "men and women shall be equal in law" and prohibits
 discrimination based on race, religion, sex, class or language. However, de facto dis-
 crimination against women is pervasive, and die Government does not frequently
 enforce antidiscrimination laws.
 Women.-There are credible reports that violence against women, usually wife
 beating, is common, particularly in rural areas. Police do not usually intervene in
 domestic disputes, and most people are reluctant to go outside the family for re-
 dress. The law and society view rape as a very serious crime, and the law stipulates
 that persons convicted of rape may be imprisoned up to 10 years, more if the victim
 is a minor. Rape trials often result in convictions. Moreover, vigilante action is often
 meted out to the accused before the police are able to arrest rape or family violence
 suspects.
 Despite constitutional protections, women face extensive societal discrimination,
 especially in rural areas where Islamic and Senegalese customs, including polygyny
 and Islamic rules of inheritance, are strongest, and women are generally confined
 to traditional roles. In the countryside, women perform much of the subsistence
 farming and childrearing and have limited educational opportunities. Although the
 Government has committed itself to equalizing male/female primary school enroll-
 ment, there is still much social and official discrimination against women in edu-
 cational opportunities. Only 19 percent of females over 15 years of age are literate,
 while the rate for males over age 15 is 37 percent.
 According to the U.N. only 20 percent of women are engaged in paid employment.
 Traditional practices, moreover, make it difficult for women to obtain bank credit.
 Women usually marry young (the majority by age 16 in rural areas), and average
 7 live births. About haf of all Senegalese women live in polygynous unions.
 In urban areas women encounter somewhat less discrimination and are active in
 government, political life, the legal profession, and business. About 14 percent of
 
 
 Senegalese lawyers are women. Urban women are more likely to take advantage of
 the Government's efforts to increase respect for women's legal rights to divorce, ali-
 mony, child support, and to seek education and employment. In general, urban
 women receive equal pay for equal work.
 Children.-The Ministry of Women, Children, and the Family, established in
 1990, has the responsibility for promoting children's welfare. Numerous organiza-
 tions assist the Ministry in support of children's rights, including the Ministry of
 Health which began a nationwide effort focusing on child survival in 1995. To this
 end, the Government enjoyed some success in increasing hospital services in outly-
 ing regions and introducing lower priced generic drugs into the marketplace. Less
 than a year into the program, government officials reported a nationwide increase
 in birth weights.
 The 1995 fall school term marked the beginning of a government effort to increase
 nationwide the number of classrooms and encourage more children, particularly fe-
 males, to enter and stay in school.
 There are no laws or regulations concerning female genital mutilation (FGM),
 which is widely condemned by international health experts as damaging to both
 physical and psychological health. However, the Ministry of Women, Children, and
 the Family sponsors programs to educate women to the dangers of FGM. FGM is
 not practiced by Senegal's largest ethnic group, the Wolofs (representing 43 percent
 of the population), but it is performed on girls belonging to some other ethnic
 groups.Infibulation, the most extreme and dangerous form of FGM, is practiced by
 the Toucouleur and Peulh ethnic groups. Approximately 6 percent of females are be-
 lieved to have undergone this procedure.
 People With Disabilities.-There is no official discrimination against disabled per-
 sons. There are no laws that mandate accessibility for the disabled, and in practice
 most persons with disabilities are generally unable to participate in many occupa-
 tions due to physical barriers   and lack of equipment and training opportunities
 that would make such participation possible.
 Religious Minorities.-Apprximately 92 percent of the population are Muslim.
 There are small Christian (2 percent) and indigenous (6 percent) religious commu-
 nities. Officially, adherence to a particular religion confers no official advantage or
 disadvantage in civil, political, economic, military, or other matters. In practice,
 membership in an Islamic sect may afford certain political and economic protections
 and advantages.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution and the Labor Code provide all
 workers with the right of association, and they are free to form or join unions. A
 minimum of seven persons, each having worked in the trade for at least 1 year, may
 form a trade union by submitting a list of members and a charter to the Ministry
 of Interior. While the Ministry does not always grant initial recognition to a union,
 once it gives recognition, the Ministry virtually never withdraws it. It may, however,
 disband a union if its activities deviate from its charter. The Labor Code does not
 apply to the informal and agricultural sectors where most people work.
 Although they represent a small percentage of the working population, unions
 wield significant political influence because of their ability to disrupt vital sectors
 of the econom  The small industrial component of the total work force of 4 million
 is almost totally unionized. The only union in the agrarian sector is one represent-
 ing workers at a privately owned sugar company. Some farmers are organized into
 the National Farming Association, an advocacy organization.
 The National Conederation of Senegalese Workers (CNTS), the largest union or-
 ganization, has close ties to the ruling Socialist Party (PS), and union members hold
 a considerable numb er      rnment positions. One is a PS minister, and four oth-
 ers hold PS seats in Parliament. While ostensibly an independent organization, the
 umbrella CNTS has consistently supported government policies.
 The rival to he the  is the National Union of Autonomous Labor Unions of Sen-
 egal (UNSAS). UNSAS is a federation of strategically important unions such as
 those of electricians, telecommunication workers, teachers, water technicians, and
 hospital, railroad, and sugar workers.
 The Constitution and the Labor Code provide for the right to strike, but with re-
 strictions. Unions representing members of the civil service must request permission
 to strike 1 month in advance, and private sector unions must request permission
 3 days in advance. The Governmentas the right to approve or disapprove a strike
 request. There were numerous legal-but no illegal-strikes in 1995. Regulations
 prohibit employers from retaliating against legal strikers, and these regulations are
 enforced through the Labor Court.
 
 
 224
 The Labor Code permits unions to affiliate with international bodies. The CNTS
 is active in regional and international labor organizations and is the dominant Sen-
 egalese member of the Organization of African Trade Union Unity.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Unions have the right by law
 to organize and to bargain collectively, and these rights are protected in practice.
 There are also legal prohibitions governing discrimination by employers against
 union members and organizers. Employers found guilty of antiunion discrimination
 are required to reinstate workers. There were no known instances in which workers
 were prevented from exercising the right to organize and bargain collectively. The
 Ministry of Labor can intervene in disputes between labor and management if re-
 quested, and it plays a mediation role in the private and state enterprise sectors.
 Labor laws apply to all industrial firms including those in the Dakar Industrial
 Free Trade Zone.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-There were no reports of forced
 labor, which is prohibited by law.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum age for employment
 is 16 years for apprenticeships and 18 for all other types of work. Ministry of Labor
 inspectors closely monitor and enforce these restrictions within the small formal
 wage sector, which includes state-owned corporations, large private enterprises, and
 cooperatives.
 However, children under the age of 15 frequently work in the much larger tradi-
 tional or informal sectors, such as family farms in rural areas or in small busi-
 nesses, where the Government does not enforce minimum age and other workplace
 regulations.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Legislation mandating a monthly minimum
 wage has been in force since the country's independence in 1960. The Ministries of
 Labor and Finance determine wage rates after negotiating with the unions and
 management councils. The minimum wage of less than $.40 per hour (202 CFA
 franc) last negotiated in 1989, is not adequate to support a worker and a family.
 Witin the formal sector, the law mandates: a standard workweek of 40 to 48
 hours for most occupations, with at least one 24-hour rest period and 1 month per
 year of annual leave; enrollment in government systems for social security and re-
 tirement; safety standards; and a variety of other measures. These regulations are
 incorporated into the Labor Code and are supervised by inspectors from the Min-
 istry of Labor. However, the authorities' enforcement is uneven, especially outside
 the formal sector.
 There is no explicit legal protection for workers who file complaints about unsafe
 conditions. While there are legal regulations concerning workplace safety, govern-
 ment officials do not often enforce them.
