 SENEGAL
 Senegal-is a republic with an elected president and a
 unicameral legislature.. There are 17 legal political parties,
 although the Socialist Party has dominated politics and
 controlled the Government since independence from France in
 1960. Abdou Diouf, who has been President since 1981, was
 declared reelected with 73 percent of the vote in the hotly
 contested presidential elections of 1988 (the results of which
 were openly disputed by the opposition until 1991). In April
 twa.opposition parties joined the Government, accepting five
 ministerial-level positions, including Minister of State, the
 Government's highest ranking position after the Prime
 Minister. In 1991 an electoral reform commission involved all
 but oxe political party (that chose not to participate) in
 substantially revising the electoral code: lowering the voting
 age to 18, limiting presidential terms of office (two 7-year
 terms), and addressing virtually all of the weaknesses cited by
 opposition parties.
 The Senegalese armed forces (about 19,000 men, including the
 paramilitary gendarmerie) is a professional, disciplined
 organization which-traditionally remains aloof from politics
 and is respected by the population. In the first part of the
 year, the army exchanged shots almost weekly with the
 Mauritanian army across the Senegal river. Reportedly, at
 least six Senegalese civilians were killed by gunfire from the
 Mauritanian side of the border. The exchanges tapered off
 toward July when face-to-face talksbegan between the two
 Governments.
 Separatist-related violence in the Casamance continued between
 January and May resulting in 87 casualties, of which 22 were
 reportedly unarmed combatants. On-May 31, a cease-fire
 agreement was signed between the Government and the
 proindependence Movement of the Democratic Forces in the
 Casamance-(MFDC). There have been no further reports of
 violence. -Civilian security forces are fairly well trained and
 generally respect the laws they enforce; those who do not
 sometimes face criminal prosecution. However, there were
 credible reports that both military and civilian security
 forces were involved in torture and killings of noncombatants
 in the Casamance in 1990 and 1991.
 Senegal has a mixed economy with a substantial private sector.
 It is overwhelmingly agricultural, with more than 70 percent of
 the labor force engaged in farming, largely peanut production.
 Since 1983 Senegal has actively-pursued a structural adjustment
 program, with the support of the International Monetary Fund,
 the World Bank, and major bilateral donors, designed to
 liberalize the economy and stimulate economic growth. There is
 concern, however, about the-short-term political impact of the
 austerity reforms, particularly in Dakar, where high
 unemployment and deteriorating social conditions contributed to
 civil unrest in the past. The unrest abated in 1991, but the
 economy remains fragile.
 Senegal's generally good human rights record continued to be
 marred by credible reports of torture and extrajudicial
 killings in the Casamance. However, reports of such abuses
 lessened considerably with the end of the separatist-related
 violence in the Casamance in May. All persons detained or
 imprisoned in connection with the separatist movement were
 released in May and later amnestied, along with all persons
 imprisoned or awaiting trial for acts connected to the protests
 following the 1988 elections. Government security forces were
 
 
 318
 SENEGAL
 removed from the Casamance region, the military governor was
 replaced by a civilian, and the dialog between the Government
 and the MFDC continues. Other areas of human rights abuse
 include failure of the Government to establish responsibility
 for torture and deaths of persons in detention by civilian and
 military officials in 1990, and some restrictions on freedom of
 the press and on the rights of women. Electoral code revisions
 agreed to by the Government and opposition parties appear to
 have removed virtually all of the procedural concerns arising
 out of the disputed 1988 elections. The effect of the changes
 will be demonstrated conclusively only when the next elections
 are held in 1993.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were credible reports of such killings in connection with
 separatist-related violence in the Casamance (see Section l.g.).
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 The authorities generally respect the legal prohibition on
 physical abuse, but detainees are sometimes subjected to abuse,
 usually during the "garde a vue" (detention) period between
 arrest and appearance before a magistrate. This abuse usually
 consists of beatings and denial of food, water, and clothing to
 prisoners. The two reports of extrajudicial killings by
 government troops noted in Section l.g. involved severe
 beatings of suspected Casamance rebels that led to their
 deaths. There were other word-of-mouth reports of abusive
 treatment of persons detained by both sides between January and
 May in the Casamance dispute. No complaints were lodged, and
 the Ministry of Justice was not asked to investigate any of the
 above situations.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Constitution prohibits arbitrary arrest and detention, and
 this is generally respected in practice. The Senegalese legal
 system is patterned after the French. Warrants, issued by
 judges, are required for arrests. A person suspected of a
 crime may be legally held without charge for 48 hours after
 arrest and may be held up to 72 hours if ordered by a public
 prosecutor; this period legally may be doubled in case of
 crimes against the security of the State.
 During this period of detention, the prisoner has no access to
 family or attorney; but after a charge is lodged, both family
 and attorney may visit. More extended "temporary" detention or
 custody is permitted when civil authorities determine that
 there is a threat of civil disturbance or that a person is a
 threat to himself or others. Temporary custody is valid for a
 maximum period of 6 months, but it may be renewed for
 additional 6-month periods if the investigating magistrate
 certifies that more time is required to complete the
 investigation. There is no limit to the number of times it may
 
 
 319
 SENEGAL
 be renewed. These laws are generally respected by law
 enforcement officials in ordinary cases.
 The Government used its legal powers to detain persons
 suspected of belonging to the MFDC or of participating in
 violence connected to Casamance separatist activities. Until
 May, over 400 people were in detention. No trial date before
 the State Security Court had been fixed. On May 27, President
 Diouf ordered the release of all detainees and canceled all
 arrest warrants issued for persons suspected of involvement in
 separatist-related activities. On May 31, the Government and
 the MFDC signed a cease-fire agreement, and on June 28, the
 National Assembly passed a bill of amnesty for all persons
 arrested in connection with the Casamance events. No prisoners
 connected to the separatist movement remain in jail, and there
 is no pending prosecution. The same legislation also amnestied
 over 100 people charged during the troubles following the 1988
 elections, including three men awaiting trial for. fire-bombing
 a vehicle in 1988. There were no known political detainees
 being held at year's end. Exile is not used as a means of
 poiitical control.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Senegal has an active and well-trained judiciary, which is
 constitutionally independent of the executive, the legislature,
 and the armed forces. Court officials are lawyers who have
 completed several years of required apprenticeship. Defendants
 are presumed innocent until proven guilty. Trials are public,
 and defendants have the right to a defense attorney from the
 time the case is presented before an examining magistrate.
 While there is a provision for defendants to have a lawyer at
 public expense, it is not funded and does not occur in
 practice. Defendants have the right to be present in court, to
 confront witnesses, and to present evidence.
 Ordinary courts are presided over by a panel of judges which in
 criminal cases includes a panel of citizens as a form of jury.
 Magistrates are appointed by decree and in principle are not
 subject to government or political intervention; however, low
 pay, poor working conditions, and family and political ties
 make magistrates vulnerable to outside pressures. There are
 four categories of special courts: the High Court of Justice,
 the State Security Court, the Cburt for the Repression of the
 Unlawful Accumulation of Wealth, and the military courts. The
 High Court of Justice, created for the sole purpose of trying
 high government officials for treason or malfeasance, has never
 met.
 The State Security Court, consisting of a judge and two
 assessors, has jurisdiction over cases involving politically
 motivated crimes. All cases involving Casamance separatists
 before the State Security Court, including the cases of five
 MFDC members who had been extradited from Guinea-Bissau and
 convicted-of plotting against the security of the State, were
 dismissed and amnestied; the cases involving Mauritanians
 charged with espionage continued at year's end. The "illegal.
 enrichment" Court, which has judged only three cases since it
 was created in 1981, is not presently active. The military
 court system has jurisdiction over offenses committed by
 members of the armed forces during peacetime. Civilians may
 not be tried by military courts. There is a right of appeal in
 all courts except the State Security Court, the "illegal
 enrichment" Court, and the Military Tribunal.
 
 
 320
 SENEGAL
 There were no political prisoners at the end of 1991.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Constitution prohibits arbitrary invasion of the home, and
 there is relatively little government interference in the
 private lives of Senegalese citizens, particularly in rural
 areas. Search warrants are normally required and may be issued
 only by judges and in accordance with procedures established by
 law. In practice, searches without warrants occasionally take
 place. There is no evident pattern of monitoring the private
 written or oral communications of citizens. Some of those
 opposition figures who believed their phones had been tapped
 thought that the practice ended in 1991.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian
 Law in Internal Conflicts
 The violence in the Casamance region of Senegal, which began in
 1982 with sporadic attacks on Senegalese security forces by
 armed members of the MFDC and intensified in 1990, abated in
 early 1991 and almost completely ceased in May when a
 cease-fire agreement was signed between the Government and the
 MFDC.
 However, there are two independent reports of government forces
 beating and killing people in custody in the Casamance in early
 1991. The Government said that because no formal complaints
 were filed with the Ministry of Justice, no investigation would
 be undertaken. Between January and May, the separatists killed
 about 17 villagers and wounded 5 others. Approximately 21
 armed incidents between separatists and government forces of
 all kinds were reported in the Casamance during that period,
 resulting in 3 deaths and 16 wounded among government forces,
 and about 46 deaths and an unknown number of wounded among the
 separatists.
 In January a nongovernmental human rights organization issued a
 report covering events of the last 6 months of 1990 that gave
 detailed accounts of the execution by government troops of 9
 prisoners and the torture of 12 others. The report stated that
 the Government had not issued clear guidelines on the rules of
 engagement and had never given orders not to kill or torture
 prisoners. The Minister of Justice, in a public letter, denied
 the allegations, asserting that Senegalese security forces
 conformed to the law in maintaining order and did not carry out
 torture or extrajudicial executions. He did not address the
 specific cases described in the report except to say that
 Senegalese authorities had conducted preliminary investigations
 into the deaths of six people mentioned in the report.
 According to the Government, the investigations were later
 dropped for lack of sufficient evidence. The Government
 released no information regarding the two military
 investigations begun in 1990 of alleged unlawful deaths.
 In late December, two Socialist Party figures were killed in
 the Casamance in what appeared to be a targeted assassination.
 The recognized leaders of the MFDC publicly denied
 responsibility. Also in late December, in two separate
 incidents Senegalese military shot people who allegedly failed
 to heed warnings to halt.
 
 
 SENEGAL
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and press are protected in the Constitution,
 although journalists' activities are circumscribed by legal
 restrictions against expressing views which discredit the
 State, incite the population to disorder, or disseminate "false
 news." While Senegal's only daily newspaper is'controlled by
 the ruling Socialist Party, it extended its coverage of the
 activities of opposition parties in 1991, and there are many
 regularly published magazines and newspapers reflecting a broad
 range of political opinion from conservative to Marxist. The
 wide variety of political views expressed in the independent
 press is often critical of the Government and its programs;
 government officials, politicians, and the political parties
 participating in the Government are not immune.
 In 1991 the government-owned broadcast media extended their
 coverage of political opposition parties. In the past very
 little news and information about opposition party activities
 had been disseminated through radio and television. More
 equitable access to the electronic media emerged as a principal
 opposition demand during and after the 1988 elections. In
 April 1991, a national advisory commission for broadcasting was
 established to oversee radio and television coverage of
 political party activities. At the same time, two political
 parties formerly in opposition joined the Government. Since
 then, the news coverage of political parties both within and
 outside of the coalition Government has increased
 significantly. -The coverage has included political meetings,
 press conferences, and interviews of opposition leaders, who
 have not hesitated to make their opinions known. Further
 liberalization of the state-.controlled broadcast media included
 changes in the statutes governing television, which altered its
 status as a government entity and had the aim of providing
 greater independence. The Government has also given permission
 to Radio France International to begin transmissions in Senegal
 and to a French company to operate a pay-television channel.
 The cases against the journalists of the opposition newspaper,
 Sopi, filed in 1989 and 1990, have been settled. The editor of
 Sopi, convicted in 1990 of spreading false news, completed a
 6-month prison sentence early in 1991. All other Sopi cases,
 including the conviction of a National Assembly deputy for
 complicity in offending the Chief of State, were dismissed as a
 result of a June 28 amnesty decree affecting all those charged
 in connection with the protests of the 1988 elections. The
 deputy is now a minister in the coalition Government. Since
 the formation of the new Government, Sopi has refrained from
 criticizing the President or the Government. Publishers are
 required to register with the Central Court prior to starting
 publication, but such registrations are routinely approved.
 Publications, including foreign publications, critical of the
 Government, are rarely censored or banned in Senegal.
 In general, academic freedom is enjoyed by the schools and the
 universities.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 In general, Senegalese freely exercise their constitutional
 rights of assembly and association, although demonstrations or
 protest meetings against government policies are closely
 monitored by security- services. Prior authorization for public
 
 
 3 22
 SENEGAL
 demonstrations is required. In 1991 there were few public
 political demonstrations, a change from 1990 which saw many.
 Senegalese wishing to form associations must register them with
 the Ministry of Interior (except for business-related
 associations, which are registered with the Ministry of
 Commerce). By law and in practice, the'Interior Ministry is
 obliged to register such groups, so long as the objectives of
 association are clearly stated and are not in violation of the
 law.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Senegal is constitutionally a secular state, and freedom of
 religion is a legal right, which exists in practice. Islam is
 the religion of 94 percent of the population, but no attempt
 has been made by the Government to introduce Shari'a law.
 Other religions, the major one of which is Roman Catholicism,
 are freely practiced. Missionary activity is permitted, and
 foreign Protestant missionaries are active in several regions
 of the country. Conversion is permitted, and there is no
 discrimination against minority religions. Adherence to a
 particular religion confers no official advantage or
 disadvantage in civil, political, economic, military, or other
 sectors. Both Islamic and Christian organizations publish
 periodicals. Koranic and Catholic schools exist alongside the
 public school system, and the Mouride Brotherhood is
 constructing an Islamic university in its headquarters city of
 Touba.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Constitution states that all citizens have the right to
 travel and establish themselves freely anywhere in Senegal, a
 right respected in practice. Exit visas are not required for
 travel outside the country. There is no restriction on
 emigration, and repatriates are not disadvantaged on their
 return to Senegal. A Senegalese citizen by birth may not have
 his citizenship annulled for any reason. A naturalized citizen
 may have his citizenship revoked if it is proved in a court of
 law that he obtained his citizenship fraudulently or if he has
 been convicted of a crime and has been a citizen less than 15
 years.
 In 1989 ethnic violence between Senegal and Mauritania resulted
 in a flood of refugees and displaced persons. Throughout 1991,
 refugees continued to trickle over the river into Senegal. The
 United Nations High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR) recorded
 63,442 registered refugees in 275 Senegalese sites along the
 river border with Mauritania as of July. They are free to
 circulate within Senegal and are not subject to forced
 repatriation. The Governments of Senegal and Mauritania began
 formal discussions in August on issues of indemnification and
 compensation, but diplomatic relations had not resumed by
 year's end, the border was still closed, and there had been no
 discussion on the return of refugees.
 As a result of the violence in the Casamance region, the UNHCR
 reported in August that it was assisting 5,000 Senegalese
 refugees from the Casamance in Guinea-Bissau. There were also
 several hundred refugees in The Gambia, and an estimated 2,000
 displaced Senegalese in Ziguinchor, the region's largest town.
 Some of the latter two groups may have returned to their
 villages, but there are no official records of their numbers or
 movements.
 
 
 323
 SENEGAL
 In May Senegal gave refuge to Hissan Habre after he was deposed
 in 1990 as President of Chad.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Senegal has a multiparty political system and universal
 suffrage for all citizens over 21. Presidential and
 legislative elections have been held concurrently every 5
 years, most recently in 1988. As a result of electoral code
 reforms,, presidential elections will be held hereafter every 7
 years. There are no restrictions in law or practice against
 women or minorities voting or participating in politics.
 The Socialist Party has dominated Senegalese political life
 since independence. Political opposition leaders' claims of
 fraud in-the 1988 election ceased in 1991 when President Diouf
 invited four opposition parties to join his Government. Two
 parties accepted, including the largest and most vocal of the
 opposition, the Senegalese Democratic Party (PDS). Five
 ministerial-level positions were given to the two parties;
 Abdoulaye Wade, President Diouf's chief opponent in the 1988
 presidential elections, accepted the post of Minister of State,
 the highest ranking position in the Government after the Prime
 Minister.
 In April President Diouf convoked a national commission to
 reform the electoral code, which opposition parties had
 strenuously criticized, particularly for lax voter
 identification and only an optional secret ballot. The
 opposition cited weaknesses in the electoral code as one of the
 reasons for boycotting local elections in 1990. The electoral
 reform commission, headed by a widely respected jurist,
 included all political parties, save one that refused to
 participate. The new code, approved by the National Assembly
 in September, addresses virtually all of the concerns voiced by
 opposition parties in 1988 and 1990.  Among its extensive
 changes, it lowers the voting age to 18, limits the
 presidential term of office to two terms of 7.years each,
 mandates a secret ballot in all elections, tightens the system
 of voter identification, and involves all participating
 political parties in key aspects of election administration.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There are at least eight Senegalese human rights organizations,
 including the Association of African Jurists and the
 Association of Young Senegalese Lawyers. All are free to
 publicly criticize the Government, although none have directly
 done so on issues related to the Casamance.
 The Government allows human rights groups such as Amnesty
 International to investigate allegations concerning human
 rights abuses in Senegal and responds to requests for
 information about those allegations. The ICRC, with the
 approval of the Government, maintains an office in Dakar.
 Senegal actively promotes international standards for human
 rights practices; it sponsored the African Charter on Human and
 People's Rights of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and
 was a founder of the OAU's African Human Rights Commission in
 1987.
 
 
 324
 SENEGAL
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution states that "men and women shall be equal in
 law." While officially there is no discrimination in Senegal
 based on race, religion, or language, the country is
 predominantly Muslim.  Islamic customs, 'including polygamy and
 Islamic rules of inheritance, generally prevail, especially in
 the rural areas. Despite government encouragement and
 increased educational opportunities, females still get less
 than one-third of the schooling of males. Modifications of the
 family code adopted by the National Assembly in 1988 reinforced
 women's rights to divorce, alimony, child support, and
 employment.
 However, Islamic and Senegalese customs persist, and women are
 still confined largely to traditional roles, notably engaging
 in heavy field labor in the large subsistence agricultural
 sector. Traditional inheritance and land tenure practices make
 it difficult for women to own land and to acquire sufficient
 collateral to obtain bank credit. Women usually marry young
 (the majority by age 16 in rural areas), average about seven
 live births, and die relatively young. About 67 percent of
 women aged 40 to 45 live in polygamous unions.
 Violence against women, usually wife beating, is not uncommon,
 particularly in rural areas, but there are no accurate
 statistics, and the extent of the problem is not known. Police
 do not normally intervene in domestic disputes, and women are
 reluctant to go outside the family for redress. Persons
 convicted of rape may be sentenced up to 10 years in prison--
 more if the victim is a minor.
 Female genital excision is not practiced by Senegal's largest
 ethnic group, the Wolofs, but it is performed on girls
 belonging to other ethnic groups. One study concludes that 20
 percent of Senegal's women have undergone one form or another
 of genital mutilation; the average age of girls when subjected
 to the practice is 9 years. Infibulation, the most extreme and
 dangerous form of genital mutilation, is practiced only by the
 Toucouleur and Peulh ethnic groups; perhaps 6 percent of
 Senegalese women have undergone this operation. There are no
 laws or regulations prohibiting this practice. However, in
 1990 President Diouf established a new ministerial-level office
 responsible for women and child welfare. The incumbent--one of
 three women with ministerial rank in the Government--has
 promoted programs to educate village women to the dangers of
 excision. The semiofficial daily newspaper carries occasional
 news and feature stories condemning the practice.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 All workers are free to form or join unions of their own
 Choosing. A minimum of seven persons, each having worked
 within their profession for at least I year, may form a union
 by submitting a list of members and a charter to the Ministry
 of Interior. A union can be disbanded by the Ministry if the
 union's activities deviate from the charter. Although unions
 sometimes fail to obtain initial recognition, once received it
 is virtually never withdrawn. Even though they represent a
 small percentage of the working population, unions wield
 significant political influence, primarily because of their
 ability to disrupt essential services. Unions have the right
 
 
 325
 SENEGAL
 to strike (guaranteed by the Constitution). There were a
 number of strikes in November and December. Most were by
 government employees such as post office workers and teachers,
 and most were short-lived.
 The National Confederation of Senegalese Workers (CNTS), the
 largest union organization, has close ties to the ruling
 Socialist Party and is entitled to considerable numbers of
 government positions. While ostensibly an independent umbrella
 organization, the CNTS has supported government policies. The
 Secretary General of the CNTS is at the same time a Vice
 President of the National Assembly, a member of the Socialist
 Party's governing Political Bureau, and one of President
 Diouf'q key advisers and supporters. There are three rival
 organizations: the Democratic Union of Senegalese Workers
 (UDTS) (composed'mostly of manual workers in the private
 sector), the Coordination of Autonomous Trade Unions (CSA)
 (composed of the largest autonomous teachers' and drban transit
 workers' union and two smaller crganizations), and National
 Union of Autonomous Syndicates of Senegal (UNSAS) (a federation
 of two other autonomous teachers unions and the powerful
 electrical, health and communications workers' union).
 Senegalese unions are active in regional and international
 labor organizations. The CNTS is the dominant Senegalese
 member of the Organization of African Trade Union Unity. Some
 of the autonomous unions referred to above are members of the
 Communist-domiiated World Federation of Trade Unions, or
 affiliated federations, and have close ties with Senegalese
 Marxist parties.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Senegalese unions have the right by law to organize and to
 bargain collectively, and these rights are protected in
 practice. There are also legal prohibitions on antiunion
 discrimination by employers against union members and
 organizers. There are no known instances of workers being
 forcibly discouraged from exercising these rights. The
 Ministry of Labor will intervene in disputes between labor and
 management when requested, and it plays a mediation and
 arbitration role in private and state-enterprise sectors.
 Senegalese labor laws apply in principle to all industrial
 firms, including those in the export free zone in Dakar.
 However, firms operating in the zone and those eligible for
 benefits under the Investment Code enjoy certain exceptions to
 the Labor Code which were introduced in 1989. These firms do
 not need prior government authorization to dismiss employees
 and may hire workers on the basis of temporary contracts for a
 period of up to 5 years.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 There were- no reports of forced labor in Senegal, and it is
 prohibited by law.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The minimum age for employment is 16 for apprenticeships and 18
 for all other types of work. Inspectors from the Ministry of
 Labor closely monitor and enforce these restrictions within the
 formal wage sector, that is, the area of the economy over which
 the Government can exercise some supervision, such as
 state-owned corporations, large private enterprises, or farmers
 
 
 326
 SENEGAL
 gathered into cooperatives. On the other hand, children under
 16 are frequently employed in the much larger traditional
 sector, and minimum age and other workplace regulations are not
 seriously enforced on family farms in rural areas and in small,
 privately owned businesses.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Legislation mandating a monthly minimum wage has been in force
 since independence in 1960. The actual rate is determined by
 the Ministers of Labor and Finance after negotiating with
 unions and management councils. Recent CNTS efforts have
 concentrated on raising the minimum wage for unskilled
 laborers, which, according to the unions, is not considered
 sufficient to maintain a decent standard of living. Workers
 must frequently supplement incomes through second jobs,
 reliance on the extended family, and personal debt. Within the
 formal economic sector, Senegalese law provides for acceptable
 conditions of work, including standard wcrkweeks (40 to 48
 hours per week for most professions), annual leave benefits
 (usually I month per year), and a variety of health and safety
 regulations. These regulations are incorporated into the Labor
 Code approved by the National Assembly and are supervised by
 Ministry of Labor inspectors. Enforcement, however, appears to
 be uneven, especially outside the formal wage sector.
 
 
 327
