 SENEGAL
 Senegal's efforts to end a one-party system and foster
 multi-party democracy advanced in 1978. National
 elections were held in February for the first time
 under a new constitutional provision providing for a
 three-party system. The election was contested in an
 open, uninhibited atmosphere in which the opposition
 views were freely presented in the media. Senegal is
 among the most active countries in promoting human
 rights through international organizations, warmly
 endorses the human rights policy of the United States
 and supports our initiatives for majority rule in
 Africa. A major theme of the Prime Minister's last
 annual message to the assembly was human rights and
 democracy.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Statutory prohibitions against the use of torture are
 respected and enforced.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 These forms of punishment do not exist in Senegal, nor
 does the Department of State know of any reports of
 arbitrary deprivations of life.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 The right to freedom from arbitrary arrest or imprison-
 ment has been observed in recent years.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a fair, public trial is observed.
 
 (150)
 
 
 151
 e. Invasion of the Home
 There are effective legal safeguards against arbitrary
 invasion of the home.
 2. Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 The Government's stated policy is to build a "socialist
 and democratic" society which will preserve humanistic
 values while raising per capita income and reducing
 the economic disparity between regions. Almost fifty
 percent of the Government's revenues are raised from
 import taxes which affect principally Senegal's wealthier
 clases. A progressive income tax raises another twenty
 percent of the revenues. Government wage policies for
 the salaried work force have had the effect of leaving
 the real purchasing power of Senegalese workers in 1978
 at approximately the same level as it was in 1970.
 Labor legislation is progressive, and social welfare
 benefits provided to workers are approximately 25
 percent of basic wages.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Includ-
 ing:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion
 and Assembly
 Freedom of speech, thought and intellectual inquiry
 are respected. There is no discrimination based upon
 race, ethnic origin or religion, and the Senegalese
 record for tolerance, both in law and actual practice,
 is excellent. The development of trade union pluralism
 has paralleled the country's development of multi-party
 democracy.
 There are no legal restrictions on press freedom. The
 nation's only daily newspaper is government-sponsored,
 and an opposition leader recently complained publicly
 about its unbalanced news coverage. However, opposition
 and independent news periodicals are freely published
 
 
 152
 and over the past year have increased in number. The
 political journals have sharply criticized the Govern-
 ment and have proposed alternative political courses.
 Opposition journalists were outspoken during the recent
 national electoral campaign.
 The Senegalese Government has, in recent years, given
 increased attention to the integration of women into
 the modern economy. In March 1978, two women were
 appointed to the Cabinet.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 Freedom of movement within Senegal is unrestricted and
 there are no controls on emigration.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Although effective political power is held by the
 socialist party, the two other legally recognized
 opposition parties are active and operate with consider-
 able freedom. The Constitution was amended in April
 1976 to limit the number of political parties to three
 and to define the ideological orientation to which each
 party must adhere. There are plans to revise the
 Constitution again to permit the creation of a fourth
 party. The main opposition party captured eighteen of
 the one hundred seats in the freely contested 1978
 national elections. Several opposition figures have
 criticized the constitutional limit of three inscribed
 parties as preventing the broadening of political
 participation. No one is excluded from participating
 in political activity within the existing framework.
 There is universal adult suffrage in local, regional,
 national assembly and presidential elections.
 In addition to the constitutional amendment limiting
 the number of political parties in Senegal, two other
 important constitutional amendments were enacted in
 March-April 1976. One annulled the provision restricting
 Senegalese Presidents to one five-year term. A second
 amendment prescribed that the Prime Minister would
 succeed the President if the latter dies or is inca-
 pacitated and serve out the remainder of his term.
 
 
 153
 Abdou Diouf, the current Prime Minister, was appointed
 to his position by President Senghor in 1970.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-Governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 No proposals for outside investigations of alleged
 human rights violations have been made with regard to
 Senegal. As the government-sponsored daily "Le Soleil"
 commented, "Senegal has not had the honor of a visit
 from Amnesty International because there isn't a single
 political detainee in its prisons."
 
 
