 SENEGAL
 Senegal is a Republic with an elected President, Abdou Diouf, who has been in
 office since 1981, and a unicameral legislature controlled by the President's Socialist
 Party (PS) since independence from France in 1960. Diouf and the PS again won
 presidential elections in February and legislative elections in May (gaining 84 of the
 National Assembly's 120 seats). The opposition parties, led by the Senegalese Demo-
 cratic Party (PDS, which won 27 seats), chared extensive fraud in the presidential
 and legislative elections. However, after muh controversy and delay, the Constitu-
 tional Court subsequently certified the presidential and later the legislative results
 as official. International observers noted that there had been irregularities in the
 presidential voting, but declared the election had been generally "free and fair."
 The postelection period was further marred, first by the assassination of Babacar
 Seye, the Vice President of the Constitutional Court (Supreme Court), as votes were
 being certified for the National Assembly election, and then by the Government de-
 taining and later charging several opposition figures, including Abdoulaye Wade,
 presidential contender on the PDS ticket, with the Seye murder.
 The Senegalese armed forces, numbering about 15,000, are professional and dis-
 ciplined. They traditionally remain aloof from politics. The paramilitary gendar-
 merie reportedly is less professional and less disciplined. The armed forces became
 the center of controversy in operations in the southernmost region of Senegal, the
 Casamance region, against the separatist group, the Movement of Democratic
 Forces of the Casamance (MFDC). There were a number of reports of serious abuses
 by both the military forces and particularly by the MFDC (see below and Section
 1.g.). Eventually, the Government signed a cease-fire agreement on July 8 with the
 MFDC. At year's end, the cease-fire agreement appeared to be holding.
 Senegal is overwhelmingly agricultural, with more than 70 percent of the labor
 force engaged in farming, largely in peanut production. Since 1983 the Government
 has pursued a structural adjustment program, supported by the International Mone-
 tary Fund, the World Bank, and major bilateral donors, intended to reduce the role
 of government to encourage the private sector, and to stimulate economic growth.
 Nonetheless, the economy remained depressed. An emergency plan adopted in Au-
 gust, by the National Assembly, which included a 15 percent reduction in civil serv-
 ants salaries, met strenuous opposition from trade unions, opposition parties, and
 merchants' associations in the form of repeated strikes.
 Although traditionally Senegal has had a strong record in support of human
 rights, there were serious human rights abuses in 1993 against a background of
 deepening internal political conflict over the elections and the Seye assassination,
 declining economic performance with several general strikes, and extensive military
 and terrorist operations in the Casamance with high death tolls (over 200 persons
 killed). The MFDC, in particular, committed many acts of violence, including tor-
 ture, beatings, and extrajudicial killing of villagers in the Casamance. On February
 21 alone, the day of the presidential elections, MFDC members killed 24 persons
 thereby carrying out a previously issued threat to attack Casamance voters and
 politicians, and a landmine reportedly planted by the MFDC killed 20 others. Gov-
 ernment troops reportedly killed 80 MFDC rebels and took no prisoners during a
 March battle; the press and local human rights groups charged the army with com-
 mitting extrajudicial killings. The Government failed, however, to investigate. Ac-
 cording to the independent press, the army also reportedly engaged in indiscrimi-
 nate shelling of civilian targets in the Casamance. There was one credible report
 
 
 240
 that police tortured a prominent Member of Parliament (M.P.)-the Government
 was extremely slow to investigate and has yet to punish the perpetrators-and po-
 lice reportedly sometimes use force in questioning suspects. Few, if any, police are
 tried and punished for such abuses. Other human rights problems include some re-
 strictions on freedom of the press (including government domination of the elec-
 tronic media), and on freedom of association, and domestic violence and discrimina-
 tion against women.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There was one death as a result of
 police firing on an unarmed political demonstration by opposition M.P.'s and others
 in November (see Section 2.b.). For details on killings connected with separatist-re-
 lated violence in the Casamance region, including the deaths of seven Red Cross
 workers by a landmine explosion see Section 1.g. In that violence, MFDC rebels as-
 sassinated the president of the rural community of Oukou, Omar Diatta, on April
 13 because of his support for the Government.
 Unknown assailants killed the first Vice-President of Senegal's Constitutional
 Court, Babacar Seye, on May 15. Seye was killed as he drove home from downtown
 Dakar following the first day of the Court's deliberations on the provisional results
 of Senegal's May 9 legislative election. On May 18, police apprehended PDS opposi-
 tion leader Abdoulaye Wade and two senior advisers, Ousmane Ngom and Jean
 Paul Dias, for questioning.
 On May 19, police arrested two more alleged PDS supporters, Cleodore Sene and
 Pape Ibrahama Diakhate, in The Gambia. Sene reportedly confessed to driving the
 hit car and implicated PDS supporter Assane Diop, Wade's financial counselor, Sam-
 uel Sarr, and PDS deputy Mody Sy. On May 28, Sene recanted his testimony in let-
 ters to Wade and to the independent press. Sene claimed that members of the ruling
 PS planned and financed the murder in order to discredit the PDS. On June 9, the
 National Assembly set up a commission to follow developments in the investigation
 of the Seye assassination. It had not issued a report by year's end.
 Subsequently, on October 1, the governmental authorities charged Abdoulaye
 Wade, his wife, Viviane, and PDS deputies Abdoulaye Faye and Ousmane Ngom,
 with complicity in the assassination and compromising the security of the State. All
 four remained free. According to the Constitution, since Wade, Faye, and Ngom are
 sitting members of the National Assembly, the Assembly would have to waive their
 immunity before they could be tried. The five others arrested in connection with the
 Seye murder remained in jail at year's end; Sene, Diakhate, and Diop on charges
 of murder, and Sarr and Sy on charges of complicity.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 Tbou Sagna and Famara Bodian, two MFDC rebels who, according to a September
 1992 report in the independent press, disappeared after being detained by the army
 near Kaguite, have not been found.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 While the authorities generally respect the legal prohibition on physical abuse
 there are credible reports that police sometimes subject detainees to beatings and
 other mistreatment, often during the "garde a vue" (detention) period between ar-
 rest and appearance before a magistrate. Moreover, there was credible evidence that
 Mody Sy, PDS M.P., was subjected to electroshock torture immediately after his ar-
 rest on May 20. The Government took 9 days to comply with the request by Sy's
 lawyer for a medical examination and was otherwise slow to investigate this matter.
 At year's end, he remained in jail. No trial date had been set.
 There were credible reports of torture of villagers by factions of the MFDC. These
 usually consisted of beatings, some of which resulted in death. There were also cred-
 ible reports that women were raped by MFDC forces prior to the July 8 cease-fire.
 There were no reports of rape or abuse by government officials. Some of the MFDC
 violence was aimed at 1993 electoral activities (see Section l.g.).
 Prisons are overcrowded, and food and health care are inadequate. As a result,
 prisoners may suffer life- or health-threatening conditions.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution's prohibitions against
 arbitrary arrest and detention are generally respected. However, there was consider-
 able question regarding the evidence used as the basis for the arrest and detention
 of PDS members for the assassination of Constitutional Court Judge Seye. One of
 the major witnesses in the case first implicated the other defendants and then re-
 canted his testimony. However, the lawyers for the defendants continue to request
 evidence from the court to support the charges.
 
 
 Warrants, issued by judges, are required for arrests. A person suspected of a
 crime may legally be held without charge for 48 hours after arrest and may be held
 up to 72 hours if ordered by a public prosecutor. This period may be doubled legally
 in the case of crimes against the security of the State. Senegalese law has no writ
 of habeas corpus.
 During temporary detention, the prisoner has no access to family or to an attor-
 ney. After the prisoner is charged, both the family and an attorney are permitted
 visits. In the case of the PDS members, on October 8 the detainees claimed that
 they were denied family visiting privileges. Temporary custody is valid for a maxi-
 mum period of 6 months, but it may be renewed for additional 6-month periods if
 the investigating magistrate certifies that more time is required. Extended "tem-
 porary" detention or custody is permitted when civil authorities determine that
 there is a threat of civil unrest or that a person is a threat to himself or others.
 Courts may review decisions of extended detention or custody.
 In May the authorities arrested in Dakar six M.P.'s, members of two opposition
 parties, for participating in a demonstration which the Government had banned.
 hey were releasedshortly afterwards. The deputies were demonstrating for the re-
 lease of opposition PDS deputy Mody Sy. The PDS alleged that the arrest and in-
 dictment of its members in the Seye murder case was arbitrary and politically moti-
 vated.
 In July, 256 Senegalese, who were being held on separatist activity charges, were
 released from jail. Their release came as part of the implementation of the cease-
 fire accord signed between the Government and the MFDC on July 8, 1993.
 Exile is not used as a means ofpolitical control. The leader of the southern front
 of the MFDC, Abbe Diamacoune Senghor, reportedly lived in self-exile in Guinea-
 Bissau for 8 months. On March 20       Senghor returned to Ziguinchor in the
 Casamance region of Senegal. Police did not attempt to take him into custody.
 e. Denial of air Public Trial.--Senegal has an active and well-trained judiciary,
 which is constitutionally independent of the executive, the legislature, and the
 armed forces. However, low pay, poor working conditions, and family and political
 ties make magistrates vulnerable to outside pressures. Moreover, the role of the
 Constitutional Court became highly controversial and political in 1993 in certifying
 national elections. The Court President Keba Mbaye, resigned in March before the
 presidential vote was certified, admonishing politicians to respect the electoral proc-
 ess. There were reports that the PS had pressured Mbaye to change the election
 results. The Court subsequently dismissed opposition claims of election malpractices
 in May 1993.
 Constitutionally defendants are presumed innocent until proven guilty. Trials are
 public, and defendants have the right to be present in court, to confront witnesses,
 to present evidence, and to have a defense attorney. Despite a provision for defend-
 ants to have a lawyer at public expense, in practice some defendants are denied
 legal assistance due to lack of funding.
 Ordinary courts are presided over by a panel of judges. In criminal cases ordinary
 citizens also serve on the panel. Although three new courts were created in May
 1992 to replace the Supreme Court, which was abolished in accordance with the
 Election Code, they are understaffed and in some cases are not fully functional. The
 new courts are the Council of State for Administrative Questions, the Constitutional
 Council for Matters Relating to the Constitution, and a Court of Appeals.
 Th,.re are three other categories of special courts, two of which have rarely met,
 i.e., the High Court of Justice, created for the sole purpose of trying senior govern-
 ment officials for treason or malfeasance, and the Court for the Repression of the
 Unlawful Accumulation of Wealth, and the military court system. Civilians may not
 be tried by military courts. The right of apeal exists in all courts except military
 courts and in the special "illegal enrichment Court.
 There were no political detainees or prisoners at the end of 1993 except for those
 held in connection with the Babacar Seye assassination and religious leader
 Moustapha Sy, who is also being detained for "various offenses against the Head
 of State.'
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution prohibits arbitrary invasion of the home, and there is relatively little
 government interference in the private lives of citizens, particularly in the rural
 areas. Search warrants normally are required and may be issued only by judges and
 in accordance with procedures established by law. In practice, however, searches
 without warrants occasionally take place.
 g. Use of Excessive Forc.c and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-There have been repeated violations of human rights in the southernmost
 region of Senegal, the Casamance region, mainly committed by the MFDC, but also
 by the army and the gendarmerie. Most of the violations took place prior to the
 
 
 242
 cease-fire on July 8 between the Government and the MFDC. The MFDC, a pre-
 dominantly Diola minority ethnic group, has been campaigning for the independence
 of the Casamance region for over 10 years. Until August 1992, the military and gen-
 darmes had been restricted to their barracks as required by the May 1991 Agree-
 ment of Bissau between the Government and the MFDC. However, as rebel activity
 increased in the Casamance, government forces redeployed and engaged the MFDC
 units in several battles.
 Several MFDC-initiated incidents heightened tensions, beginning with the death
 of seven Red Cross workers on January 25 by mine explosions. On the day of the
 presidential election, February 21, MFDC troops killed 24 persons, following MFDC
 threats to attack Casamance voters and politicians. The separatist movement had
 previously announced a ban on politics and voting in the Casamance. The MFDC
 was also held responsible for the deaths of 20 other persons that day when a mine
 blew up under a van rented by the Socialist Party to bring its members to the polls.
 In larger engagements between the Senegalese army and MFDC rebels, the fight-
 ing in March at liadem, near Ziguinchor, Feft 80 dead, and a major battle in April
 near the town of Oussouye resulted in at least 100 rebels and 3 government soldiers
 dead. While estimates varied widely, the two battles resulted in the highest death
 tolls in the recent history of Casamance violence. As the military held few MFDC
 rebel prisoners following these significant engagements, the local press and local
 human rights associations charged that the army had engaged in extrajudicial
 killings. These charges could not be confirmed, and there hadbeen no followup offi-
 cial investigation. As the MFDC normally does not leave their dead or wounded
 members behind in battle, this could also be a possible explanation.
 The press and other observers not only questioned the military's action in these
 major battles but also criticized the army for periodic indiscriminate shelling of sus-
 pected rebel areas, which jeopardized the lives of innocent civilians. There were sev-
 eral incidents following the July 8 cease-fire, including in September the killing of
 a young MFDC member during a search at a police checkpoint.
 The number of civilian deaths due to the fighting in the Casamance in 1993 ould
 not be determined but was believed to be ashigh as 250. No one has been charged
 in any of the above killings.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-While the Constitution provides for freedom of
 speech and press, the press is restricted by laws prohibiting the expression of views
 w~ich "discreditI the State, incite the population to disorder, or disseminate "false
 news." No one was prosecuted under these laws in 1993, although religious leader
 Moustapha Sy has been charged with offenses against the State. In 1993 numerous
 daily and weekly independent newspapers began circulation. Prior to this, ILe Soleil,
 a newspaper controlled by the Government, had been the sole daily. A brad spec-
 trum of thought and opinion is available through regularly published magazines and
 newspapers. The broadcast media is controlled, not through self-censors hip, but by
 government licensing arrangements for radio and by the fact that the government
 operates the only television station.
 Political views expressed in the independent press are often critical of the Govern-
 ment and its programs; government officials, politicians, and the political parties
 participating in the Government are not immune. Publishers are required to reg-
 istr with the Central Court prior to starting publication, but such registrations are
 routinely approved. Publications, including foreign publications critical of the Gov-
 ernment, were not censored or banned. Press coverage of the 1993 presidential and
 legislative elections was extensive in all dailies, although Ie Soleil heavily weighted
 its coverage towards the ruling party.
 Access to the electronic m a   ied  toled by the Government and continued to
 pose prblems for opposition parties in the 1993 elections. The authorities expanded
 broadcast media coverage of opposition party activities but relegated it to off-peak
 hours. There is no other television service available to the general public, and the
 only domestically produced radio broadcasting is from the government station. The
 Government a pproved an application for a pnvate radio station but with conditions
 that made it financially unrealistic for the owner to begin operating, i.e., high "ay-
 ments to the state-owned radio and television corporation and limitations on adver-
 tising.
 Schools and universities enjoy academic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful A sembly and Association.-In general, Senegalese freely
 exercise their constitutional rights of assembly and association, although demonstra-
 tions or protest meetings against government policies are monitored closely by secu-
 rity forces. Prior authorization for public demonstrations is required. During the
 1993 election period, the Government allowed the opposition parties to hold
 
 
 243
 
 preelection rallies, but it also arrested six opposition members in May for participat-
 in a demonstration not authorized by the Government (see Section I.d.). Three
 .'s and some 87 others were found guilty on November 12 of participating in an
 illegal demonstration called for by the political opposition on November 5 to protest
 cuts in civil service salaries and the jailing of Moustarchadine leader Moustapha Sy.
 The police retaliated with heavy doses of tear gas to disperse the crowd and at one
 point used live ammunition, killing one person.
 Senegalese wishing to form associations must register with the Ministry of Inte-
 rior except for business-related associations, which are registered with the Ministry
 of Commerce. By law and in practice, the Ministry of Interior is obliged to register
 such groups, so long as the objectives of association are clearly stated and are not
 in violation of the law.
 c. Freedom of Religion.--Senegal is a secular State, and freedom of religion, a
 legal right, exists in practice. Islam is the religion of 94 percent of the population;
 other religions are also practiced freely. Missionary activity is permitted, and for-
 eign Protestant missionaries are active in several regions of the country.
 Conversion is permitted, and there is no discrimination against minority religions.
 In theory, adherence to a particular religion confers no official advantage or dis-
 advantage in civil, political, economic, military, or other sectors. In practice, mem-
 bership in an Islamic sect may afford certain political and economic privileges. Both
 Islamic and Christian organizations publish periodicals. Koranic and Catholic
 schools exist alongside the public school system, and the Mouride Brotherhood, an
 Islamic sect, has an Islamic university in its headquarters city of Touba.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides all citizens the right to travel and establish
 themselves freely anywhere in Senegal, a right respected in practice. Exit visas are
 not required for travel outside the country.
 There is no restriction on emigration, and repatriates are not disadvantaged on
 their return to Senegal. A Senegalese citizen by birth may not have his citizenship
 annulled for any reason. A naturalized citizen may have his citizenship revoked if
 it is proved in a court of law that he obtained his citizenship fraudulently or if he
 has been convicted of a crime and has been a citizen less than 15 years.
 Ethnic violence against Senegalese in Mauritania and Mauritanians in Senegal in
 1989 resulted in the breaking of relations between the two countries and the repa-
 triation of thousands of Senegalese and Mauritanian nationals. Senegal accepted
 back its own nationals and provided asylum to Afro-Mauritanians expelled by the
 Government of Mauritania. At year's end, the United Nations High Commissioner
 for Refugees (UNHCR) had registered 55,000 refugees from Mauritania, most from
 the Toucouleur and Peulh ethnic groups.
 Refugees have freedom of movement and are not subject to forced repatriation.
 An estimated 80 percent would like to return to Mauritania. Refugees say that their
 return is hindered by problems of identity and citizenship documentation, by lack
 of funds, and by the refusal of the Government of Mauritania to guarantee their
 security, indemnify them, and recognize their citizenship.
 While relations between the Governments of Senegal and Mauritania were rees-
 tablished and borders were reopened in 1992, indemnification talks between the two
 Governments in Paris had not yet resolved the issue of voluntary repatriation for
 Mauritanian refugees by the end of 1993.
 Because of violence and instability in the Casamance region of Senegal, approxi-
 mately 18,000 Senegalese refugees remained in Guinea-Bissau and 2,000 in The
 Gambia at the end of 1993. Several thousand more villagers were displaced within
 the Casamance region prior to the July 8 cease-fire because of MFDC rebel activity,
 interethnic violence, and Senegalese army operations.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Senegalese have the constitutional right to change their government through peri-
 odic multiparty elections. Even so, the domination of Senegalese political life by the
 Socialist Party, which has held power since independence, has called into question
 the extent to which citizens have been able to exercise that right. President Abdou
 Diouf was declared reelected in February 1993 with 53 percent of the vote, a victory
 that gives him a 7-year term in office. (His previous two terms were for 5 years.)
 The closest presidential contender, Abdoulaye Wade, received 32 percent of the vote,
 and the other six candidates, collectively, received just under 10 percent. Approxi-
 mately 60 percent of the 2.5 million registered voters participated in the election.
 Under the new Electoral Code, the secret ballot was introduced and the voting was
 lowered to 18 years.
 
 
 244
 Despite the new Electoral Code, which had been drafted with the opposition, oppo-
 sition party members alleged that the governing Socialist Party had orchestrated
 fraud in the preelection phase and on election day. These charges were given credi-
 bility when the new all-party National Tabulation Commission (NTC) was unable
 to reach consensus, and the head of NTC suddenly resigned implying she had been
 under pressure from the Government. Opposition parties petitioned the Constitu-
 tional Court to reject a number of votes said to have been invalidated by irregular
 procedures. Amidst much controversy, the Constitutional Court finally certified the
 results of the February 21 presidential election 3 weeks after the vote, ruling that
 the voting irregularities did not affect the integrity and validity of the election out-
 come.
 In the May legislative elections, the ruling party, the PS, won 84 of 120 assembly
 seats, followed by the PDS with 27. Four other opposition  arties divided the re-
 maining nine. Following the procedural revisions of Senegafs new Electoral Code,
 enacted by the National Assembly prior to the May elections, the Constitutional
 Court certified the May 9 legislative election results within the newly mandated pe-
 riod of 10 days. While there are 20 legal political parties, most with small member-
 ships, the 1993 elections pointed to the possibility of an emerging two party system,
 the PS, and the PDS.
 Of the 29 ministers who make up the President's Cabinet, only 2 are women.
 There are no women heading a political party, and only 9 women deputies are rep-
 resented in the 120-member National Assembly. Their underrepresentation reflects
 the disparity in education, as many girls are not educated beyond the primary level.
 It also represents, in part, cultural pressures that dictate women should assume
 subservient roles.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are at least eight Senegalese human rights associations. All are free to
 criticize the Government publicly, although none has done so directly.
 The Government allows international human rights groups to investigate allega-
 tions concerning human rights abuses and generally responds to requests for infor-
 mation about allegations. However, the Government did not undertake a formal in-
 vestigation after Amnesty International asked the Government to look into the May
 1993 charges by Mody Sy that he was tortured after arrest (see Section I.c.).
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution states that "men and women shall be equal in law." Officially,
 there is no discrimination based on race, religion, sex, or language, but de facto dis-
 crimination against women is pervasive.
 Women.-Despite constitutional provisions, women face extensive societal dis-
 crimination, especially in the rural areas where Islamic and Senegalese customs, in-
 cluding polygyny andIslamic rules of inheritance, are strongest and where women
 are confined to traditional roles. There is no legal discrimination against women in
 the law of inheritance. In tha countryside, women perform much of the subsistence
 farming and childrearing and have only very limited opportunities for an education.
 Traditional practices, for example, make it difficult for women to acquire sufficient
 collateral to obtain bank credit. According to a U.N. study, only 20 percent of Sen-
 egalese women are in paid employment. Women usually marry young (the majority
 by age 16 in rural areas), average seven live births, and die relatively young. About
 57 percent of women between the ages of 40 and 45 live in polygynous unions.
 Despite government encouragement, there is still much discrimination against fe-
 males in educational opportunities. Overall, females receive less than one-third of
 the schooling received by males.
 In the urban areas, women are active in government, political life, and business--
 although few are in top positions-and the Government has taken some steps to
 change the laws. For example, modifications to the law on family matters, adopted
 by the National Assembly in 1988, reinforced women's rights to divorce, alimony,
 child support, and employment, although such laws are often not effectively en-
 forced, particularly in the rural areas where the majority of women live. Women re-
 ceive equal pay for equal work. Among the women's groups working for change are
 Women, Rights, and Development, Yewwe Yewwe, Women for Development and En-
 terprise in Africa, the African Federation of Women of Senegal, and the African
 Center for Integrated Development.
 There are credible reports that violence against women, usually wife beating, is
 common, particularly in rural areas. Police do not normally intervene in domestic
 disputes, and women are reluctant to go outside the family for redress. Persons con-
 
 
 245
 victed of rape may be sentenced for up to 10 years in prison, and more if the victim
 is a minor.
 Children.-The Government supports the protection of children's rights and wel-
 fare. It established in 1990 the Ministry of Women, Children, and the Family which
 has the responsibility for promoting children's welfare. Organizations active in sup-
 port of children's rights include the Senegalese Association for Education and the
 Promotion of Human Rights, and the Inter-African Committee on Traditional Prac-
 tices Affecting the Health of Women and Children.
 There are no laws or regulations prohibiting female genital mutilation (circumci-
 sion), which has been condemned by international experts as damaging to both
 physical and psychological health. Female circumcision is not practiced by Senegal's
 largest ethnic group, the Wolofs, but it is performed on girls belonging to other eth-
 nic groups. According to an independent expert, the percentage of Senegalese girls
 who have undergone this procedure may be as high as 50 percent. Genital mutila-
 tion generally occurs at the age of 9. Infibulation, the most extreme and dangerous
 form of genital mutilation, is practiced only by the Toucouleur and Peulh ethnic
 groups. Perhaps 6 percent of Senegalese women have undergone this procedure.
 Among other activities, the Ministry of Women, Children, and the Family promotes
 programs to educate village women to the dangers of genital mutilation.
 People with Disabilities.-There is no overt discrimination against the handi-
 capped. In practice, persons with physical disabilities are unable to participate in
 almost all mainstream occupations due to physical barriers and lack of equipment
 that would make such participation possible. There are no laws or regulations that
 mandate accessibility.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The rights of workers in the formal wage sector are
 protected by the proworker Labor Code of 1961. All workers have the right of asso-
 ciation and are free to form or join unions. A minimum of seven persons, each hav-
 ing worked within the trade for at least 1 year, may form a trade union by submit-
 ting a list of members and a charter to the Ministry of Interior. Not all unions, how-
 ever, get registered. The International Labor Organization's (ILO) Committee on
 Freedom of Association, in November 1993, while ruling on the case presented by
 the General Confederation of Democratic Workers of Senegal (CGTDS), deplored the
 fact that for 17 years the Ministry of Interior has not provided the CGTDS with
 a formal acknowledgement of the deposition of its bylaws. A union may be dis-
 banded by the Ministry if the union's activities deviate from its charter. The Labor
 Code is not applied to the informal and agricultural sectors.
 Although unions sometimes fail to obtain initial recognition, once received, rec-
 ognition is virtually never withdrawn. Even though they represent a small percent-
 age of the working population, unions wield significant political influence because
 of their ability to disrupt vital sectors of the economy.
 The small industrial component of the total work force of 3.9 million is almost to-
 tally unionized. More than 70 percent of the labor force is engaged in agriculture.
 There are no unions in the agrarian sector except for the workers employed at the
 Senegalese Sugar Com any (CSS). The CSS is the only plantation in Senegal, and
 it offers its employees about the same standard of living as those in industry.
 The National Confederation of Senegalese Workers (CNTS), the largest union or-
 ganization, has close ties to the ruling PS, and its members hold a considerable
 number of government positions as well as 12 of the PS seats in the National As-
 sembly. While ostensibly an independent organization, the umbrella CNTS has sup-
 ported government policies.
 The rival to the CNTS is the National Union of Autonomous Labor Unions of Sen-
 egal (UNSAS). UNSAS is a federation of strategically important unions, such as
 those of electricians, telephone and telegraph worers, teachers, water technicians,
 hospital and railroad workers, and sugar producers. UNSAS reportedly has no spe-
 cific political orientation.
 The smaller union organizations include the Democratic Union of Senegalese
 Workers, which is composed mostly of unskilled workers in the private sector, and
 the Coordination of Autonomous Trade Unions, composed of some teachers, urban
 transit workers, and two smaller organizations.
 The unions continue to operate under the Labor Code of 1961. A revised code, put
 forward in 1989, has still not come before the National Assembly. The Government
 has not renewed its efforts to revise the Labor Code, reportedly in an attempt to
 appease the unions. Some suggested revisions, for example granting more employer
 flexibility on terminating and laying off employees, would dilute the power of the
 unions.
 
 
 246
 The right to strike is provided for in the Constitution and in the Labor Code.
 However, there are restrictions. Unions representing members of the civil service
 must request permission to strike 1 month in advance. Private sector unions must
 request permission 3 days in advance. The Government has the right to approve or
 disapprovq a strike request. Four trade union federations--CNTS, UNSAS, and two
 smaller organizations---conducted a 1-day general strike on September 2. The peace-
 ful strike protested the August 24 adoption by the National Assembly of austerity
 measures, including a 15-percent cut in civil service wages and a 4-percent reduc-
 tion in private sector wages. A series of 3-day, less successful general strikes and
 demonstrations against the cuts took place in October, with sporadic acts of vio-
 lence, some directed toward those transportation workers who did not participate
 in the strike.
 The September 2 strike successfully closed down most businesses and the airport.
 Subsequent, unauthorized strikes were relatively unsuccessful. The Government re-
 sponded by first firing and then reinstating some civil service personnel who were
 absent from work and by using large amounts of tear gas to disperse crowds. On
 November 16 and November 23, the Government authorized a labor group, the Na-
 tional Union of Autonomous Unions (UWSAS), and one political party, the Party for
 Democracy and Socialism, to hold sit-ins and demonstrations. The reason for the
 strikes continued to be opposition to the government-mandated civil service wage
 cut.
 The Labor Code permits unions to affiliate with international bodies. CNTS is ac-
 tive in regional and international labor organizations and is the dominant Senegal-
 ese member of the Organization of African Trade Union Unity. The UNSAS is not
 affiliated with any regional or international labor organization.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Senegalese unions have the
 right by law to organize and to bargain collectively, and these rights are protected
 in practice. There are also legal prohibitions governing discrimination by employers
 against union members and organizers. Employers found guilty of antiunion dis-
 crimination are required to reinstate workers. During 1993 there were no known in-
 stances of workers being forcibly discouraged from exercising the right to organize
 and bargain collectively. The Ministry of Labor will intervene in disputes between
 labor and management when requested, and it plays a mediation and arbitration
 role in the private and state enterprise sectors.
 Senegalese labor laws apply in principle to all industrial firms, including those
 in the export free zone in Dakar. However, firms operating in the free zone and
 those eligible for benefits under the Investment Code enjoy certain exceptions to the
 Labor Code. Unlike other businesses in the formal sector, these firms do not need
 prior government authorization to dismiss employees, and they may hire workers
 on renewable temporary contracts for a period of up to 5 years.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-There were no reports of forced
 labor, and it is prohibited by law.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum age for employment
 is 16 years for apprenticeships and 18 for all other types of work. Inspectors from
 the Ministry of Labor closely monitor and enforce these restrictions within the for-
 mal wage sector, which includes state-owned corporations, large private enterprises,
 and cooperatives. On the other hand, children under 15 frequently are employed in
 the much larger traditional or informal sector, and minimum age and other work-
 place regulations are not enforced on family farms in rural areas or in small busi-
 nesses. Hours of young workers are not limited compared to the regular work force.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Legislation mandating a monthly minimum
 wage has been in force since independence in 1960. The actual rate is determined
 by the Ministers of Labor and Finance after negotiating with the unions and man-
 agement councils. The minimum wage of about $0.70 (200 CFA) per hour is not ade-
 quate to support a worker and family, and workers must frequently supplement in-
 comes through second jobs and reliance on the extended family.
 Within the formal economic sector, Senegalese law mandates: a standard work-
 week of 40 to 48 hours for most occupations, with at least one 24-hour rest period;
 I month per year of annual leave; enrollment in government systems for social secu-
 rity and retirement; safety standards and a variety of other measures. These regula-
 tions are incorporated into the Labor Code and are supervised by inspectors from
 the Ministry of Labor. Enforcement, however, appears to be uneven, especially out-
 side the formal sector.
 There are no explicit legal protections for workers who file complaints about un-
 safe conditions. While there are regulations on the books concerning workplace safe-
 ty, they are often not enforced.
 
 
 247
