 SENEGAL
 Senegal is a moderately decentralized republic dominated by a strong presidency.
 President Abdou Diouf, who has been in office since 1981, was reelected to a 7-year
 term in 1993. Credible international observers reported favorably on the registra-
 tion, campaigning, and polling phases of that election, and stated that observed
 irregularities in those phases did not materially affect the outcome; however, in the
 vote tabulation phase, the National Tabulation Commission could not reach consen-
 sus and its head resigned, indicating pressure from the Government. Members of
 the President's Socialist Party (PS) have occupied the presidency and dominated the
 unicameral legislature since independence from France in 1960, although opposition
 parties have been legal. During the year, the Government amended the Constitution
 to create a second legislative chamber, a Senate, in which the President is to ap-
 point one-fifth of the members and an Electoral College consisting largely of elected
 local and regional government officials is to chose most of the others; both the Con-
 stitutional Court and most major opposition parties objected to this system for se-
 lecting Senators. In May the PS won 50 percent of votes cast and 93 of 140 seats
 in elections for an expanded National Assembly. Unlike previous elections, these
 were supervised by a National Election Observatory (ONEL), independent of the
 Government. Although the elections were marred by violence and by persistent
 flaws in the electoral system, and although most international observers were not
 permitted to monitor them, they apparently were generally freer and significantly
 more transparent than previous elections, including both the 1993 national elections
 and the country's first regional and local elections, held in 1996, which were charac-
 terized by irregularities and fraud. In March prior to the elections, the Senegalese
 Democratic Party quit the Cabinet. Following the elections, in July President Diouf
 appointed a 32-member cabinet that included only 1 minister from an opposition
 party. The Government continued to implement decentralized regional and local ad-
 
 
 352
 ministrations. Sporadic fighting continued in the Casamance area in the southern
 p art of the country between the Government and the secessionist Movement of
 Democratic Forces in the Casamance (MFDC). The judiciary is independent, but
 subject in practice to government influence and pressure.
 The armed forces are professional and generally disciplined. They traditionally re-
 main aloof from politics and are firmly under civilian control. The paramilitary gen-
 darmerie and the police are less professional and less disciplined. Some members
 of the security forces, the gendarmerie, and the police continued to commit serious
 human rights abuses.
 The country is predominantly agri   al with roughly 70 percent of the labor
 force engaged in farming. Recorded gross domestic product (GDP) per capita is esti-
 mated at about $600 a year, but this excludes a large informal economy. Since the
 devaluation of the CFA franc in 1994, the Government has implemented a series
 of economic policy reforms to enhance competitiveness by dismantling monopolies,
 liberalizing markets, and privatizing several state-owned industries. Recorded GDP
 per capita has a grown at an average rate of between 2 and 3 percent a year since
 1995. Exports account for about one-third of recorded GDP, and are led by fish and
 fish products, phosphates and fertilizers, tourism, and peanuts. The Government
 continued to receive external assistance from international financial institutions and
 other sources, and such assistance represents an important part of the national
 budget.
 The Government respected the rights of its citizens in many areas, but its human
 rights record was marked by serious problems in other areas, particularly reports
 of extrajudicial killings and disappearances, torture and beatings by police of sus-
 pect during questioning, arbitrary arrest and detention, and lengthy pretrial deten-
 tion. The Government rarely tries or punishes members of the military, gendar-
 merie, or police for human rights abuses. Prison conditions are poor. The judiciary
 is subject to government influence and pressure and suffers from low salaries and
 insufficient resources. At times the police infringe on citizens' privacy rights. There
 were several instances in which the Government limited freedom of assembly. The
 Socialist Party's continued domination of political life calls into question the extent
 to which citizens can meaningfully exercise their right to change the Government.
 The ONEL improved transparency in the May legislative elections; however, persist-
 ent flaws in the electoral system remain. The Government's creation of a second leg-
 islative chamber, no members of which are to be directly elected by the people and
 one-fifth of the members of which are to be appointed by the President, further re-
 duced the ability of citizens to change their Government and increased the presi-
 dency's domination of the State. Domestic violence and discrimination against
 women, female genital mutilation, and child labor remained problems. Mob violence
 also is a problem.
 Rebel MFDC forces reportedly were responsible for killings and torture.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-While there were no confirmed re-
 ports of political or extrajudicial killings by government officials during the resur-
 gence of violence in the southern Casamance region that began in early 1997, gov-
 ernment forces were suspected of responsibility for many civilian deaths.
 According to eyewitness reports, on the night of February 20, during an identity
 verification check of a group of young men gathered in a residential area, police offi-
 cers from the Thiaroye station in Dakar arrested and beat one young man who had
 tried to flee. The victim reportedly was taken to a nearby medical center where the
 duty nurse certified the death and noted the presence of blood, broken limbs, and
 swollen areas on the corpse. The following day a doctor at Aristide le Dantec public
 hospital performed an autopsy and determined that the victim had died from natu-
 ral causes. Skeptical family members requested a review of this finding, and the Af-
 rican Assembly for the Defense of Human Rights (RADDHO-a Senegalese human
 rights organization) assisted the victim's family to file a legal complaint in March.
 The case reportedly was pending at year's end.
 In December 1997, in the face of resistance put up by a group of inhabitants being
 issued an eviction order, law enforcement officers from the Hann gendarmerie sta-
 tion in Dakar opened fire, killing a child. Although no autopsy certificate was made
 available, with the assistance of the RADDHO, the family of the victim filed a legal
 complaint.
 In March a government report on the Casamance conflict stated that 97 civilians
 were killed in 1997. The report made no mention of government responsibility for
 civilian deaths or any investigations into such allegations. However, in a report re-
 
 
 353
 leased in February, Amnesty International (A) charged that government security
 forces committed extrajudicial killings, torture, and illegal detention of civilians in
 the Casamance during 1997 and earlier years.
 Following the outbreak of a rebellion in June in neighboring Guinea-Bissau, Sen-
 egalese troops in the area near the rebels' main base in Bissau were reportedly
 under instructions to shoot to kill anyone seen on the streets. These instructions
 may have contributed to the June 23 shooting of two guards at a foreign embassy,
 one of whom died from his injuries. Eyewitnesses identified the assailants as Sen-
 egalese soldiers. A subsequent investigation by Senegalese military authorities con-
 cluded that it was not possible to determine which side fired at the two guards, who
 reportedly were caught in a crossfire. Also on June 23, Senegalese troops reportedly
 shot and killed three unidentified youths who were fleeing the soldiers in the Bissau
 neighborhood of Antula. Senegalese forces were observed stealing private vehicles
 and other goods and attempting to ship them to Senegal. The Senegalese military
 arrested two Senegalese soldiers on charges that they looted a foreign ambassador's
 residence on July 14 in Bissau. There were unconfirmed reports that in June Sen-
 egalese troops fired heavy artillery shells across the border into Guinea-Bissau.
 On many occasions vigilante groups and mobs lynched suspected thieves. In April
 representatives from 52 villages in the area around the eastern town of Kidira met
 to discuss a problem of banditry and livestock theft. A mob formed and assaulted
 a Mauritanian refugee camp, killing one refugee. The next day the same group of
 local inhabitants burned several refugee encampments located outside the official
 refugee sites. In the following 2 weeks, additional attacks and reprisals by refugees
 resulted in 12 deaths (of both Senegalese and refugees) and loss of property. The
 Government then deployed extra police and additional security at the official refu-
 gee sites. In cooperation with the office of the United Nations High Commissioner
 for Refugees (UNHCR), the Government successfully separated the two groups and
 worked to calm tensions. Although there were no arrests or charges in the deaths,
 the Government arrested several individuals it claimed were responsible for the
 banditry that led to the mob actions.
 The government report issued in March claimed that MFDC rebels were respon-
 sible for an unspecified number of executions of civilians. Periodic attacks on busi-
 nesses throughout the year by suspected MFDC groups engaged in banditry also re-
 sulted in the killing of civilians. The AI report issued in February also charged the
 MFDC forces with abuses including killings, beatings, and other acts of violence
 against civilians. On several occasions landmines, particularly those planted on pub-
 lic roadways, exploded and killed civilians.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of poitically motivated disappearances
 during the year.
 The 30 disappearances in the Casamance reported by AI in September 1997 re-
 mained unresolved. The RADDHO also reported that the six disappearance cases it
 cited in its 1997 report have yet to be resolved.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 There are credible reports that police and gendarmes often beat suspects during
 questioning and pretrial detention, in spite of constitutional prohibitions against
 such treatment. The press repeatedly reported instances of torture perpetrated by
 police, usually beatings, and the problem remained a serious public concern. In Feb-
 ruary the police in Dakar reportedly beat a young man to death (see Section 1.a.).
 The AI report issued in February (see Section l.a.) charged that the security forces
 committedtorture in the Casamance in 1997.
 On May 5, gendarmes used live ammunition to disperse a demonstration at the
 University of Saint Louis in northern Senegal, severely wounding five students. The
 Government denied charges that police had used live ammunition; however, accord-
 ing to press reports, medical personnel at the Saint Louis hospital confirmed that
 bullets had been removed from some of the wounded. On other occasions when the
 police dispersed public protests (see Section 2.b.), they used nonlethal means such
 as tear gas.
 On October 1, Ankilling Diabone, the head of the Casamance regional office of
 RADDHO, was subjected to rough, abusive, and inhuman treatment by soldiers at
 a military checkpoint on a road in the Casamance. According to RADDHO's report,
 the soldiers bound and gagged Diabone, threatened to kill him, and left him lying
 in the sun for almost 2 hours before finally releasing him. The military initially de-
 nied having tied up or otherwise mistreated Diabone, but initiated an inquiry into
 the incident after repeated requests by RADDHO and other human rights organiza-
 tions. The inquiry reportedly was ongoing at year's end.
 Despite stronger legal provisions against torture put in place in 1997, the Govern-
 ment rarely undertakes investigations or prosecutes officials allegedly responsible
 for such acts. Those cases that are pursued often take years before final judgment
 
 
 354
 is reached. Two police officers arrested in 1996 for torturing a suspect by spraying
 paint thinner on his buttocks and setting him on fire were still on bail pending trial
 at year's end.
 In August a Dakar court sentenced two police officers to 22 years in jail for the
 abuse and rape of a female suspect detained at a police station in the Dakar suburb
 of Guediawaye in connection with a case of theft. The court also ordered the two
 police officers and their civilian accomplices to pay $4,000 (2 million CFA francs)
 to the victim, who lost a hand due to her injuries. The case had been pending before
 the court since June 1996 when the officers were arrested. Since then, they had
 been released on bail.
 In May the international press reported allegations that local security forces in
 Ziguinchor cut off the lips of a suspected rebel sympathizer, shoved them in his
 mouth, and forced him to drink his own blood. However, this report was not con-
 firmed by national NGO's, and the alleged incident was not covered by newspapers
 in the country.
 The AI report issued in February charged the MFDC with beatings and other acts
 of violence against civilians.
 Prison conditions are poor. Prisons remain overcrowded, and food and health care
 are inadequate. However, there have been no reports of deaths in prison as a result
 of these conditions.
 The Government permits prison visits by independent human rights monitors.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution prohibits arbitrary ar-
 rest and detention; however, the authorities at times violate these constitutional
 prohibitions.
 The law specifies that warrants, issued by judges, are required for arrests. How-
 ever, laws also grant the police broad powers to detain prisoners for lengthy periods.
 Police officers may hold without charge a person suspected of a crime for 48 hours
 after arrest and for up to 96 hours if ordered by a public prosecutor. This period
 may be doubled in the case of crimes against the security of the State. The prosecu-
 tor decides whether to forward the case to an investigating judge who may open an
 investigation. At this point, the suspects are charged preliminarily and may be held
 or released on their own recognizance. There is a system of bail, but it rarely is
 used. During temporary detention, the accused has no access to family or an attor-
 ney but has the right to demand a medical exam. Once charged, a prisoner is per-
 mitted visits by both family and legal advisers. The accused may be held in custody
 for 6 months, and the investigating magistrate can certify that an additional 6-
 month extension is required. Such extensions may be reviewed by a court on appeal.
 In December, the Council of Ministers approved and submitted to the National As-
 sembly draft legislation that would enhance the rights of the accused, by entitling
 them to legal representation after 48 hours in police custody, and by allowing judges
 to order release pending trial without the prosecutor's consent.
 Police rarely are prosecuted for violations of arrest and detention procedures, and
 the authorities may detain a prisoner for long periods of time while they investigate
 and build a case against a suspect. The authorities may and routinely do hold pris-
 oners in custody unless and until a court demands their release. Despite 'the 6-
 month limitation on detention, the time between the charging phase and trial aver-
 ages 2 years. In an effort to -improve the administration of justice, the Government
 recruited 48 law school graduates to be trained as magistrates over a 2-year period.
 In July a work-to-rule strike by SUTELEC, the largest electrical workers union,
 caused severe power outages throughout the country. The national electrical com-
 pany filed a lawsuit claiming that the union had sabotaged equipment. The Govern-
 ment then arrested and jailed union leader Mademba Sock along with 26 others.
 The suspects were detained in police custody for 5 days under the provision of the
 law that allows for detention without charge for up to 6 days in cases involving
 threats to the security of the State. The SUTELEC leaders were held incommuni-
 cado for 3 days, unable to contact their attorneys or family members. Family mem-
 bers and several other union leaders claimed to have faced bureaucratic obstacles
 in exercising their right to visit the detainees. On December 8, a judge sentenced
 Sock and one of his aides to 6 months' imprisonment for conspiracy to disrupt law
 and order. He dropped all charges against the other 25 persons and released them
 after they had been detained for 5 months.
 According to human rights monitors, approximately 130 suspected MFDC mem-
 bers remain in political detention. A few weeks after the rebel leader Abbe
 Diamacoune Senghor had called in February for rebels to end the use of landmines
 and to enter negotiations, the Government released from jail some 20 MFDC mem-
 bers, who had been detained in Ziguinchor and Dakar.
 The Constitution prohibits exile, and it is not used.
 
 
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for a judiciary inde-
 pendent of the executive, the legislature, and the armed forces; however, mag-
 istrates are vulnerable to outside pressures due to low pay, poor working conditions,
 and family and political ties. Also, the Minister of Justice and subordinate authori-
 ties have extensive authority to influence judicial procedures by keeping the accused
 in pretrial detention.
 The legal system is based on French civil law and is composed of ordinary courts
 and a number of higher and special courts, including the three created in May 1992
 to replace the Supreme Court: the Council of State for Administrative Questions;
 the Constitutional Council; and a court of appeal. These courts remain understaffed,
 and many of the special courts, including one to deal with unlawful enrichment and
 others to try government officials for treason and malfeasance, are dormant. Mus-
 lims have the right to choose customary law or civil law for certain civil cases, such
 as those concerning inheritance and divorce. However, customary law decisions are
 rendered by civil court judges. There is a separate system of military courts for
 members of the armed forces and the gendarmerie. The right of appeal exists in all
 courts except military courts and the special Unlawful Enrichment Court. Military
 courts may try civilians only if they are involved in violations of military law com-
 mitted by military personnel.
 In principle the accused is innocent until proven guilty, and when brought to trial
 it is the State's burden to prove that the accused is guilty of the charges. Trials are
 public, and defendants have the right to be present in court, to confront witnesses,
 to present evidence, and to have an attorney. However, some defendants are denied
 legal assistance at public expense due to lack of funding. Evidentiary hearings may
 be closed to the public and the press, but the defendant and his lawyer have access
 to all evidence presented and may introduce their own evidence before the inves-
 tigating judge decides to refer the case to the prosecutor for trial. A panel of judges
 presides over ordinary courts for both civil and criminal cases; in criminal cases citi-
 zens also serve on the panel.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution prohibits arbitrary invasion of the home, and there was little govern-
 ment interference in the private lives of citizens. The law requires search warrants,
 and only judges may issue them. However, in past years, during high-profile or po-
 litically charged investigations, police often proceeded without the required search
 warrants. There were no reports of this during the year.
 There were no reports that government officials monitored mail or telephone com-
 munications without judicial authorization.
 MFDC rebels sought to collect supplies and money from civilians.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and of the press, and the Government generally respects these rights in practice.
 Laws prohibit the press from the expression of views that "discredit" the State, in-
 cite the population to disorder, or disseminate "false news." In 1997 the Dakar Pros-
 ecutor General charged the publisher and three journalists of Sud Quotidien, a pri-
 vately owned daily newspaper, with "disseminating false news" and "insulting the
 Head of State." The paper had criticized President Diouf for attempting to influence
 the judiciary by holding a nationally televised awards ceremony to honor two busi-
 nessmen 5 days before the Court of Appeals was due to return its decision on a defa-
 mation case those businessmen had brought against the newspaper's parent com-
 pany, Sud Communication. At year's end, the journalists remained free on bail
 pending their trial.
 A broad spectrum of thought and opinion is available to the public through regu-
 larly published magazines and newspapers, including foreign publications. Political
 and economic views expressed in the independent press are often critical of the Gov-
 ernment and its programs. While publishers are required to register prior to start-
 ing publication, the Government routinely approves such registrations.
 Radio, being relatively inexpensive, remained the most important medium of mass
 information and the main source of news for citizens outside urban areas. Six pri-
 vately owned radio stations broadcast within the country; of these, five were owned
 by nationals of the country. In December 1997, a new independent radio station
 owned by the Wal Fadjri newspaper began broadcasting. All six stations broadcast
 national news and political commentary. Some of them were often critical of the
 Government, and no harassment of them was reported. However, the state radio
 and television company retains a monopoly in the allocation of frequencies and li-
 censing of private radio stations. Independent radio operators claim that the legal
 obligation of private stations to pay fees to the state company infringes on the prin-
 
 
 ciple of free competition. Although they have consented to pay the fees, the private
 companies argue they are unreasonably high.
 A government monopoly controls local television, an important source of news.
 While there are no privately owned domestic television stations, French-owned pay
 television is available but offers no local news.
 At year's end, at least seven Internet service providers operated in the country.
 The government did not restrict access to the Internet. A personal account with un-
 limited access time cost about $18 (10,000 CFA Francs) per month. Several
 cybercafes in the capital city, Dakar, provided short-term access to the Internet that
 was used by many persons unable to afford personal accounts.
 Academic freedom is generally respected. However, student meetings on part of
 the campus of the University of Dakar are banned informally (see Section 2.b.), os-
 tensibly to prevent militant student groups from disrupting classes and studies. In
 May police shot and wounded student demonstrators who were protesting poor food
 and electricity shortages at the University of Saint Louis (see Section 1.c.).
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 the right of peaceful assembly, and while the Government generally respected it in
 practice, there were several instances in which the Government limited this right.
 The Government requires prior authorization for public demonstrations, which it
 usually grants. Meetings by students on the academic campus of the University of
 Dakar are banned informally, but this prohibition does not extend to the dormitory
 areas of the campus.
 During the year, the Government from time to time denied authorization for pub-
 lic demonstrations by unions or political parties. In August the Government refused
 to permit at least five marches or demonstrations by the Federation of Independent
 Labor Unions to protest the privatization of the national electric company and de-
 mand the release from jail of union leader Mademba Sock and 26 of his supporters.
 On each occasion, the union ignored the ban and the police dispersed the gatherings
 with tear gas and detained the union leaders for a few hours.
 The Constitution provides for the right of association, and the Government gen-
 erally respects it in practice. Citizens who wish to form associations must register
 with the Ministry of Interior. Business-related associations register with the Min-
 istry of Commerce. By law and in practice, the Ministry of Interior must register
 such groups as long as the objectives of the association are stated clearly and they
 do not violate the law.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for these rights, and the Government gen-
 erally respects them in practice. Some public employees, including teachers, are re-
 q uired by law to obtain government approval before departing the country, although
 this is not regularly enforced in practice.
 At times, usually during sweeps for MFDC rebels, the security forces temporarily
 restricted access to the Casamance region or areas within it. The security forces also
 regularly maintained checkpoints in the Ziguinchor region to screen for MFDC
 rebels and arms transports. Security forces generally allowed travelers to proceed
 after checking documents and searching vehicles.
 Although MFDC leader Abbe Augustine Diamacoune Senghor remained free from
 house arrest and was permitted to receive visitors, the Government controlled his
 movements.
 Continued sporadic violence in the Casamance and clashes between the armed
 forces and MFDC rebels caused civilians to flee their homes throughout the year.
 In April the JNHCR reported an influx of over 3,000 Casamance refugees into
 Guinea-Bissau. Refugees told the UNHCR that they were fleeing MFDC rebels at-
 tempting to collect money and supplies.
 The law inciudes provisions for granting refugee/asylee status in accordance with
 the provisions of the 1951 U.N. Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees and
 its 1967 Protocol. Since 1989 as a country of first asylum, Senegal has hosted
 Mauritanian refugees who reside primarily in villages located along the length of
 the border with Mauritania. The Government cooperates with the UNHCR and
 other humanitarian organizations in providing assistance for refugees. The UNHCR
 reported no significant protection problems for these refugees; however, the
 UNHCR's assistance was scheduled to terminate at the end of the year. While no
 formal repatriation agreement exists with the UNHCR, the two governments
 reached an informal agreement at mid-year to cooperate in facilitating and promot-
 ing repatriation. Refugees continue to return to Mauritania, but exact figures are
 unavailable due to unofficial movements. In the absence of a recent census, the
 
 
 357
 UNHCR believes that there are under 40,000 Mauritanian refugees remaining in
 Senegal.
 In June, following the military rebellion in Guinea-Bissau, Senegal accepted sev-
 eral hundred refgees from that country. Although these refugees protested their re-
 location outside the urban area of Dakar, the authorities, in cooperation with the
 UNHCR, relocated them without the use of force. At year's end, there were approxi-
 mately 700 Guinea-Bissauan refugees in a camp at Tries, about 60 miles east of
 Dakar.
 There were no reports of the forced return of persons to a country where they
 feared persecution.
 Section 3. Respect-for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have the constitutional right to change their Government through peri-
 odic multiparty elections; however, the Socialist Party's domination of political life-
 it has held power since independence- -and irregularities and fraud in elections have
 called into question the extent to which citizens can meaningfully exercise this
 right.
 On February 4, the National Assembly decided to equalize the number of deputies
 elected by simple majority vote in districts and by proportional representation na-
 tionwide and to increase the size of the Assembly from 120 to 140 members. The
 Constitutional Council voided the increase in size on February 23, on the grounds
 that the Assembly's bill had not identified funding for the new seats. In March the
 Government proposed, and an extraordinary session of the Assembly enacted, a sec-
 ond bill implementing the increase in a manner consistent with the Council's objec-
 tion.
 In the May parliamentary elections, the ruling PS received 50.1 percent of the
 votes cast and secured 93 of the 140 seats. There are 34 legally registered parties.
 The 32-member Cabinet that President Diouf appointed in July included only one
 minor opposition party leader.
 In February the Assembly passed a bill to create a second legislative chamber,
 a 60-member Senate. Forty-five of its members are to be elected by an electoral col-
 lege on the basis of dual proportional and majority systems and regional slates. The
 electoral college has 13,920 members consisting of elected local government officials
 and members of the National Assembly. The President is to appoint 12 members
 of the Senate, and the remaining 3 are to he elected from slates representing several
 associations of expatriate Senegalese. Although the Constitutional Court rejected
 this system for selecting Senators, in August the Assembly passed a second bill
 overriding the Court's objection. By the December 4 deadline, only four parties reg-
 istered to participate in the election of the new Senate, which was scheduled for
 January 24, 1999. Most major opposition parties decided to boycott the election be-
 cause the ruling party's domination of elected local and regional offices gave opposi-
 tion parties little chance of winning seats in the Senate. In August 1997, the Gov-
 ernment created a National Observatory of Elections (ONEL) to supervise and over-
 see elections. The ONEL was a temporary, independent oversight body empowered
 to order bureaucrats to obey the law and to take legal action against individuals
 and parties who violate it. The Interior Ministry remains responsible for the actual
 organization and -implementation of the elections. A newly created General Direc-
 torate of Elections within the Interior Ministry centralized the formerly dispersed
 responsibility for administering elections. The ONEL significantly improved the
 level of transparency of the May National Assembly elections, despite persistent
 flaws in the system. However, the ONEL's mandate expired after it submitted its
 final report to President Diouf in August, since the law only constituted the ONEL
 during an electoral campaign. The Government rejected most international offers of
 election assistance, including monitors, stating that it could finance the elections
 itself. However, the domestic private press and RADDHO, with the help of inter-
 national funding, conducted election monitoring activities without government inter-
 ference.
 The ONEL issued a comprehensive report that identified areas for improvement
 to make the process more transparent, including an overhaul of the election rolls
 and better controls on the activities of the commissions responsible for voter reg-
 istration and distribution- of voter cards. The Government and opposition parties
 agreed to revise -the election rolls, but no details, particularly time frames, were
 made public. The election law requires establishment of an ONEL-like institution
 for every election.
 There were several-incidents of election-related violence; however, incidents of vio-
 lence were fewer and less widespread than during some previous elections. On May
 8 in Thioncon Sanche, Linguere department, the press reported that PS supporters
 
 
 358
 
 attempted forcibly to disperse a group of Democratic Renewal Movement (MDR)
 members from the fringes of a PS rally, and that a PS activist shot and wounded
 an MDR supporter. On May 5 and May 10, there were also instances when property
 was destroyed that belonged to former PS members who had joined the MDR; the
 victims blamed their former PS colleagues. On May 14, a PS activist was stabbed
 to death at a PS rally in Bambey in an altercation between rival PS factions.
 In 1996 the PS won control of all 10 regional governments and many local govern-
 ments in the country's first subnational level elections, which were marked by credi-
 ble allegations of widespread fraud and procedural irregularities, gerrymandering,
 illegal fundraising, and voter list manipulations. Due in part to the flaws in these
 elections, the Government's decentralization program has had limited success in de-
 fusing the secessionist rebellion in the Casamance region (see Section 5), which con-
 tinued to give rise to many abuses (see Sections l.a. and 1.c.). Officials chosen in
 these widely flawed elections also made up the bulk of the 13,920-member Electoral
 College that was to choose most members of the newly created Senate under legisla-
 tion enacted during the year.
 Elections are held by balloting that is officially described as secret but may permit
 voters to leave the polling place with evidence of how they voted. At polling places
 on election day, registered citizens receive a package of ballot papers, one for each
 candidate. Each citizen votes by depositing into a sealed ballot box, alone inside a
 closed booth, an envelope containing one of these ballots. In the same booth, a trash
 receptacle is provided in which the voter may privately dispose of the unused bal-
 lots; however, polling officials cannot readily ensure that this is done. Nevertheless,
 despite apparent potential for abuse, this balloting system has not been the subject
 of complaints or reports of abuse in recent elections in the country.
 Women are underrepresented in the political process. While there are no legal im-
 pediments to their participation in government and politics, cultural and edu-
 cational factors hamper them. In addition, political parties often rank women low
 on party lists, making it difficult for them to be elected to the National Assembly
 or to be appointed ministers. Only 5 of the 32 ministers in the President's Cabinet
 are women, and there are only 2 women in the 19-member Economic and Social
 Council, the Government's policymaking body. No women head political parties, and
 only 18 female deputies hold seats in the 140-member National Assembly. Women's
 lower representation reflects not only a: disparity in education (see Section 5) but
 also cultural pressures.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A wide variety of human rights groups operate without government restriction,
 investigating and publishing their findings on human rights cases. Government offi-
 cials generally are cooperative and receptive to their views.
 The Government declined offers of assistance from international organizations in
 organizing and monitoring the May legislative elections (see Section 3).
 In 1997 the Government enacted a law to strengthen the National Committee on
 Human Rights. The Committee includes members from the Government and civic
 organizations, including private human rights groups. It may on its own initiative
 investigate human rights abuses, including torture, but it did not investigate any
 cases of abuse during the-year.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution states that "men and women shall be equal in law" and prohibits
 discrimination based on race, religion, sex, class, or language. However, discrimina-
 tion against women is pervasive, and the Government frequently does not enforce
 antidiscrimination laws.
 Women.-There are credible reports that violence against women, usually wife
 beating, is common. Several women's groups have formed to address this problem.
 Police usually do not intervene in domestic disputes, and most people are reluctant
 to go outside the family for redress. In contrast, the law and society view rape as
 a very serious crime, and the law stipulates that persons convicted of rape may be
 imprisoned for up to 10 years. If the victim is a minor, her age is considered an
 aggravating circumstance. Rape trials often result in convictions.
 Despite constitutional protections, women face extensive societal discrimination,
 especially in rural areas where Islamic and Senegalese customs, including'polygyny
 and Islamic rules of inheritance, are strongest, and women generally are confied
 to traditional roles. By law, women-have the right to choose when and whom they
 marry; however, in some areas, traditional practice can restrict a woman's choice.
 There is no minimum age of consent to marry, marriages are sometimes arranged
 
 
 359
 
 in some communities, and in polygynous unions women do not have the right of no-
 tification or approval prior to a subsequent marriage. In the countryside, women
 perform much of the subsistence farming and child rearing and have limited edu-
 cational opportunities. Although the Government has committed itself to equalizing
 male and female primary school enrollment, there is still much social and official
 discrimination against women in educational opportunities. Only 23 percent of fe-
 males over 15 years of age are literate, while the rate for males over age 15 is 43
 percent.
 It is estimated that only 20 percent of women are engaged in paid employment.
 Moreover, traditional practices make it difficult for women to obtain bank credit.
 Women usually marry young (the majority by age 16 in rural areas) and average
 5.7 live births (down from 7 in 1995). About half of all women live in polygynous
 unions.
 In urban areas, women encounter somewhat less discrimination and are active in
 overnment, political life, the legal profession, and business. About 14 percent of
 awyers are women. Urban women are more likely to take advantage of the Govern-
 ment's efforts to increase respect for women's legal rights to divorce, alimony, and
 child support, and to seek education and employment. In general urban women re-
 ceive equal pay for equal work.
 In September the Ministry of Family, Social Action, and National Solidarity an-
 nounced plans to create a national center for women's rights. The decision arose
 from a ministry-sponsored workshop on the promotion of the legal status of women
 and elimination of all forms of discrimination. The Observatoire National des Droits
 de la Femme (ONDF), as the center is to be called, has as its mandate the "control,
 protection, and promotion of the status of women and girls; information, education,
 and awareness. It is to have members from both the Government and civil society.
 Children.-The Ministry of Family, Social Action, and National Solidarity, estab-
 lished in 1990 (formerly the Ministry of Women, Children, and the Family, and re-
 named in 1998), is responsible for promoting children's welfare. Numerous organiza-
 tions assist the Ministry in support of children's rights, including the Ministry of
 Health, which maintained a nationwide effort focusing on child survival. The Gov-
 ernment continues to increase the number of classrooms and encourage more chil-
 dren, particularly females, to enter and stay in school. The law requires that chil-
 dren attend school until age 12, but this is not enforced due to a shortage of schools.
 Organized street begging by children who are Koranic students results in a signifi-
 cant interruption of their education, and many children work in their familys fields
 (see Section 6.d.).
 There were no laws or regulations concerning female genital mutilation (FGM),
 which is widely condemned by international health experts as damaging to both
 physical and psychological health. However, the Council of Ministers approved on
 December 22 draft legislation to ban the practice of FGM, and submitted it to the
 National Assembly with a strong request that it be enacted as early in 1999 as pos-
 sible, The Council also approved other amendments to the Penal Code aimed at
 stemming violence against women and children. The PS was expected to assure
 early passage by the National Assembly. The Government sponsors programs to
 educate women to the dangers of FGM. FGM is not practiced by Senegal's largest
 ethnic group, the Wolofs (representing 43 percent of the population), but it is per-
 formed on girls belonging to some other ethnic groups. Infibulation, the most ex-
 treme and dangerous form of FGM, is practiced by members of the Toucouleur and
 Peulh ethnic groups, particularly those in rural areas. Unsubstantiated recent stud-
 ies estimate that between 5 and 20 percent of females undergo the procedure.
 People With Disabilities.-There are no laws that mandate accessibility for the
 disabled, and in practice most persons with disabilities are generally unable to par-
 ticipate in many occupations due to physical barriers and a lack of equipment and
 training opportunities that would make such participation possible.
 Religious Minorities.-Approximately 92 percent of the population are Muslims.
 There are small Christian (2 percent) and indigenous (6 percent) religious commu-
 nities. Officially, adherence to a particular religion confers no advantage or dis-
 advantage in civil, political, economic, military, or other matters. However, in prac-
 tice, membership in an Islamic subgroup may afford certain political and economic
 protections and advantages.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-The country is ethnically diverse. The larg-
 est ethnic groups are the Wolof (more than 40 percent of the country's population),
 the Pular (also called Peuihl or Fulani, nearly 25 perent), and the Serer (more than
 15 percent). Other smaller groups include the Diola, Mandink, and Soninke. Each
 group has its own primary language although French and Wolof are widely used as
 secondary languages. While general regions of origin can be identified for most eth-
 nic groups, these regional separations are no longer distinct.
 
 
 360
 In most of the country, ethnic and regional tensions have not contributed signifi-
 cantly to recent human rights abuses, and opposition to the Government has gen-
 erally taken the form of nonviolent political parties that have not had readily identi-
 fiable ethnic or regional bases. This has not been true in the Casamance region, the
 part of the country to the south of The Gambia. Casamance is substantially less
 arid, less Islamic, and less Wolof than the rest of the country to the north of The
 Gambia. Resentment on the part of Casamance groups including the Diola of domi-
 nation by northerners including the Wolof reportedly has contributed significantly
 to the secessionist MFDC rebellion in the Casamance region, which began in 1982
 and has continued to give rise to many human rights abuses (see Sections l.a. and
 1.c.). Flaws in the country's first local and regional elections, held in 1996, have re-
 duced the effectiveness of the Government's ongoing decentralization program in
 accomodating aspirations for greater regional and ethnic autonomy.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution and the Labor Code provide all
 workers with the right of association, and they are free to form or join unions. Any
 group of workers in the same occupation, similar trades, or the same professions
 may form a union. While the Ministry does not always grant initial recognition to
 a union, once it gives recognition, the Ministry virtually never withdraws it. How-
 ever, the Government may disband a union if its activities deviate from its charter.
 The Labor Code does not apply to the informal and agricultural sectors where most
 persons work.
 Although they represent a small percentage of the working population, unions
 wield significant political influence because of their ability to disrupt vital sectors
 of the economy. The small industrial component of the total work force of 4 million
 is almost totally unionized. The only union in the agrarian sector is one represent-
 ing workers at a privately owned sugar company. Some farmers are organized into
 the National Farming Association, an advocacy organization.
 The National Confederation of Senegalese Workers (CNTS), the largest union or-
 ganization, has close ties to the ruling Socialist Party, and union members hold a
 considerable number of government positions. One is a PS minister, and several oth-
 ers hold PS seats in the Assembly. While ostensibly an independent organization,
 the umbrella CNTS consistently supports government policies.
 The rival to the CNTS is the National Union of Autonomous Labor Unions of Sen-
 egal (UNSAS). The UNSAS is a federation of strategically important unions such
 as those formed by electrical workers, telecommunication workers, teachers, water
 technicians, and hospital, railroad, and sugar workers.
 The Constitution and the Labor Code provide for the right to strike, but with re-
 strictions. Unions representing members of the civil service must notify the Govern-
 ment of their intent to strike no less than 1 month in advance, and private sector
 unions must make a similar notification 3 days in advance. The Government or the
 employer can use the time to seek a settlement to the dispute but cannot stop the
 strike. There were numerous legal strikes during the year. In August the UNSAS
 held a 1-day strike which was observed only partially after the Government declared
 it illegal on the grounds of insufficient advance notice. Regulations prohibit employ-
 ers from retaliating against legal strikes, and these regulations are enforced
 through the labor court.
 On several occasions police used tear gas to disperse union members who were
 holding protest demonstrations (see Sections l.c. and 2.b.).
 The Labor Code permits unions to affiliate with international bodies. The CNTS
 is active in regional and international labor organizations and is the dominant Sen-
 egalese member of the Organization of African Trade Union Unity.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectiuely.-The law provides unions with
 the right to organize and to bargain collectively, and these rights are protected in
 practice. There are also legal prohibitions governing discrimination by employers
 against union members and organizers. Employers found guilty of antiunion dis-
 crimination are required to reinstate workers. There were no known instances in
 which workers were prevented from exercising the right to-organize and bargain col-
 lectively. The Ministry of Labor can intervene in disputes between labor and man-
 agement if requested, and it plays a mediation role in the private and state enter-
 prise sectors.
 Labor laws apply to all industrial firms including those in the Dakar industrial
 free trade zone.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-There were no reports of forced
 labor, which is prohibited by law. The Constitution prohibits child labor of all kinds,
 and the Government enforces this ban in the formal sector. There is no evidence
 that forced or bonded child labor takes place in the informal or agricultural sectors.
 
 
 361
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The Con-
 stitution bans child labor of all kinds, and the Government enforces this ban in the
 formal sector, which is under the purview of the labor law. There is no evidence that
 forced or bonded child labor takes place in the informal or agricultural sectors (see
 Section 6.c.). However, instead of attending school, many children work in their famn-
 fly's fields.
 The minimum age for employment is 16 years for apprenticeships and 18 for all
 other types of work. Inspectors from the Ministry of Labor closely monitor and en-
 force these restrictions within the small formal wage sector, which includes state-
 owned corporations, large private enterprises, and cooperatives. However, children
 under the age of 16 frequently work in the much larger traditional or informal sec-
 tors, such as family farms in rural areas or in small businesses, where the Govern-
 ment does not enforce minimum age and other workplace regulations.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Legislation mandating a monthly minimum
 wage has been in force since the country's independence in 1960. The Ministries of
 Labor and Finance determine wage rates after negotiating with the unions and
 management councils. The minimum wage of about $0.34 7209.1 CFA francs) per
 hour is not adequate to provide a decent standard of living for a worker and family.
 Within the formal sector, the law mandates a standard workweek of 40 to 48
 hours for most occupations, with at least one 24-hour rest period and 1 month per
 year of annual leave; enrollment in government systems for social security and re-
 tirement; safety standards; and a variety of other measures. These regulations are
 incorporated into the Labor Code and are supervised by inspectors from the Min-
 istry of Labor. However, enforcement is uneven, especially outside the formal sector.
 There is no explicit legal protection for workers who file complaints about unsafe
 conditions. While there are legal regulations concerning workplace safety, govern-
 ment officials often do not enforce them. In theory workers have the right to remove
 themselves from unsafe working conditions, but in practice the right seldom is exer-
 cised in circumstances of high unemployment and a slow legal system.
