 SENEGAL
 Senegal, which has a tradition of democratic government,
 is a multi-party, constitutional republic headed by a
 president. It became independent from French colonial rule
 in 1960. The head of government is a prime minister chosen
 by the president. The current president, Abdou Diouf, is
 also Secretary General of the Senegalese Socialist Party,
 which holds a majority of seats in the unicameral, popularly
 elected National Assembly. President Diouf succeeded
 President Leopold Senghor as chief of state when the latter.
 voluntarily retired from office on January 1, 1981. Presi-
 dential and legislative elections are scheduled for Febru-
 ary 1983. Senegal defines its economy as socialist, albeit
 with significant participation by the private sector. It is
 a developing country whose economy is based on agriculture.
 There have been no events in 1982 which have adversely
 affected Senegal's human rights record. The country's open
 society, democratic institutions, and vigilant court system
 encourage a free debate of important issues. No reports
 have been received of any significant violations of human
 rights in Senegal in recent years. Amnesty International
 has not identified any critical deficiencies in Senegalese
 human rights practices.
 Both long-and-short-term trends in the human rights field
 are favorable. The health of the democratic system is
 demonstrated by the country-wide preparations for presi-
 dential and legislative elections in 1983.
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Killing
 There are no reports of killing for political motives
 in recent years.
 b. Disappearance
 There is no record of persons being abducted, secretly
 arrested, or held in clandestine detention by official or
 quasi-official security forces. No vigilante groups exist
 whose activities are condoned by the Senegalese Government.
 There are also no records of Senegalese subject to prolonged
 or permanent *disappearance."
 c. Torture
 The Constitution states that the person is sacred and
 must be protected by the state. The criminal code specif-
 ically prohibits physical abuse. Nevertheless, some physi-
 cal coercion, including beating of persons held in detention
 by prison authorities, occurs.
 d. Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Other than whipping of fractious prisoners for violations
 of prison discipline, punishment which might be considered
 cruel, inhuman, or degrading is not practiced in Senegal.
 Prisons are far from ideal because of overcrowded conditions
 and meager fare. Clerics, friends, and family enjoy access
 to prisoners.
 
 
 253
 e. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Arbitrary arrest or imprisonment is forbidden by the Consti-
 tution and is not practiced. The Constitution guarantees
 every citizen access to legal counsel in every aspect of
 legal procedure. Habeas corpus is not incorporated into
 Senegalese law. Preventive detention is permitted when the
 civil authorities determine that there is a threat of civil
 disturbance, or the person is a danger to himself or others.
 A suspect can legally be held without charge for 48 hours
 following arrest, or up to 72 hours if a public prosecu-
 tor so orders. Charges are formally and clearly stated.
 f. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Senegal follows the French legal system. Trials are fair
 and open to the public. Officials of the courts are trained
 lawyers with several years of required apprenticeship.
 Defendants in theory have the right to effective counsel in
 the sense that public defenders are provided for in the law;
 they do not exist in practice, however. Senegalese defense
 lawyers are famous throughout francophone Africa for their
 skills. The judiciary is constitutionally and effectively
 independent of the executive and military. Ordinary courts
 differ from political and military courts. Ordinary courts
 have hearings which are presided over by a panel of judges
 and, in the case of criminal charges, they have a jury.
 Political and military courts are considered special
 courts and include the High Court of Justice, the Security
 ("political*) Court and the Military Courts. The High Court
 of Justice was created for the sole purpose of trying high
 government officials for treason or for malfeasance in
 office. This Court has not been convened since the early
 1970's.  The Security (or "political") Court consists of a
 judge and two assessors. It has jurisdiction over any case
 involving crimes believed to have been committed with a
 political motive. Such cases are referred to the Security
 Court by the Government. Appeals from this Court are
 referred to the Supreme Court, but only on the basis that a
 mistrial has occurred. This Court has not been convened in
 over 15 years.
 Military Courts - the Court of Appeals, the Tribunals of the
 First Instance and the Courts of Assize may be augmented by
 military assessors to constitute military courts which have
 jurisdiction over offenses committed by members of the armed
 forces in time of peace. (In wartime, courts martial are
 convened.) This Court has a jury if the case is tried in
 Assize. Appeals from these courts may be granted on the
 basis of a mistrial. Civilians may not be tried in a
 military court.
 g. Invasion of the Home
 There are constitutional and legal safeguards against
 arbitrary invasion of the home. The right of property is
 guaranteed and the home is inviolable. Search warrants may
 be issued only by judges and only according to appropriate
 procedures outlined by law. There is no evidence to suggest
 that the public security forces'violate the privacy
 of the home.
 
 
 254
 2.   Respect for Civil and Political Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and intellectual inquiry are respected.
 The Constitution guarantees the right of each individual to
 express and disseminate his opinions freely. Senegal has a
 vociferous and iconoclastic press, with a half-dozen regu-
 larly published newspapers ranging from politically conser-
 vative to Marxist-Leninist. In addition to observed prac-
 tice and constitutional safeguards, the Government earlier
 this year reaffirmed its belief in free speech and equal
 access to the news media in official letters to opposition
 parties which had queried the Government on these points.
 Opposition political parties meet regularly in widely-
 publicized conferences which are open to the public.
 Criticism of the Government is free and wide-ranging.
 There is virtually no censorship of domestic or foreign
 books. The most recent case occurred in 1979, when a
 magazine containing an article critical of a local relig-
 ious organization was not allowed into Senegal. The
 schools and universities enjoy academic freedoms.
 Television and radio stations are owned by the Government,
 and in this sense an indirect censorship is exerted on the
 media. Coverage is given to the activities of opposition
 political parties, although the parties themselves claim
 that they do not receive a share of air time proportional
 to the membership. The Government has denied this claim
 but has promised to examine the question prior to the
 national election. There are no reports of any journalists
 having been intimidated, harassed, or arrested, nor has any
 newspaper or magazine been closed down. The Constitution
 guarantees the inviolability of private correspondence,
 mail, telephone, and telegraphic communication, and these
 guarantees are observed in practice.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.
 The Constitution authorizes citizens freely to assemble,
 a right which is often exercised. No group has been denied
 the right of free assembly. However, during the recent
 visit to Senegal of President Mitterand, Senegalese police
 broke up the press conference of a local quasi-political
 figure who was in the process of urging his audience to
 attack French interests in Senegal. There have been no
 reports of any other official interference in political
 meetings.
 Both the major trade union confederation, which is a govern-
 mental organization, and small independent trade unions,
 play an important role in the society and economy of Senegal.
 Unions exercise the right to organize, negotiate, and
 strike. The major trade union confederation serves as a
 means for the Government to influence workers' desires and
 grievances and to insure that strikes are legal and staged
 for significant reasons. The major trade union confedera-
 tion has a sense of independence. Under existing laws, it
 could support opposition candidates in the forthcoming
 elections. In April 1982, at the annual congress of the
 trade union confederation., membership voted to no longer
 accept ministerial rank for their leadership because of
 potential conflicts of interest. (Under law, the confeder-
 ation is entitled to two ministerial posts.) Less than 25
 
 
 255
 percent of the labor force is unionized. No official
 harassment of unions has been noted, nor have any indepen-
 dent scientific or professional groups complained of perse-
 cution or intimidation. The regional International Labor
 Organization office has characterized labor relations
 in Senegal as very good.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Senegal is a secular state. Freedom of conscience and
 religion are constitutionally guaranteed and are recog-
 nized in practice. Religious institutions have the right
 to administer their own affairs. Some 75 percent of the
 population is Muslim; other religions are represented,
 however, and are permitted to practice freely. There are
 Christians, for example, in prominent government positions.
 Conversions among religions are permitted and do occur.
 There is no discrimination against minority religions.
 Adherence to a particular faith does not confer either
 advantage or disadvantage in civil, economic, military,
 or other secular status.
 d. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigratioh, and Repatriation
 The Constitution states that all citizens of the republic
 have the right to move and establish themselves freely
 anywhere in Senegal.' Movement within Senegal is not re-
 stricted. There are no restrictions placed on residence in
 certain areas. In 1981 the Government abolished a require-
 ment for exit visas for travel outside Senegal.
 Senegal does not restrict emigration as a matter of policy
 or practice, nor do official attitudes discourage or impose
 sanctions on intending emigrants or intending repatriates.
 The Senegalese Government does not impede either domestic
 or foreign travel on the part of its citizens. It accords
 privileged status to visitors from counfries belonging to
 the West African Economic Community. It places no restric-
 tions on residence by citizens or aliens in certain cities
 or rural areas. The United Nations High Commissioner for
 Refugees (UNHCR) estimates that 5,200 refugees, mainly from
 Guinea-Conakry and Guinea-Bissau, reside in Senegal. To
 UNHCR knowledge, no refugee has been forced to return to his
 homeland. Guinean residents of Senegal, who number 500,000
 to 600,000, pass through'the poorly-guarded borders without
 official formalities and settle wherever they wish. Because
 of close ties between the Senegalese and Guinean governments,
 however, few are recognized officially as refugees.
 e. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Senegal is an active, multi-party democracy. The Consti-
 tution permits an unlimited number of political parties.
 At present there are 14 which run the full range of the
 political spectrum from conservative to Marxist-Leninist.
 Political-parties enjoy full freedom of expression in speech
 and print. Two parties are currently represented in the
 National Assembly, of which the majority is the "Partie
 Socialiste". The National Assembly vigorously debates
 government policy and frequently splits its vote along
 party lines.
 
 
 256
 Elections in Senegal are free. Nationwide elections
 in 1983 will be held for the office of president and for the
 National Assembly. The Government has been conducting a
 vigorous voter registration drive for the last year in
 preparation for the elections, in which most of the politi-
 cal parties are expected to participate. In addition,
 provincial and municipal elections have recently been held
 in hundreds of constituencies throughout the country.
 Senegal has universal adult suffrage. All areas of the
 country are represented in the Government. Equal employment
 opportunity is legally assured for women, but lack of
 training or of previous employment experience as well as
 traditional views about the role of women in society hamper
 achievement in practice. There are, however, female members
 of the cabinet as well as women's groups active in the
 various political parties.
 3.   Government Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Senegal is a leader among African countries in the estab-
 lishment of international standards for human rights prac-
 tices. It was the original sponsor in 1979 of the Organi-
 zation of African Unity (OAU) Human Rights Charter which was
 adopted at the OAU summit in Nairobi in June 1981. Senegal
 is also represented and plays a positive role in expanding
 the influence of the Human Rights Commission. It is the
 headquarters of the African Bar Association's Institute of
 Human Rights, an organization which trains lawyers and
 judges in translating rights into practical judicial
 legal procedures. The Senegalese Government has not been
 the subject of human rights actions by official interna-
 tional organizations.
 Amnesty International is represented in Senegal and
 recently held an exposition in Dakar. There have been
 no recent official visits by any other external non-
 governmental human rights group.
 The judicial system is the most effective guarantor of
 individual liberties in Senegal. Such organizations as the
 Institute of Human Rights, the Senegalese United Nations
 Association, and Dakar University Faculty of Law keep a
 watching brief on human rights issues, while the courts have
 a positive record in defending the rights of individuals and
 private institutions. The National Assembly publicly
 reviews and evaluates all government programs throughout
 the year. There is no evidence of pressure brought to bear
 on such institutions by the Government.
 4.   Economic, Social, and Cultural Situation
 Over the past 12 months, Senegal continued to implement
 measures designed to stave off international bankruptcy
 which had seemed a real probability until mid-1981. The
 World Bank reports per capita GNP as increasing from $430
 in 1979 to $451 in 1980. However, over the last 18 months
 there has also been a 20 percent increase in a traditional
 African family's cost of living. This indicates a consider-
 able reduction of the man-in-the-street's purchasing power.
 At least a part of this reduced real income is a result of
 official policies. The Government has attempted to restrain
 public employment and administrative costs, as well as to
 cut back consumer and agricultural subsidies.
 
 
 257
 Structural economic reform is a major problem having an im-
 pact on the well-being of the public. With nearly six mil-
 lion inhabitants (5,830,000 estimated in 1981) and a popula-
 tion growth rate of 2.8 or higher, food self-sufficiency has
 become the chief development goal. Senegal is trying to in-
 crease and improve its agricultural resources to feed a bur-
 geoning population. Family planning is still in the initial
 stages. However, there are indications that the Government
 is urgently addressing these issues.
 Health continues to show steady improvement, reflecting
 the Government's efforts to decentralize social services
 away from Dakar to the benefit of the rural inhabitants.
 Life expectancy at birth has increased from 42.1 in 1979
 to 43.2 in 1980 according to the World Bank. The infant
 mortality rate in the first year of life has declined
 from 159 per 1,000 live births in 1972 to 146..8 in 1980.
 The major commitment by President Diouf to strengthen
 primary and secondary education in 1981 has continued
 throughout the past year. Primary school enrollment con-
 tinues to increase, and the Government is concentrating
 on finding employment for school graduates.
 
 
 258
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- 03LIGAT:ONS AND LO!N AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL Y2.AKS - MILLICS 3F DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: SENEGAL
 C!" 1i       1982
 I.ECON. ASST.-TTAL...         27.0     35.5     30.9
 LOANS. ..............      7.0     7.0      7.0
 GRANTS ................     Z3.0     2.5     23.9
 A.AIO ......................... 10.0     14.      16.2
 LOANS................   .    0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        10.0     14.S    16.2
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)o..         0.0       3.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .....         15.1     13.6     12.7
 LOANS .................. 7.0         7.0      7.0
 GRANTS ................  .  1     11.6      5.7
 TITLE -TDTAL ......,.            7.0      7.0      7.0
 REPAY. IN I-LOANS,....          7.u      7.0      7.0
 PAY. IN FJR. CURR ....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE II-TUTAL .......          3.1     11.6      5.7
 E.RELPEF.EC.3RV P WFP.          L.1      4.2      0.6
 VOLREL1EP AGENCY-~             5.0      7.4      5.1
 G.OTHER 5CUN. ASSIST,..          1.9      2.1      2.0
 LOANS ................0.0             0.0      0..0
 GRANTS.     ............     1.7      2.1      2.0
 PEAC= CORPS ......        1.9       2.1      2.0
 NANCOTICS ........        0.0       0.0      0.0
 OThER ............ 0.0             .0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL            0.2      01.2      0.3
 LOANS ..............        0.3       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.2       0.2      0.3
 A.MAP GRANTS ........           0.0      0.0      0.0
 8.CREOIT SALES-MS ....        0.0 '     1.0      3.0
 CINTL ML.E3TRNG....          O.Z      0.1     .0.3
 O.TRAN-iX(EbS STOCK,..          0.0      3.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........        0.0       0.0      0.0
 II.TOTAL zCON. B   IL...       27.2     35.7     31.2
 LOANS: .................   7.0      7.u      7.0
 GRANTS .............  .......0.Z    23.7     24.2
 OTHER US LOANS ..........         O,.G 0.           0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......          .       0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER ............... 0.             0.0      0.0
 ----.- ...............- -  -------------  ---------------  -------.. ..
 ASSISTANC: FROM INTeRNATIONAL AGENCI5S
 193U     1951     193?     1946-82
 TOTAL ........    5.5      95.0      12.9    t9.2
 8R3              .10.0     55o6       3.0    155.7
 IFC                3.5     Z5.2       0.0     32.t
 IOA               42.3      0.0       0.-    137.5
 108                0.0      0.0       0.3      0.0
 ADS                0.0     O.        0.0      0.0
 AFO5               1.a       0.0      2.1     33.
 UNJP               Z.5      1.2      O.      31.7
 OTHER-UN           o.U      0.5       0.0      6.2
 EEC                0.0     12.0      1C.0    201.6
 
 
 259
