 SENEGAL
 Senegal is a republic with an elected President, Abdou Diouf, who has been in
 office since 1981, and a unicameral legislature controlled by the President's Socialist
 Party (PS) since independence from France in 1960.
 The Senegalese armed forces, numbering about 15,000, are professional and dis-
 ciplined. They traditionally remain aloof from politics. The paramilitary Gendar-
 merie reportedly is less professional and less disciplined. Police were responsible for
 a number of serious human rights abuses during the year.
 Senegal is predominantly agricultural. More than 70 percent of the labor force is
 engaged in farming, largely peanut production. Since 1983, the Government has
 pursued a structural adjustment program intended to reduce the role of govern-
 ment, encourage the private sector, and stimulate economic growth. Nonetheless,
 the economy remained depressed. A 50-percent devaluation in January of the CFA
 (the local currency pegged to the French franc) has encouraged a regeneration of
 tourism and other major exports.
 There were, however, serious human rights abuses in 1994 arising from internal
 political conflict over the 1993 elections, the unresolved case of a judge's assassina-
 tion in 1993, and a 1994 opposition party meeting which ended in violence and sev-
 eral deaths, including six policemen. These abuses involved the arrest and extended
 detention of political opposition figures without serious evidence, the torture of pris-
 oners by police, and the death of a suspect in police custody. Few, if any, police are
 tried and punished for such abuses, and none were in 1994. Other human rights
 abuses include restrictions on freedom of association, and domestic violence and dis-
 crimination against women.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political
 killings, but in one instance a suspect died in police custody under circumstances
 the Government refused to clarify or investigate. Police arrested Lamine Samb, a
 member of the Moustarchidine Islamic religious sect ("Followers of God") on Feb-
 ruary 26 and questioned him in connection with riots in which eight persons had
 died. Samb later died in police custody, following questioning about the disturb-
 
 
 212
 ances. The Government did not release an autopsy report and stated in response
 to inquiries from human rights organizations that it had found no police responsibil-
 ity for Samb's death. It did not state the cause of death or otherwise clarify the mat-
 ter.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Pumshment.-
 There are credible reports that police tortured many of the 150 persons arrested in
 February in connection with riots that erupted following a meeting of Coordination
 of Democratic Forces a coalition of opposition parties.
 Parliamentarian Miody Sy one of several alleged conspirators in the May 1993 as-
 sassination of Constitutiona Court Vice President Babacar Seye, presented credible
 evidence upon his release from jail in June that he was subjected to electroshock
 torture immediately after his arrest on May 20. Sy's release came after a 6-day hun-
 ger strike that aggravated an existing medical condition.
 Prisons remain overcrowded, and ood and health care are inadequate. There have
 been no reported deaths in prison caused by these conditions.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Although the Constitution prohibits arbi-
 trary arrest and detention, there continue to be instances in which police arrest and
 detain opponents of the Government, using highly questionable evidence. This was
 the case again in the arrest and detention of opposition party leaders for crimes
 against the security of the State during the February 16 riots. Police charged 150
 persons arrested on February 24 with threatening state security during these riots.
 They included three sitting members of the legis ature, the head of the Senegalese
 Democratic Party (PDS) Abdoulaye Wade, the Secretary-General of the And/Jef-pads
 opposition party Landing Savane, Deuty Pape Omar Kane, Pape Malick Sy, uncle
 of the jailed Moustarchidine leader Moustapha Sy, and over 100 supporters of the
 Moustarchidine religious sect. The court never ruled whether the arrests of the Dep-
 uties violated their parliamentary immunity, which only the National Assembly has
 the power to waive. The State avoided the issue by relying on a law known as "Fla-
 grant Delit" (caught in the act) which the prosecution claimed made it unnecessary
 to waive the deputies' immunity before charging them. The defendants remained in
 jail from February 18 until July 4. The Government released them after they began
 a hunger strike on June 30 to protest its failure to set a trial date. On August 30,
 the court dismissed charges against Wade and the five codefendants. The court or-
 dered that the case go forward against 25 others who are members of the
 Moustarchidine Movement and against Moustarchidine leader Moustapha Sy (who
 was in jail on other charges at the time the riots took place). The 25 Moustarchidine
 defendants received fines of up to $500. All have been released from prison.
 Warrants, issued by judges, are required for arrests. Police may legally hold with-
 out charge a person suspected of a crime for 48 hours after arrest and for up to
 72 hours if ordered by a public prosecutor. This period may be doubled in the case
 of crimes against the security of the state. The prosecutor decides whether or not
 to proceed with the case. If so, it is forwarded to a judge of instruction who can open
 an investigation. At this point the suspects are preliminarily charged. They may be
 held over without bail or released on their own recognizance.
 The law grants the police broad powers to detain prisoners, frequently without
 cause or explanation. During temporary detention, the prisoner has no access to
 family or an attorney, but is allowed to ask for examination by a medical doctor.
 Once a prisoner is charged, both are permitted visits. Custody is valid for 6 months,
 extendible for 6 additional months if the investigating magistrate certifies that more
 time is required. Extensions of custody are permitted when civil authorities deter-
 mine that there is a threat of civil unrest or that a person is a danger to himself
 or others. Such extensions may be reviewed by a court on appeal from the accused's
 attorney.
 Such procedures raise serious questions about the presumption of innocence. In
 principle, the accused is innocent until proven guilty, and when brought to trial it
 is the State's burden to prove that the accused is guilty of the charges against him.
 The detention process, however, virtually presumes guilt. Police are given the bene-
 fit of the doubt and may detain a prisoner for long periods of time while they inves-
 tigate and build a case against him. The first 6 months of custody are virtually un-
 challen.eable. Beyond 6 months, the accused may appeal to a court to end custody.
 Authorities may and routinely do hold prisoners m custody unless and until a court
 demands their release.
 Exile is not used as a means of political control.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution calls for a judiciary independent
 of the executive, the legislature and the armed forces. However, low pay, poor work-
 ing conditions, and family and political ties continue to leave magistrates vulnerable
 to outside pressures.
 
 
 Except as noted in Section 1.d., defendants are legally presumed innocent until
 proven guilty. Trials are public, and defendants have the right to be present in
 court, to confront witnesses to present evidence, and to have a defense attorney.
 In practice, however, some defendants are denied legal assistance at public expense
 due to lack of funding. Hearings for evidence can be closed to the public and the
 press, as was the case with the-March 17 hearings for opposition leaders Wade and
 Savane.
 A panel of judges presides over ordinary courts. In criminal cases, ordinary citi-
 zens also serve on the panel. Three courts created in May 1992 to replace the Su-
 preme Court remain understaffed and only partly functional. There are three other
 categories of special courts, two of which have rarely met, namely the High Court
 of Justice, created for the sole purpose of trying senior government officials for trea-
 son or malfeasance, the Court for the Repression of the Unlawful Accumulation of
 Wealth, and the Military Court System. Military courts may not try civilians. The
 right of appeal exists in all courts except military courts and in the special "Illegal
 Enrichment" court.
 In politically sensitive cases, the Minister of Justice has a great deal of authority
 in scheduling trials. The prosecution also has a substantial ability to delay cases.
 The cases of PDS Deputy Mody Sy and PDS financial counselor Samuel Sarr, two
 of the alleged conspirators in the May 1993 assassination of Judge Babacar Seye,
 are particularly egregious exam ples of judicial delay. Sy and Sarr were jailed in
 Ma 1993. On May 26, 1994, a lower court dismissed charges against them, along
 with PDS Secretary-General Abdoulaye Wade his wife Viviane, and PDS Deputy
 Ousmane Ngom. The Attorney General appeafed the ruling, and, despite constitu-
 tional appeals to the contrary, Sy and Sarr remained in jail awaiting higher court
 (Cour de Cassation) review. They were released from detention on June 27 after a
 6-day hunger strike. The High Court affirmed the dismissal of charges on Septem-
 ber 6. The Court ruled that charges should go forward against ae     iahate,
 Cleodore Sene, and Assane Diop, the alleged assassins, who have been in jail since
 May 1993. The Court sentenced the three on October 9 to 18, 18, and 20 years, re-
 spectively, at hard labor.
 Moustapha Sy, Moustarchidine religious leader, was convicted for incitement to
 riot and offenses against the Head of State. Sy was sentenced to 1 year in prison
 on January 14 andined approximately $4,000. The incident stemmed from a speech
 before a PDS rally in October 1993. Sy refused to testify at his trial, charging that
 he had committed no crime. Because of his refusal to appear at trial, Sy's lawyers
 were barred from representing him President Diouf pardoned Sy on September 12.
 There were no political detainees or prisoners at the end of 1994.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution prohibits arbitrary invasion of the home, and there was little govern-
 ment interference in the private lives of citizens, particularly in the rural areas.
 Normally, search warrants are required and only judges may issue them In prac-
 tice, however, searches without warrants  csionaly take place.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Whil   e Constitution provides for freedom of
 speech and press, the press is restricted by laws prohibiting the expression of views
 which "discredit' the State, incite the population to disorder, or disseminate "false
 news." For example, religious leader Mostapha Sy was convicted under this law
 on January 1 for statements he allegedly made during a political meeting (see Sec-
 tion i.e.).
 In 1994 numerous daily and weekly independent newspapers continued circula-
 tion unhindered. A broad spectrum of thought and opinion is available through reg-
 ularly published magazines and newspapers. Until the debut of Senegal's first inde-
 pendent radio station, SUD-FM in July, the Government controlled the broadcast
 media not through seif-censh        t     sing arrangements. Prior to the estab-
 lishment of SUD-FM, two other radio stations provided mostly international news.
 The Government continued to operate the country's only television station. Two
 French cable channels offer entertainment but no local news coverage.
 Political views expres   ith       nt    ss are often critical of the Govern-
 ment and its programs. Government officials, politicians, and political parties are
 not immune. Publishere are required to register with the Central Court prior to
 starting publication, but the Government routinely approves such registrations.
 Publications, including foreign publications critical of the Government, were neither
 censored nor banned. In fact, the Government interceded to get charges against the
 editor of Jeune Afrique magazine dismissed, and a court-ordered 1-year ban against
 the journal's distribution in Senegal overturned.
 Academic freedom is respected.
 
 
 214
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Government requires prior
 authorization for public demonstrations. After eight persons died during the Feb-
 ruary riots, the Government severely restricted the constitutional rights of assembly
 and association, including banning all activities of the Moustarchidines. It permitted
 only two public demonstrations by political opposition parties since that time.
 Senegalese wishing to form associations must register with the Ministry of Inte-
 rior. Business-related associations are registered with the Ministry of Commerce. By
 law and in practice, the Ministry of Interior must register such groups so long as
 the objectives of association are clearly stated and do not violate the law.
 c. Freedom of Religion.--Senegal is a secular state, and freedom of religion, a legal
 right, exists in practice. Islam is the religion of 94 percent of the population, but
 citizens also practice other religions freely. Missionary activity is permitted, and for-
 eign Christian missionaries are active in several regions of the country. Conversion
 is permitted, and there is no discrimination against minority religions.
 In theory, adherence to a particular religion confers no official advantage or dis-
 advantage in civil, political, economic, military, or other matters. In practice, mem-
 bership in an Islamic sect may afford certain political and economic protection. The
 Moustarchidines had supported the Democratic party, including holding protest
 marches.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides all citizens the right to travel and establish
 themselves freely anywhere in Senegal, a right respected in practice. Exit visas are
 not required for travel outside the country.
 There is no restriction on emigration, and repatriates are not disadvantaged on
 their return to Senegal. A Senegalese citizen by birth may not have his citizenship
 annulled for any reason. The Government may revoke the citizenship of a natural-
 ized citizen if it is proved in a court of law that the person had obtained citizenship
 fraudulently or was convicted of a crime while a citizen for less than 15 years.
 Ethnic violence against Senegalese in Mauritania and Mauritanians in Senegal in
 1989 resulted in the suspension of relations between the two countries and the repa-
 triation of thousands of Senegalese and Mauritanian nationals. Senegal accepted its
 own nationals and provided asylum to Afro-Mauritanians expelled by the Govern-
 ment of Mauritania. Approximately 52,000 refugees from Mauritania remain in Sen-
 egal. Of this number, several thousand circulate freely, and the majority have set-
 tled along the bank of the Senegal River on the border of the two countries.
 Refugees have freedom of movement and are not subject to forced repatriation.
 While relations between the Governments of Senegal and Mauritania were reestab-
 lished and borders reopened in 1992, the two countries had not resolved the issue
 of voluntary repatriation for Mauritanian refugees by year's end. Most of the 13,600
 Senegalese refugees in Guinea-Bissau who fled the violence in the Casamance re-
 gion of Senegal have been able to remain in Guinea-Bissau due to economic and eth-
 nic integration, while observing whether the Casamance peace will endure. About
 half of the nearly 3,500 Senegalese refugees who fled to the Gambia have returned
 to the Casamance region.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Senegalese have the constitutional right to change their government through peri-
 odic multiparty elections. However, the Socialist Party's domination of political
 life-it has held power since independence-has called into question the extent to
 which citizens can exercise that right.
 The PS holds 84 of the 120 Assembly seats, and the PDS 27. Four other opposi-
 tion parties divide the remaining nine seats. The 1992 Electoral Code introduced the
 secret ballot and lowered the voting age to 18 years. In August the National Assem-
 bly approved changes to the Electoral Code that eliminated 'Ordonnances," a much-
 abused process that allowed individuals to vote who, among other things, claimed
 their identification cards had been lost or stolen.
 There are no legal impediments to women's participation in government and poli-
 tics, but several de facto impediments exist. Only 2 of the 29 ministers who make
 up the President's Cabinet are women. There are no women heading political par-
 ties, and only 9 deputies in the 120-member National Assembly are women. Their
 lower representation reflects not only disparity in education (see Section 5), but also
 cultural pressures, since ministers appointed by the President and Deputies owe
 their election to the National Assembly to their ranking on party voting lists.
 
 
 215
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are at least eight local human Tights associations. All are free to criticize
 the Government publicly. The Government allows international human rights
 groups to investigate allegations concerning human rights abuses and generally re-
 sponds to requests for information about aIlegations.
 However, the Government still failed to undertake a formal investigation after
 Amnesty International asked it to look into the May 1993 charges by M-dy Sy that
 he was tortured after arrest (see Section I.c.). In response to an Amnesty Inter-
 national inquiry into the death of Lamine Samb while in custody, the Government
 denied responsibility (see Section 1).
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution states that "men and women shall be equal in law." Officially,
 there is no discrimination based on race, religion, sex, or language, but de facto dis-
 crimination against women is pervasive.
 Women.-Despite constitutional provisions, women face extensive societal dis-
 crimination, especially in the rural areas where Islamic and Senegalese customs, in-
 cludingpolygyny and Islamic rules of inheritance, are strongest and where women
 are confined to traditional roles. There is no legal discrimination against women in
 the law of inheritance. In the countryside, women perform much of the subsistence
 far   g and chld-rearing and have only very limited educational opportunities.
 Traditional practices, for example, make it difficult for women to acquire sufficient
 collateral to Obtain bank credit. According to a U.N. study, only 20 percent of women
 are in paid employment. Women usually marry young (the majority by age 16 in
 rural areas), average seven live births, and die relatively young. About half of all
 Senegalese women live in polygynous unions. Despite Government encouragement,
 there is still much discrimination against females in educational opportunities.
 Overall, females receive less than one-third the schooling received by males.
 In urban areas, women are active in government, political life, and business--al-
 though few are in top positions. The Government has made some efforts to increase
 respect for women's legal rights to divorce, alimony, child support, and employment,
 but it still does not enforce these rights effectively, particularly in rural areas. In
 general, women receive equal pay for equal work.
 There are credible reports that violence against women usually wife beating, is
 common, particularly in rural areas. Police do not normally intervene in domestic
 disputes, and women are reluctant to go outside the family for redress. Rape is
 viewed as a very serious crime, and rape cases that come to trial have produced con-
 victions. The law stipulates that persons convicted of rape may be imprisoned up
 to 10 years, and more if the victim is a minor.
 Children.-The Ministry of Women, Children, and the Family, established in
 1990, has the responsibility for promoting children's welfare. Organizations active
 in support of children's rights include UNIFEM, the Senegalese Association for Edu-
 cation and the Promotion of Human Rights and the Inter-African Committee on
 Traditional Practices Affecting the Health of Women and Children.
 There are no laws or regulations prohibiting female genital mutilation (FGM)
 which has been condemned by international experts as damaging to both physica
 and psychological health. FGM is not practiced by Senegal's largest ethnic group,
 the Wolofs, but it is performed on girls belonging to other ethnic groups. According
 to an independent expert, the percentage of girls who have undergone this proce-
 dure may be as high as 50 percent. Infibulation, the most extreme and dangerous
 form of genital mutilation, is practiced by the Toucouleur and Peulh ethnic groups.
 Perhaps 6 percent of women have undergone this procedure. Among its other activi-
 ties, the Ministry of Women, Children, and the Faiy promotes programs to edu-
 cate women to the dangers of genital mutilation.
 People With Disabilities.-There is no overt discrimination against the handi-
 capped. In practice, persons with physical disabilities are unable to participate in
 almost all mainstream occupations due to physical barriers and lack of equipment
 that would make such participation possible. There are no laws or regulations that
 mandate accessibility.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-All workers have the right of association and are
 free to form or join unions. A minimum of seven persons, each having worked within
 the trade for at least 1 year, may form a trade union by submitting a list of mem-
 bers and a charter to the Ministry of Interior. Not all unions however, succeed in
 gaining recognition, and the Ministry may disband a union if its activities deviate
 
 
 216
 from its charter. The Labor Code does not apply to the informal and agricultural
 sectors.
 Although unions sometimes fail to obtain initial recognition, once received, the
 Government virtually never withdraws it. Even though they represent a small per-
 centage of the working population, unions wield significant political influence be-
 cause of their ability to disrupt vital sectors of the economy.
 The small industrial component of the total work force of 3.9 million is almost to-
 tally unionized. The only union in the agrarian sector is one representing the work-
 ers employed at the Senegalese Sugar Company.
 The National Confederation of Senegalese Workers (CNTS), the largest union or-
 ganization, has close ties to the ruling PS, and union members hold a considerable
 number of government positions as well as 12 of the PS seats in the National As-
 sembly. While ostensibly an independent organization, the umbrella CNTS has sup-
 ported Government policies.
 The rival to the CNTS is the National Union of Autonomous Labor Unions of Sen-
 egal (UNSAS). The UNSAS is a federation of strategically important unions, such
 as those of electricians, telephone and telegraph workers, teachers, water techni-
 cians, hospital and railroad workers, and sugar producers. The UNSAS reportedly
 has no specific political orientation.
 The Constitution and the Labor Code provide for the right to strike, but with re-
 strictions. Unions representing members of the civil service must request permission
 to strike 1 month in advance, and private sector unions must request permission
 3 days in advance. The Government has the right to approve or disapprove a strike
 request. Separate strikes by the Union of University Professors and the Students'
 Union led to the Government's decision to invalidate the 1993-94 academic year at
 the University of Dakar.
 The Labor Code permits unions to affiliate with international bodies. The CNTS
 is active in regional and international labor organizations and is the dominant Sen-
 egalese member of the Organization of African Trade Union Unity. The UNSAS is
 not so affiliated.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Unions have the right by law
 to organize and to bargain collectively, and these rights are protected in practice.
 There are also legal prohibitions governing discrimination by employers against
 union members and organizers. Employers found guilty of antiunion discrimination
 are required to reinstate workers. There were no known instances in which workers
 wer fo_rcibly di'ouraged from exercising the griht to organize and bargain collec-
 tively. The Ministry of Labor can intervene in disputes between labor and manage-
 ment if requested, and plays a mediation and arbitration role in the private and
 state enterprise sectors.
 Labor laws apply in principle to all industrial firms, including those in the export
 free zone in Dakar. However, firms operating in the free zone and those eligible for
 benefits under the investment code enjoy certain exceptions to the Labor Code. Un-
 like other businesses in the formal sector, these firms do not need prior government
 authorization to dismiss employees, and they may hire workers on renewable tem-
 porary contracts for a period of up to five years.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-There were no reports of forced
 labor, and it is prohibited by law.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum age for employment
 is 16 years for apprenticeships and 18 for all other types of work.-Ministry of Labor
 inspectors closely monitor and enforce these restrictions within the formal wage sec-
 tor, which includes state-owned corporations, large private enterprises, and coopera-
 tives.
 On the other hand, children under 15 frequently work in the much larger tradi-
 tional or informal sector, such as family farms in rural areas or in small businesses,
 where the Government does not enforce minimum age and other workplace regula-
 tions.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Legislation mandating a monthly minimum
 wage has been in force since the countrys independence in 1960. The Ministers of
 Labor and Finance determine wage rates after negotiating with the unions and
 management councils. The minimum hourly wage of less than $0.50 (about 200
 CFA) is not adequate to support a worker and family. Following the devaluation of
 the CFA franc in January, unions and Government failed to reach an agreement on
 an increase in the minimum wage. Other salaries, depending on the sector and
 level, were increased by 10 to 30 percent.
 Within the formal economic sector, the law mandates: a standard workweek of 40
 to 48 hours for most occupations, with at least one 24-hour rest period, 1 month
 per year of annual leave; enrollment in Government systems for social security and
 retirement; safety standards; and a variety of other measures. These regulations are
 
 
 incorporated into the Labor Code but are supervised by inspectors from the Ministry
 of Labor. Enforcement, however, appears to be uneven, especially outside the formal
 sector.
 There are no explicit legal protections for workers who file complaints about un-
 safe conditions. While there are legal regulations concerning workplace safety, gov-
 ernnent officials do not often enforce them.
