 SENEGAL
 Senegal, which attained independence from French colonial rule in
 1960, is a republic with a democratically-elected president and
 unicameral Parliament. President Abdou Diouf, who succeeded
 former President Leopold Senghor when he resigned from the
 Presidency in January 1981, was elected in his own right in
 freely.contested elections in February 1983. A new Parliament
 was elected at the same time. The Socialist Party, of which
 President Diouf is Secretary General, won 111 of the 120 seats
 in Parliament. While there were at the time some charges by
 losIng parliamentary candidates of voting irregularities, the
 Presidential election results are generally regarded as an
 accurate reflection of voter sentiment. While the Senegalese
 Government defines the country's economy as socialist--and the
 majority Socialist Party is a member of the Socialist
 International--the private sector plays an important role in the
 economy. The Senegalese Government is encouraging a greater
 private sector role in agriculture on which the Senegalese economy
 is based.
 Senegal has longstanding democratic traditions which predate
 independence and there is wide public interest in and debate on
 political matters. Throughout much of the post-independence
 period, political life has been dominated by the Socialist Party,
 but 1983 has witnessed a continuation of the trend towards multi-
 partyism; there are now fifteen legal political parties.
 The Senegalese military has a well-deserved reputation as an
 apolitical and professional organization, is respected by the
 population, and does not impinge on human rights. Its contri-
 bution to literacy, training, and civic action arguably enhance
 the climate in which human rights prosper. The civilian secur-
 ity forces are generally well-trained and disciplined and respect
 the laws which they enforce. The legal system is active and
 effective in protecting human rights.
 The Government, which has designated a senior official at the
 Presidency to follow human rights matters, has encouraged the
 work of Dakar-based human rights organizations in organizing con-
 ferences and other human rights activities in Africa. Both long
 and short term trends in the human rights field are positive.
 Particularly noteworthy is the free and pluralistic political
 system in which local and municipal elections are scheduled to be
 held in 1984. Two tendencies which are not now significant could
 potentially have an adverse effect on human rights. The first of
 these is the apparent growth of a kind of Islamic fundamentalism
 drawing inspiration from an authoritarian Iranian model. This is
 in marked contrast to the norm of religious tolerance of Senegal's
 Muslim majority. The second is an increase in common crime re-
 sulting from continued depressed economic conditions which could
 eventually degrade the climate of security based on respect for
 the law in which human rights in Senegal have flourished.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Unlawful or Arbitrary Deprivation of Life
 There have been no reported instances of killing for political
 motives or of other instances of arbitrary deprivation of life in
 recent years.
 (293)
 
 
 294
 b. Disappearance
 There have been no reports of abduction of individuals by
 official, quasi-official, or opposition groups. Nor have there
 been reports of disappearances through the action of vigilante
 groups.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 There is in Senegal general respect by government officials of
 the constitutional provision that the person is sacred and must
 be protected by the state and of the section of the Criminal
 Code prohibiting physical abuse. There are, however, reported
 instances of the use of force by lower level police officials
 in the interrogation of suspected criminals. While there is
 no cruel intent,. prison conditions are difficult, characterized
 by overcrowding and inadequate food--direct results of Senegal's
 serious economic difficulties. Harsh prison conditions are to
 some extent alleviated by the access to prisoners by clerics,
 friends, and families who are permitted to provide amenities.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The constitutional prohibition against arbitrary arrest or de-
 tention is respected in practice. Persons are not detained,
 punished, or tried for the expression of views critical or dif-
 ferent from those of the Government. The Senegalese legal
 system is patterned after the French and does not include the
 right of habeas corpus. A person suspected of a crime may
 legally be held without charge for 48 hours after arrest, or up to
 72 hours if ordered by a public prosecutor. The limitations of
 this provision of law are respected and charges are formally and
 clearly drawn. Preventive detention is permitted when civil
 authorities determine that there is a threat of civil disturbance
 or the person is a danger to himself or others. Twenty-five
 persons arrested in December 1982 in connection with a separatist
 demonstration in the Casamance region were not brought to trial
 until December 1983. By law every citizen has access to legal
 counsel of his choice in every aspect of legal procedure. In
 practice, persons with means will have private legal counsel and
 the law makes provision for public defenders for those without
 means.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Senegal has an active, independent, and well-trained judiciary.
 Court officials are trained lawyers who have completed a number of
 years of required apprenticeship. Trials are open to the public,
 and accused persons have the right to defense lawyers who are
 often very skilled and aggressive in the protection of their
 clients. Hearings of ordinary courts are presided over by a panel
 of judges and, in the case of criminal charges, include a jury.
 There are also three other categories of courts: High Court of
 Justice, the Security ("political") Court, and a military court
 system. The High Court of Justice has the sole purpose of trying
 high government officials for treason or for malfeasance in
 
 
 295
 office. This court has not been convened since the early 1970's.
 The Security (or "political ) Court consists of a judge and two
 assessors. It has jurisdiction over cases referred to it by the
 Government when it is suspected that a crime has been committed
 for a political motive. Not having been previously convened for
 over 15 years, the Security Court was activated after demonstra-
 tions and riots broke out in the southern Casamance provincial
 capital of ziguinchor in December 1982. The demonstrators seemed
 to have secession as their goal and were believed to have been
 instigated from outside Senegal.   In the aftermath of these
 events, 78 persons were arrested. The majority of these suspects
 were released on bail, and some have fled the country. The trial
 of 25 persons interned since December, 1982 began on December 5,
 1983 in Dakar. Further demonstrations, including an attempted
 armed attack by separatists on government offices in Ziguinchor,
 occurred in December 1983; they were put down by security forces,
 but several dozen officers and demonstrators lost their lives.
 The military court system has jurisdiction over offenses
 committed by members of the armed forces during peacetime.   (In
 wartime, courts martial would be convened.) Civilians may not
 be tried by military courts.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Senegalese Government bureaucracy is in many respects pat-
 terned after the French system and shares with it a high degree
 of centralization and the obligation of a fairly extensive amount
 of documentation for purposes of education, obtaining social
 security benefits, etc. The intent, however, is not coercive and
 there is otherwise little governmental interference in the private
 lives of Senegalese citizens. There is no coercion to join a
 particular political party or to participate in political de-
 monstrations. A wide variety of political expression is evident
 and not subject to government restrictions other than those
 relating to public order. The Government is alert to the danger
 of foreign subversion by countries opposed to Senegal's open
 political and relatively liberal economic systems, but this has
 not led to any pattern of monitoring the private correspondence
 (written or oral) of Senegalese citizens. There are constitu-
 tional and legal safeguards against arbitrary invasion of the home
 which are considered inviolable. Search warrants are required and
 may be issued only by judges and in accordance with procedures
 established in law. Public security forces appear to respect the
 law in this regard.
 Section 2  Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Senegal enjoys freedom of speech and press. There are half a
 dozen regularly published newspapers in Senegal and a number of
 publications which appear spasmodically. They reflect a broad
 range of opinion from religious conservative to Marxist-Leninist.
 Senegal's most professional and informative newspaper, and its
 only daily, is controlled by the majority Socialist Party and
 therefore tends to support government policies. However,
 articles critical of government policies and officials regularly
 appear in this newspaper. Other publications are sometimes vo-
 ciferously critical of the Government.
 
 30-231 0 - 84 - 20
 
 
 296
 Poreign publications are widely sold in Senegalese book stores.
 In the past, foreign publications containing materials considered
 slanderous to Senegalese officials have not been permitted to be
 sold on the newstands. However, there are no reported instances
 of this in recent years.
 Senegal's politicians, and the better educated in general, have
 a fondness for conferences and seminars where a broad range of
 subjects is discussed. Depending on the subject matter and who
 is billed as appearing, these conferences often get large attend-
 ance and considerable publicity. The debate is often heated.
 b. Preedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Senegalese freely exercise their constitutional right to assembly.
 Assemblies for the purpose of demonstrating against government
 policies or as protests of whatever sort are closely monitored by
 the security services to ensure that they do not degenerate into
 riotous behavior inimical to the rights of the citizenry in
 general. While there is no evidence of restrictions on the right
 of assembly in Casamance province, the Government is known to be
 concerned at the possibility of foreign-instigated secessionist
 activity in the wake of the December 1982 riots there and keeps a
 close watch on political demonstrations in the province.-
 Gendarmes assigned to monitor a demonstration organized on the
 opening day of the Casamance secessionists' trial December 6 were
 attacked by the crowd. Three gendarmes died in the melee.
 Trade unions in Senegal are free to organize, negotiate, and
 strike. Less than 25 percent of the Senegalese labor force is
 organized. The major trade union confederation is a-governmental
 organization and, by law, entitled to two ministerial posts.
 However, since 1983 the confederation has chosen no longer to
 exercise this right because of potential conflict of interest.
 This is but one indication of the major confederation's growing
 sense of independence from the Government.
 The Government still considers its connection with the confedera-
 tion a useful means of informing workers of government policies
 (as was done when severe austerity measures were adopted in
 August 1983), understanding worker grievances, and ensuring that
 strikes are legal and staged for significant reasons. Other
 smaller independent trade unions function freely without a direct
 government link. In large part, union activity in Senegal is
 focused on economic and work-related issues rather than politics.
 A number of professional and scientific organizations also
 operate freely in Senegal. The International Labor Organization
 maintains a regional office in Senegal, and the African-American
 Labor Center has been active in a number of projects.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Senegal is constitutionally a secular state, and freedom of
 religion is a legal right which exists in fact. Islam is the
 religion of some 75 percent of the population. Other religions,
 primarily Catholicism, are freely practiced. Missionary activity
 is permitted, and foreign Protestant missionaries are active in
 several regions of the country. Conversion is permitted but
 would have obvious social implications for the individual in his
 home locality. There is no discrimination against minority
 religions, and adherence to a particular religion confers neither
 advantage nor disadvantage in civil, political, economic, mili-
 
 
 297
 tary, or other secular status. Religious faith is not a factor
 in membership in the majority Socialist Party or the other party
 represented in Parliament, though religion would be relevant to
 some of the minor parties (e.g., the Marxist-Leninist ones).
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel,
 Emigration, and Repatriation
 The constitutional provision that all Senegalese have the right
 freely to move and establish themselves anywhere in Senegal is
 respected in practice. Movement within Senegal is not restricted,
 and there are no restrictions placed upon residence in certain
 areas. There is a requirement for non-official foreign residents
 *of Senegal to have an exit visa for travel outside Senegal. There
 is no restriction on emigration or sanctions, official or
 otherwise, against intending emigrants. Repatriates (e.g.,
 Senegalese found ineligible for continued residence in France) are
 not officially disadvantaged on return to Senegal.Senegal is host
 to large numbers of persons from Guinea and Guinea-Bissau, perhaps
 as many as 500,000-600,000. Partly from a Senegalese desire to
 maintain good relations with its neighbors, few of these are of-
 ficially given the status of refugees. There is a U.N. High.
 Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) office in Senegal, which has
 officially recognized and assisted about 5,000 persons as
 refugees. There is no evidence that any refugee has been forced
 to return to his homeland.
 Section 3  Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to
 Change Their Government
 Senegal is a functioning multi-party democracy. There are cur-
 rently 15 legally registered political parties, ranging from
 conservative to Trotskyite. Presidential and parliamentary
 elections were held in early 1983. The elections were vigorously
 contested and aroused general and enthusiastic popular partici-
 pation. There were some charges of voting irregularities, but
 there is consensus that the elections were on the whole free and
 fair. While there is a long tradition of democracy in Senegal,
 political life has nevertheless been dominated by the Socialist
 Party throughout the post-independence period. This party won a
 large majority in the 1983 election and, by virtue of its incum-
 bent status, enjoyed some advantage over other parties, particu-
 larly access to press and radio. There is no evidence of its
 having taken illegal advantage of its majority position.
 Municipal and local elections are scheduled to be held in
 November 1984.
 Senegal has universal suffrage. Women participate actively in
 the political process with several parties, including the dominant
 Socialist Payy, having active sections promoting women's rights.
 There are 12 women members of the National Assembly and three
 women ministers in President DiouVs cabinet (up from two in the
 previous cabinet). Women make up an important part of the in-
 tellectual elite and are prominent as professors at the University
 of Dakar, including one department head. A number of ministries
 employ women in key positions: the Political Director of the
 Ministry of Foreign Affairs is a woman, as are several important
 agronomists, and some statisticians and economists in other
 ministries. The new head of Senegal's only major trade union
 confederation has made a point of emphasizing women's rights; that
 confederation's last two officially sponsored seminars centered on
 the role of women in Senegalese society.
 
 
 298
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government of Senegal is active in the promotion of human
 rights activities. In 1979 it was the original sponsor of the
 Organization of African Unity Human Rights Charter adopted by the
 Organization in 1981. Senegal is a member of the Human Rights
 Commission. Dakar is the headquarters of the African Bar
 Association's Institute of Human Rights. Individual Senegalese
 lawyers and the law faculty of, Dakar University are involved in
 protecting and promoting human rights activities in Senegal and
 elsewhere in Africa. If sufficient external funding can be
 assured, the Government of Senegal is prepared to host a Second
 World Congress on Human Rights in Dakar in late 1984 or early 1985
 (the First Congress was held in Costa Rica in 1981).
 Senegal has not been the subject of human rights investigations
 by outside organizations. Any event which would merit an inves-
 tigation would be the subject first of intense activity by
 Senegal's own independent judiciary and human rights groups. It
 is likely that the Government would cooperate with an outside in-
 vestigation, if one were called for. Amnesty International did
 not report on Senegal this year. Freedom House rates Senegal
 'partly free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 During the last several years, Senegal has suffered economic
 reverses, both domestic and international. The situation of its
 population has been seriously aggravated by a drought during 1983
 and by a 40 percent devaluation of Senegal's currency, the franc
 CPA (Communaute Financiere Africaine or African Financial
 Community), over the last two years because of its direct linkage
 to the French franc. However, Senegal's difficulties also in part
 flow from long-term deficiencies in its agricultural sector
 policies and its consumer goods pricing structures. The downward
 pressure of the standard of living appears likely to intensify
 through 1984. The drought during 1983 has not only cut Senegal's
 peanut export crop in half, but it has also sharply reduced its
 subsistence crop production. The most important food crop for the
 rural populations, millet, looks as if it will give yields 40
 percent lower than in 1982. Rice and corn production is expected
 to be down by over 20 percent, and the cowpea and bean crop, an
 important element in the diet of the rural population in the
 northeast, the area worst hit by the drought, may be less than 25
 percent of last year's. Production of all cereal crops is
 expected to be 36 percent lower than 1982.
 The changes in the value of its currency have also intensified
 Senegal's difficulties. Its principal basic imports--petroleum,
 rice, wheat, and sugar--have been more expensive; the interest on
 its foreign debts as calculated in its local currency has in-
 creased. At the same time, receipts from exports as calculated in
 local currency, particularly of peanut oil sold almost exclusively
 to France, have not risen proportionally.
 The World Bank reports per capita gross national product as
 increasing to $499 in 1983 from $430 in 1981. Complicating the
 present situation is the fact that Senegal has exhausted its
 international credit. It has been staving off international
 bankruptcy since 1980 through assistance from bilateral donors,
 
 
 299
 the International Monetary Fund (IMP), and debt rescheduling.
 Increasingly aware that strong government action, including
 structural reforms, was necessary, and in a more secure position
 following its electoral victory in February 1983, the Government
 faced up to the fact that it would have to make difficult de-
 cisions and went back to the negotiating table with the IMF.
 In July 1983 it concluded a new one-year IMF standby agreement
 which established significant and stringent financial targets
 and limits. On August 19, 1983, President Diouf announced a full
 range of austerity measures. These involved strict expenditure
 controls, restrictive credit policies, a curtailment in the growth
 of public sector employment and government, agriculture sector
 subsidies, and removal of the principal consumer goods subsidies.
 The latter action resulted in price increases of 24 percent for
 rice, 15 percent for sugar, 20 percent for cooking oils, and eight
 percent for petroleum products. Senegal succeeded in seeking
 rescheduling of its foreign debts at the December Paris Club
 meeting, and it is already turning to its principal bilateral
 donors for additional budget and balance of payments support, as
 well as. assistance in continuing its development through the
 critical period ahead.
 The belt-tightening measures which economic circumstances are
 forcing the Government to take are having a direct impact on the
 population. Pressures thus generated may place strains on the
 institutions which have enabled the Senegalese to enjoy a broad
 exercise of their human rights. On the other hand, Senegal's
 economic progress in the two decades since it gained independence
 has been sufficiently continuous and impressive to provide a
 certain assurance of stability within the country. The World
 Bank reports that the daily per capita supply of calories is 100
 percent of the requirements standard.
 Senegal has a road and transportation system capable of distri-
 buting imported-food supp1-es in times of acute shortage. Health
 conditions have improved. World Bank statistics indicate that
 the infant mortality rate has declined frm 159 deaths per
 thousand live births in 1972 to 145 in 1983. Life expectancy at
 birth has risen from an estimated 40 years in 1968 to 44 years in
 1982. The population (estimated at 6,335,000 in 1983, one half
 million larger than the 1981 estimate) is growing at a 3.2
 percent rate as estimated in 1983. This growth reflects the
 improvement in public health and in the general standard of
 living, but it also poses a threat to already overloaded public
 services, especially in the urban centers. Family planning is
 making some progress, and improvements in the educational system
 also are taking place. (Adult literacy in the late 1970s was
 estimated to be around 10 percent.) The Government is continuing
 its efforts, flowing from a commitment to expansion of the educa-
 tional system by President Diouf in 1981, to increase enrollment
 in primary and secondary schools and to find employment for school
 graduates. Nevertheless, Senegal's international debt situation
 and the economic effects of the drought will impose constraints on
 the government's social development efforts.
 Traditional values, particularly as they relate to access to
 certain types of employment and higher education, have inhibited
 women from obtaining the prominence in political life to which
 they are legally entitled. There are, however, no specific legal
 hindrances to advancement of women in Senegalese society and,
 although women are still not numerous in the upper levels of
 government and the private sector, they are present in
 respectable numb/ers which show good potential for growth.
 
 
 300
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 
 COUNTRY: SENEGAL
 1981
 .......................................
 
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...
 LOANS ..............
 GRANTS  .............
 A .AID  .................
 LOANS  ..............
 GRANTS .............
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...
 B.FOOD  FOR  PEACE .......
 LOANS  ..............
 GRANTS .............
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ..........
 REPAY.  Il  S-LOANS .....
 PAY.  IN  FOR.  CURR .....
 TITLE  II-TOTAL .........
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.
 VOL.RELIEF  AGENCY .....
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...
 LOANS  ..............
 GRANTS .............
 PEACE  CORPS ......
 NARCOTICS ........
 OTHER ............
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...
 LOANS  ..............
 GRANTS  .............
 A.MAP  GRANTS ..........
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....
 C.INTL  MIL.ED.TRNG ....
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...
 E.OTHER  GRANTS ........
 III.TOTAL  ECON. &  MIL...
 LOANS  ..............
 GRANTS  .............
 
 35.5
 7.0
 28.5
 14.8
 0.0
 14.8
 0.0
 18.6
 7.0
 11.6
 7.0
 7.0
 0.0
 11.6
 4.2
 7.4
 2.1
 0.0
 2.1
 2.1
 0.0
 0.0
 0.2
 0.0
 0.2
 0.0
 0.0
 0.2
 0.0
 0.0
 35.7
 7.0
 28.7
 
 OTHER  US  LOANS ..........       0.0
 EX-IM  BANK  LOANS .......      0.0
 ALL  OTHER ................     0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1981     1982     1983
 
 TOTAL ........
 IBRD
 IFC
 IDA
 IDB
 ADB
 AFDB
 UNDP
 OTHER-UN
 EEC
 
 142.1   36.4
 55.8    0.0
 25.2    0.0
 47.1   19.5
 0.0    0.0
 0.0    0.0
 0.0    2.9
 1.2    4.0
 0.8    0.0
 12.0   10.0
 
 57.2
 0.0
 0.0
 32.2
 0.0
 0.0
 12.8
 0.0
 1.2
 11.0
 
 1982    1983
 
 30.9
 7.0
 23.9
 16.2
 0.0
 16.2
 0.0
 12.7
 7.0
 5.7
 7.0
 7.0
 0.0
 5.7
 0.6
 5.1
 2.0
 0.0
 2.0
 2.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.3
 0.0
 0.3
 0.0
 0.0
 0.3
 0.0
 0.0
 31.2
 7.0
 24.2
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 
 33.1
 7.0
 26.1
 19.1
 0.0
 19.1
 5.0
 12.2
 7.0
 5.2
 7.0
 7.0
 0.0
 5.2
 0.3
 4.9
 1.8
 0.0
 1..8
 1.8
 0.0
 0.0
 0.4
 0.0
 0.4
 0.0
 0.0
 0.4
 0.0
 0.0
 33.5
 7.0
 26.5
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 
 1946-83
 780.3
 158.9
 32.8
 286.5
 0.0
 0.0
 46.5
 35.6
 7.4
 212.6
 
 
</pre>
<pre>
