 SENEGAL
 Senegal is a republic with an elected president and unicameral
 legislature. Although Senegal has 17 legal political parties,
 the Socialist Party has dominated the political scene and
 controlled the Government since independence from France in
 1960. Vice President Abdou Diouf automatically succeeded the
 retiring President Leopold Senghor in January 1981. Diouf was
 elected President in his own right in the regularly scheduled
 elections 2 years later, and his Socialist Party won 111 of
 120 National Assembly seats. In the hotly contested
 presidential elections of February 1988 (the results of which
 were disputed by the opposition), Diouf was reelected with 73
 percent of the vote. In-the concurrent National Assembly
 elections, the Socialist Party took 103 seats and the
 opposition Senegalese Democratic Party (PDS) 17 seats.
 The Senegalese military (about 15,000 men, including the
 paramilitary gendarmerie) is a professional, disciplined force
 which maintains a tradition of aloofness from politics and is
 respected by the population. Civilian security forces are
 fairly well trained and generally respect the laws they
 enforce; those who do not face criminal prosecution.
 Although the Government and ruling party describe the national
 economy as socialist, Senegal in fact has a mixed economy with
 a substantial private sector. Recent economic reforms--
 encouraged by the International Monetary Fund and donor
 countries--include new private initiatives in agriculture and
 industry and selling off unprofitable state-owned
 enterprises. There is growing concern, however, about the
 political impact of the economic reforms--particularly in
 Dakar, where high unemployment and deteriorating social
 conditions contributed to marked opposition gains in the
 February elections.
 Senegal's favorable human rights record was tested in 1988 in
 the handling of the violence and controversy surrounding these
 national elections. The President declared a state of
 emergency in the Dakar region which was confirmed by the
 National Assembly. The state of emergency lasted 3 months,
 during which the Government had the authority to restrict some
 civil liberties, including freedom of the press, assembly, and
 movement of persons. In practice, the Government, while
 imposing a curfew, exercised considerable restraint in using
 this authority. While more than 300 persons were arrested for
 violence, the few persons who were convicted received light
 sentences. The Government pressed charges against the
 defeated presidential candidate, Abdoulaye Wade, and seven
 other opposition figures for endangering national security.
 But the State Security Court gave Wade only a 1-year suspended
 sentence after a public trial. Soon afterwards, the National
 Assembly approved a presidential amnesty for Wade and others
 convicted with him. Also included in this amnesty were most
 persons convicted in connection with past separatist
 activities in the southern province of Casamance.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There was no evidence of any killings for political motives.
 
 
 SENEGAL
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of politically motivated abduction.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Government officials in Senegal generally respect the section
 of the criminal code prohibiting physical abuse. -There are,
 however, instances of the use of force by lower level police
 officials in the interrogation of suspected criminals. There
 were unverified reports that some of those who were arrested
 during the postelection violence in 1988, including one
 journalist covering the story, were kicked and beaten by the
 police. Prison conditions are severe, and food is little
 better than the subsistence level. In accordance with African
 practice, families and friends of detainees are permitted and
 even expected to provide food and amenities.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The constitutional prohibition against arbitrary arrest or
 detention is respected in practice. The Senegalese legal
 system is patterned after the French. A person suspected of a
 crime may be legally held without charge for 48 hours after
 arrest and may be held up to 72 hours if ordered by a public
 prosecutor. Temporary custody, which replaced "preventive
 custody" in 1985, is permitted when civil authorities
 determine that there is a threat of civil disturbance or that
 an individual is a threat to himself or others. Temporary
 custody is valid for a maximum period of 6 months, but it may
 be renewed for additional 6-month periods if the investigating
 magistrate certifies that this time is required to complete
 the investigation. There is no limit to the number of times
 it may be renewed. These laws are generally respected by law
 enforcement officials, and charges are formally and clearly
 drawn. By law, every person has access to legal counsel
 during every step of the legal process. In practice, persons
 with means will have private attorneys. The court appoints
 public defenders for indigents charged with felonies.
 During the state of emergency, which was in effect from
 February 29 to May 20, the Government had the authority to
 order house arrests and declare administrative internment for
 up to 2 months of persons whose activities presented "a danger
 to public order." The Government was also empowered to hold
 suspects 8 days before charging them, which it did in the case
 of the arrested opposition leaders. No house arrests were
 made, however, nor were there any cases of administrative
 detention.
 At least one instance of arrest with political overtones
 remained unresolved at the end of 1988. On August 27, police
 in Louga arrested 14 members of 2 opposition parties. Five
 were charged under the penal code with unlawful assembly and
 inciting a riot; the other nine were released without charge.
 Opposition newspapers claimed the meeting had been authorized
 by local authorities, then abruptly forbidden at the last
 minute under pressure from the provincial governor. The five
 charged were provisionally released pending trial. On
 November 10, a judge dismissed the case, ruling that the group
 had gathered in a private home and therefore did not come
 under the provision regulating public meetings. At the end of
 1988, the Government had appealed the case, and the five
 arrested remained free.
 
 
 286
 SENEGAL
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.
 Senegal has an active and well-trained judiciary, which is
 constitutionally independent of the executive, the
 legislature, and the military. Court officials are lawyers
 who have completed a number of years of required
 apprenticeship. Trials are public, and defendants have the
 right to a defense attorney. Ordinary courts are presided
 over by a panel of judges which in criminal cases includes a
 panel of citizens as a form of jury. Although magistrates are
 appointed by decree and judges are not subject to government
 supervision, they are sensitive to Government concerns. There
 are occasional allegations that the courts are not immune to
 government pressure and that some judges have been removed
 from cases when they proved too independent-minded.
 There are four categories of special courts: the High Court
 of Justice, the State Security (or "political") Court, the
 Court for the Repression of the Unlawful Accumulation of
 Wealth, and the military courts. The High Court of Justice,
 created for the sole purpose of trying high government
 officials for treason or malfeasance, has never met. The
 State Security Court, consisting of a judge and two assessors,
 has jurisdiction over cases involving politically motivated
 crimes. The "Illegal Enrichment" Court, which has only judged
 three cases since it was created 7 years ago, is not presently
 active. The military court system has jurisdiction over
 offenses committed by members of the armed forces during
 peacetime. Civilians may not be tried by military courts.
 On April 21, PDS leader and defeated presidential candidate
 Abdoulaye Wade and seven other opposition figures went on
 trial before the State Security Court on charges of
 endangering the national security and inciting to riot. The
 charges grew out of violence in the wake of the February
 presidential elections and were filed under the state of
 emergency declared by the President. The trial was conducted
 in open court, under intense international scrutiny, and
 followed established procedures. Wade and his colleagues were
 defended by a large team of lawyers, some of them
 non-Senegalese with international reputations. On May 11, the
 Court acquitted Wade of endangering national security and
 inciting to violence but found him guilty of having "called an
 unarmed crowd into the street."  Wade received a 1-year
 suspended sentence; one defendant received 2 years in prison
 and two others 6 months each; and three were acquitted and
 released. Two weeks later, the President and the National
 Assembly granted amnesty to all those convicted.
 In this same amnesty, the National Assembly voted on May 28 to
 free persons convicted of crimes related to separatist
 activities in the southern province of Casamance--except for
 those sentenced to more than 15 years for the murder of 7
 gendarmes in December 1986. A small separatist movement in
 Casamance has for some years carried out clandestine political
 activities and associated attacks on military personnel. All
 of those arrested during those events have either been
 convicted or released.
 There are no political prisoners in Senegal.
 
 
 287
 SENEGAL
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence.
 There is little government interference in the private lives
 of Senegalese citizens, particularly in rural areas. There is
 no evident pattern of monitoring the private written or oral
 communications of Senegalese citizens. There are
 constitutional safeguards against arbitrary invasion of the
 home. Search warrants are required and under normal
 circumstances may be issued only by judges and in accordance
 with procedures established by law. While there is no
 evidence that public security forces systematically violate
 the law in this regard, searches without warrants occasionally
 take place.
 Under the state of emergency decree, the Government was
 permitted to authorize searches by day or night without
 judicial oversight, a power it exercised in searching the homes
 of the arrested opposition leaders. The decree also authorized
 government control of all postal, telegraphic, and telephone
 communications, although this power was not exercised.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and press is provided constitutionally and
 is generally respected in practice. Subject to restrictions
 relating to public order, a wide variety of political
 expression is possible. There are, however, laws prohibiting
 personal attacks against the chief of state or the institutions
 of the Republic. Another law prohibiting the dissemination of
 "false news" has been criticized for having a possible
 chilling effect on journalists. Full academic freedom is
 enjoyed by the schools and the country's sole university.
 Publications, including foreign publications, are neither
 censored nor banned in Senegal. Publishers are required to
 register with the central court prior to starting publication,
 but such registrations are routinely approved. There are many
 regularly published magazines and newspapers, and a number of
 publications appear sporadically reflecting a broad range of
 political opinion from conservative to Marxist. Senegal's
 most professional and informative newspaper (and only daily)
 is controlled by the majority Socialist Party.  The wave of
 demonstrations, strikes, and violence occurring in the wake of
 the disputed elections was featured in the press, and articles
 critical of government policies and officials occasionally
 appear in the semiofficial paper.
 Notwithstanding the diversity, the official media (including
 the government-controlled radio, which is by far the most
 important medium of news dissemination) are subject to
 controls over their news coverage. Activities of the ruling
 party are always covered, while the opposition parties are
 mentioned only occasionally and selectively, e.g., communiques
 are not read in their entirety, or certain factions are
 excluded in favor of others less hostile to the Government.
 News stories which affect and interest Senegalese are
 sometimes ignored completely in the official media. For
 example, official coverage of the civil disorders and arrests
 and trials of opposition leaders following the February
 elections was partial and selective. Neither television nor
 radio investigated opposition charges of election
 irregularities.
 
 
 288
 SENEGAL
 Coverage of the subsequent trials of opposition political
 leaders was sparse on television, better on radio, and most
 complete in the daily print media. During the state of
 emergency, the Government had the authority to issue orders to
 control the press and all publications as well as radio and
 television broadcasts, movie showings, and theatrical
 productions.
 There are also legal limits on access to, and use of, the
 official media during election campaigns, as well as
 restrictions on the use of public opinion polls. The ruling
 party and its allies are entitled to 50 percent of the time
 allotted to political broadcasts, while the opposition parties
 divide the remainder. In postelection reconciliation talks
 between *the Socialist Party and the opposition last summer,
 wider and regular access to the media emerged as a key
 opposition demand, and President Diouf has announced his
 intention to introduce legislation in the National Assembly to
 increase such access.
 A national commission reviews all films prior to public
 showing. Movies with pornographic content, excessive nudity,
 or scenes offensive to Senegalese sensibilities regarding
 family or religion are censored or banned. No instances are
 known of films being banned because of offensive political
 content.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Senegalese freely exercise their constitutional right of
 assembly, within certain restrictions aimed at protecting
 public order. Prior authorization for public demonstrations
 is required, and demonstrations or protest meetings against
 government policies are closely monitored by security services.
 -During the state of emergency, the police did legally break
 up several peaceful demonstrations, and some demonstrators
 were briefly detained. Many opposition party activities are
 hindered or delayed because rallies or meetings can be banned
 by a local police official. The opposition claims that these
 techniques are used to limit their access to the people and to
 stifle their voice as in the case of those arrested in Louga
 (see Section l.d.).
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Senegal is constitutionally a secular state, and freedom of
 religion is a legal right which exists in fact. Islam is the
 religion of over 85 percent of the population, but no attempt
 has been made by the Government to introduce Shari'a (Islamic)
 law. Other religions, the major one of which is Roman
 Catholicism, are freely practiced. Missionary activity is
 permitted, and foreign Protestant missionaries are active in
 several regions of the country. Conversion is permitted, and
 there is no discrimination against minority religions.
 Adherence to a particular religion confers neither advantage
 nor disadvantage in civil, political, economic, military, or
 other sectors.
 
 
 289
 SENEGAL
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Senegalese Constitution states that all citizens have the
 right to move and establish themselves freely anywhere in
 Senegal, a right that is respected in practice. Since 1981
 exit visas are not required for travel outside the country.
 There is no restriction on emigration, and repatriates are not
 officially disadvantaged on return to Senegal. A nighttime
 curfew was imposed on the residents of the Dakar region under
 the February-May state of emergency.
 The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
 maintains a regional office in Dakar. According to the UNHCR,
 Senegal is host to less than 200 registered and assisted
 refugees. A number of refugees from several African
 countries--including a colony near Fatick of some 5,000 from
 Guinea-Bissau--have been integrated into the economy and
 society over several years and are no longer receiving
 assistance.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Senegal is a functioning multiparty democracy with universal
 suffrage for all citizens over 21. The Socialist Party has
 dominated Senegalese political life since independence.
 Parties may not be based on divisive factors such as language,
 religion, or ethnic group. Presidential and legislative
 elections are held concurrently every 5 years. In February
 1988, the Socialist Party turned back a strong challenge from
 an opposition coalition led by the Senegalese Democratic Party
 (PDS). The Supreme Court, certifying the balloting, declared
 President Diouf reelected with 73 percent of the vote; his
 principal, challenger, PDS leader Wade, received 26 percent.
 For the National Assembly, the Socialist Party received 71
 percent (103 seats), PDS 25 percent (17 seats), and minor
 opposition parties 4 percent (no seats). Overall, the
 opposition scored considerable gains over its showing in the
 1983 national elections. Opposition leaders claimed
 widespread electoral fraud and have publicly disputed the
 legitimacy of the announced results. Some fraud was
 substantiated, especially concerning the misuse of voter
 identification cards. The Supreme Court invalidated results
 from a number of precincts on procedural as well as
 substantive grounds. However, the consensus among independent
 observers was that the election results generally reflected
 the opinions of the voters. Opposition leaders have since
 urged reforms in the electoral code, including a tightening of
 the voting identification card system and mandatory secret
 voting. The President has announced his intention to
 introduce legislation on election code reform.
 Women are active participants in the political process, and
 several parties, including the dominant Socialists, have
 sections promoting women's rights. Diouf's Cabinet includes 2
 female ministers (out of 21) and 1 junior minister (out of 5),
 and 15 female deputies sit in the National Assembly.
 Senegal's new permanent representative to the United Nations
 is a female career diplomat, and women occupy other key
 professional posts in the Government.
 
 
 290
 SENEGAL
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government allows human rights groups to investigate
 allegations concerning human rights abuses in Senegal and
 responds to requests for information about those allegations.
 Senegal is a leader among African countries in the promotion
 of international standards for human rights practices. For
 example, it sponsored the African Charter on Human and
 People's Rights of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and
 was a founder of the OAU's African Human Rights Commission in
 1987. Its officials serye in a variety of pertinent bodies,
 and its representative to the U.N. Human Rights Commission is
 currently its chairman. Dakar is the headquarters of several
 institutions which foster human rights and democratic
 pluralism in Africa, Amnesty International has an active
 chapter in Dakar which frequently sends missions to
 investigate reports of human rights abuses in Africa; for
 example, in September 1988 a Senegalese lawyer and member of
 AI monitored the trial of Mauritanian military officers.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Sex, Race, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 While officially there is no discrimination in Senegal based
 on race, religion, or language, the country is predominantly
 Muslim and Islamic customs, including polygamy and the rules
 of inheritance, generally prevail, especially in the rural
 areas.
 The status of women has steadily improved under government
 encouragement and increased educational opportunities.
 However, the reality is that women are still confined largely
 to traditional roles, notably in the large subsistence
 agricultural sector. Women usually marry young (the majority
 at age 16), average about seven live births, and die
 relatively young. Sixty-seven percent of women aged 40 to 45
 live in polygamous unions. Women are barred from the armed
 services and paramilitary gendarmerie, and a requirement that
 new police officers have prior military experience effectively
 has put an end to the recruitment of women in that service.
 A subtle form of discrimination based on social status does
 exist against families "of caste," that is, persons
 traditionally occupied with menial jobs in the community such
 as tanners, blacksmiths (and, by extension, gold and
 silversmiths), wood carvers, and some fishermen. Although it
 is against the law to even mention the caste of a Senegalese,
 traditions persist, and virtually all citizens know where each
 person fits in the social hierarchy. Families sometimes
 refuse to permit the marriage of a daughter to a young man of
 caste because it would lower her status. At the same time, a
 number of persons from caste families have risen to the
 highest levels of the Government.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 There is no comprehensive census of the economically active
 population in Senegal, and data concerning the labor force are
 incomplete. The working population (15 to 59 years old
 inclusive) is estimated at 50 percent of Senegal's nearly 7
 million citizens. Of these, at least 75 percent are engaged
 
 
 291
 SENEGAL
 in rural activities such as cultivation, herding, fishing. At
 least 85 percent of the remaining 800,000 are engaged in
 small, privately owned and operated businesses. Approximately
 100,000 are government workers or employees of state-owned
 business enterprises.
 A minimum of seven people, each having worked within their
 profession for at least 1 year, may form a union by submitting
 a list of members and a charter to the Ministry of Interior.
 A union can be disbanded by the Ministry if the union's
 activities deviate from the charter. Even though they
 represent a small percentage of the overall population, unions
 wield a significant amount of political influence, primarily
 because of their ability to disrupt essential services.
 Unions have the right to strike, and during 1988 there were
 frequent strikes by the teacher/professor, electrical, and
 health worker unions which were resolved in bargaining with
 the Government. Senegalese unions are represented in
 international labor organizations, such as the International
 Labor Organization (ILO) and the Organization of African Trade
 Union Unity. Almost all the unions are based in the capital
 city of Dakar.
 The National Confederation of Senegalese Workers (CNTS) was
 formed in 1969, and while ostensibly an independent umbrella
 organization, it follows government policy closely. It has
 come under fire recently by opposition parties who believe the
 CNTS puts government needs before those of the workers.
 Several small unions, usually of leftist/Communist
 orientation, have broken away from the CNTS and attempted to
 form a parallel umbrella organization. Members of these
 breakaway unions are concentrated within a few specialized
 areas, including teachers, university professors, and health
 workers. Although these defections have eroded the CNTS'
 prestige and influence somewhat, it remains Senegal's largest
 and most powerful labor organization.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Senegalese unions have the right to organize and to bargain
 collectively, and these rights are protected in practice.
 There are no known instances of workers being forcibly
 discouraged from exercising these rights. In recent years, as
 the economic situation worsened and factories and businesses
 closed down, collective bargaining has succeeded in several
 instances in guaranteeing extended benefits for laid-off
 workers. For example, the union representing workers at the
 recently closed Bata shoe factory secured from management a
 generous severance package. Subsequently, agreement was
 reached between Bata, the Government, and the union to reopen
 a restructured Bata facility with a reduced labor force. The
 CNTS has been a major force in establishing, through
 collective bargaining, regulations and guidelines for the
 well-being of workers. Government policy is to let the CNTS
 handle labor union problems, but the Government has in the
 past intervened when requested. For example, a government
 financial consultant was tasked to verify a company's claim of
 bankruptcy due to high labor costs.
 A free zone exists in Dakar into which goods may be imported
 for manufacture and reexported without payment of duty.
 Senegalese labor laws apply in this zone.
 
 
 292
 SENEGAL
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 There is no forced labor in Senegal. The ILO Committee of
 Experts, however, has noted that under sections of the
 Merchant Navy Code seafarers can be punished for breaches of
 labor discipline with sentences of imprisonment involving
 compulsory labor. The Government has stated that in practice
 no such sentences have been passed by judges; nevertheless,
 the Committee has urged that the provisions be brought into
 conformity with Convention 105.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The minimum age for employment in Senegal is 16 for
 apprenticeships and 18 for all other types of work. These
 restrictions are closely monitored and strictly enforced
 within the formal wage sector, that is, the area of the
 economy over which the Government can exercise some
 supervision such as state agencies, large private enterprises,
 or farmers gathered into cooperatives. On the other hand,
 minimum age and other workplace regulations on family farms in
 rural areas and in privately owned businesses are much less
 well enforced. Children under 16 are employed in this
 informal work sector, but there were no reported incidents of
 "sweat shops" or work-related abuses of children in Senegal.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The CNTS has been very successful, within the wage sector, in
 forcing implementation of acceptable conditions of work,
 including standard workweeks (40 hours per week for most
 professions), holiday/annual leave benefits (usually 1 month
 per year), and a variety of health and safety regulations.
 These regulations are incorporated into the labor code
 approved by the National Assembly. Recent CNTS efforts have
 concentrated on raising the minimum wage, currently
 approximately $0.70 an hour, which is not considered
 sufficient to maintain a decent standard of living.
 
 
 293
