 SENEGAL
 Senegal is a republic with a democratically elected president
 and a unicameral legislature. After acceding automatically to
 the presidency in January 1981, when former President Senghor
 retired, Abdou Diouf was elected in his own right in freely
 contested elections in 1983. A new parliament was elected at
 the same time with President Diouf's Socialist Party winning
 111 of the 120 seats. Senegal has longstanding democratic
 traditions which predate independence, and there is wide
 public interest in, and debate on, political matters. While
 the Socialist Party has dominated the public scene since
 independence from France in 1960, Senegal is a true multiparty
 state with 16 legal political parties.
 The Senegalese military has a well-earned reputation as an
 apolitical and professional organization and is respected by
 the population. The generally well-trained and disciplined
 civilian security forces respect the laws they enforce.
 Although the Government and the majority party describe the
 national economy as Socialist, the Government has taken steps
 to reduce its involvement in many sectors of the economy,
 including selling off some state-owned enterprises and
 encouraging private initiative in agriculture and industry.
 However, with wages frozen and prices rising for agricultural
 products and consumer goods, there was increased concern in
 1986 about the political impact of the economic reform program
 Long- and short-term trends in the human rights context remain
 positive. The legal system is active and effective in
 protecting human rights. The political process works well
 despite some concerns about the fairness of the electoral
 laws. The Government continued to provide strong support to
 several Dakar-based organizations which study human rights
 questions in Africa and the Third World. The only credible
 allegations of human rights violations in 1986 concerned
 prisoners who said they were tortured while in detention after
 separatist rioting in late 1983.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing.
 There was no evidence of any killings at government
 instigation or for political motives.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of abduction of individuals by official,
 quasi-official, opposition, or vigilante groups.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment
 or Punishment
 Government officials in Senegal generally adhere to the
 section of the criminal code prohibiting physical abuse.
 There have been instances reported, however, of the use of
 force by lower level police officials in the interrogation of
 suspected criminals. During their trial in late 1985 and
 early 1986, most of the persons accused of participating in
 the separatist riots in Casamance in 1983 claimed they had
 
 
 249
 SENEGAL
 been tortured by police and gendarmes after being arrested.
 While an internal investigation reportedly began in 1986, and
 as many as 12 gendarmes faced possible charges, there had been
 no announcements and no prosecutions by the end of 1986.
 Prison conditions are crowded, and food is little above the
 subsistence level. Harsh prison conditions are partly
 alleviated by the access to prisoners by clerics, friends, and
 families, who are permitted and expected to provide food and
 amenities.
 d. Arbitary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The constitutional prohibition against arbitrary arrest or
 detention is respected in practice. Persons are not generally
 detained, punished, or tried for the expression of views
 critical of or different from the Government. However, in
 1986 one journalist complained, in print, that he had been
 arrested, questioned, and held for several days for carrying
 copies of an "unauthorized newspaper," a charge he denied.
 Preventive detention is permitted indefinitely when civil
 authorities determine that there is a threat of civil
 disturbance or that an individual is a threat to himself or
 others, such as in the case of the Casamance separatist
 supporters (see Section l.e.).
 The Senegalese legal system is patterned after the French
 system. A person suspected of a crime may be legally held
 without charge for 48 hours after arrest and may be held up to
 72 hours if ordered by a public prosecutor. This law is
 generally respected by law enforcement officials, and charges
 are formally and clearly drawn. By law, every person has
 access to legal counsel during every step of the legal
 process. In practice, persons with means will have private
 legal counsel, while the law makes provision for public
 defenders for indigents.
 There is no forced or compulsory labor in Senegal.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Senegal has an active, independent, and well-trained
 judiciary, which is constitutionally independent of the
 executive, the legislature, and the military. Court officials
 are trained lawyers who have completed a number of years of
 required apprenticeship. Trials are open to the public, and
 defendants have the right to a defense attorney, many of whom
 are very skilled and aggressive in the protection of their
 clients. Ordinary courts hold hearings which are presided
 over by a panel of judges and, in the case of criminal
 charges, include a panel of citizens sitting with the judges
 as a form of jury.
 There are three categories of special courts: The High Court
 of Justice, The Security ("political") Court, and the military
 courts. The High Court of Justice was created for the sole
 purpose of trying high government officials for treason or
 malfeasance. It has not been convened since the early 1970's.
 The Security (or "political") Court consists of a judge and
 two assessors and has jurisdiction over cases involving
 politically motivated crimes. This court was called into
 session in November 1985 for the trial of 105 persons accused
 of participating in a December 1983 separatist insurrection in
 
 
 250
 SENEGAL
 the southernmost region of Casamance, in which 3 gendarmes
 died and 80 persons were injured. The trial ended January 4,
 1986, with relatively lenient sentences, considering the
 violence of the incidents and the penalties requested by the
 prosecution--73 defendents were freed outright, 31 received
 sentences ranging from 2 to 15 years, and 1 received life
 imprisonment. The trial was held in open court and marked by
 procedural controversy, which delayed the testimony. The
 defendants claimed that they had been held in prison for
 excessive periods after arrest before being officially
 charged, and that they had been beaten and tortured at the
 hands of police or gendarmes. The military court system has
 jurisdiction over offenses committed by members of the armed
 forces during peacetime (in wartime, courts-martial may be
 convened). Civilians may not be tried by military courts.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Senegalese bureaucracy, patterned after the French system,
 is highly centralized and requires of Senegalese citizens a
 fairly extensive array of documentation for purposes of
 education, obtaining social security benefits, etc. The
 intent, however, is not coercive, and there is otherwise
 little Government interference in the private lives of
 Senegalese citizens. There is no coercion to join a
 particular political party or to participate in political
 demonstrations. A wide variety of political expression is
 possible and is not subject to restrictions other than those
 relating to public order. There is no evident pattern of
 monitoring the private written or oral communications of
 Senegalese citizens. There are constitutional and legal
 safeguards against arbitrary invasion of the home. Search
 warrants are required and may be issued only by judges and in
 accordance with procedures established by law. There is no
 evidence that public security forces have violated the law in
 this regard.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Senegal enjoys freedom of speech and press both in theory and
 in practice. The Constitution guarantees the right of each
 person to express and disseminate opinions freely. Full
 academic freedom is enjoyed by the schools and the country's
 sole university.
 There is neither censorship nor banned publications in
 Senegal. Publishers are required to register with the Central
 Court prior to starting publication, but such registrations
 are routinely approved. There are several regularly published
 magazines and newspapers and a number of publications which
 appear sporadically, reflecting a broad range of opinion from
 conservative to Marxist. The country's most professional and
 informative newspaper is controlled by, and supports, the
 majority Socialist Party. However, articles critical of
 government policies and officials regularly appear even in
 this paper. Other publications, representing other
 viewpoints, are sometimes vociferously critical of the
 Government. Foreign publications are not banned or censored.
 The editor of an opposition newspaper, arrested in August 1985
 on charges of defamation of the Head of State and the
 
 
 251
 SENEGAL
 Government (slander), was released after serving a sentence of
 230 days. Opposition leaders described his arrest as an
 attempt to muzzle the media. Since his release, he has
 resumed publication of his paper, which continues to voice
 criticism of the Government's policies, albeit with more
 restraint and discretion.
 Television and radio stations are owned by the Government;
 activities of the Socialist Party are given prominence, but
 there is occasional coverage of the declarations and
 activities of the opposition parties.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Senegalese freely and frequently exercise their constitutional
 right of assembly. Prior authorization for public
 demonstrations is required, and demonstrations or protest
 meetings against government policies are closely monitored by
 security services. In April 1986, students at the University
 of Dakar planned a march from the campus to the U.S. Embassy
 to protest the American raids on Libya. They were denied
 permission for the march, and the authorities stationed
 gendarmes and troops at choke points near the campus and on
 the route to the Embassy. When the students saw the show of
 force, they confined their march to the university grounds.
 No one was arrested or detained.
 Workers have the right to organize and bargain collectively
 and to strike if negotiations are unsuccessful. Less than 25
 percent of the labor force is unionized. In most union
 activities, economic and work-related issues are the principal
 concerns. The major trade union confederation, the National
 Confederation of Senegalese workers (CNTS), is affiliated with
 the ruling Socialist Party. There are also small independent
 trade unions which are important to the society and economy of
 Senegal. The CNTS is entitled by law to ministerial posts but
 rather than fill them itself has chosen to retain the right to
 veto the President's nominations. In the past, the Government
 has used its connection with the CNTS as a useful means of
 informing workers of government policies, gaining better
 understanding of worker complaints and problems, and ensuring
 that strikes are legal and called only over significant
 grievances. In September workers at the printing plant which
 produces Dakar's daily newspaper stopped work to protest a
 management decision to cease providing transport for employees
 who worked night shifts. A compromise was reached after a
 week, and the printers resumed work. The International Labor
 Organization maintains a regional office in Senegal.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Senegal is constitutionally a secular state, and freedom of
 religion is a legal right which exists in fact. Islam is the
 religion of over 85 percent of the population. Other
 religions, primarily Catholicism, are freely practiced.
 Missionary activity is permitted, and foreign Protestant
 missionaries are active in several regions of the country.
 Conversion is permitted, and there is no discrimination
 against minority religions. Adherence to a particular
 religion confers neither advantage nor disadvantage in civil,
 political, economic, military, or other sectors.
 
 
 252
 SENEGAL
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Senegalese Constitution states that all citizens have the
 right to move and establish themselves freely anywhere in
 Senegal, a right that is respected in practice. Since 1981,
 exit visas are not required for travel outside the country.
 There is no restriction on emigration, and repatriates are not
 officially disadvantaged on return to Senegal.
 Senegal is host to 5,140 recognized and assisted refugees.
 Prior to the April 3, 1984 coup in Guinea, there were an
 estimated 500,000 Guineans in Senegal most of whom were not
 officially recognized as refugees. Most of them have since
 returned to Guinea. There is a regional office of the United
 Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in Dakar. Senegal
 continues to make places available for refugee students from
 other countries at the University of Dakar and other
 educational institutions. An opposition newspaper reported in
 late September that three "political refugees," opponents of
 the Government of Guinea-Bissau, had been arrested in the
 Dakar area and extradited to that country in August. The
 Senegalese Government has indicated that the three were
 involved in planning active intervention against the Bissauan
 Government, which would violate any agreement for refuge under
 which they entered Senegal.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Senegal is a functioning multiparty democracy with universal
 suffrage. There are currently 16 legally registered parties
 ranging in ideology from conservative to Trotskyite.
 Presidential and parliamentary elections were last held in
 February 1983, with rural and municipal elections in November
 1984. The next general elections are scheduled for February
 1988. While there is a long tradition of democracy in
 Senegal, political life throughout the postindependence period
 has been dominated by the Socialist Party, which won the
 presidency and i11 of the 120 parliamentary seats in the 1983
 elections, and which swept the municipal and rural elections
 the following year. Opposition parties complained that
 changes in the electoral law favored the government party by
 removing the requirements for voter identification, a secret
 ballot, and opposition representation when ballots were
 counted. While the consensus was that the 1983 voting was on
 the whole free and fair, the largest opposition party, with
 eight seats in the Parliament, decided to boycott the 1984
 elections. In 1986 several of the opposition parties
 announced their intention to boycott the 1988 general
 elections unless the electoral law is modified. The
 Government is reportedly studying the issue.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Senegal is a leader among African countries in the
 establishment and promotion of international standards for
 human rights practices. Senegal was the original sponsor of
 the Human Rights Charter of the Organization of African Unity
 and is also an active member of the U.N. Human Rights
 Commission. Dakar is the headquarters of the African Bar
 Association's Institute of Human Rights, an organization which
 
 
 253
 SENEGAL
 trains lawyers and judges in translating general human rights
 principles into practical legal and judicial procedures. A
 number of Senegalese are prominent in African and
 international human rights activities. Senegal maintains a
 dialogue with organizations such as Amnesty International,
 whose 1985 Report apparently influenced the Government to move
 forward with the trials of the Casamance detainees.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Sex, Race, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 There is no discrimination in Senegal based on race, religion,
 or language. While there is no discrimination in law based on
 sex, since the country is predominantly Muslim (over 80
 percent of the population), Islamic customs including polygamy
 and the rules of inheritance generally prevail, especially in
 the rural areas. Women are active participants in the
 political process, and several parties, including the dominant
 Socialist Party, have sections promoting women's rights.
 Twelve women are deputies in the National Assembly, and there
 are three women in President Diouf's Cabinet. In addition, a
 number of government ministries employ women in key positions,
 e.g., the political director of the Ministry of Foreign
 Affairs. In other ministries key agronomists, statisticians,
 and economists are women. In the urban areas, the lay
 character of the State and the nondiscriminatory nature of the
 country's legal system is more likely to prevail.
 A subtle form of discrimination based on social status does
 exist, although it has been officially outlawed for several
 years. It concerns those families "of caste," who were
 traditionally occupied with menial or dirty jobs in the
 community--tanners, blacksmiths (and by extension, gold and
 silversmiths), wood carvers, some fishermen, etc. Although it
 is against the law to even mention the caste of a Senegalese,
 in fact virtually all citizens of the country know where each
 person fits in the social hierarchy. There have been articles
 in the press describing frictions which result from this
 social stratification. For example, a family may refuse to
 permit the marriage of a daughter to a young man of caste
 because it would lower her status. The Government would like
 to see this discrimination disappear and has legislated
 against it, but old traditions persist.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 While there are industry-wide statutes concerning the minimum
 age for employment of children, the economic situation in
 Senegal has created an environment wherein a substantial
 number of underage workers are employed, particularly in
 cottage industries. Through collective bargaining,
 principally by the National Confederation of Senegalese
 Workers, there are legal guidelines for occupational safety
 and health, minimum wages, and limits on working hours. In
 practice, however, these guidelines are often ignored and
 working conditions in Senegal, as in most third world
 countries at a similar stage in their economic development,
 are below Western standards.
 
 
 254
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COJNTRY: SENEGAL
 1984     1985     1986
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL..        51.2     53.2     52.3
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................   51.2     53.2     52.3
 A.AIO ...... ...........5...  34.6     44.4     50.2
 LOANS ..............     ..  0.3     0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............       34.6     44.4     50.2
 (SEC.SUPPASSIST.),,,        10.0     15.0    27.5
 B.FOO0  FOR  PEACE .......     14.7      6.8      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................   14.7      6.8      0.0
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ..........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 DAY.  IN  FOR.  CURR .....     0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  Il-TOTAL .........      14.7      6.8      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV 1 WFP,         9.3      2.0      0.0
 OL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        5.4      4.8      0.0
 C.OT4ER  ECON.  ASSIST,,,       1.9      2.0      2.1
 LOANS ..............        0.0      3.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    1.9      2.0      2.1
 PEACE  CORPS ......       1.9      2.0      2.1
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ............ ... .  0      0.0      0.0
 Il.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL..,         2.5      3.5      3.4
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     2.5      3.5      3.4
 A.MAP  GRANTS ..........       2.0      3.0      2.9
 S.CREDIT FINANCING ....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL  MIL.EO.TRNG ....       0.5      0.5      0.5
 0.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK,..         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER  GRANTS ........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL  ECON.  &  MIL..,     53.7     56.7     55.7
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................   53.7     56.7     55.7
 ----------------------------------------------------------
 OTHER  US  LOANS ..........      0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM  BANK  LOANS .......      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL  OTHER ..............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1984     1985     1986     1946-86
 TOTAL ........    79.6     39.5     75.0    981.0
 ISRO               0.0      0.0      0.0    158.9
 IF:                3.2      0.0      2.6     38.5
 IDA               52.1     24.0     72.4    445.0
 103                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 A03                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFOB              13.0     13.5      0.0     73.0
 UNOP               1.3      2.0      0.0     45.6
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0      0.0      7.4
 EE:                3.0      0.0      0.0    212.6
 
 
 255
