 SENEGAL
 Senegal has a freely-elected, democratic government,
 which has established the framework for a multi-party
 system. Local elections in late 1976 were contested
 by the opposition, and opposition parties will chal-
 lenge the incumbent Socialist Party (Parti-Socialiste)
 in the local, regional, and presidential elections in
 February, 1978. Senegal firmly supports U.S. policy
 initiatives for majority rule in Africa, favors
 regional cooperation on the continent, and warmly
 endorses the U.S. human rights policy. The Senegalese
 Government's record in implementation and protection
 of human rights is good.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from
 a. Torture
 Statutory prohibitions against torture are respected
 and enforced.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading treatment or
 Punishment
 These do not exist in Senegal, nor do we have any
 reports of arbitrary deprivations of life.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 The right to freedom from arbitrary arrest or im-
 prisonment has been observed in recent years.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a fair, public trial is observed.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 There are effective legal safeguards against arbitrary
 invasion of the home.
 
 (100)
 
 
 101
 2.   Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health
 Care Education
 The December, 1976, extraordinary session of Senegal's
 governing Socialist Party, among other actions,
 adopted a resolution aimed at raising per capita
 income substantially, promoting modern agriculture,
 accelerating the development of the state-directed
 social services sector, and promoting employment--
 particularly non-salaried employment in the agri-
 cultural sector, the most important in Senegal's
 economy. The basic model is for a "socialist and
 democratic society" incorporating "scientific socialism"
 and the "values of our Negro-African humanism." Family
 planning and reduction of the population exodus to the
 cities and of inequalities between the regions were
 also highlighted. The government's Fourth (Economic)
 Plan, 1973-77, focused more attention on rural de-
 velopment than in the past, and resulted in anarrest
 of the previous declining trend in that sector. The
 new Fifth (Economic) Plan, 1977-81, devotes even
 greater proportionate resources to rural development.
 3.   Respect for Civil and Political Liberties,
 Including
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion
 and Assembly
 Freedom of speech, thought and intellectual enquiry
 are respected. There is full freedom of religion.
 Freedom of assembly is respected. The labor union
 movement is active, although generally subject to
 governmental guidelines. There is movement toward
 trade union pluralism paralleling the political
 pluralism now developing in Senegal.
 There are no restrictions on press freedom. The
 largest daily newspaper is government-sponsored, but
 opposition party and other newspapers are published
 and distributed. Over the past half-year there has
 been an increase in the number of opposition political
 
 
 102
 journals published in Senegal criticizing the Govern-
 ment and proposing new political courses. Their free
 circulation reflects the willingness of the government
 to allow open criticism of its policies. Despite
 recent defamation charges against two satirical
 opposition newspapers, Senegalese journalists remain
 strikingly outspoken. As a recent issue of the
 magazine Jeune Afrique noted "the Senegalese opposition
 press has--loursHiIn the nascent multiparty system
 to an extent which would be unimaginable in most
 African countries."
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country,
 Foreign Travel and Emigration
 Freedom of movement within Senegal is unrestricted,
 and there are no controls on foreign travel or emi-
 gration.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political
 Process
 Although political power is now held by the Senegalese
 Socialist Party, legally recognized opposition parties
 are active, and operate with considerable freedom.
 Recent local elections were hotly contested. One
 minority party, the Parti-Democratique Senegalais
 (PDA - Senegalese Democratic Party) gained control of
 two rural assemblies in November 1976.
 There is universal adult suffrage in local, regional
 national assembly, and presidential elections.
 4.   Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and on-Governmetal 'Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 No proposals for outside investigation of alleged
 human rights violations have been made with regard to
 Senegal. The Government of Senegal appears willing to
 accept any such proposals which reflect legitimate
 concerns.
 
 
