 SENEGAL
 Senegal is a republic with an elected president and a
 unicameral legislature. Although there are 17 legal political
 parties, the Socialist Party (PS) has dominated politics and
 controlled the Government since independence from France in
 1960. Abdou Diouf, who has been President since January 1981,
 was declared reelected with 73 percent of the vote in the
 hotly contested presidential elections of February 1988 (the
 results of which continue to be disputed by the opposition).
 In the concurrent National Assembly elections, the PS took 103
 seats and the opposition Senegalese Democratic Party (PDS) 17
 seats.
 The Senegalese Armed Forces (about 15,000 men, including the
 paramilitary Gendarmerie) is a professional, disciplined
 organization which traditionally remains aloof from politics
 and is respected by the population. In 1990 the army
 conducted military operations on the northern and eastern
 borders with Mauritania, where there were renewed bloody
 clashes in early January, and in the southern region of
 Casamance, where separatist-related violence has increased.
 Operations in the southern region resulted in significant
 numbers of civilian casualties. Civilian security forces are
 fairly well trained and generally respect the laws they
 enforce; those who do not sometimes face criminal prosecution.
 Senegal has a mixed economy with a substantial private
 sector. Since 1983, Senegal has actively pursued a structural
 adjustment program, with the support of the International
 Monetary Fund (IMF), the World Bank, and major bilateral
 donors, designed to liberalize the economy and stimulate
 economic growth. There is concern, however, about the
 short-term political impact of the austerity reforms,
 particularly in Dakar, where high unemployment and
 deteriorating social conditions contributed to marked
 opposition gains and civil unrest in the 1988 elections. The
 economy remained fragile at the end of 1990.
 Senegal's generally good human rights record was marred by the
 Government's strong and sometimes excessive response to an
 upsurge in violence in the southern region of the Casamance,
 allegedly perpetrated by the proindependence Movement of
 Democratic Forces of the Casamance (MFDC). The Government
 reinforced its security presence, arrested over 1,000
 suspected separatists, and offered amnesty to MFDC
 sympathizers not suspected of direct involvement in violence.
 There were credible reports of arbitrary arrests and torture
 of suspected Casamance separatists detained by the security
 forces. Military units, after having come under attack by
 guerrillas, on occasion responded by burning dwellings in
 villages suspected of harboring the attackers; hundreds of
 villagers, uprooted by the violence, have taken refuge over
 the border in Guinea-Bissau and The Gambia. Other areas of
 human rights abuse include some restrictions on freedom of the
 press and on the rights of women.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section I Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 Since 1982 armed members of the MFDC, who demand independence
 for the Casamance, have launched sporadic attacks on
 
 
 SENEGAL
 Senegalese security forces in the region. Beginning in April,
 the intensity and scope of these attacks increased, as did the
 intensity of the response of the government security forces.
 The MFDC began targeting civilians as well as the security
 forces. Government forces also killed civilians in the course
 of fighting between the insurgents and the military and
 gendarmes and during government searches for MFDC sympathizers
 and arms. Amnesty International (AI) charged that five
 civilians suspected of being Casamance sympathizers were
 summarily executed by security forces in September in Kanao, a
 village on The Gambia/Senegal border. Approximately 35 armed
 incidents of all kinds were reported, resulting in 26 deaths
 and about 26 wounded among government forces and about 142
 civilians killed and approximately 153 wounded. The
 Government claimed that many of these civilian casualties were
 in fact MFDC guerrillas and sympathizers, but credible reports
 indicated that many of the civilians were not engaged in armed
 combat at the time they were killed.
 There were numerous reports of deaths in official custody.
 The Ministry of Justice was, at year's end, conducting 10
 investigations of "suspect" deaths among those detained by
 civilian security officials. The Inspector General's Office
 of the Armed Forces is charged with investigating alleged
 unlawful deaths at the hands of military personnel.
 Government sources say at least two military investigations
 have been conducted into such allegations, but no information
 was available on the results by the end of the year.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading,
 Treatment or Punishment
 The authorities generally respect the legal prohibition on
 physical abuse, but torture of alleged Casamance separatists
 was reported. Other detainees are occasionally subjected to
 abuse, usually during the "garde a vue" (detention) custody
 between arrest and appearance before a magistrate or during
 military operations. This abuse usually consists of beatings
 and denial of food, water, and clothing to prisoners.
 According to an AI report in May, security forces were
 involved in the torture of many persons and death in detention
 of some six persons suspected of separatist activities in the
 Casamance from 1982 to 1989. The report's publication
 followed a visit to Senegal, with the Government's consent, by
 an Al delegation in October 1989. The Government denied most
 of the allegations in the Al report and questioned the
 credibility of one of AI's principal sources. The Government
 also rejected AI's suggestion that a special committee be
 established to investigate these human rights abuses, saying
 that existing legal mechanisms were sufficient. The Ministry
 of Justice announced that it would investigate any charges
 formally filed by the family or lawyers of an alleged torture
 victim, but by year's end no such charges had been lodged. Al
 also stated in its May report that Jean-Pascal Badji, a
 songwriter, died soon after his arrest in 1988, reportedly as
 a result of torture.
 The Government publicly reaffirmed its opposition to torture
 and promised to improve oversight procedures in the courts and
 security forces to prevent abuses. The Minister of Justice
 
 
 318
 SENEGAL
 issued a directive on October 26, 1989, to local and regional
 court officials, calling on them to ensure that the human
 rights of prisoners were respected, especially during the
 "garde a vue" period when most abuses reportedly occur. The
 Chief of the State Security Court issued a report on September
 14, following an investigation of security procedures in the
 Casamance, concluding that the security forces were respecting
 the law and following established government procedures.
 There were fewer reports of incidents of alleged mistreatment
 in Casamance toward the end of the year, perhaps due to the
 arrival of new senior security and civilian administration
 personnel, but other abuses continued.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Constitution prohibits arbitrary arrest and detention, and
 this is generally respected in practice except in the case of
 alleged Casamance separatists. The Senegalese legal system is
 patterned after the French. A person suspected of a crime may
 be legally held without charge for 48 hours after arrest and
 may be held up to 72 hours if ordered by a public prosecutor;
 this period legally may be doubled in case of crimes against
 the security of the State. During this period of detention,
 the prisoner has no access to family or attorney.
 More extended "temporary" detention or custody is permitted
 when civil authorities determine that there is a threat of
 civil disturbance or that a person is a threat to himself or
 others. Temporary custody is valid for a maximum period of 6
 months, but it may be renewed for additional 6-month periods
 if the investigating magistrate certifies that more time is
 required to complete the investigation. There is no limit to
 the number of times it may be renewed. These laws are
 generally respected by law enforcement officials in ordinary
 cases.
 However, the Government used its legal powers to strike at its
 critics, including journalists and members of the political
 opposition (see Section 2.a.). Over 1,000 persons were
 arrested from April to December on suspicion of belonging to
 the MFDC or of participating in violence. At year's end, 236
 persons had been charged with attacks on the security of the
 State. No trial date before the State Security Court had been
 fixed. Meanwhile, they remained in custody and had access to
 family, lawyers, and doctors. The Government states that all
 other Casamance detainees were released. At the end of 1990,
 the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) was still
 negotiating with the Government for permission to visit
 security detainees in accordance with ICRC's usual standards.
 At the end of 1990, three men arrested in December 1988
 remained in detention awaiting trial for involvement in the
 fire-bombing of an official vehicle, allegedly for political
 reasons.
 Exile is not used as a means of political control. The
 Government claims that hundreds of MFDC members have taken
 advantage of the amnesty offered to all MFDC supporters not
 involved in violent acts.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Senegal has an active and well-trained judiciary, which is
 constitutionally independent of the Executive, the
 Legislature, and the Armed Forces. Court officials are
 
 
 SENEGAL
 lawyers who have completed several years of required
 apprenticeship. Trials are public, and defendants have the
 right to a defense attorney from the time the case is
 presented before an examining magistrate. Ordinary courts are
 presided over by a panel of judges which in criminal cases
 includes a panel of citizens as a form of jury. Magistrates
 are appointed by decree and in principle are not subject to
 government intervention; however, low pay, poor working
 conditions, and family and political ties may make magistrates
 vulnerable to outside pressures.
 There are four categories of special courts: the High Court
 of Justice, the State Security Court, the Court for the
 Repression of the Unlawful Accumulation of Wealth, and the
 military courts. The High Court of Justice, created for the
 sole purpose of trying high government officials for treason
 or malfeasance, has never met.
 The State Security Court, consisting of a judge and two
 assessors, has jurisdiction over cases involving politically
 motivated crimes and was particularly active in 1990. At the
 beginning of the year, 23 persons were indicted before the
 State Security Court for membership in the MFDC. Of this
 group, five who had been extradited from Guinea Bissau in 1988
 were convicted of plotting against the security of the State
 on August 16 and sentenced to a total of 36 years in prison
 among them. At year's end, 18 others remained free on
 provisional liberty awaiting a trial date. Of 18 Mauritanian
 nationals charged with espionage, 3 were convicted and,
 imprisoned, and 15 await trial; 11 of the 15 remained in
 detention, and 4 were on provisional liberty.
 The "illegal enrichment" court, which has judged only three
 cases since it was created in 1981, is not presently active.
 The military court system has jurisdiction over offenses
 committed by members of the armed forces during peacetime.
 Civilians may not be tried by military courts.
 There were no reports of political prisoners at the end of
 1990.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Constitution prohibits arbitrary invasion of the home, and
 there is relatively little government interference in the
 private lives of Senegalese citizens, particularly in rural
 areas. Search warrants are required and under normal
 circumstances may be issued only by judges and in accordance
 with procedures established by law. In practice, searches
 without warrants occasionally take place, especially in the
 Casamance. There is no evident pattern of monitoring the
 private written or oral communications of citizens. There are
 reports, however, that active supporters of the political
 opposition are subject to wiretaps, unusually close scrutiny
 of tax records, and other forms of harassment.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and press are protected in the Constitution,
 although legal restrictions against expressing views which
 discredit the institutions of the State and the dissemination
 of "false news" circumscribe journalist's activities. Subject
 
 
 320
 SENEGAL
 to these and other restrictions relating to public order, a
 wide variety of political views are expressed. While
 Senegal's only daily newspaper is controlled by the ruling PS,
 there are many regularly published magazines and newspapers
 reflecting a broad range of political opinion from
 conservative to Marxist. The independent press often breaks
 stories ignored by the party's daily newspaper (e.g., attacks
 by Casamance separatists on security forces and the arrest and
 torture of suspected MFDC). The principal opposition
 newspaper, Sopi, regularly denounces the Government as
 illegitimate and calls on President Diouf to resign.
 Notwithstanding this diversity, the Government controls
 significant media outlets, including the radio, which is by
 far the most important medium of news dissemination.
 Activities of the ruling party are always covered, while the
 opposition parties are mentioned only occasionally and
 selectively, e.g., communiques are not read in their entirety,
 or certain factions are excluded in favor of others less
 hostile to the Government. More equitable access to the media
 emerged as a principal opposition demand during and after the
 1988 elections. The National Assembly in October 1989 enacted
 a new law regulating access to television and radio by
 "regularly constituted political parties." In a public
 address in November, the President of the Supreme Court
 pointed up inequities created by the Government's restrictive
 policy on access to government-owned media. Later in the
 month, President Diouf announced he had given instructions to
 implement the law. Some increase in government-owned media
 coverage of opposition political activities was evident prior
 to and after the municipal and rural council elections held on
 November 25.
 Laws prohibiting personal attacks against the Chief of State
 or the institutions of the Republic, as well as the
 dissemination of false news, encourage self-censorship by
 journalists. Since 1989, seven people--officials of the chief
 opposition party and journalists of its newspaper, Sopi--were
 prosecuted on charges of spreading false news. The publisher
 of Sopi was convicted of such charges in four separate trials;
 he is currently serving 6 months in prison for one conviction,
 while awaiting hearings on appeal from the others. Another
 Sopi journalist, who is also a National Assembly Deputy and
 chairman of the opposition parliamentary group, was convicted
 of complicity in offending the Chief of State and sentenced to
 3 months in prison. He remains free while his conviction is
 being appealed. Two Sopi journalists and the newspaper's
 publisher were convicted of inciting the army to
 disobedience-charges filed after they published an article
 critical of the military's preparedness-and sentenced to
 prison terms ranging from 1 year to 3 months; the convictions
 were later reversed on appeal. At year's end, six-of the
 seven Sopi associates were found guilty and sentenced; one was
 acquitted; three were freed when their appeals were upheld;
 and the publisher's appeal had not yet been heard. In
 response, the independent press publicly questioned the
 Government's commitment to judicial independence and
 democracy, suggesting the Government use the press, not the
 courts, to respond to Sopi.
 Publishers are required to register with the Central Court
 prior to starting publication, but such registrations are
 routinely approved. Publications, including foreign
 publications, critical of the Government, are rarely censored
 
 
 SENEGAL
 or banned in Senegal. In general, academic freedom is enjoyed
 by the schools and the university.
 A national commission reviews all films prior to public
 showing. Movies deemed offensive to Senegalese moral
 sensibilities are censored or banned. No instances were known
 of films being banned because of offensive political content.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 In general, Senegalese freely exercise their constitutional
 rights of assembly and association, although demonstrations or
 protest meetings against government policies are closely
 monitored by security services. Prior authorization for
 public demonstrations is required.
 In February and March, the political opposition organized a
 series of public protests and demonstrations in Dakar and
 other cities and towns with the avowed objectives of forcing
 President Diouf to resign, promoting the formation of a
 government of transition, and forcing new presidential
 elections. The Government banned some demonstrations as a
 threat to public order (for example, onSenegal's National Day
 April 4) and permitted others. Some of these demonstrations
 took place peacefully, while others were accompanied by random
 street violence and the brief detention of some opposition
 political leaders. One person died during one such
 demonstration on February 28; opposition figures claimed he
 was beaten to death by the police, but the authorities said a
 coroner's report showed the victim died of a heart attack
 during the march. Some 25 to 50 persons were arrested for
 participating in a demonstration welcoming the return to Dakar
 February 10 of opposition leader Abdulaye Wade. The peaceful
 demonstration turned violent after police blocked the path of
 Wade's motorcade, refusing to let it enter the central
 business district. An unauthorized opposition march in Dakar
 on November 14, protesting limitations on opposition access to
 the media, was broken up by police using clubs and tear gas.
 Several opposition leaders were briefly detained in custody,
 and one PDC National Assembly Deputy was hospitalized with
 head wounds.
 Senegalese wishing to form associations must register them
 with the Ministry of Interior (except for business-related
 associations, which are registered with the Ministry of
 Commerce). By law and in practice, the Interior Ministry is
 obliged to register such groups, so long as the objectives of
 association are clearly stated and are not in violation of the
 law.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Senegal is constitutionally a secular state, and freedom of
 religion is a legal right, which exists in practice. Islam is
 the religion of 94 percent of the population, but no attempt
 has been made by the Government to introduce Shari'a law.
 Other religions, the major one of which is Roman Catholicism,
 are freely practiced. Missionary activity is permitted, and
 foreign Protestant missionaries are active in several regions
 of the country. Conversion is permitted, and t~h-ere is no
 discrimination against minority religions. Adherence to a
 particular religion confers no official advantage or
 disadvantage in civil, political, economic, military, or other
 sectors. Both Islamic and Christian organizations publish
 periodicals. Koranic and Catholic schools exist alongside the
 
 
 SENEGAL
 public school system, and the Mouride Brotherhood is
 constructing an Islamic University in its headquarters city of
 Touba.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Constitution states that all citizens have the right to
 travel and move and establish themselves freely anywhere in
 Senegal, a right respected in practice. Exit visas are not
 required for travel outside the country. There is no
 restriction on emigration, and repatriates are not
 disadvantaged on their return to Senegal. A Senegalese
 citizen by birth may not have his citizenship annulled for any
 reason. A naturalized citizen may have his citizenship
 revoked if it is proved in a court of law that he obtained his
 citizenship fraudulently or if he has been convicted of a
 crime and has been a citizen less than 15 years.
 Although Senegal's tolerant political and economic environment
 traditionally has attracted many Africans from other
 countries, until 1989 Senegal hosted few official refugees.
 However, in that year, the refugee and displaced person
 situation changed dramatically with the ethnic violence which
 erupted in Senegal and Mauritania in April and May. As a
 result of the large-scale movement of populations (both
 coerced and voluntary) in the wake of this violence, some
 70,000 Senegalese who had been temporarily living and working
 in Mauritania were repatriated to Senegal. These repatriates
 for the most part have been absorbed into their families and
 communities throughout the country.
 In addition to these repatriates, some 60,000 black Africans
 of Mauritanian nationality and 20,000 Senegalese who
 traditionally lived on and worked lands on the Mauritanian
 side of the river frontier were expelled to Senegal by
 Mauritanian authorities or fled a climate of intimidation and
 violence. Throughout 1990, refugees continued to trickle over
 the river into Senegal. Most of these refugees and displaced
 persons are sheltered in camps near the border supported by
 the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. They are
 free to circulate within Senegal and are not subject to forced
 repatriation. The Government is seeking a diplomatic
 resolution of the conflict with Mauritania that will permit
 the voluntary return of the refugees. Meanwhile, it is
 exploring ways to encourage greater economic self-sufficiency
 among the refugees.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Senegal has a multiparty political system, but the legitimacy
 of its 1988 election results was sharply challenged by the
 opposition. Continuing controversy over these and the 1990
 local election results and the electoral code increased
 skepticism of many Senegalese about the state of Senegal's
 democracy. The Socialist Party has dominated Senegalese
 political life since independence. Presidential and
 legislative elections, with universal suffrage for all
 citizens over 21, are held concurrently every 5 years.
 Election of municipal and rural councils normally are held
 every 5 years as well; the most recent such local elections
 were held in November 1990.
 
 
 SENEGAL
 Following the 1988 elections, opposition leaders claimed
 widespread fraud and continued in 1989 and 1990 to dispute
 publicly the legitimacy of the announced results. Sixteen of
 the 17 elected opposition deputies did take their seats in the
 National Assembly and participated in parliamentary
 activities. Opposition leaders demanded electoral reforms,
 including a tightening of the voter identification card system
 and the compulsory use of secret ballots. Limited electoral
 reform legislation was enacted by the National Assembly in
 October 1989. The new electoral law, however, failed to
 address satisfactorily these and other issues in the eyes of
 the opposition, which demands, in addition, a neutral national
 commission to supervise elections, a task now carried out by
 civil servants and the Supreme Court. At the invitation of
 the Government, an international team of experts organized by
 the National Democratic Institute visited Senegal from
 September 26 to October 3 to study the nation's electoral laws
 and practices. The visit attracted wide attention, and team
 members consulted a wide spectrum of government and political
 (both PS and opposition) figures, journalists, and
 academicians.
 All opposition parties boycotted the 1990 local elections,
 demanding further electoral reforms and the establishment of a
 transition government to oversee new legislative,
 presidential, municipal, and rural elections. Following the
 November 26 elections, the Government claimed a 73-percent
 voter turnout, which the ruling PS declared was a massive
 popular endorsement of President Diouf. These announced
 results were greeted with widespread public skepticism. The
 opposition charged that the Government rigged the elections
 and claimed the voter turnout was closer to 15 percent and the
 elections were "null and void."
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government allows human rights groups such as Amnesty
 International to investigate allegations concerning human
 rights abuses in Senegal and responds to requests for
 information about those allegations. The ICRC, with the
 approval of the Government, maintains an office in Dakar.
 Senegal's numerous human rights groups have been largely
 silent on the situation in the Casamance. In November the
 Association of African Jurists-a group based in Paris which
 has just opened an office in Dakar--sent a letter to President
 Diouf requesting the creation of an independent national
 committee to look into the issue of torture in the Casamance;
 By mid-December, according to the Association's president, no
 reply from the President had been received.
 Senegal is a leader among African countries in the promotion
 of international standards for human rights practices. For
 example, it sponsored the African Charter on Human and
 People's Rights of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and
 was a founder of the OAU's African Human Rights Commission in
 1987. Dakar is the headquarters of several institutions which
 foster human rights and democratic pluralism in Africa and
 frequently is the site of conferences related to human rights.
 
 
 324
 SENEGAL
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution states "men and women shall be equal in
 law." While officially there is no discrimination in Senegal
 based on race, religion, or language, the country is
 predominantly Muslim, and Islamic customs, including polygamy
 and the special muslim rules of inheritance, generally
 prevail, especially in the rural areas. The status of women
 has improved with government encouragement and through
 increased educational opportunities. Modifications of the
 family code adopted by the National Assembly in 1988
 reinforced women's rights to divorce, alimony, child support,
 and employment.
 However, Islamic and Senegalese customs persist, and women are
 still confined largely to traditional roles, notably in the
 large subsistence agricultural sector. Traditional
 inheritance and land tenure practices make it difficult for
 women to own land and sufficient collateral to obtain bank
 credit. Women usually marry young (the majority by age 16),
 average about 7 live births, and die relatively young. About
 67 percent of-women aged 40 to 45 live in polygamous unions.
 Violence against women, usually wife beating, is not uncommon,
 particularly in rural areas, but there are no accurate
 statistics, and the extent of the problem is not known.
 Police do not normally intervene in domestic disputes, and
 women are reluctant to go outside the family for redress.
 Persons convicted of rape may be sentenced up to 10 years in
 prison--more if the victim is a minor. Female genital
 excision is not practiced by Senegal's largest ethnic group,
 the Wolofs, but it is performed on girls belonging to other
 ethnic groups. One study concludes that 20 percent of
 Senegal's women have undergone one form or another of genital
 mutilation; the average age of girls when subjected to the
 practice is 9 years. Infibulation, the most extreme and
 dangerous form of genital mutilation, is practiced only by the
 Toucouleur and Peulh ethnic groups; perhaps 6 percent of
 Senegalese women have undergone this operation. There are no
 laws or regulations prohibiting this practice. However, in
 March President Diouf established a new cabinet-level office
 responsible for women and child welfare. The incumbent--one
 of two women with ministerial rank in the Government--has
 promoted programs to educate village women to the dangers of
 excision.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 -a. The Right of Association
 A minimum of seven people, each having worked within their
 profession for at least 1 year, are required in order to form
 a union by submitting a list of members and a charter to the
 Ministry of Interior. A union can be disbanded by the
 Ministry if the union's activities deviate from the charter.
 Even though they represent a small percentage of the overall
 population, unions wield significant political influence,
 primarily because of their ability to disrupt essential
 services. Although 1990 was relatively free of industrial
 action, unions have the right to strike.
 About 25 percent of the working population is in the formal
 wage sector, and of these about one-third (100,000) belong to
 various unions. Approximately 65,000 workers in 62 unions
 
 
 325
 SENEGAL
 belong to the National Confederation of Senegalese Workers
 (CNTS), which is affiliated with the ruling PS. Although the
 CNTS was established in 1969 as the sole trade union central,
 with affiliation to the then sole legal party, political and
 trade union pluralism was reestablished after 1976. The
 principal rival organization to the CNTS is known as the
 Democratic Union of Senegalese Workers (UDTS), and various
 independent unions exist in health, education, and
 transportation sectors.
 While ostensibly an independent umbrella organization, the
 CNTS has supported government policies. The Secretary General
 of the CNTS is at the same time a Vice President of the
 National Assembly, a member of the ruling Socialist Party's
 governing Political Bureau, and one of President Diouf's key
 advisers and supporters. Although CNTS remains Senegal's
 largest and most powerful labor confederation, it faces
 increased competition from independent unions.
 Senegalese unions are active in international labor
 organizations. The CNTS and the small Union of Free Workers
 of Senegal (UTLS) belong to the organization of African Trade
 Union Unity. The UTLS is also listed as an affiliate of the
 Communist-controlled World Federation of Trade Unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Senegalese unions have the right by law to organize and to
 bargain collectively, and these rights are protected in
 practice. There are no known instances of workers being
 forcibly discouraged from exercising these rights. The
 Government will intervene in labor/management disputes when
 requested and plays a mediation and arbitration role in
 private and state-enterprise sectors.
 Senegalese labor laws largely apply in the export free zone in
 Dakar. However, firms operating in the zone and firms
 eligible for benefits under the investment code enjoy certain
 exceptions to the labor code introduced in 1989. These firms
 do not need prior government authorization to dismiss
 employees and may hire workers on the basis of temporary
 contracts for a period of up to 5 years.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 There were no reports of forced labor in Senegal, and it is
 prohibited by law.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The minimum age for employment in Senegal is 16 for
 apprenticeships and 18 for all other types of work. These
 restrictions are closely monitored and strictly enforced
 within the formal wage sector, that is, the area of the
 economy over which the Government can exercise some
 supervision, such as state-owned corporations, large private
 enterprises, or farmers gathered into cooperatives. On the
 other hand, children under 16 are employed in the traditional
 sector, and minimum age and other workplace regulations are
 not seriously enforced on family farms in rural areas and in
 small, privately owned businesses.
 
 
 326
 SENEGAL
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Recent CNTS efforts have concentrated on raising the minimum
 wage, currently approximately $0.70 an hour for unskilled
 laborers, which, according to Senegalese unions, is not
 considered sufficient to maintain a decent standard of living.
 Workers must frequently supplement incomes through second jobs
 and reliance on the extended family.
 The CNTS has been very successful, within the formal economic
 sector, in obtaining acceptable conditions of work, including
 standard workweeks (40 to 48 hours per week for most
 professions), annual leave benefits (usually 1 month per
 year), and a variety of health and safety regulations. These
 regulations are incorporated into the labor code approved by
 the National Assembly and are supervised by Ministry of Labor
 inspectors. Enforcement, however, appears to be uneven,
 especially outside the formal wage sector.
 
 
 327
