Singapore
Singapore remains an authoritarian state with strict curbs on freedom of expression,
assembly, and association; denial of due process rights; draconian defamation
laws; and tight controls on independent political activity. Since 1959 the ruling
People’s Action Party (PAP) has won all elections.
Internal security and criminal laws permit prolonged detention of suspects without
trial. Caning is obligatory for certain categories of crimes, as is the death
penalty for others. Although reforms have improved employment conditions for
some of the country’s 180,000 migrant domestic workers, the government still
fails to guarantee them basic rights.
Freedom of Expression and Assembly
Singapore’s constitution guarantees freedom of assembly and expression, though
parliament can and does limit both on security, public order, and morality
grounds. Opposition politicians and their supporters are at constant risk of prison
and substantial fines for simply expressing their views.
On October 13, 2008, Singapore’s High Court ruled that opposition Singapore
Democratic Party (SDP) Secretary General Dr. Chee Soon Juan and his sister, Chee
Siok Chin, must pay Minister Mentor Lee Kuan Yew and his son, Prime Minister
Lee Hsien Loong, US$416,000 in damages for an article in the SDP’s newsletter.
The article had compared how the government is run to a scandal at a well-known
charity. The ruling may bankrupt the SDP and permanently shut it down. Dr. Chee
and Ms. Chee are already bankrupt because of previous defamation rulings
against them.
In September 2008 the Lees also won a defamation suit against the Far Eastern
Economic Review and its editor Hugo Restall for commentary on the same case.
Damages had yet to be assessed at this writing. The government is also seeking
contempt proceedings against the publisher and two editors of the Asian Wall
Street Journal for editorial comments related to the case.
In May Dr. Chee and a colleague were fined for speaking in public without a permit
during the 2006 election campaign. They were charged with trying to sell
copies of the SDP newsletter on a Singapore street.
Movies, music, and video games are routinely censored in Singapore. The Media
Development Authority controls website licensing. In May 2008 the authority
interrupted a private screening, sponsored by the SDP, of the video One Nation
Under Lee.
The Newspaper and Printing Presses Act requires that locally published newspapers
renew their licenses each year, and empowers authorities to limit the circulation
of foreign publications deemed to “be engaging in the domestic politics of
Singapore.”
How far Singapore’s leadership will loosen curbs on assembly and expression, as
Prime Minister Loong suggested in August 2008, remains to be seen. The only
step taken in 2008 was the government’s decision in September to rescind the
need for police permission for gatherings and rallies of more than four people at
a popular park site officially labeled the Speaker’s Corner. Race and religion still
may not be publicly discussed, police may still intervene on public order grounds,
and a permit is still required elsewhere in the city.
In March, on World Consumer Rights Day, police stopped a protest against rising
prices outside Parliament House. The organizers, among them Dr. Chee, had been
refused a permit; 18 protesters have since been charged with illegal assembly
and procession. A day after the attempted rally, the non-political Consumer
Association of Singapore was able to hold a public event without incident.
Due Process
Singapore’s Internal Security Act (ISA), Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act
(CLA), Misuse of Drugs Act (MDA), and Undesirable Publications Act permit arrest
and detention of suspects without a warrant or judicial review. Both the ISA and
the CLA also authorize preventive detention. The MDA permits the Central
Narcotics Bureau chief to send suspected drug users for rehabilitation without
recourse to trial.
The ISA is used against suspected Islamist militants, many of whom have been
detained for long periods without trial. There is no right to challenge detention on
substantive grounds. As of April 2008 some 30 suspected Muslim militants were
being held, almost all members of Jemaah Islamiah. Another 25-30 former
detainees live under restriction orders.
Caning
Singapore’s penal code mandates caning combined with imprisonment for some
30 offenses, including drug and immigration felonies. It is discretionary for other
offenses. Courts reportedly sentenced 6,404 men and boys to caning in 2007,
some 95 percent of whose sentences were carried out.
Death Penalty
Although death penalty statistics are secret in Singapore, available information
indicates that it has one of the world’s highest per capita execution rates. In
December 2007 Singapore joined with 53 other states in voting against a nonbinding
UN General Assembly resolution calling for “a moratorium on executions
with a view to abolishing the death penalty.” Earlier, Singapore’s home affairs
minister, referring to the law’s deterrent effects, commented that “there is no
room to go soft.”
Migrant Domestic Workers
Singapore’s labor laws exclude some 180,000 migrant domestic workers from key
protections guaranteed to other workers, such as a weekly day off, limits on working
hours, annual leave, paid holidays, and caps on salary deductions. In May
2008 acting Minister for Manpower Gan Kim Yong said it was unnecessary to
mandate a weekly rest day. He instead supported the current standard contract
provision that provides for at least one day off a month or compensatory pay.
However, many employers forbid domestic workers to take a rest day; their isolation
and employers’ power to have them deported at will make it difficult if not
impossible for them to bargain effectively for their due.
The government has prosecuted some employers who physically abuse domestic
workers and imposed penalties on labor recruitment agencies for unethical practices.
However it has failed to regulate exploitative recruitment charges that can
consume a third or more of workers’ two-year wage total.
Privacy
In October 2007 Singapore’s parliament rejected a proposal to repeal law 377A,
which bans private and consensual sexual relations between men. Although prosecutions
are rare, those found in violation can be jailed for up to two years on
charges of “gross indecency.”
In April 2008 the Media Development Authority fined a local television station for
featuring a gay couple and their baby under regulations that prohibit promotion
of gay lifestyles. It also fined a cable network for airing a commercial that showed
two women kissing.
Human Rights Defenders
State laws and political repression effectively prevent the establishment of
human rights organizations and deter individuals from speaking out publicly
against government policies.
Unless they are registered as political parties, associations may not engage in any
activities the government deems political. Trade unions are under the same
restrictions and are banned from contributing to political parties or using their
funds for political purposes. Most unions are affiliated with the umbrella National
Trade Union Congress, which does not allow members supportive of opposition
parties to hold office.
Key International Actors
Singapore is a key member of the Southeast Asia Regional Centre for Counter-
Terrorism, along with the US, Malaysia, and others, and is an active participant in
regional and sub-regional security issues. It is also an important financial and
banking center for Southeast Asia.
In February 2008 Singapore Foreign Minister George Yong-Boon Yeo, then chair of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), expressed ASEAN’s concern
about the conditions under which Burma’s constitutional referendum took place.
Since July 2008, after Singapore’s term as chair of ASEAN ended, the government
has shown more support for Burma’s government, even refusing to renew residency
permits for Burmese citizens who appear to have taken part in peaceful
activities critical of Burmese government policies.
