 SINGAPORE
 Singapore is a parliamentary republic in which politics is dominated overwhelm-
 ingly by the People's Action Party (PAP), which has held power uninterruptedly
 since Singapore gained autonomy from the United Kingdom in 1959. Opposition par-
 ties exist and regularly contest elections; however, the PAP holds 81 of 83 elected
 parliamentary seats and all the ministerial positions. Elections take place at regu-
 lar, constitutionally mandated intervals. The judiciary is efficient and constitu-
 tionally independent; however, there has been a perception that it reflects the views
 of the executive in politically sensitive cases as government leaders historically have
 utilized court proceedings, in particular defamation suits, against political oppo-
 nents and critics.
 The police are responsible for routine security within the country and for the pro-
 tection of the borders, including action against illegal immigrants and patrolling the
 island's territorial waters. The military forces are responsible for external defense.
 The Internal Security Department (ISD) in the Ministry of Home Affairs operates
 under the Internal Security Act (ISA) to counter such perceived threats to the na-
 tion's security as subversion, narcotics, and the activities of secret societies. The ci-
 vilian Government maintains tight control over all security activities. The Govern-
 ment's use of the ISA to control what it considers serious security threats has de-
 creased, although the Government continues to rely on related security laws to deal
 with espionage, organized crime, and narcotics.
 Singapore has an open free market economic system. The construction and finan-
 cial services industries and manufacturing of computer-related components are key
 sectors of the economy, which has achieved very steady growth since independence.
 However, economic growth slowed considerably in 1998 in the wake of the Asian
 economic crisis. Gross domestic product rose approximately 1.3 percent in 1998,
 compared with 7.8 percent in 1997. The annual per capita gross domestic product
 was approximately $26,000. Wealth is distributedrelatively equally in an economy
 that, despite the economic crisis, maintained a low rate of unemployment.
 The Government generally respected the human rights of its citizens, although
 there were problems in some areas. The Government has wide powers to limit citi-
 zens' rights and to handicap political opposition. However, the Government publicly
 acknowledged the inevitability of a relaxation over time of restrictions on civil and
 political rights. The citizenry, including the press  more openly discussed the possi-
 bility of an expansion of these rights and more openly debated the Government's
 role regarding these rights. However, despite discussion of these issues, there were
 no significant concrete steps to change the wide array of laws and government prac-
 tice, or the informal levers of government influence that lie behind the limitations
 on civil and political rights.
 There have been occasional instances of police mistreatment of detainees; how-
 ever, the Government investigates and punishes those responsible. The authorities
 sometimes infringe on citizens' privacy rights. The Government restricts freedom of
 speech and of the press and intimidates journalists into practicing self-censorship.
 Although government leaders historically have utilized court proceedings, in par-
 ticular, defamation suits, against political opponents and critics, they initiated no
 new defamation suits against their political opponents or critics in 1998. However,
 the continuation of one such case on appeal and the effect of other recent suits con-
 tinued to have a chilling effect on political speech and action and to highlight con-
 cerns about the ruling party's use of the judicial system for political purposes.
 The Government restricts freedom of assembly and association, although the prob-
 lem of these restrictions was the subject of greater public discussion. While freedom
 of religion generally is respected, Jehovah's Wituesses have been banned since 1972
 and the Unification Church since 1982. There is some legal discrimination against
 women, which affects benefits for children and husbands in limited cases. The Gov-
 ernment has moved actively to counter societal discrimination against women and
 minorities.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The law prohibits torture, however, there have been occasional instances of police
 mistreatment of detainees. The Government investigates and punishes instances of
 such practices as sleep deprivation or interrogation of detainees in very cold rooms
 
 
 1053
 where the prisoners may be stripped of their clothes and doused with water. In
 1993, the last year for which statistics are available, of the 94 complaints of police
 abuse investigated, 14 were substantiated. The Penal Code mandates caning, in ad-
 dition to imprisonment, as punishment for some 30 offenses involving the use of vio-
 lence or threat of violence against a person, such as rape and robbery, and also for
 such nonviolent offenses as vandalism, drug trafficking, and violation of immigra-
 tion laws.
 Caning is discretionary for convictions on other charges involving the use of crimi-
 nal force, such as kidnaping, or voluntarily causing grievous hurt. Women, men over
 50 or under 16, and those determined unfit by a medical officer are exempted from
 caning. In 1993, the last year for which statistics are available, the courts included
 a caning sentence in 3,244 cases.
 Prison conditions are generally good and meet minimum international standards.
 The Government does not allow human rights monitors to visit prisons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law provides that, in most instances,
 arrests are to be carried out following the issuance of an authorized warrant. Those
 arrested must be charged before a magistrate within 48 hours. The great majority
 of those arrested are charged expeditiously and brought to trial. Those who face
 criminal charges are allowed counsel, and legal assistance is available through the
 Legal Aid Bureau for those who cannot afford to hire an attorney. A functioning sys-
 tem of bail exists for those charged. The courts have instituted a number of proce-
 dures, such as video links between prisons and the courts, that expedite the pretrial
 process.
 Some laws--the Internal Security Act (ISA), the Criminal Law (Temporary Provi-
 sions) Act (CiA), the Misuse of Drugs Act (MDA), and the Undesirable Publications
 Act rPA)--have provisions for arrest without warrant. The ISA historically has
 been employed primarily against suspected Communist-related security threats. The
 CIA historically has been employed primarily against suspected organized crime
 (mainly secret society) threats.
 The ISA and the CIA permit preventive detention without trial for the protection
 of public security or safety or the maintenance of public order. The ISA gives broad
 discretion to the Minister for Home Affairs to order detention without charges at
 the direction of the President, if the latter determines that a person poses a threat
 to national security. The initial detention may be for up to 2 years and may be re-
 newed without limitation for additional periods up to 2 years at a time. Detainees
 have a right to be informed of the grounds for their detention and are entitled to
 counsel. However, they have no right to challenge the substantive basis for their de-
 tention through the courts. The ISA specifically excludes recourse to the normal ju-
 dicial system for review of a detention order made under its authority. Instead, de-
 tainees may make representations to an advisory board, headed by a Supreme Court
 Justice, which reviews each detainee's case periodically and must make a non-
 binding recommendation to the President within 3 months of the initial detention.
 The President may concur with the advisory board's recommendation-that a de-
 tainee be released prior to the expiration of the detention order but is not obligated
 to do so.
 No one was detained under the ISA from 1989 through 1996. In 1997 two persons
 were detained and, in 1998 four were detained under the ISA, all for alleged espio-
 nage. Of these six, two remained in detention at the end of 1998. One person, Chia
 Thye Poh, a former Member of Parliament, who had been detained for over 20 years
 on allegations of Communist activity, was released in 1998 from restrictions on po-
 litical speech or activity, the last of the restrictions on his speech, activity, resi-
 dence, and movement, which had been relaxed gradually since 1989.
 Undereche to the terms ofithe CIA, the Minister for Home Affairs can order preventive
 detention at his own initiative for an initial period of 1 year, and the President can
 extend detention for additional periods up to 1 year at a time. The Minister must
 provide a written statement of the grounds for detention to an advisory committee
 within 28 days of making the order and the advisory committee must make a writ-
 ten recommendation to the President, who may cancel, confim, or amend the order.
 The CIA makes no prevision for notification of the detainee of the grounds of deten-
 tion. However, persons detained under the CIA may have recourse to the courts via
 an application of a writ of habeas corpus. Persons detained without trial under the
 CiA are entitled to counsel but only may challenge the substantive basis for their
 detention to the committee advising the Minister for Home Affairs on detention
 issues. The CIA is used almost exclusively in cases involving narcotics and secret
 criminal societies and has not been used for political purposes. At the end of 1998,
 450 persons were detained under the C LA.
 There were no reports of instances in which the Government used indefinite de-
 tention without trial to pressure detainees to "rehabilitate" themselves and make
 
 
 1054
 admissions of wrongdoing. In the past, the Government acknowledged that, in the
 case of detentions without trial under the CLA,-the indefinite nature of the deten-
 lions served to pressure the detainees. Persons alleging mistreatment under deten-
 tion may bring criminal charges against government officials who are alleged to
 have committed such acts; there were no reports during the year that persons were
 discouraged from making such accusations by fear of official retaliation (see Section
 i.e.).
 Both the ISA and the CLA contain provisions that allow for such modified forms
 of detention as curfews, residence limitations, requirements to report regularly to
 the authorities, limitations on travel, or, in the case of the ISA, restrictions on polit-
 ical activities and association.
 The Misuse of Drugs Act (MDA) permits detention without trial. Under the MDA,
 the Director of the Central Narcotics Bureau also may commit-without trial-sus-
 pected drug users to a drug rehabilitation center for up to 6 months, with subse-
 quent extensions in cases of positive urinalysis tests.
 The Constitution prohibits exile, and the Government respects the prohibition in
 practice.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, and the Government generally respects this prvision; however, control over
 the assignment of judges and laws that limit judicial review allow for some restric-
 tions in practice. Many judicial officials, especially Supreme Court judges, have close
 ties to the ruling party and its leaders. The President appoints judges to the Su-
 preme Court on the recommendation of the Prime Minister in consultation with the
 Chief Justice. The President also appoints subordinate court judges on the rec-
 ommendation of the Chief Justice. The term of appointment is determined by the
 Legal Service Commission, of which the Chief Justice is the chairman. The 1989
 constitutional amendments that eliminated judicial review of the objective grounds
 for detentions under the ISA and subversion laws allow the Government to restrict,
 or even eliminate, judicial review in such cases and thereby restrict, on vaguely de-
 fined national security grounds, the scope of certain fundamental liberties provided
 for in the Constitution. Under the ISA and the CLA the President and the Minister
 of Home Affairs have substantial de facto judicial power, which explicitly (in the
 case of the ISA) or implicitly (in the case of the CLA) excludes normal judicial re-
 view.
 Government leaders historically have utilized court proceedings, in particular def-
 amation suits, against political opponents and critics. Both this practice and consist-
 ent awards in favor of government plaintiffs have raised questions about the rela-
 tionship between the government and the judiciary and led to a perception that the
 judiciary reflects the views of the executive in politically sensitive cases. A series
 of decisions in favor of poitical leader plaintiffs was taken as an indication of a com-
 piant judiciary in these particular cases. It is unciear whether the judiciary was
 unduly sympathetic to the government plaintiffs in the two most recent such
 cases-defamation actions against Workers' Party politicians Tang Liang Hong and
 J.B. Jeyaretnam for statements that they made during the 1996-97 election cam-
 paign (see Section 3).-
 The judicial system has two levels of courts: The Supreme Court, which includes
 the High Court and the Court of Appeal; and the subordinate courts. Subordinate
 court judges and magistrates, as well as public prosecutors, are civil servants whose
 specific assignments are determined by the Legal Service Commission, which can
 decide on job transfers to any of several legal service departments. If they wish, Su-
 preme Court Justices may remain in office until the mandatory retirement age of
 65, after which they may continue to serve at the Government's discretion for brief,
 renewable terms at full salary. The Constitution has a provision for the Prime Min-
 ister or the Chief Justice to convene a tribunal in order to remove a justice "on the
 ground of misbehavior or inability. . . to properly discharge the functions" of office,
 but it has never been used.
 In addition, the law provides for Islamic courts whose authority is limited to Is-
 lamic family law. The subordinate courts, primarily district courts'or magistrates
 courts but also including specialized courts such as the Small Claims Tribunal, han-
 dle the great majority of civil and criminal cases in the first instance. The High
 Court may hear any civil or criminal case, although it generally limits itself to civil
 matters involving substantial claims and criminal matters carrying the death pen-
 alty or imprisonment of more than 10 years. The Court of Appeal is the highest and
 final court of review for matters decided in the subordinate courts or the High
 Court.
 The judicial system provides citizens with an efficient judicial process. In normal
 cases, the Criminal Procedures Code provides that a charge against a defendant
 must be read and explained to him or her as soon as it is framed by the prosecution
 
 
 1055
 or the magistrate. Defendants enjoy a presumption of innocence and the right of ap-
 peal, in most cases. They have the right to be present at their trials, to be rep-
 resented by an attorney, to confront witnesses against them, to provide witnesses
 and evidence on their own behalf, and to review government-held evidence relevant
 to their cases. Trials are public and by judge. There are no jury trials.
 The Constitution extends these rights to all citizens. However, persons detained
 under the ISA or CIA are not entitled to a public trial. In addition, proceedings of
 the advisory board under the ISA and CIA are not public (see Section 1.d.).
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-A1-
 though the Government generally respects the privacy of homes and families, it has
 a pervasive influence over civic and economic life and sometimes uses its wide dis-
 cretionary powers to infringe on these rights. Normally, the police must have a war-
 rant issued by a magistrate's court to conduct a search. However, they may search
 a person, home, or property without a warrant if they decide that such a search is
 necessary to preserve evidence. The Government has wide discretionary powers
 under the ISA, CLA, MDA, and UPA to conduct searches without warrant if it de-
 termines that national security, public safety or order, or the public interest are at
 issue. The courts may undertake judicial review of such searches at the request of
 the defendant.
 Divisions of the Government's law enforcement agencies, including the Internal
 Security Department and the Corrupt Practices Investigation Board, have wide net-
 works for gathering information and highly sophisticated capabilities to monitor
 telephone and other private conversations and conduct surveillance. It is believed
 that the authorities routinely monitor telephone conversations and use of the Inter-
 net, and there were credible reports of such practices (see Section 2.a.). It also is
 widely believed that the authorities routinely conduct surveillance on some opposi-
 tion politicians and other critics of the Government, although there were no proven
 allegations that they did so in 1998.
 The Government is active in some areas normally considered private, in pursuit
 �of what it considers the public interest. For example, in publicly subsidized housing,
 where the majority of citizens live and own their own units, the Government en-
 forces ethnic ratios designed to achieve an ethnic mix more or less in proportion to
 that in the society at large.
 The Government does not permit the import of newspapers from Malaysia and
 bans the import of other publications (see Section 2.a.).
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and expression but permits official restrictions on these rights. In practice, the Gov-
 ernment restricts the freedoms of speech and the press and intimidates journalists
 into practicing self-censorship. The Government's authoritarian style has fostered
 an atmosphere inimical to fully free speech and the press. However, there was some
 limited progress towards greater openness during the year.
 The Government has defined certain topics as out of bounds. The ISA permits the
 Government to prohibit or to place conditions on publications that incite violence,
 that counsel disobedience to the law, that might arouse tensions among the various
 classes (races, religions, and language groups), or that might threaten national in-
 terests, national security, or public order. The Government uses a broad definition
 of these laws to restrict political opposition and criticism. Strict defamation and
 press laws, and the Government's demonstrated willingness to defend vigorously
 against what it considers personal attacks on officials have led journalists to be cau-
 tious about publishing items about alleged government corruption, nepotism, or a
 compliant judiciary. Furthermore, political leaders have challenged publicly the le-
 gitimacy of political speech articulated outside the boundaries of the formal political
 system. In a case that continues to have an impact locally, the Prime Minister in
 1994 publicly castigated the writer Catherine Lim for two opinion pieces published
 in the local press that were mildly critical of the ruling party's authoritarian style.
 The Prime Minister suggested that such comments only would be legitimate if ut-
 tered in a formal political context.
 The Government strongly influences both the print and the electronic media.
 Singapore Press Holdings Ltd. (SPH), a private holding company with close ties to
 the Government, owns all general circulation newspapers in the four official lan-
 guags-English, Chinese, Malay, and Tamil. The Government must approve, and
 can remove, the holders of SPH management shares, who have the power to appoint
 or dismiss all directors or staff. Hence, while newspapers print a large and diverse
 selection of articles from domestic and foreign sources, their editorials, coverage of
 domestic events, and coverage of sensitive foreign relations issues closely reflect gov-
 
 
 1056
 eminent policies and the opinions (f government leaders. Government leaders often
 criticize what they call the "western model" of journalism, in which the media are
 free to report the news as they see it. Government officials argue that the role of
 the domestic media is to act responsibly, which generally is understood to mean sup-
 port for the goals of the elected leadership and preservation of social and religious
 harmony.
 A wide range of international magazines and newspapers may be purchased un-
 censored, although newspapers printed in Malaysia may not be imported. A 1990
 law requires foreign publications that report on politics and current events in South-
 east Asia to register and post a substantial bond (equivalent to $141,000), and name
 a person in Singapore to accept legal service. These requirements strengthen gov-
 ernment control over foreign media. The Government may ban the circulation of do-
 mestic and foreign publications under the provisions of the ISA and the Undesirable
 Publications Act. Under amendments to the Newspaper and Printing Presses Act,
 the Government may limit the circulation of foreign publications that it determines
 interfere in Singapore's domestic politics. It has done so in the past.
 The weekly circulation of the Asian Wall Street Journal (AWSJ), Asiaweek, and
 the Far Eastern Economic Review (FEER) is limited (or "gazetted"). The fact that
 the Government gradually has raised the weekly circulation of the FEER and
 Asiaweek more or less commensurate with actual demand allows the Government
 to maintain this aspect of control over the press while still giving the appearance
 of flexibility.
 The Government, which in the past was cautious about permitting foreign cor-
 respondents to be stationed in the country and has denied such requests, has be-
 come more receptive to their presence and to the establishment of regional head-
 quarters by foreign or international media. According to the Foreign Correspondents
 Association (FCA), the-number of persons it classifies as "foreign correspondents"
 has increased substantially in the past year or two. This is primarily due to the re-
 location to Singapore of the regional headquarters of Reuters and Dow Jones. Much
 of the increase is represented by journalists assigned to cover regional news. Work-
 ing journalists are issued 1-year renewable visas. According to the FCA, journalists
 were "expected" to stay in the country for 3 years, and then depart. However, there
 are a number ofjournalists who have been in the country for many years.
 Import of some publications is barred, and the authorities censor movies, tele-
 vision programs, video materials, and music. The ISA, UPA, and the Films Act
 allow banning, seizing, censoring, or restricting written, visual, or musical materials
 if it is determined that they threaten the stability of the State, are pro-Communist,
 contravene moral norms, are pornographic, show excessive or gratuitous sex and vi-
 olenc, glamorize or promote drug use, or incite racial, religious, or linguistic ani-
 mosities. Polls indicate that there is strong public support for continued censorship
 of sex and violence in films.
 The UPA was amended in 1998 to include CD-ROMS, sound recordings, pictures,
 and computer-generated drawings, and to raise the fine for distribution or posses-
 sion of banned publications. At the request of a Member of Parliament, the Govern-
 ment publicized the list of banned English-language publications, which is made up
 primarily of sexually-oriented materials, but also includes some religious and politi-
 cal materials. The Films Act was amended to ban political advertising using films
 or videos. The Government justified the ban as protecting politics from sensational-
 ism, innuendo, and inaccuracy, but the effect was to further restrict an already lim-
 ited range of what was deemed acceptable political discourse (see Section 3).
 The government-linked holding company, Singapore International Media Pte Ltd,
 has a near monopoly on broadcasting. Its subsidiaries operate all 4 free television
 channels and 10 of the 15 domestic radio stations. Of the 5 remaining radio stations,
 4 are owned by organizations with close government affiliation-2 by the Singapore
 Armed Forces Reservists' Association (SAFRA) and 2by the National Trade Union
 Congress (NTUC). Only one, the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) World
 Service, is completely independent of the Government. A cable service with links to
 the Government is available. Malaysian and Indonesian television and radio broad-
 casts can be received, but satellite dishes are banned, with few exceptions.
 The Singapore Broadcasting Authority (SBA), established in 1994 to regulate and
 promote the broadcasting industry, develops censorship standards with the help of
 a citizen advisory panel It also regulates access to material on the Internet. In 1996
 the SBA introduced a framework of web site licenses to encourage accountability
 and responsible use of the Internet. Since 1996 the SBA has regulated Internet ma-
 terial by licensing Internet service providers who install "proxy servers" through
 which local users must route their Internet connections. These act as a filter for oT-
 jectionable content and can block access to certain sites. While the Government does
 not classify regulation of the Internet as censorship, the SBA directs service provid-
 
 
 1057
 ers to block access to web pages that, in the Government's view, undermine public
 security, national defense, racial and religious harmony, and public morals. In Sep-
 tember 1996, the SBA ordered Internet service providers to block access to about
 a dozen sites deemed to violate these rules. A number of prohibited sites remain
 blocked, almost all of-which are pornographic in nature. The list of prohibited sites
 is not a matter of public record.
 In 1997 the SBA announced a new Internet Code of Practice to further clarify
 what types of material were forbidden and specify the responsibilities of Internet
 providers. The SBA stated that it had no intention of monitoring Internet or e-mail
 use but intended to block access to material that contained pornography or excessive
 violence or that incites racial or religious hatred. Virtually all web sites are avail-
 able on the Internet. Nevertheless, a 1996 Interpol case that led to the arrest and
 conviction of a Singaporean for downloading child pornography made all citizens
 keenly aware that, even if the Government does not regularly monitor their use of
 the Internet, it has the ability to do so.
 Government leaders from time to time have used defamation suits or the threat
 of such actions to discourage public criticism and intimidate the press. The unbro-
 ken success of government leaders' suits has helped to foster caution about political
 speech among the public and a culture of self-censorship among the press. There
 were no new defamation cases in 1998. However, four cases decided since 1995 con-
 tinued to have a strong influence on public perceptions of how freely citizens could
 speak and publish, particularly on political matters. These included a record 1995
 defamation judgment of $678,000 against the International Herald Tribune (IHT) in
 a case brought by Senior Minister Lee Kuan Yew, Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong,
 and Lee's son, Deputy Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong, for a 1994 article that alleg-
 edly suggested that the younger Lee was appointed to his post on account of his
 father. Also in 1995, former visiting academic Dr. Christopher Lingle, the IHT, and
 the IHT's Singapore Printer were fined for contempt of court and, in a related civil
 libel suit, agreed to pay damages for an IHT article that was interpreted as critical
 of Singapore's judiciary. These two suits had the effect of intimidating the press.
 More recently, two defamation suits instituted by the Prime Minister and other po-
 litical leaders in 1997 against two Workers' Party members--Tang Liang Hong and
 J.B. Jeyaretnam-led to the award during the year of substantial damages to the
 plaintiffs for statements made by the defendants during the 1997 election campaign
 (see Section 3).
 However, there was some limited progress towards greater openness in the Gov-
 ernmenes attitude toward freedom of speech and the press during the year. Public
 statements of concern over constraints on these freedoms increased. The press itself
 reported more fully on these kinds of statements and published a growing body of
 commentary on the problem. The Government showed greater interest in soliciting
 the views of citizens, primarily through a set of committees set up to explore policy
 alternatives, but with government control over the committees' agendas and mem-
 bership. The government-linked Institute for Policy Studies (IPS) sponsored a semi-
 nar on civil society, which explored citizen-government relations and cautiously
 pushed the outer limits of criticism of the Government's record of hostility toward
 more open political speech and action. The press reported fully on the seminar, with
 extensive commentary that included a call on the Government to take specific steps
 toward a more open civil society. Government ministers spoke publicly, including at
 the IPS seminar, about the inevitability of greater citizen demand for free expres-
 sion and freer access to information as global technology advanced.
 Late in the year, opposition political figure Chee Soon Juan gave a public speech
 for which he had not received a permit, and subsequently was charged for this ac-
 tion. He said that he intended to violate the law, claiming that the requirement of
 a permit to speak in public was a violation of the constitutional right of free speech.
 All public institutions of higher education and think tanks are closely linked to
 the Government. Although faculty members technically are not government employ-
 ees, in practice, they are subject to potential government influence. Academics speak
 and publish widely, and engage in debate on social and political issues. However,
 they are aware that public comments, outside the classroom or academic publica-
 tions that venture into the "out of bounds" areas, e.g., criticism of political leaders
 or sensitive social and economic policies, or comments that might disturb ethnic or
 religious harmony or that appear to advocate partisan poitical views, could subject
 them to sanctions. Publications by local academics and members of think tanks
 rarely deviate substantially from government views.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution grants citi-
 zens the right of peaceful assembly but permits Parliament to impose restrictions
 "as it considers necessary or expedient"' in the interest of security, and Government
 restricts this right in practice. Assemblies of more than five persons in public, in-
 
 
 1058
 cluding political meetings and rallies, must have police permission. Spontaneous
 public gatherings or demonstrations are unknown. The Government closely monitors
 political gatherings regardless of the number present. Persons who wish to speak
 at a public function, excluding functions provided by or under the auspices of the
 Government, must obtain a public entertainment license from the police. Opposition
 politicians routinely have experienced delays before being notified of the decision on
 their applications.
 The Constitution provides for freedom of association but permits Parliament to
 impose restrictions "as it considers necessary or expedient' in the interest of secu-
 rity, and the Government restricts this right in practice. Most associations, societies,
 clubs, religious groups, and other organizations with more than 10 members must
 be registered with the Government under the Societies Act. The Government denies
 registration to groups it believes likely to be used for unlawful purposes or for pur-
 poses prejudicial to public peace, welfare, or public order (see Section 2.c.). The Gov-
 ernment has absolute discretion in applying this broad and vague language to reg-
 ister or dissolve societies. It prohibits organized political activities, except by organi-
 zations registered as political parties. This prohibition, limits opposition activities,
 and, along with other factors, restricts the scope of unofficial political expression
 and action (see Section 3). The prohibition has less of an effect on the PAP, which,
 because of its long domination of the Government and its current overwhelming par-
 liamentary majority, can use ostensibly nonpolitical organizations such as residen-
 tial committees and neighborhood groups for political purposes far more extensively
 than can opposition political parties. Furthermore, the recent development of gov-
 ernment-organized and predominantly government-funded Community Development
 Councils (CDC's) to promote community development and cohesion, and to provide
 welfare and other assistance services, strengthens the PAP, which monopolizes
 these CDC's even in opposition-held constituencies.
 There are relatively few nongovernmental organizations (NGO's), except for reli-
 gious, ethnic-affiliated organizations, or providers of welfare services. The dominant
 role of the Government in almost every facet of life and the limiting effect of the
 law on the formation of publicly active organizations are, in large part, responsible
 for this situation.
 During the year there was a continuation of the modest gains that NGO's have
 made in establishing a legitimate role in public discourse and activity. The Govern-
 ment showed itself more willing to acknowledge NGO's legitimate public role. NGO's
 engaged more actively in public discussion of civil society and that discussion, in
 turn, identified a growing role for NGO's.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government generally respects this right in practice. However, the Government
 bans some religious groups.
 There is no state religion. The Government plays an active, but limited, role in
 religious affairs. It does not tolerate speech or actions, including ostensibly religious
 speech or action, that affects racial and religious harmony. The Government also
 seeks to assure that citizens, the great majority of whom live in publicly subsidized
 housing, have ready access to religious organizations traditionally associated with
 their ethnic groups by assisting religious institutions to find space in these public
 complexes. The Government maintains a semiofficial relationship with the Muslim
 community through the Islamic Religious Council (MUIS) set up under the Adminis-
 tration of Muslim Law Act. The MUIS advises the Government on concerns of the
 Muslim community and has some regulatory functions over Muslim religious mat-
 ters. The Government provides some financial assistance to build and maintain
 mosques.
 Missionaries are permitted to work and to publish and distribute religious texts.
 However, all religious groups are subject to government scrutiny and must be reg-
 istered legally. The 1990 Maintenance of Religious Harmony Act made illegal what
 the Government deems to be the inappropriate involvement of religious groups and
 officials in political affairs. The act also prohibits judicial review of its enforcement
 or of any possible denial of rights arising from it.
 The Government restricts some religious groups by application of the Societies Act
 and has banned others, such as Jehovah's Witnesses and the Unification Church.
 The Government banned the former in 1972 on the grounds that its roughly 2,000
 members refuse to perform military service (which is obligatory for all male citi-
 zens), salute the flag, or swear oaths of allegiance to the State. In 1996 a number
 of members of Jehovah's witnesses were found guilty of holding a meeting of a
 "banned society" and publications in their possession were confiscated. In 1998 a
 member of Jehovah's Witnesses sued a government school over a 1994 dismissal (al-
 legedly because he refused to sing the national anthem).
 
 
 1059
 
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution grants citizens the right to move freely throughout
 the country; although the Government generally respects this right in practice, it
 limits it in certain respects. For example, citizens' choice of where to live may be
 limited by the Government's policy of assuring ethnic balance in publicly-subsidized
 housing, in which the great majority of Singaporeans live (see Section 1.f). The Gov-
 ernment requires all citizens and permanent residents over the age of 12 to register
 and to carry identification cards. The Government may refuse to issue a passport
 and has done so in the case of former ISA detainees. Under the ISA, a detainee's
 movement may be restricted, although this provision is normally a part of the proc-
 ess of relaxing the conditions of detention and has been used very seldom in recent
 years.
 The right of voluntary repatriation is extended to holders of Singaporean pass-
 p orts. The Government actively seeks to encourage citizens iving overseas to return
 home or, at least, to maintain active ties with Singapore. A provision of law for the
 possible loss of citizenship by Singaporeans who reside outside the country for more
 than 10 years consecutively seldom is used, although it was applied in 1987 in at
 least one well-known case involving government opponent Tan Wah Piaow.
 Male citizens who still have national service reserve obligations (normally until
 age 40 for enlisted men, and age 50 for officers) must advise the Ministry of Defense
 if they plan to travel overseas for less than 6 months, and must receive an exit per-
 mit for trips over 6 months. Beginning at age 11, boys' passports are restricted to
 6 months. Males who are eligible for national service must obtain an exit permit
 for travel outside Singapore of more than 6 months, with the exception of travel to
 peninsular Malaysia on a restricted passport.
 The law stipulates that Singaporean former members of the Communist Party of
 Malaya (CPM) residing outside the country must apply to the Government to be al-
 lowed to return. They must renounce communism, sever all organizational ties with
 the CPM, and pledge not to take part in activities prejudicial to the State's internal
 security. In addition, the law requires them to submit to interview by the Internal
 Security Department and to any restrictive conditions imposed on them.
 Faced with the potential for significantly increased numbers of migrants seeking
 to enter Singapore illegally from countries affected by the regional economic crisis,
 the Government in March announced that none of these migrants would be re-
 garded as refugees and that all would be prosecuted under the law, and, if found
 guilty, would be punished and repatriated. The Government took active steps to
 intercept those seeking to enter Singapore illegally by boat or across the two cause-
 ways linking Singapore and Malaysia.
 Singapore neither accepted the Comprehensive Plan of Action for Indochinese
 seeking refugee status nor offered first asylum to refugees. Prior to 1991, the Gov-
 ernment permitted Indochinese asylum seekers to disembark if a resettlement coun-
 try promised to remove them within 90 days and if the rescuing vessel was in
 Singapore on a scheduled port of call. In June 1991, the Government halted disem-
 barkation on the grounds that resettlement countries had not honored their commit-
 ment for removal. Five Vietnamese asylum seekers have been allowed to remain in
 Singapore. The authorities permit persons of other nationalities who make claims
 for asylum to have their status determined by the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees (UNHCR) for possible resettlement elsewhere. The Government
 does not offer first asylum. The law does not include provision for granting refugee/
 asylee status in accordance with the 1951 U.N. Convention Relating to the Status
 of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol. There were no reports that persons were returned
 forcibly to a country where they feared persecution.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Condtitution provides citizens with the right to change their government
 peacefully through democratic means, opposition parties are free to contest elec-
 tions, and the voting and vote-counting systems are fair, accurate, and free from
 tampering. However, the PAP, which has held power continuously and overwhelm-
 ingly for over 3 decades, uses the Government's extensive powers to place formida-
 ble obstacles in the path of political opponents. The PAP has maintained its political
 dominance in part by developing genuine voter support through honest, effective ad-
 ministration and its strong record in bringing economic prosperity to the country,
 and, in part, by manipulating the electoral framework, intimidating organized politi-
 cal opposition, and circumscribing the bounds of legitimate political discourse and
 action. It attempts to intimidate the members of the opposition through the threat
 of libel suits and the subsequent loss of their political future, since large judgments
 in libel suits can lead to bankruptcy, and under the law bankrupt persons are ineli-
 
 
 1060
 
 gible to sit in Parliament. The Government also intimidates the opposition through
 the threat of potential loss of employment or professional licenses. Opposition politi-
 cians report that potential employers are reluctant to hire them or their supporters.
 As a result, opposition parties have been unable seriously to challenge the PAP's
 domination of the political system since the late 1960's.
 Singapore has a parliamentary system in which the majority party in Parliament
 has the authority to constitute the Government, which is headed by a Prime Min-
 ister. Parliamentary elections may be called at any time but must be held no later
 than 5 years from the date a new parliament first sits. Following the 1997 elections,
 the PAP holds 81 of 83 elected seats; the opposition Singapore People's Party and
 the Workers' Party (WP) each hold one seat. The WP' holds one "non-constituency"
 seat based on a law that assures at least three opposition members in Parliament
 even if fewer than three actually are elected. In addition, the Government nomi-
 nates and the President appoints '"prominent citizens" to serve as nominated mem-
 bers of parliament (NMP's) for 2-year terms. Nine NMP's currently sit in Par-
 liament. Non-constituency members' and NMPs' voting rights are restricted.
 Singapore's economic success and generally honest, effective government under
 the PAP has helped the PAP maintain a solid base of voter support. The Party has
 an extensive grassroots system and a carefully selected, highly disciplined member-
 ship, including members of Parliament who maintain close contact with their con
 stituents, which is responsive to constituent needs and delivers effective government
 services. However, the PAP, as virtually synonymous with the Government, is not
 averse to using the threat to withdraw benefits as a way of assuring' popular sup-
 port. For example, during the 1997 election campaign, the Prime Minister and other
 senior government officials pointediy warned voters that precincts that elected oppo-
 sition candidates would have the lowest priority in government plans to upgrade
 public housing facilities. This heightened concerns among some observers about vot-
 ers' genuine freedom of choice. This warning was also an economically important
 consideration for the majority of citizens who own their own units in the publicly
 subsidized system and can profit by reselling them.
 The PAP also maintains its grip on power by other means, including patronage;
 political control of the press and the courts; restrictions on opposition political ac-
 tivities; and complete control of the political process. Often these means are fully
 in keeping with the law and the normal prerogatives of government, but the overa
 effect (and, many argue, the ultimate purpose) is to disadvantage and weaken the
 oitical opposition. The Government altered the boundaries of election districts in
 ctober 1996, 3 months before the 1997 elections. In recent years, it has changed
 most single-seat constituencies into group representational constituencies (GRC's) of
 three, four, five, or six parliamentary seats, where the party with a plurality wins
 all the seats. According to the Constitution, the purpose of this change is to ensure
 ethnic minority representation in Parliament since each GRC candidate list must
 contain at least one Malay, Indian, or other ethnic minority candidate. However,
 this change has made it more difficult for opposition parties with very limited mem-
 bership to fill multimember candidate lists, especially when one member must be
 an ethnic minority. The PAP does not suffer from this disadvantage.
 Although political parties are legally free to organize, they operate under the
 same limitations that apply to all organizations, -and the authorities impose strict
 regulations on their constitutions, fundraising, and accountability. Government reg-
 ulations hinder attempts by opposition parties to rent office space in government
 housing or to establish community foundations. In addition, government influence
 extends in varying degrees to academic, community service, and other nongovern-
 mental organizations.
 A February amendment to the Films Act that banned political videos and films
 put opposition parties at a disadvantage. The ban, ostensibly to prevent the sensa-
 tionalist or emotional effect that videos or films could have on political issues, ap-
 plied to the PAP as well as opposition parties. Nonetheless, it had the effect of deny-
 ing opposition parties, which already receive far less coverage than does the PAP
 in the government-influenced press and media, a potential outlet for their political
 message (see Section 2.a.).
 The threat of civil libel or slander suits, which government leaders have used con-
 sistently against political opponents and critics, continues to have a stiffing effect
 on the full expression of political opinion and to disadvantage the formal political
 opposition. The Penal Code also provides for criminal defamation offenses, but these
 provisions seldom have been used.
 Most recently, in the wake of the 1997 elections, a group of senior PAP leaders-
 Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong, Senior Minister Lee Kuan Yew, and nine other cur-
 rent or former Members of Parliament (M.P.s)--sued defeated WP candidate Tang
 Liang Hong for defamation. Most of the suits arose from responses Tang had made
 
 
 1061
 to the PAP leaders' claim, made during and after the election, that he was an "anti-
 Christian, anti-English-educated, Chinese-language chauvinist." Immediately after
 the election, Tang fled Singapore, citing death threats, and has yet to return. In
 May 1997, the High Court ordered Tang to pay the PAP leaders a record $5.77 mil-
 lion in damages. Revenue authorities also charged Tang with tax evasion.
 Also in 1997, the same PAP leaders who had sued Tang also filed defamation
 claims against Tang's VP colleague, party secretary general and nonconstituency
 M.P. J.B. Jeyaretnam. The plaintiffs claimed that Jeyaretnam defamed them by im-
 plying that they were guilty of a serious crime when he told a rally in January 1997
 that Tang had filed police reports against "Goh Chok Tong and his people." In the
 first of these cases to be decided, that of the Prime Minister, the High Court in 1997
 awarded the Prime Minister 10 percent of the requested damages and 60 percent
 of all legal costs. The Prime Minister appealed the judgment and, in July 1998, the
 Appeals Court raised the damages to half of the requested amount and full legal
 costs. The remaining defamation suits against Jeyaretnam still were pending at
 year's end.
 Government entities also have used libel or slander suits, and dismissal from posi-
 tions in government-related entities, to intimidate prominent opposition politicians.
 For example, Chee Soon Juan, then-Secretary General of the Singapore Democratic
 Party (SDP), was dismissed from his teaching position at the National University
 of Singapore in 1993 for alleged irregularities involving the use of research funds.
 In the context of this case, his department chairman, who was also a PAP M.P.,
 successfully sued Chee for defamation.
 The Government also uses parliamentary censure or the threat of censure to hu-
 miliate or intimidate opposition leaders. For example, in two other separate in-
 stances, Parliament censured Chee. In 1995 Chee was censured for allegediy endors-
 ing attacks on the judiciary by failing to contradict criticisms made by others on a
 panel of which he was a member. The SDP was also censured. The Government did
 not attribute any statement directly attacking the judiciary or endorsing the views
 of the other panelists to Chee or the SDP. Rather, government parliamentary lead-
 ers said that the failure of Chee and other SDP leaders to contradict the attacks
 constituted positive assent by "clever omission." In 1996 Parliament levied fines on
 Mr. Chee and three other SDP members for alleged perjury and other offenses for
 providing incorrect statistics to a special parliamentary committee examining gov-
 ernment health care subsidies. Chee and his colleagues claimed that they had sub-
 mitted some incorrect figures to the committee in error but that they had not in-
 tended to mislead anyone.
 The Government has also put significant obstacles in the way of opposition politi-
 cal figures' candidacy for the presidency, a largely ceremonial position that nonethe-
 less has some powers over civil service appointments, government and statutory
 board budgets, and internal security affairs. In the, first election of a president, in
 1993, the requirements that candidates demonstrate suitable character and experi-
 ence in managing the financial affairs of a large institution, among other qualifica-
 tions, were used to rule out two Workers' Party aspirants. The fact that many of
 the country's large institutions are government run or government linked strongly
 limits the chance that an opposition political figure could satisfy this particular cri-
 terion.
 Opposition political figures claim that such impediments are the root cause of the
 weakness of the opposition parties. The PAP claims that the lack of an effective op-
 position is due to disorganization, lack of leadership, and lack of alternative policy
 programs.
 There is no legal bar to the participation of women in political life, however,
 women are underrepresented, in government and politics. Women hold 4 of the 83
 elected parliamentary seats. There are no female ministers; the highest-ranking
 woman is a senior minister of state.
 There is no restriction in law or practice against minorities voting or participating
 in politics. The minority Malay and Indian communities are represented in Par-
 liament and at the ministerial level more or less in proportion to their numbers in
 the population. Indians make up 7 percent of the general population and hold 10
 percent of the seats in Parliament. Minority representation in Parliament is in part
 the result of laws requiring a minority representative in selected group constitu-
 encies.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no nongovernmental organizations, with the exception of the opposition
 political parties, that actively and openly monitor alleged human rights violations.
 This situation is consistent with the general lack of NGO's and the Government's
 
 
 1062
 dominance of society. While the Government does not formally prohibit them, efforts
 by any independent organizations to investigate and criticize publicly government
 human rights policies would face the same obstacles as those faced by political par-
 ties.
 In the past, the Government denied that international organizations had any com-
 petence to look into human rights matters in Singapore and, for years, barred Am-
 nesty International (AI) from visiting the country. However, in 1997 the Govern-
 ment allowed observers from both Amnesty International and the International
 Commission of Jurists (ICJ) to observe the proceedings in the defamation suits
 brought against WP Secretary General J.B. Jeyaretnam (see Section 3). The ICJ's
 and Al's criticisms of these cases were reported fully in the local press, and the Gov-
 ernment responded vigorously in the press, alleging bias and citing alleged factual
 errors.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution states that all persons are equal before the law and entitled to
 the equal protection of the law; it contains no explicit provision providing equal
 rights for women and minorities. The Government carries out these provisions in
 practice. Mindful of Singapore's history of intercommunal tension, the Government
 takes affirmative measures to ensure racial, ethnic, religious, and cultural non-
 discrimination. Social, economic, and cultural benefits and facilities are available to
 all citizens regardless of race, religion, or sex. Minorities actively participate in the
 political process and are well represented throughout the Government, except in
 some sensitive military positions.
 Women.-There is no evidence of any widespread practice of violence or abuse
 against women. The Penal Code and the Women's Charter protect women against
 domestic violence and sexual or physical harassment. A battered wife can obtain
 court orders barring the spouse from the home until the court is satisfied that he
 has ceased his aggressive behavior. The Penal Code prescribes mandatory caning
 and a minimum imprisonment of 2 years for conviction on a charge of "outraging
 modesty" that causes the victim fear of death or injury. The press gives fairly promi-
 nent coverage to instances of abuse or violence against women. During the year,
 2,730 persons applied for court orders to protect themselves against violent family
 members compared with 2,019 in 1997 and 1,306 in 1996. The great majority of
 those applying were women. Some of the increase is attributed to a 1997 amend-
 ment to the Women's Charter Act that broadened the definition of violence to in-
 clude intimidation, continual harassment, or restraint against one's will.
 Women enjoy the same legal rights as men in most areas, including civil liberties,
 employment, commercial activity, and education. The Women's Charter, enacted in
 1961, gives women, among other rights, the right to own property, conduct trade,
 and receive divorce settlements. Muslim women enjoy most of the rights and protec-
 tions of the Women's Charter. Muslim men may practice polygyny and may divorce
 unilaterally, whereas Muslim women may not.
 Women make up 41 percent of the labor force and are well represented in many
 professions but hold few leadership positions in the private sector. They still hold
 the preponderance of low-wage jobs such as clerks and secretaries. As a result, their
 average salary levels are only 76 percent those of men. In 1962 the Government in-
 stituted the principle of equal pay for equal work in the civil service and abolished
 separate salary scales in 1965.
 Some areas of discrimination remain. Children born overseas to female citizens
 are not granted citizenship automatically, while those of male citizens are. Female
 civil service employees who are married do not receive health benefits for their
 spouses and dependents as do male government employees. However, in a positive
 step, the Government announced in December that beginning January 2, 1999, fe-
 male citizens would be able to sponsor their non-Singaporean husbands for citizen-
 ship.
 Children.-The Government demonstrates its strong commitment to children's
 rights and welfare through its well-funded systems of public education and medical
 care. Access to public education and medical care is equal for all children in society.
 The Children and Young Persons Act establishes protective services for orphaned,
 abused, disabled, or refractory children, and creates a juvenile court system. The
 Ministry of Community Development works closely with the National Council for
 Social Services to oversee children's welfare cases. Voluntary organizations operate
 most of the homes for children, while the Government funds up to 50 percent of all
 child costs, which includes normal living expenses and overhead, as well as ex-
 penses for special schooling, health care, or supervisory needs.
 There is no societal pattern of abuse of children.
 
 
 1063
 People With Disabilities.-The Government implemented a comprehensive code on
 barrier-free accessibility in 1990, which established standards for facilities for the
 physically disabled in all new buildings and mandated the progressive upgrading of
 older structures. Although there is no legislation that addresses the issue of equal
 opportunities for the disabled in education or employment, the National Council of
 Social Services, in conjunction with various voluntary associations, provides an ex-
 tensive job training and placement program for the disabled. Informal provisions in
 education have permitted university matriculation for visually impaired, deaf, and
 physically disabled students. The Government allows the equivalent of a $2,400 tax
 deduction for families with a disabled person. Press coverage of the activities and
 achievements of the disabled is extensive.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Ethnic Malays constitute approximately 15
 percent of the total population. The Constitution acknowledges them as "the indige-
 nous people of Singapore" and charges the Government to support and promote
 their political, educational, religious, economic, social, cultural, and language inter-
 ests. Ethnic Malays have not reached the educational or socioeconomic levels
 achieved by the ethnic Chinese majority, the ethnic Indian minority, or the Eur-
 asian community. Malays remain underrepresented at the uppermost rungs of the
 corporate ladder, and, some have claimed, in certain sectors of government and the
 military, a reflection of their historically lower education and economic position, but
 also a result of employment discrimination. Advertisements sometimes specify eth-
 nicity and gender requirements or require fluent Mandarin speakers. The Govern-
 ment has taken steps to encourage greater educational achievement among Malay
 students as a key to economic advancement and, the socioeconomic gap has been
 narrowed in recent years.
 A Presidential Council on Minority Rights examines all pending bills to ensure
 that they are not disadvantageous to a particular group. It also reports to the Gov-
 ernment on matters affecting any racial or religious community and investigates
 complaints.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution provides all citizens with the right
 to form associations, including trade unions. However, Parliament may impose re-
 strictions based on security, public order, or morality grounds. The right of associa-
 tion is delimited by the Societies Act and by labor and education laws and regula-
 tions. Under these laws any group consisting of 10 or more persons is required to
 register with the Government. The Trade Unions Act authorizes the formation of
 unions with broad rights, albeit with some narrow restrictions, such as prohibitions
 on the unionization of uniformed employees. The national labor force comprises
 about 1.9 million employees, approximately 275,000 of whom are organized into 82
 employee unions. Seventy-two of these unions are affiliated with the National
 Trades Union Congress (NTUC), an umbrella organization that has a close relation-
 ship with the Government.
 The NTUC unabashedly acknowledges that its interests are closely linked with
 those of the ruling PAP, a relationship often described by both as "symbiotic." For
 example, the NTUC Secretary General (SG), Lim Boon Heng, a PAP M.P., is Min-
 ister Without Portfolio and was formerly Second Minister for Trade and Industry.
 His predecessor, current President Ong Teng Cheong, was simultaneously NTUC
 SG and Deputy Prime Minister. It is common for young PAP M.P.'s to be given lead-
 ership positions in the NTUC or a member union. NTUC policy prohibits union
 members who actively support opposition parties from holding office in affiliated
 unions. While the NTUC is financially independent of the PAP, with income gen-
 erated by NTUC-owned businesses, the NTUC and PAP share the same ideology
 and work closely with management in support of nonconfrontational labor relations.
 Workers, other than those in essential services, have the legal right to strike but
 rarely do so. No strikes have occurred since 1986. Most disagreements are resolved
 through informal consultations with the Ministry of Manpower. If conciliation fails,
 the disputing parties usually submit their case to the Industrial Arbitration Court,
 which has representatives from labor, management, and the Government. Besides
 these labor dispute mechanisms and the close working relationship and shared
 views among labor, management, and the Government, the maintenance of labor
 peace has been a product of high economic growth rates, regular wage increases,
 and a high degree of job mobility in a virtual full-employment economy. In addition,
 the widely held view that labor conflict would undermine Singapore's economic com-
 petitiveness and attractiveness to investors, and a cultural aversion to confrontation
 help to maintain a harmonious labor situation. The economic downturn in 1998 that
 produced unaccustomed levels of unemployment and put pressure on wages did not
 
 
 1064
 
 alter significantly the basic tripartite consensus that labor peace is essential to the
 country's economic well-being.
 The NTUC is free to associate regionally and internationally.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Collective bargaining is a nor-
 mal part of labor-management relations, particularly in the manufacturing sector.
 Agreements between management and labor are renewed every 2 to 3 years, al-
 though wage increases are negotiated annually. Collective bargaining agreements
 generally follow the guidelines issued by the National Wages Council, a group com-
 posed of labor, management, and government representatives, which makes annual
 recommendations regarding salary and bonus packages. The Industrial Relations
 Act makes it an offense to discriminate against anyone who is or proposes to become
 a member or an officer of a trade union. The offense i_ punishable by a fine equiva-
 lent to $1,414 and/or a 12-month prison sentence. Labor laws and regulations are
 enforced uniformly.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Government prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor and enforces this provision effectively (see Section 6.d.). Under
 sections of the Destitute Persons Act, any indigent person may be required to reside
 in a welfare home and engage in suitable work. The International Labor Organiza-
 tion (ILO) has criticized the coercive terms of this act, which includes pena sanc-
 tions, as not in compliance with the ILO Convention on Forced Labor. The Govern-
 ment maintains that the act is social legislation that provides for the shelter, care,
 and protection of destitute persons, and that work programs are designed to re-
 integrate individuals into society.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The Gov-
 ernment enforces the Employment Act, which prohibits the employment of children
 under the age of 12. Although schooling is not compulsory, virtually 100 percent of
 school age children attend school. Restrictions on the employment of children be-
 tween the ages of 12 and 16 are rigorous and enforced fully. Children under the age
 of 14 are prohibited from employment in any industrial undertakings. A child who
 is 12 years or above may be engaged in "light work suited to his capacity." Suit-
 ability for such light work must be certified by a medical officer. Employers must
 notify the Commissioner of Labor within 30 days of hiring a child between the ages
 of 14 and 16 and must attach medical certification of fitness for employment. The
 incidence of children taking up permanent employment is low, and abuses are al-
 most nonexistent. The Government prohibits forced and bonded labor by children
 and enforces this provision effectively (see Section 6.c.).
 Ministry of Manpower regulations prohibit night employment of children and re-
 strict industrial work for children between the ages of 14 and 16 to no more than
 7 hours a day. Children may not work on commercial vessels, with any machinery
 in motion, on live electrical apparatus lacking effective insulation, or in any under-
 ground job. The Ministry of Manpower effectively enforces these laws and regula-
 tions.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There are no laws or regulations on minimum
 wages or unemployment compensation. The labor market offers good working condi-
 tions and relatively high wages, which provide a decent standard of living for a
 worker and family. The Employment Act sets the standard legal workweek at 44
 hours and provides for 1 rest day each week.
 Because of a domestic labor shortage, approximately 460,000 foreign workers are
 employed legally, approximately 24 percent of the total work force. There are no re-
 liable estimates of the number of foreigners working illegally. Most foreign workers
 are unskilled laborers and household servants from other Asian countries. Foreign
 workers face no legal wage discrimination. However, they are concentrated in low-
 wage, low-skill jobs and often are required to work long hours. Most foreign con-
 struction workers live on-site in substandard conditions. Although the great major-
 ity of the more than 100,000 maids (mainly from the Philippines, Indonesia, and Sri
 Lanka) work under clearly outlined contracts, their low wages, their dependence on
 their employers for food and lodging, and the fact that they often live and work rel-
 atively isolated from the rest of society make them vulnerable to mistreatment and
 abuse. In 1998 Parliament passed an amendment to the Penal Code, in response
 to a reported increase in cases of maid abuse, that raised the punishment for confin-
 ing or sexually or physically abusing a maid. The authorities have fined or impris-
 oned employers who have abused domestics, often with great publicity.
 Most maids work 6 days per week from very early morning until late in the
 evening. Many contracts allow only 1 day off per month. Contracts often stipulate
 that, even when she is ostensibly not working, a maid must remain on the premises
 except for official duties or on her day off. According to the Ministry of Manpower
 statistics, wages average around $250 per month (not including free room and
 
 
 1065
 board). Maids must often put aside most or all of their wages for the first several
 months of employment to reimburse their placement agents. Work permits for low-
 wage workers stipulate the cancellation of such permits if workers apply to marry
 or marry a Singapore citizen or permanent resident. Maids only occasionally com-
 plain since they find the wages and working conditions to be generally acceptable.
 Although many lower paid workers not covered under the Employment Act are
 ineligible for the limited free legal assistance that is available to citizens, the Min-
 istry of Manpower also offers mediation services for all employees, foreign or local.
 The Government allows complainants to seek legal redress.
 The Ministry of Manpower effectively enforces laws and regulations establishing
 working conditions and comprehensive occupational safety and health laws, Enforce-
 ment procedures, coupled with the promotion of educational and training programs,
 have been implemented to reduce the frequency of job-related accidents. While a
 worker has the right under the Employment Act to remove himself from a dan-
 gerous work situation, his right to continued employment depends upon an inves-
 tigation of the circumstances by the Ministry of Manpower.
