 SINGAPORE
 Singapore, a city-state of 3.2 million people, has a repiiblican form of government
 based on the parliamentary system. The majority of the population is ethnic Chi-
 nese (78 percent), with Malaya (14 percent) and Indians (7 percent) constituting sub-
 stantial minorities. Politics is dominated by the People's Action Party (PAP), which
 has held power since Singapore gained autonomy from Great Britain in 1959. Goh
 Chok Tong completed his third year as Prime Minister in 1993. Lee Kuan Yew, who
 served as Prime Minister from independence in 1965 until 1990, remains active po-
 litically, holding the title of Senior Minister. The current Parliament was elected in
 August 1991. The PAP holds 77 of the 81 parliamentary seats.
 The Government maintains active internal security and military forces to counter
 perceived threats to the nation's security. It has frequently used security legislation
 to control a broad range of activity. The Internal Security Department (ISD) is re-
 spnsible for enforcement of the Internal Security Act (ISA), including its provisions
 for detention without trial. All young males are subject to national service (mostly
 in the military) and receive nationalistic indoctrination conforming to the credos
 held by the PAP.
 Singapore's open economic system has achieved remarkably steady growth in re-
 cent years, with GDP climbing 9.8 percent in 1993. There are no duties on over 95
 percent of its products. As a result, Singaporeans have an annual per capita income
 over $15,000. Individual ownership of housing, mostly government built, is enjoyed
 by 90 percent of Singaporean families. Wealth is distributed relatively equally in
 what is essentially a full-employment economy
 Intimidation of opposition politicians, exclusion of opposition presidential can-
 didates, and restrictions on press freedom were among human nghts concerns in
 1993. In May Dr. Chee Soon uan, a prominent opposition politician, lost his teach-
 ing position at the National University in a politically motivated action officially jus
 tiffed as dismissal for misuse of university funds. In August two opposition politi-
 cians were declared unqualified, on the basis of personal character and financial ex-
 , erience, to run as candidates in Singapore's first presidential election. In July the
 Goverment placed limits on the circulation of The Economist because of a dispute
 over the Government's insistence that it has the right of unedited reply to what it
 considers inaccurate reporting or unfair allegations.
 The Government retained wide powers to detain people and subsequently restrict
 their travel, freedom of speech, and right to associate freely, and to handicap politi-
 cal opposition. There was no evidence of a change in the Government's basic willing-
 ness to restrict human rights when it deemed that necessary in the pursuit of its
 policy goals.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no known instances of
 such killing.
 
 
 726
 b. Disappearance.-There were no known instances of politically motivated abduc-
 tion, secret arrests, or clandestine detentions by either the Government or the oppo-
 sition.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Torture is prohibited by law, and government leaders have stated that they oppose
 its use. However, there have been credible reports of police mistreatment, some of
 which have been reported in the press. Reliable reports indicate that interrogations
 at times take place in very cold rooms where prisoners may be stripped of their
 clothing and doused with water. A reported case in April involved two men arrested
 for rape. One of the accused claimed that the police obtained his confession durin
 a 17-hour nonstop interrogation in a cold room, during which police punched and
 physically abused him. The second defendant protested that police stripped him
 naked and interrogated him in a cold room. The judge in this case rejected the con-
 fession of the first defendant. Both men, however, were convicted and sentenced to
 prison. In a separate case of alleged police mistreatment in March, murder charges
 were withdrawn against a person who claimed that he was forced to make a confes-
 sion as a result of police interrogation methods. The police maintained that all prop-
 er procedures were followed in taking the confession and that the defendant raised
 the issue of a forced confession only after many months had elapsed.
 The Government reserves the right to use indefinite confinement to pressure de-
 tainees to "rehabilitate" themselves as well as to make admissions of wrongdoing.
 In the past, the Government has acknowledged that in the case of detentions with-
 out trial under the Criminal Act, the indefiniteness of detentions served to pressure
 the detainees. Persons alleging mistreatment under detention may bring criminal
 charges against those in the Government who are alleged to have committed such
 acts, but may be discouraged from making accusations for fear of government retal-
 iation in the form of redetention under the ISA.
 The Penal Code mandates caning in addition to imprisonment as punishment for
 offenses involving the use of violence or threat of violence against a person, such
 as rape, robbery, and extortion. Singapore law also mandates caning in other areas,
 such as for certain convictions under the Vandalism Act and for specific immigration
 offenses. Caning is discretionary for convictions on other charges involving the use
 of criminal force, such as kidnaping and aggravated outrage of modesty, or volun-
 tarily causing grievous hurt. The law prescribes a maximum or minimum number
 of cane strokes in many of these cases. Women are exempted from caning, as are
 men over 50 and those determined unfit by a medical officer.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Arrest without warrant is legally per-
 mitted under the ISA the Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act, the Misuse of
 Drugs Act, and the Undesirable Publications Act. Those arrested must be charged
 before a magistrate within 48 hours. At that time, those detained under criminal
 charges may obtain legal counsel. There is a functioning system of bail for those
 charged. There were no reported abuses of the bail system in 1993.
 The ISA and the Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act authorize detention
 without trial. The latter act is used almost exclusively in cases involving narcotics
 and secret criminal societies and is not used for political purposes. According to the
 Government, 759 persons were in detention under the Criminal Law (Temporary
 Provisions) Act as of September, of which 320 were for secret society activities and
 439 for drug trafficking. The Director of the Central Narcotics Bureau (CNB) can
 also commit suspected drug users for up to 6 months, with subsequent extensions,
 to a drug rehabilitation center in cases of positive urinalysis tests.
 Those persons detained without trial under the ISA or the Criminal Law (Tem-
 porary Provisions) Act are entitled to counsel but have no legal recourse through
 the courts to challenge the substantive basis for their detention. The ISA also gives
 broad discretion to the Minister of Home Affairs to order detention without charges
 if the President determines that a person poses a threat to national security. The
 President may authorize detention for up to 2 years; the detention order may be re-
 newed for a 2-year period, with no limitation on the number of times the detention
 order is renewed. A detainee's case is reviewed periodically by an advisory board,
 to which the detainee may make representations. The board can make nonbinding
 recommendations that a detainee be released prior to expiration of a detention
 order. If the Minister wishes to act contrary to a recommendation for release by the
 board, he must seek agreement of the President.
 The ISA empowers the police to detain a person for up to 48 hours; any police
 officer at or above the rank of superintendent may authorize that the detainee be
 held for up to 28 days longer. ISA detainees normally have been allowed access to
 lawyers and visits by relatives once initial interrogation has been completed.
 Noeone has been under ISA detention since 1990. The Government maintains
 some restrictions on the rights of two former ISA detainees to travel abroad, make
 
 
 727
 public statements, and associate freely. This was one less than in 1992; restrictions
 on Teo Soh Lung were allowed to lapse on their expiration in January.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Singapore judiciary system is based on the
 British model, but there are significant differences (see below). There are two levels
 of courts-the Supreme Court, which includes the high court and the court of ap-
 peal; and the subordinate courts. In normal cases the Criminal Procedures Code
 provides that a charge against a defendant must be read and explained to him as
 soon as it is framed by the magistrate. The accused has the right to be represented
 by an attorney. Trial is by judge rather than jury. Persons detained under the ISA
 or the Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act are not entitled to a public trial,
 which is accorded in all other cases. Judicial review of the ISA and subversion laws
 is severely restricted, in effect giving the Government a free hand in such cases.
 Amendments to establish a single court of appeal, combining the former court of
 appeal (for civil cases) and court of criminal appeal, took effect in July. The creation
 o a single court of appeal marked another step toward the Government's objective
 of eliminating referrals to the Privy Council in London. The Privy Council still re-
 mains the last resort for appeals under certain circumstances such as convictions
 for life imprisonment or the death penalty.
 Judges of the Supreme Court are appointed by the President and may remain in
 office until the mandatory retirement age of 65, after which they may continue to
 serve at the Government's discretion for brief, renewable terms at full salary.
 Judges on the court of appeal receive permanent appointments.
 Subordinate court judges are appointed by the President. These appointments are
 for renewable 2-year terms. Subordinate court judges and magistrates, as well as
 public prosecutors, are civil servants whose specific assignments are determined by
 the Legal Service Commission which can decide on job transfers to any of several
 legal service departments. Judicial officials, especially in the Supreme Court, are
 well entrenched in the Singapore establishment and have close ties to the Govern-
 ment and its leaders.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Government uses its wide discretionary powers when it determines that national se-
 curity is threatened. In most cases, search warrants, normally issued by the mag-
 istrate court, are required for intrusion into the home. Law enforcement officers
 may, however, search a person, home, or property without a warrant if they decide
 searches are necessary to preserve evidence.
 Warrantless searches can also be conducted under the Misuse of Drugs Act and
 the Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act in dealing with drug- and secret soci-
 ety-related offenses. Judicial review of such searches can be undertaken by the
 courts at the request of the defendant but it is not automatic. Divisions of the Gov-
 ernment's law enforcement agencies, including the ISD and the Corrupt Practices
 Investigation Board (CPIB), have wide networks for gathering information.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution permits official restrictions on
 the freedom of expression and freedoms of speech and press are circumscribed. The
 Internal Security Act permits the Government to prohibit or to place conditions on
 publications that incite to violence, that counsel disobedience to the law, that might
 arouse tensions among the various classes (races, religions, and language groups)
 or that might threaten national interests, national security or public order. The
 Government has in some cases applied a broad definition of these laws to restrict
 political opposition and criticism.
 The Singapore Broadcasting Corporation (SBC) is owned by the Government and
 oprates under a statutory board of the Ministry of Information and the Arts. The
 SWC develops censorship standards with the help of advisory panels with a member-
 ship representing a cross section of society. The SBC has a near monopoly on broad-
 casting, operating all 3 free television channels, all 3 pay channels and 9 of 12 radio
 stations. Two of the other three radio stations are operated by the National Trade
 Union Congress (NTUC), which is closely affiliated with the Government; the third
 is the BBC World Service, available 24 hours a day on the FM band. In addition
 to the BBC World Service, Malaysian television and radio broadcasts and Indo-
 nesian radio broadcasts are received uncensored. Satellite dishes are banned with
 few exceptions.
 All general circulation newspapers, with the exception of a small circulation
 a   anuage newspaper, are owned by Singspore Press Holdings (SPH), a private
 corporation which has close ties to the nationsl leadership. SPH is required by law
 to issue ordinary and "management" shares; holders of management shares have
 the power to control all SPH personnel decisions. The Government must approve,
 and can remov, holders of management shares. Hence, while Singapore news-
 
 
 728
 eapers, especially the English-language Straits Times, print a large and diverse se-
 ction of articles from their domestic and a variety of foreign resources, editorials
 and coverage of domestic events closely parallel government policies and the opin-
 ions of government leaders. Government leaders have criticized the "Western model"
 of journalism in which the media have unrestricted freedom to report the news as
 they see it. Sin a pre officials argue that the role of the domestic media is to sup-
 port the goals of the elected leadership and not to advance its own political agenda.
 A case ly the Government against the editor of the Business Times, the leading
 business daily, and 4 other persons, remained before the courts at year's end. The
 editor and three others-a government official and two employees of a foreign secu-
 rities firm-were charged in December 1992 for violation of the Official Secrets Act
 in regard to a report in the Business Times of unreleased government growth fig-
 ures. A fifth person-another journalist-was charged in the case in July. In Decem-
 ber the presiding judge ruled that there was no proof that the accused government
 official passed classified information and amended the charge to failing to protect
 the secrecy of official information.
 A wide range of international magazines and newspapers may be purchased un-
 censored in Singapore, although newspapers printed in Malaysia may not be im-
 ported. A 1990 law requires foreign publications that report on politics and current
 events in southeast Asia to register, post a bond the equivalent of $118,000, and
 name a person in Singapore to accept legal service. These requirements strengthen
 government control over foreign media. The Government may ban the circulation of
 domestic and foreipublications under provisions of the ISA and the Undesirable
 Publications Act. Under amendments to the Newspaper and Printing Presses Act
 it may limit the circulation of foreign publications which, by the Government's broad
 determination, interfere in Singapore's domestic politics.
 In its relations with foreign media in 1993 the Government relaxed restrictions
 in some areas and introduced new ones in others. In August the Government lim-
 ited ("gazetted") the circulation of The Economist to 7,500 copies per issue after a
 dispute over the Government's "right of reply," i.e., the Government s insistence that
 it has the right of unedited reply to what it considers to be inaccurate reporting or
 unfair allegations. While this limit equaled The Economist's circulation at that time,
 it prevents any increase. The Government also required The Economist to register
 in Singapore and meet other requirements of the 1990 Press Law Amendments from
 which it previously had been exempted.
 The Economist was the first non-U.S.-owned publication to be gazetted. The Asian
 Wall Street Journal (AWSJ), Asiaweek, and the Far Eastern Economic Review, all
 gazetted in 1987 remained gazetted. However the limits were raised to 5,000 per
 issue on the AWSJ and 12,600 per issue for Asiaweek, bringing them back to ap-
 roximately their full circulations at the times they were gazetted. From 1988 to
 991, the AWSJ was not permitted to have a correspondent in Singapore. Beginning
 in 1991 an AWSJ correspondent was permitted on a part-time basis. Tnis restriction
 was further eased in July 1993 with a government decision to accept a full-time
 AWSJ correspondent.
 Singapore censors movies, video materials, and music. Some publications are
 barred from importation. Censorship of materials and the decision to deny the im-
 portation of specific publications is based on the determination that such materials
 would undermine the stability of the State, are pro-Communist, contravene moral
 norms, are pornographic, show excessive and/or gratuitous sex and violence, glamor-
 ize or promote drug use, or incite racial, religious, or language animosities. There
 is strong public support for continued censorship of sex and violence in films.
 Faculty members at Singapore public institutions of higher education are govern-
 ment employees. A number of university lecturers are concurrently PAP Members
 of Parliament (M.P.'s). Academics sometimes criticize government policies, but avoid
 public criticism of individual government leaders and sensitive social and economic
 policies because of possible sanctions, such as in the case of Dr. Chee Soon Juan.
 Publications by local academics and members of think tanks rarely deviate substan-
 tially from government views.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Assemblies of more than five
 persons in public, including political meetings and rallies, must have police permis-
 sion. Those who wish to speak at a public function must obtain permission from the
 Public Entertainment Licensing Unit, a division of the police Criminal Investigation
 Department. Opposition politicians have experienced delays as long as 26 days, ac-
 cording to police records, before receiving notification of action on their applications.
 The Government closely monitors political gatherings regardless of the number
 present. Associations, societies, clubs, churches, and other organizations with more
 than 10 members must be registered with the Government under the Societies Act.
 The Government denies registration to societies it believes likely to be used for un-
 
 
 729
 lawful purposes or for purposes prejudicial to public peace, welfare, or public order.
 The Government has absolute discretion in applying this broad and vague language
 to register or dissolve societies. It prohibits organized political activities, except by
 organizations registered as political parties. This prohibition extends to the opposi-
 tion, but it is not clear that it applies to the PAP, which enjoys the support of resi-
 dential committees and neighborhood groups ostensibly organized for nonpolitical
 purposes but whose leadership contains many grassroots PAP members (see also
 Section 3).
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Freedom of religion is provided for in the Constitution
 and respected in practice with a few exceptions. There is no state religion and most
 missionaries are permitted to work and to publish religious texts. However, all reli-
 gious groups are subject to government scrutiny and must be legally registered. The
 Government restricts some religious sects by application of the Societies Act and has
 banned others, such as the Jehovah's Witnesses and the Unification Church. At
 year's end, five members of Jehovah's Witnesses were reportedly free on bail pend-
 ing trial after having been charged under the Undesirable Publications Act. The
 1990 Maintenance of Religious Harony Act made illegal what the Government
 deemed to be the inappropriate involvement of religious groups and officials in polit-
 ical affairs. The Act also denies the judiciary the competence to review possible de-
 nial of rights which could arise from the application of the act, and specifically de-
 nies judicial review of its enforcement.
 The Goveinment provides financial assistance to build and maintain mosques.
 Singapore's universal conscription into military service does not allow conscien-
 tious objectors' status based on religious beliefs. The law provides that those who
 refuse to be inducted into the military may receive prison sentences of upto 3 years.
 Those who refuse on religious grounds to perform annual reservist duty may be
 jailed for 40 days (or for 4 months if court-martialed) every year for such refusal.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation-A Singapore citizens and permanent residents over the age of 12 are
 required to register with the Government and to carry identification cards. After the
 completion of national service, enlisted men remain liable for reserve training until
 the age of 40, and officers to age 50. Reservists whoplan to travel overseas or less
 than 6 months must advise the Ministry of Defense. For trips longer than 6 months,
 reservists must obtain an exit permit. Males approaching national service age must
 obtain an exit permit in order to study outside Singapore. The Government may
 deny apassport, and has done so, in the case of former ISA detainees.
 The ISA allows the Minister for Law and Home Affairs to suspend or revoke a
 detention order or to impose restrictions on former detainees' activities, places of
 residence, and travel abroad. The right of voluntary repatriation is extended to hold-
 ers of Singaporean passports. In 1985 Parliament provided for the loss of citizenship
 by Singaporeans who reside outside Singapore for more than 10 years consecutively.
 Action under this law is discretionary and has been taken in at least one case in-
 volving a well-known government opponent, Tan Wah Piaow.
 Former Singaporean members of the Communist Party of Malaya (CPM) residing
 outside Singapore must appeal to the Government to be allowed to return. They
 must renounce Communism, sever all organizational ties with the CPM, and pledge
 not to indulge in activities prejudicial to Sin spore's internal security. In addition
 they must be prepared to be interviewed by the ISD and to abide by any restrictive
 conditions imposed on them.
 Singapore neither accepts the Comprehensive Plan of Action for Indochinese seek-
 ing refugee status nor offers first asylum to refugees. Prior to 1991, the Government
 permitted Vietnamese asylum seekers to disembark if a resettlement country prom-
 ised to remove them within 90 days and if the rescuing vessel was in Singapore on
 a scheduled port of call. In June 1991, the Government halted disembarkation on
 the grounds that resettlement countries had not honored their guarantees of re-
 moval. As of September 1, there were 95 asylum seekers at the Hawkins Road
 camp, all of whom had been denied refugee status through screening procedures
 conducted by the local office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
 (UNHCR). Persons of other nationalities in Singapore who make claims for asylum
 are permitted to have their status determined by the UNHCR for possible resettle-
 ment elsewhere.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Constitutionally, Singaporeans have the right to change their government peace-
 fully through democratic means and, in fact, the voting and vote-counting systems
 in elections are fair, accurate, and free from tampering. This was the case in the
 August presidential election in which the former PAP Deputy Prime Minister re-
 
 
 730
 ceived 59 percent of the vote. However, the Government has extensive powers which
 it uses to place formidable obstacles in the path of political opponents. It also resorts
 to intimidation, attempting to intimidate the opposition through libel suits and po-
 tential loss of employment or professional licenses.
 Opposition parties have been unable seriously to challenge the PAP since the late
 1960 s. Consequently, the PAPs domination of politics in Singapore continues as it
 had for three decades under the authoritarian leadership of Lee Kuan Yew. The
 PAP's political success in large part results from government policies which helped
 Singapore achieve rapid economic growth, thereby enabling the Government to pro-
 vide a wide array of public services. The PAP enjoys a broad base of popular sup-
 port, sustained in part through neighborhood, youth, and labor associations.
 Political parties, while legally free to organize, are subject to strict regulations on
 party constitutions, fundraising, and accountability. While the PAP has been able
 to enjoy the support of ostensibly nonpolitical organizations, the Government has
 used its broad discretionary powers to hinder the creation of support organizations
 for the opposition parties. The PAP's grip on power has also been enhanced by pa-
 tronage; political control of the press, courts, and, to some extent, religion; strong
 party discipline and performance; and its access to the instruments of power. For
 example, a government program to refurbish public housing gives priority to PAP
 constituencies. Government regulations also hinder attempts by opposition parties
 to rent office space in government housing estates or to establish community foun-
 dations which run private kindergartens. The PAP attributes the lack of an effective
 opposition to disorganization, lack of leadership, and lack of alternative policy pro-
 grams.
 In August Singapore held its first presidential election under 1991 legislation that
 instituted an elected presidency with expanded powers over civil service appoint-
 ments government and statutory board budgets, and internal security affairs. Presi-
 dential aseirants were required to obtain prior certification from the Presidential
 Elections ommittee (PEC), a body composed of the Chairman of the Public Service
 Commission, the Chairman of the Public Accountants Board, and a member of the
 Presidential Council for Minority Rights. The PEC was responsible for screening ap-
 plicants on the basis of integrity, character, reputation, ability, and experience in
 managing the financial affairs of a large institution. Eligibility was considered auto-
 matic if the candidate had 3 years' experience as a high-ranking public servant or
 chief executive officer of a large corporation. The committee rejectedthe applications
 of two opposition figures-J.B. Jeyaretnam. Secretary General of the Workers' Party
 and a former M.P., and another Workers' Party member-for not satisfying the eli-
 gibility criteria regarding character and financial expertise.
 In 1993 two prominent opposition figures were the targets of investigations con-
 ducted by government entities that served to intimidate the political opposition. Dr.
 Chee Soon Juan, a lecturer at the National University of Singapore and deputy sec-
 retary-general of the Singapore Democratic Party, was dismissed from his teaching
 position in May after a university audit of his financial records uncovered an alleged
 irregularity involving his use of research funds to express mail his wife's doctoral
 thesis to her university advisor in the United States. Chee defended his action by
 arguing that his wife's thesis was relevant to his own research and that he had re-
 ceived prior approval for the mailing from his department chairman, a PAP M.P.
 Chee, one of the first university lecturers to join an opposition party, rose to promi-
 nence during an unsuccessful bid against Prime Minister Goh in the December 1992
 by-election. Chee now faces defamation suits from university personnel that stem
 from remarks he made defending his actions. In the second case, the Singapore
 Medical Council, a statutory board under the Ministry of Health, found Dr. Tan Bin
 Seng, chairman of the Workers' Party, guilty on seven counts of "professional mis-
 conduct" for overprescribing sleep medication. The Council struck Tan from the
 medical register, thereby stopping him from practicing medicine. Tan chose not to
 appeal the case. He can apply for reinstatement on the register after 1 year.
 Government leaders continued to use the threat of civil libel or slander suits
 against opposition leaders. Singapore's Legal Code also provides for criminal defa-
 mation offenses, but these provisions are seldom used. In January Singapore Demo-
 cratic Party politician Ashleigh Seow was threatened with a slander suit by four
 PAP M.P.'s for making allegedly defamatory remarks during the December 1992 by-
 election campaign. In his rally speech, Seow called joining the PAP "a very smart
 career move, and gave examples of Members who had done well since their election
 to Parliament. Seow settled out-of-court. He agreed to pay the equivalent of $15,000
 to charity, pay all legal costs, and place a public retraction and apology in the
 Straits Times. In April former President Devan Nair withdrew certain statements
 made in 1988 comparing the behavior of opposition figure Francis Seow with that
 of Lee Kuan Yew and himself when they were members of the political opposition
 
 
 731
 in the 1960's. Those remarks had prompted a libel suit against Nair filed by Lee
 Kuan Yew in 1988. Nair's retraction opened the way to a settlement in which Lee
 waived damages and costs.
 There are no female cabinet members and only 2 of the 81 parliamentary seats
 are occupied by women. Women are also underrepresented in the highest levels of
 the civil service.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no nongovernmental organizations, with the exception of the opposition
 political parties, that actively and openly monitor alleged human rights violations.
 Wile the Government does not formally prohibit them, efforts by any independent
 organizations to investigate and criticize publicly government human rights policies
 would face the same obstacles as those faced by political parties. The Government
 denies that international organizations have any competence whatsoever to look into
 human rights matters in Singapore. Visa regulations do not recognize monitoring
 human rights as a "business purpose" for visiting Singapore, but neither is such ac-
 tivity regarded as a "social visit." Amnesty International is not allowed to operate
 in Singapore.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Because of Singapore's history of intercommunal tension, the Government takes
 affirmative measures to ensure racial, ethnic, religious, and cultural nondiscrimina-
 tion. Social, economic, and cultural facilities are available to all citizens regardless
 of race, religion, or sex. Minorities are constitutionally afforded equal rights, actively
 participate in the political process, and are well represented throughout the govern-
 ment.
 Women.-Women enjoy the same legal rights as men in most areas, including civil
 liberties, employment, commercial activity, and education. The Women's Charter,
 enacted in 1961, gave women, inter alia, the right to own property, conduct trade,
 and receive divorce settlements. Muslim women enjoy most of the same rights and
 protections of the Women's Charter, except that Muslim men are allowed to practice
 bigamy and may divorce unilaterally whereas Muslim women may not. In 1962 the
 Government instituted the principle of equal pay for equal work in the civil service
 and announced the abolition of separate salary scales by 1965. Some areas of dis-
 crimination remain. For example, children born overseas to Singaporean women are
 not granted automatic citizenship as are children born to Singaporean men. Female
 civil service employees who are married do not receive health benefits for their
 spouses and dependents as do male government employees. Singapore's Constitution
 contains no explicit guarantee of equal rights for women.
 There is no evidence of any widespread practice of violence or abuse against
 women. Laws such as the Penal Code and the Women's Charter protect women
 against domestic violence and sexual or physical harassment. A battered wife can
 obtain court orders barring the spouse from the home until the court is satisfied
 that he will stop his aggressive behavior. The Penal Code prescribes mandatory
 caning and a minimum imprisonment of 2 years for conviction on a charge of
 outraging modesty that causes the victim fear of death or injury.
 Women make up over 50 percent of the labor force and are well-represented in
 many professional fields, but still hold the preponderance of low-wage jobs as clerks
 and secretaries. As a result, their average salary levels are only 70 percent those
 of men. Women hold few leadership positions in the private sector.
 A women's organization founded in 1985, the Association of Women for Action and
 Research (AWARE), enjoys increasing prominence among the educated elite anA
 now has 500 members. AWARE issues research publications and sponsors a 24-hour
 help line for women suffering from domestic abuse or discrimination. In addition to
 AWARE, there are over 30 professional and service organizations for women.
 Children.-In 1993 the Government revised and reenacted the Children and
 Young Persons Act. This Act establishes protective services for those children who
 are orphaned, abused, disabled or refractory; creates a juvenile court system; and
 provides for the licensing and operation of children's homes. The Ministry of Com-
 munity Development works closely with the National Council for Social Services to
 oversee children's welfare cases. The operation of most homes for children is carried
 out by voluntary organizations. The Government funds up to 50 percent of all child
 costs, which includes normal living expenses and overhead, as well as expenses for
 special schooling or supervisory needs. A 1993 U.N. Children's Fund report entitled
 "Progress of Nations," concerning child welfare criteria, rated Singapore very favor-
 
 
 732
 ably on infant mortality rates, access to primary education, and availability of vac-
 cinations.
 National/Racial /Ethnic Minorities.-The Constitution acknowledges the "special
 position" of Malays as the indigenous people of Singapore, and charges the Govern-
 ment to support and promote their "political, educational, religious, economic, social,
 and cultural interests." The Government has concentrated on creating equality of
 opportunity, especially in education, and does not promote the concept of equality
 in result, instead leaving it up to the ethnic communities, individual initiative, and
 the marketplace to determine economic success. Malays currently hold 12 percent
 of the seats in Parliament, in part the result of government legislation requiring a
 minority representative in selected constituencies. A presidential council on minor-
 ity rights examines all current and pending bills to ensure that they are not disad-
 vanta gous to a particular ethnic group. It also reports to the Government on mat-
 ters affecting any racial or religious community and investigates complaints.
 Unlike the Indian or Eurasian communities, which have achieved economic and
 educational success rates on a par with the majority Chinese, Malay Singaporeans
 still have a lower standard of living, although the gap has diminished in recent
 years. Malays remain underrepresented at the uppermost rungs of the corporate
 ladder, a refection of their historically lower educational and economic position, but
 also a result of de facto employment discrimination. Job advertisements sometimes
 specify the ethnicity and gender required of applicants or require fluent Mandarin
 speakers.
 People with Disabilities.-The Government implemented a comprehensive code on
 barrier-free accessibility in 1990 which established standards for facilities for the
 physically disabled in all new buildings and mandated the progressive upgrading of
 older structures. Although there is no legislation that addresses the issue of equal
 opportunities for the disabled in education or employment, the National Council of
 Social Services, in conjunction with various voluntary associations, provides an ex-
 tensive job training and placement program for the disabled. Informal provisions in
 education have permitted university matriculation for visually handicapped, deaf,
 and physically disabled students. The Government allows the equivalent o a $2,000
 tax deduction for families with a disabled person.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution gives all citizens the right to form
 associations, including trade unions. Parliament may however, impose restrictions
 based on security, public order, or morality grounds. Wlhe right of association is de-
 limited by the Societies Act and by labor and education laws and regulations. The
 Trades Union Act authorizes the formation of unions with broad rights, albeit with
 some narrow restrictions, such as prohibitions on the unionization of uniformed em-
 ployees and of the holding of union office by persons with criminal records. The na-
 tional labor force comprises about 1.65 million employees, of whom more than
 233,000 are organized into 83 employee unions. Seventy-four of these unions, rep-
 resenting almost 99 percent of all unionized workers, are affiliated with the Na-
 tional Trades Union Congress (NTUC), an umbrella organization which has a close
 relationship with the Government.
 The NTUC unabashedly acknowledges that its interests are closely linked with
 those of the ruling PAP, a relationship often described by both as "symbiotic." For
 example, President Ong Teng Cheong served simultaneously as NTUC Secretary
 General and second deputy Prime Minister before assuming his current position in
 September. His successor at the NTUC, Lim Boon Heng, was formerly second Min-
 ister for Trade and Industry and continues as Minister without Portfolio. In addi-
 tion, several other high-ranking NTUC officials are PAP M.P.'s. NTUC policy pro-
 hibits union members who actively support opposition parties from holding office in
 affiliated unions. While the NTUC is financially independent of the PAP, with in-
 come generated by NTUC-owned businesses, the NTUC and PAP share the same
 ideology.
 Workers, other than those in essential services, have the legal right to strike but
 rarely do so; the most recent strike took place in 1986. Most disagreements are re-
 solved through informal consultations with the Ministry of Labor. If conciliation
 fails, the disputing parties usually submit their case to the Industrial Arbitration
 Court, which has representatives from labor, management, and the Government.
 These labor dispute mechanisms, along with the PAP/NTUC nexus, have played im-
 portant roles in creating amicable labor relations. The Government also attributes
 the rarity of strikes to a cultural aversion to confrontation, high economic growth
 rates, and labor shortages in recent years that have sustained regular wage in-
 creases, and to the popular conviction that strikes would undermine Singapore's
 attractiveness to investors.
 
 
 733
 The NTUC is free to associate regionally and internationally.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Collective bargaining is a nor-
 mal part of management-labor relations, particularly in the manufacturing sector.
 Agreements between management and labor are renewed every 2 to 3 years, al-
 though wage increases are negotiated annually. Collective bargaining agreements
 generally follow the guidelines issued by the National Wages Council (NWC), a
 group composed of labor, management, and government representatives, that makes
 annual recommendations regarding salary and bonus packages. The Industrial Rela-
 tions Act makes it an offense to discriminate against anyone who is or proposes to
 become a member or an officer of a trade union. The offense is punishable by a fine
 equivalent to $1,250 and/or a 12-month prison sentence. Labor laws and regulations
 are enforced uniformly. There are no export-processing zones, nor are special conces-
 sions given to firms producing for export.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Under sections of Singapore's Des-
 titute Persons Act, any indigent person may be required to reside in a welfare home
 and engage in suitable work. The International Labor Organization (ILO) has criti-
 cized the coercive terms of this act, which includes penal sanctions, on the grounds
 that it is not in compliance with the ILO Convention on Forced Labor, ratified by
 Singapore in 1965. The Government maintains that the act is social legislation pro-
 viding for the shelter, care, and protection of destitute persons; that no one is co-
 erced to work; and that work programs are designed towards reintegrating individ-
 uals back into society.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Government enforces the Em-
 ployment Act, which prohibits the employment of children under age 12. A child
 over age 12 and under age 14 must receive written permission from the Commis-
 sioner for Labor for "light work suited to his capacity." Through September, no ap-
 plications were made in 1993, and all seven such applications made in 1992 were
 disapproved by the Commissioner. Nonetheless, the Government has chosen not to
 harmonize its legislation with the requirements of the Convention on Minimum Age
 (Industry), as recommended by the ILO. Employers must notify the Ministry of
 Labor within 30 days of hiring a child between the ages of 14 and 16 and must for-
 ward medical certification to the Commissioner. The incidence of children taking up
 permanent employment is also low and abuses are almost nonexistent.
 Ministry of Labor regulations prohibit night employment of children and restrict
 industrial work to no more than 7 hours a day. Children cannot work on commercial
 vessels, with any machinery in motion, on live electrical apparatus lacking effective
 insulation, or in any underground job. These laws and regulations are effectively en-
 forced by the Ministry of Labor.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Singapore has no minimum wage or unemploy-
 ment compensation. The labor market offers relatively high wages and good working
 conditions. The Employment Act sets the standard legal workweek at 44 hours, and
 provides for 1 rest day each week. Laws and regulations establishing working condi-
 tions are effectively enforced by the Ministry of Labor, as are comprehensive occupa-
 tional safety and health laws. Enforcement procedures, coupled with the promotion
 of educational and training programs, have reduced the frequency of job-related ac-
 cidents by a third over the past decade. There has also been a reduction in the aver-
 age severity of occupational accidents. While a worker has the right under the Em-
 ployment Act to remove himself from a dangerous work situation, his right to con-
 tinued employment depends upon an investigation of the circumstances by the Min-
 istry of Labor.
 Because of the demestic labor shortage, over 250,000 foreign workers are em-
 ployed legally in Singapore, 16 percent of the total work force. Most are unskilled
 laborers and household servants from other Asian countries. Foreign workers face
 no legal wage discrimination; however, they are concentrated in low-wage, low-skill
 jobs. Some 65,000 foreign maids, mainly from the Philippines, Indonesia, and Sri
 Lanka, are employed in Singapore, and there have been complaints of abuse or poor
 working conditions. The Government does not bar complainants from seeking legal
 redress and takes a firm stand against employers who abuse their domestic serv-
 ants. Foreign workers may find it difficult to obtain legal assistance, however, be-
 cause the Government closed the Geylang Catholic Center in 1987 and no other or-
 ganization exists to provide legal aid to foreign workers with less than 3 years' resi-
 dence in Singapore. Employers who have abused domestics have been fined or im-
 prisoned, often with great publicity.
 
 
 734
