Singapore
Singapore remains an authoritarian state with strict curbs on freedom of expression,
assembly, and association. All political activities are tightly controlled.
Singapore also retains and continues to apply criminal and internal security laws
that allow for prolonged detention of suspects without trial. Each year, several
thousands of people, including illegal immigrants and other people convicted of
crimes, are beatencanedas part of their punishment. Despite recent reforms,
authorities also fail to guarantee basic rights for the roughly 160,000 migrant
domestic workers in the country.
Freedom of Expression and Assembly
The Peoples Action Party (PAP) has been Singapores governing party since 1959
and holds 82 of 84 seats in the legislature. Its political dominance is built on
laws strictly limiting opportunities for opposition political activity and a draconian
defamation law wielded as a political weapon. Opposition figures too often face a
choice between speaking out and bankruptcyand sometimes prison.
Opposition rallies and protests are largely prohibited by laws requiring that public
assemblies of five or more persons have police permission, and by the Public
Entertainment and Meetings Act, which requires a permit for almost all forms of
public address and entertainment.
Both restrictions have been used repeatedly to prevent the opposition Singapore
Democratic Party (SDP), headed by Dr. Chee Soon Juan, and other opposition parties
from informing citizens of their political message and criticizing government
policies. On October 8, 2007, for example, four members of the SDP protesting
Singapores links with Burma were arrested for illegal assembly under the
Miscellaneous Offences (Public Order and Nuisance Act). In August 2007 the
opposition Workers Party was refused permission to celebrate its 50th anniversary
in November with a bicycle party in a public park. Political parties are
banned from sponsoring outdoor events to avoid any possibility of a public disturbance.
The government ruthlessly pursues politically motivated defamation cases to
deprive political opponents of basic rights to liberty and freedom of movement.
On September 7, 2007, Chee was sentenced to a three-week jail term for refusing
to pay a fine of US$2,621, levied for his attempt to leave the country without permission
in April 2006. He had needed clearance to leave as he had been declared
bankrupt in February 2006 after he defaulted on $316,455 due in defamation
damages to Lee Kuan Yew and ex-prime minister Goh Chok Tong. Other charges
against Chee have included speaking in public without a permit. Between
November and December 2006, he served a five-week sentence in lieu of a
$3,268 fine.
On October 17, 2007 the Financial Times apologized publicly to Lee Kuan Yew; his
son, Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong; and the latters wife, Ho Ching, for suggesting
in an article entitled, Sovereign funds try to put on an acceptable face, that
nepotistic motives were involved in the appointments of Lee Hsien Loong and
Ho Ching. The paper admitted that the allegations were false and without foundation,
and that damages and costs would be paid by way of compensation. It
is unclear whether the Financial Times settled because they believed the article
was in error or because they did not want to be banned from distribution in
Singapore, as has happened with the Far Eastern Economic Review (FEER).
The Singapore government restricted FEERs circulation in 1987 under a 1986 law
that gave the government the right to limit sales if it deemed a publication had
interfered in local politics. The full ban came in September 2006 along with a
defamation suit instituted by Lee and his son over an article critiquing the way
the government responded to a scandal at a charitable organization. The article
went on to suggest that Singapores government was less than squeaky clean
and used defamation charges to hide real misdeeds.
Free expression is further compromised by government monitoring of the internet
and censorship of all media outlets. Movies, music, and video games are also
censored. Political websites must register with the Media Development Authority.
Singapores Films Act prohibits the showing of films on issues of public controversy
or that in any other way are directed towards a political end in Singapore. In
April 2007, the government banned the film Zaharis 17 years, the story of an
imprisoned journalist.
Due Process
Singapores Internal Security Act (ISA), Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions Act)
(CLA), Misuse of Drugs Act, and Undesirable Publications Act permit detention
and arrest of suspects without a warrant or judicial review. Both the ISA and the
CLA also authorize preventive detention. The drug act permits the Central
Narcotics Bureau chief to send suspected drug users for rehabilitation without
recourse to trial. The ISA, used in the past to detain political opponents and critics,
is now used against suspected Islamist militants, many of whom have been
detained for long periods without trial. In September 2006 the government said
that 34 suspected Muslim militants were being held on national security grounds.
Caning
Singapores penal code mandates caning, combined with imprisonment, for some
30 offenses, both violent and nonviolent, and permits caning for a variety of others.
In 2006, 5,984 people reportedly were sentenced to caning and in some 95
percent of the cases the sentence was carried out.
Death Penalty
Although death penalty statistics are secret, available information indicates that
Singapores per capita execution rate is one of the worlds highest. Not only are
death sentences mandatory for drug traffickers, but Singaporean law shifts the
burden of proof to suspects to prove that they did not knowingly carry drugs or
had no intention to traffic in drugs. On January 26, 2007, a Nigerian and a South
African were hanged for smuggling, even though the judge concluded that in the
case of the Nigerian there was no direct evidence that he knew the capsules
contained diamorphine. Singapores Home Affairs Minister, referring to the laws
deterrent effects, commented that there is no room to go soft.
Migrant Domestic Workers
Approximately 160,000 migrant domestic workersprimarily from Indonesia, the
Philippines, and Sri Lankaare employed in Singapore. Many domestic workers report excessive work hours without regular rest breaks, restrictions on freedom
of movement, unpaid wages, and in some cases, physical abuse.
The government has prosecuted some employers who physically abuse domestic
workers and imposed penalties on labor recruitment agencies for unethical practices.
Singapores labor laws, however, still exclude domestic workers from key
protections guaranteed to other workers, such as a weekly day off, limits on working
hours, and caps on salary deductions. The government also has failed to regulate
exploitative recruitment charges. Many domestic workers must work for
months just to pay off recruitment debts, making it difficult for them to leave abusive
employers.
Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Rights
In October 2007 Singapores parliament rejected a proposal to repeal law 377A,
which bans private and consensual sexual relations between men. Although prosecutions
have been rare, those found in violation of law 377A can be jailed for up
to two years on charges of gross indecency.
Human Rights Defenders
State laws and political repression effectively prevent the establishment of
human rights organizations and deter individuals from speaking out publicly
against government policies.
The need for police permits prevents civil society groups from organizing outdoor
events with ties to public issues. In October 2007, for example, police refused to
grant permission for an outdoor Peace Concert for Burma, forcing the concert
indoors on grounds that an outdoor event had higher potential to stir emotions
and controversy.
Unless they are registered as political parties, associations may not engage in any
activities the government deems political. Trade unions are under the same
restrictions and are banned from contributing to political parties or using their
funds for political purposes. Most unions are affiliated with the umbrella National Trade Union Congress which does not allow union members supportive of opposition
parties to hold office.
Burma
On September 27, 2007, Singapores Minister for Foreign Affairs, George Yeo, the
chair of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), issued a statement
expressing ASEANs revulsion over the use of violent force to put down antigovernment
demonstrations in Burma. The statement called for a halt to the
crackdown and the release of all political prisoners. ASEAN has since rejected
interference in Burmas internal affairs and its members even refused to allow
Ibrahim Gambari, UN special envoy to Burma, to address their meeting. At this
writing, Singapore has yet to indicate its willingness to reexamine the human
rights implications of its own economic ties to Burma, including in sectors that
directly benefit the Burmese military. Singapore-registered companies are active
in Burmas oil and natural gas industry, and the Burmese junta and its allies are
believed to use Singapore for banking and other financial transactions.
Key International Actors
Singapore is a key member of the Southeast Asia Regional Centre for Counter-
Terrorism, along with the US, Malaysia, and others, and is an active participant in
regional and sub-regional security issues. Singapore and the US maintain an
active partnership as outlined in the 2005 Strategic Framework Agreement
Between the United States of America and the Republic of Singapore for a Closer
Cooperation Partnership in Defense and Security. Singapore is also an important
financial and banking center for southeast Asia.
Singapore has not ratified important international human rights instruments,
including the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the
International Convention on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, and the
Convention Against Torture.