 SINGAPORE
 Singapore, a city-state of 3.3 million people, is a parliamenta republic in which
 politics are dominated by the People's Action Party (PAP), which has held power
 since Singapore gained autonomy from the United Kingdom in 1959. The PAP holds
 77 of the 81 seats in Parliament. Goh Chok Tos completed his fifth year as Prime
 Minister, and Lee Kuan Yew, who served as Prime Minister from independence in
 1965 until 1990, remains active politically, holding the title of Senior Minister. The
 majority of the population is ethnic Chinese (78 percent), with Malaya and Indians
 constituting substantial minorities.
 The Government maintains active internal security and military forces to counter
 perceived threats to the nation's security. It has frequently used security legislation
 to control a broad range of activity. The Internal Security Department (ISD) is re-
 sponsible for enforcement of the Internal Security Act (ISA), including its provisions
 for detention without trial. All young males are subject to national service (mostly
 in the military).
 Singapore has an open free market economic system. The construction and finan-
 cial services industries and manufacturing of computer-related components are key
 sectors of the economy which has achieved remarkably steady growth since inde-
 pendence. Gross domestic product rose a projected 7.7 percent in 1995, and citizens
 have an annual per capita gross national product over $19,200. Wealth is distrib-
 uted relatively equally in what is essentially a full-employment economy.
 There was no improvement or deterioration in the human rights situation. Th~e
 Government continued to intimidate opposition parties and their candidates and to
 restrict the independence of the judiciary in cases with political implications or af-
 fecting members of the ruling party. The Government has wide powers to detain
 people arbitrarily and subsequently restrict their travel, freedom of speech, and
 right to associate freely, and to handicap political opposition. There was no evidence
 o a chane in the Government' maintngs iingnes to restecrit ths man rghts when
 
 
 709
 it deemed that necessary in pursuit of its policy goals. The Government restricts
 press freedom and intimidates journalists into practicing self-censorship. There is
 some legal discrimination against women, which, in practice, affects only a small
 percentage of the population. The Government has moved actively to counter soci-
 etal discrimination against women and minorities.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of politically
 targeted killing.
 In August the Government charged three prison officials with causing the death
 of a prisoner (see Section 1.c.). ((NOTE: Deaths in custody at the hands of prison
 officials should be mentioned routinely in Section La. in all reports which describe
 such incidents.))
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The law prohibits torture, and government leaders have stated that they oppose its
 use. However, there have been credible reports in past years of police mistreatment
 of detainees. Reliable reports indicate that police have sometimes employed sleep
 deprivation or interrogate detainees in very cold rooms where the prisoners may be
 stripped of their clothes and doused with water. In 1993, of the 94 complaints of
 police abuse investigated, 14 were substantiated.
 The Government reserves the right to use indefinite detention without trial to
 pressure detainees to "rehabilitate themselves as well as to make admissions of
 wrongdoing. In the past, the Government has acknowledged that, in the case of de-
 tentions without trial under the Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act, the in-
 definite nature of the detentions served to pressure the detainees. Persons alleging
 mistreatment under detention may bring criminal charges against government offi-
 cials who are alleged to have committed such acts, but they may be discouraged
 from making accusations for fear of official retaliation (see Sections 1.d. and I.e.).
 The Pena Code mandates caning in addition to imprisonment as punishment for
 offenses involving the use of violence or threat of violence against a person, such
 as rape, robbery and extortion. The law also mandates caning in other areas, such
 as for certain convictions under the Vandalism Act and for specific immigration of-
 fenses. Prior to 1994, damage against private property had been classified as mis-
 chief, which does not include caning as a means of punishment. However, the Gov-
 ernment opted to apply the Vandalism Act in 1994 in a widely publicized case of
 foreign teenagers accused of spray painting privately owned automobiles and some-
 times used the Act in 1995 in such property cases. For example, in February the
 Government invoked it against a shipyard boss accused of scratching the privately
 owned automobile of a neighbor. In contrast, a couple convicted in March of spray
 painting a privately owned automobile was charged only with mischief.
 Caning is discretionary for convictions on other charges involving the use of crimi-
 nal force, such as kidnaping or voluntarily causing grievous hurt. The law prescribes
 a maximum or minimum number of cane strokes in many of these cases, although
 the court does not always abide by these guidelines. Women are exempted from
 caning, as are men over 50, under 16, and those determined unfit by a medical offi-
 cer. In 1993 the courts included a caning sentence in 3,244 cases. Caning statistics
 for 1994 are not available.
 Prison conditions are generally good and meet minimum international standards.
 Some abuses have occurred and have been reported in the press. In August, for ex-
 ample, three prison officials were charged with causing the death of a prisoner. The
 Government responded quickly to the alleged abuse and publicly denounced all
 abuses of power by prison officials. The Government does not allow human rights
 monitors to visit prisons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Internal Security Act (ISA), the
 Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act (CIA), the Misuse of Drugs Act (MDA),
 and the Undesirable Publications Act all have provisions for arrest without warrant.
 Those arrested must be charged before a magistrate within 48 hours. At that time,
 those detained under criminal charges may obtain legal counsel. A functioning sys-
 tem of bail exists for those charged, and there were no reported abuses of it.
 The ISA, the CLA, and the MDA authorize detention without trial. The CLA is
 used almost exclusively in cases involving narcotics and secret criminal societies and
 has not been used for political purposes. According to the Government, the cumu-
 lative number of persons currently detained under the CIA as of July was 570, of
 which 248 were for secret society activities and 322 for drug trafficking. Under the
 MDA, the Director of the Central Narcotics Bureau (CNB) may also commit-with-
 
 
 710
 out trial-suspected drug users to a drug rehabilitation center for up to 6 months,
 with subsequent extensions, in cases of positive urinalysis tests.
 Those persons detained without tria under the ISA are entitled to counsel but
 have no legal recourse through the courts to challenge the substantive basis for
 their detention. Persons detained without trial under the CIA are also entitled to
 counsel but may only challenge the substantive basis for their detention to the com-
 mittee advising the Minister for Home Affairs on detention issues. The ISA gives
 broad discretion to the Minister of Home Affairs to order detention without charges
 if the President determines that a person poses a threat to national security. The
 President may authorize detention for up to 2 years; the detention order may be re-
 newed for 2-year periods with no limitation on renewal. An advisory board reviews
 each detainee's case periodically, and detainees may make representations to it. The
 board may make nonbinding recommendations that a detainee be released prior to
 expiration of the detention order. If the Minister wishes to act contrary to a rec-
 ommendation for release by the board, he must seek the agreement of the President.
 The ISA empowers the police to detain a person for up to 48 hours; any police
 officer at or above the rank of superintendent may authorize that the detainee be
 held for up to 28 days longer. Once initial interrogation has been completed, the au-
 thorities have generally allowed ISA detainees access to lawyers and visits by rel-
 atives.
 No one has been jailed under formal ISA detention since 1990. However, the Gov-
 ernment has maintained some restrictions on the rights of two former ISA detainees
 to travel abroad, make public statements, and associate freely. Chia Thye Poh, a
 former Member of Parliament, was released from prison in 1989 after 23 years in
 preventive detention under the ISA but was confined to a small island adjacent to
 Singapore during evening and night hours until 1992. Now resident in Singapore
 prper, he cannot be employed, travel abroad, issue public statements, or associate
 with other former detainees without ISD approval. Vincent Cheng, a detainee re-
 leased in 1990, could not issue public statements, publish, or travel abroad without
 ISD consent until July when the ISD removed the restriction order against him.
 The Constitution prohibits exile and the Government respects the prohibition in
 practice.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, but the Government restricts the independence of the judiciary in practice
 through its control over the assignment of judges and through laws limiting judicial
 review. In 1989 the Government amended the Constitution and the ISA to eliminate
 judicial review of the objective grounds for detentions under the ISA and subversion
 aws. This allows the Government to restrict, or even eliminate, judicial review in
 such cases and thereby restrict, on vaguely defined national security grounds, the
 scope of certain fundamental liberties provided for in the Constitution.
 The judicial system has two levels of courts: the Supreme Court, which includes
 the High Court and the Court of Appeal; and the subordinate courts. The President
 appoints judes to the Supreme Court on the recommendation of the Prime Minister
 in consultation with the Chief Justice. The President also appoints subordinate
 court judges on the recommendation of the Chief Justice. The term of appointment
 is determined by the Legal Service Commission of which the Chief Justice is the
 chairman. Subordinate court judges and magistrates, as well as public prosecutors,
 are civil servants whose specific assignments are determined by the Legal Service
 Commission, which can decide on job transfers to any of several legal service depart-
 ments. Supreme Court Justices may remain in office until the mandatory retirement
 age of 65, after which they may continue to serve at the Government's discretion
 for brief, renewable terms at full salary. Judicial officials, especially in the Supreme
 Court, have close ties to the ruling party and its leaders.
 In February 1994, completing a transition begun in 1989, Parliament approved a
 bil abolishing all appeals to the Privy Council in London. The single Court of Ap-
 peal, established in 1993, combining the former Court of Appeal (for civil cases) and
 Court of Criminal Appeal, therefore became the highest court of review in Singa-
 pore.
 The judicial system provides citizens with an efficient judicial process. In normal
 cases the Criminal Procedures Code provides that a charge against a defendant
 must be read and explained to him as soon as it is framed by the prosecution or
 the magistrate. Defendants enjoy a presumption of innocence and the right of ap-
 peal, in most cases. They normally have the right to be present at their trials, to
 represented by an attorney, to confront witnesses against them, to provide wit-
 nesses and evidence on their own behalf, and to review government-held evidence
 relevant to their cases.
 The Constitution extends the above rights to all citizens. However, as noted in
 Section 1.d., persons detained under the SA and the MDA are not entitled to a pub-
 
 
 711
 lic trial. In all remaining cases, trials are public and by judge; there are no jury
 trials.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Prwvacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Government can use its wide discretionary powers under the ISA if it determines
 that national security is threatened. In most cases, the law requires search war-
 rants, normally issued by the magistrate court, for intrusion into the home. Law en-
 forcement officers may, however, search a person, home, or property without a war-
 rant if they decide that searches are necessary to preserve evidence.
 The CIA and the MDA Act also permit warrantless searches in dealing with
 drug- and secret society-related offenses. The courts may undertake judicial review
 of such searches at the request of the defendant. Divisions of the Government's law
 enforcement agencies, including the Internal Security Department (ISD) and the
 Corrupt Practices Investigation Board (CPIB), have wide networks for gathering in-
 formation. The authorities have the capability to monitor telephone and other pri-
 vate conversations and conduct surveillance. While there were no proven allegations
 that they did so in 1995, it is widely believed that the authorities routinely conduct
 surveillance on some social and political critics of the Government and on some op-
 position politicians.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution permits official restrictions on
 the freedom of expression and, in practice, the Government restricts the freedoms
 of speech and the press and intimidates journalists into practicing self-censorship.
 The ISA permits the Government to prohibit or to place conditions on publications
 that incite violence, that counsel disobedience to the law, that might arouse tensions
 among the various classes (races, religions, and language groups) or that might
 threaten national interests, national security, or public order. The Government uses
 a broad definition of these laws to restrict political opposition and criticism. It is
 clear from recent events that the Government will not tolerate discussions in the
 press of alleged government corruption, nepotism, or a compliant judiciary.
 All general circulation newspapers in all four official languages are owned by
 Singapore Press Holdings Ltd. (SPH), a private corporation which has close ties to
 the national leadership.In November SPH signed a memorandum of understanding
 to buy a Tamil langage newspaper which was the last remaining newspaper inde-
 pendent of SPH. SPH also owns 20 percent of Singapore Cablevision, which operates
 the expanding cable television system. SPH is required by law to issue ordinary and
 "management shares; holders of management shares have the power to control all
 SPH personnel decisions. the Government must approve, and can remove, holders
 of management shares. Hence, while Singapore newspapers, especially the English-
 language Straits Times, print a large anddiverse selection of articles from their do-
 mestic and a variety of foreign resources, editorials and coverage of domestic events
 closely parallel government policies and the opinions of government leaders. Govern-
 ment leaders often criticize what they call the "Western model" of journalism, in
 which the media are free to report the news as they see it. Government officials
 arue that the role of the domestic media is to support the goals of the elected lead-
 ership.
 A wide range of international magazines and newspapers may be purchased un-
 censored, although newspapers printed in Malaysia may not be imported. A 1990
 law requires foreign publications that report on politics and current events in South-
 east Asia to register, post a bend the equivalent of $144,000, and name a person
 in Singapore to accept legal service. These requirements strengthen government
 control over foreign media. The Government may ban the circulation of domestic
 and foreign publications under provisions of the ISA and the Undesirable Publica-
 tions Act. Under amendments to the Newspaper and Printing Presses Act, it may
 limit the circulation of foreign publications which, by the Government's broad deter-
 mination, interfere in Singapore's domestic politics. It has done so on occasion in
 the past.
 Some publications are barred from importation, and the authorities censor movies,
 video materials, and music. Censorship of materials and the decision to deny the
 importation of specific publications are based on a determination that such mate-
 rials would undermine the stability of the State, are pm-Communist, contravene
 moral norms, are pornographic, show excessive and/or gratuitous sex and violence,
 glamorize or promote drug use, or incite racial, religious, or linguistic animosities.
 The authorities report that there is strong public support for continued censorship
 of sex and violence in films.
 In its relations with foreign media, The Asian Wall Street Journal (AWSJ),
 Asiaweek, and the Far Eastern Economic Review remained "gazetted" (limited in
 
 
 circulation), although in May the Government relaxed restrictions and raised the
 limit for the Far Eastern Economic Review from 2,000 per issue to 4,000 per issue.
 The limits for the AWSJ and Asiaweek remained at 7,000 and 15,000 per issue, re-
 spectively.
 The new Singapore Broadcasting Authority (SBA) came into effect in 1994 to reg-
 ulate and promote the broadcasting industry. The SBA develops censorship stand-
 ards with the help of advisory panels whose membership represents a cross section
 of society.
 There are four government-linked subsidiaries under a holding company, Singa-
 pore International- Media PTE Ltd. These have a near monopoly on broadcasting
 operating all 4 free television channels and 12 of the 15 radio stations. An expanded
 cable service, Singapore Cablevision (SCV), jointly held by government-linked cor-
 porations and the US.-owned Continental Cablevision Company, began operations
 in June. The island-nation currently is being wired for a fiber-optic network. When
 the project is complete in 3 to 4 years, more than 30 channels including British
 Broadcasting Corporation and other international news and entertainment pro-
 grams will be available to subscribers. Two of the other three radio stations not op-
 erated by the State are operated bythe National Trade Union Congress (NTUC),
 which is closely affiliated with the vernment; the third is the British Broadcast-
 in Corporation (BBC) World Service, available 24 hours a day. In addition to the
 B   , Malaysian and Indonesian television and radio broadcasts are available. Cable
 News Network International, carried live, is available 24-hours a day on pay tele-
 vision. Satellite dishes are banned with few exceptions.
 Journalists from foreign publications are required by law to apply annually for re-
 newal of the employment pass which allows them to operate in Singapore. The Gov-
 ernment continued to limit the amount of time some foreign correspondents could
 remain in the country by denying requests for renewal of their employment passes,
 usually beyond a period of 3 years. The Government has denied requests in the past
 from several major publications to station correspondents in Singapore. Tension be-
 tween the Government and foreign correspondents increased as the Government
 continued to attack the "liberal Western median for carrying out an alleged "conspir-
 acy" to undermine PAP rule and for irresponsible reporting in Singapore and
 abroad.
 Government leaders sometimes use defamation suits or the threat of such actions
 to discourage public criticism. In July Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong Senior Min-
 ister Lee Kuan Yew, and his son, deputy Prime Minister Lee Hsien Long, won a
 libel suit against the International Herald Tribune (IHT) for an article, published
 in August 1994 suggesting that the younger Lee was appointed to his post on ac-
 count of his fater. ne plaintiffs sought damages in addition to a printed apology,
 which appeared in the newspaper on August 31, 1994. In June, during a wide y pub-
 licized public hearing to determine the scope of the judgment against the HIT, all
 three plaintiffs testified that the IHT did not apologize in good faith and demanded
 aggravated damages for the harm caused to their reputations. The plaintiffs sought
 $936,000 in damages. In July the High Court awarded a record judgment of
 $678,000.
 In January Dr. Christopher Lingle, an American academic who had been a visit-
 ing lecturer at the National University of Singapore, the IlT, and the Singapore
 printer were fined for contempt of court following the publication of an article about
 Asian governments by Lingle on October 7, 1994. Although Singapore was not men-
 tioned in the article, the court focused on the article's reference to some govern-
 ments as being "more subtle: relying upon a compliant judiciary to bankrupt opposi-
 tion politicians or buying out enough of the opposition to take control democrat-
 ically' as a reference to Singapore. Although the HIT published an apology for the
 article in December, 1994, Senior Minister Lee Kuan Yew filed a civil libel suit. The
 IHT agreed in November to pay the Senior Minister $213,000 in damages plus costs
 for the civil suit. The settlement included only the IHT and not Dr. Lingle, who
 could be sued at a later date. In at least the two incidents cited above, the use of
 libel suits appears to have intimidated the press successfully.
 Faculty members at public institutions of higher education are government em-
 ployees. A number of university lecturers are concurrently PAP Members of Par-
 liament (M.P.'s). Academics sometimes criticize government policies, but they avoid
 public criticism of individual government leaders and sensitive social and economic
 policies because of possible sanctions, such as in the cases of Dr. Christopher Lingle
 and Dr. Chee Soon Juan (see also Section 3). Publications by local academics and
 members of think tanks rarely deviate substantially from government views.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution grants citi-
 zens the freedom of peaceful assembly and association but permits Parliament to
 impose restrictions "as it considers necessary or expedient in the interest of the se-
 
 
 713
 curity of Singapore." The Government restricts those rights in practice. Assemblies
 of more than five persons in public, including political meetings and rallies, must
 have police permission. Persons wishing to speak at a public function, excluding
 functions provided by or under the auspices of the Government, must obtain permis-
 sion from the public entertainment licensing unit, a division of the Criminal Inves-
 tigation Department. Opposition piticians have in the past experienced delays as
 long as 26 days, according to police records, before receiving notification of action
 on their applications.
 The Government closely monitors political gatherings regardless of the number
 present. Most associations, societies, clubs, religious groups, and other organizations
 with more than 10 members must be registered with the Government under the So-
 cieties Act. The Government denies registration to groups it believes likely to be
 used for unlawful purposes or for purposes prejudicial to public peace, welfare, or
 public order (see Section 2.c.). The Government has absolute discretion in applying
 this broad and vague language to register or dissolve societies. It prohibits orga-
 nized political activities, except by organizations registered as political parties. This
 prohibition effectively limits opposition activities (see Section 3). It has less of an
 effect on the PAP, which enjoys the support of residential committees and neighbor-
 hood groups ostensibly organized for nonpolitical purposes but whose leadership
 contains many graesroots PAP members.
 c. Freedom of Re/igion.-Freedm of religion is provided for in the Constitution
 and usually respected in practice. There is no stats religion. The Government has
 determined that eveiy public housing estate must have a mosque. It therefore pro-
 vides some financial assistance to build and maintain mosques. The Government
 also facilitates contributions to the construction of Indian and Chinese temples.
 Missionaries are permitted to work and to publish religious texts. However, all
 religious groups are subject to government scrutiny and must be le ally registered.
 The Government restricts some religious sects by application of the Societies Act
 and has banned others, such as Jehovah's Witnesses and the Unification Church.
 In February the police arrested 69 suspected Jehovah's Witnesses and seized books,
 magazines, periodicals, and other materials believed to be related to the group. Of
 the 69 arrested, 28 were tried and found guilty of holding a meeting of a "banned
 society" and were fined between $709 and $2,836. The Government banned the sect
 in 1972 on the grounds that Jehovah's Witnesses oppose military service, and their
 members refuse to perform national service, salute the flag, or swear oaths of alle-
 gizance to the State. The case against them remains pending in court. The 1990
 Maintenance of Religious Harmony Act made illegal what the Government deems
 to be the inappropriate involvement of religious groups and officials in political af-
 fairs. The A  a o prohbits judicial review of any possible denial of rights arising
 from the Act, and it specifically denies* jdicial review of its enforcement.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution grants citizens the right to move freely throughout
 the country, though Parliament may pass laws restricting the right of citizens to
 move freely within the country on the basis of "the securiy of Sinspore.. the
 public order, public health, or the punishment of offenders." The Gove ent re-
 quires all citizens and permanent residents over the age of 12 to register and to
 carry identification cards. After the completion of national service, enlisted men are
 required to participate in reserve training until the age of 40 and officers to age 50.
 Reservists who plan to travel overseas for les than 6 months must advise the Min-
 istry of Defense; for trips longer than 6 months, reservists must obtain an exit per-
 mit. Males approaching national service age must obtain an exit permit in order to
 study outside Singapore. The Government may refuse to issue a passport and has
 done so in the case of former ISA detainees.
 The ISA allows the Ministers for Law and Home Affairs to suspend or revoke a
 detention order or to impose restrictions on former detainees' activities, laces of
 residence, and travel abroad. The right of voluntary repation is extendeto hold-
 ers of Singaporean passports. In 1985 Parliament provided for the loss of citizenship
 by Singaporeas who reside outside Singapore for more than 10 years consecutively.
 Action under this law is discretionary and has been taken in at least one case in-
 volving a well-known government opponent, Tan Wah Piaow.
 The law stipulates that former Singaporean members of the Communist Party of
 Malaya (CPM) residing outside Singapore must appeal to the Government to be al-
 lowedto return. They must renounce communism, sever all organizational ties with
 the CPM, and pledge not o take part in activities prejudicial to the State's internal
 security. In addition, the law requires them to be subject to interview by the ISD
 and to any restrictive conditions imposed on them.
 Singapore neither accepts the Comprehensive Plan of Action for Indchinese seek-
 ing refugee status nor offers first asylum to refugees. Prior to 1991, the Government
 
 
 714
 permitted Indochinese asylum seekers to disembark if a resettlement country prom-
 d to remove them within 90 days and if the rescuing vessel was in Singapore on
 a scheduled port of call. In June 1991, the Government halted disembarkation on
 the grounds that resettlement countries had not honored their guarantees of re-
 moval. As of December, there were 102 asylum seekers at the Hawkins Road camp,
 all of whom were denied refugee status through screening procedures conducted by
 the local office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
 The authorities permit persons of other nationalities who make claims for asylum
 to have their status determined by the UNHCR for possible resettlement elsewhere.
 There is no forcible repatriation.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides citizens with the right to change their government
 peacefully through democratic means, and the voting and vote-counting systems in
 elections are fair, accurate, and free from tampering. In practice, however, the Gov-
 ernment uses its extensive powers to place formidable obstacles in the path of politi-
 cal opponents. It also attempts to intimidate the opposition through the threat of
 libel suits and potential loss of employment or professional licenses. Parliamentary
 elections may be called at any time but must be held no later than 5 years from
 the date Parament first sits.
 Opposition parties have been unable seriously to challenge the PAP since the late
 1960s. Consequently, the PAPs domination of the political system continues as it
 has for three decades under Lee Kuan Yew. Opposition politicians currently hold
 only 4 seats in the 81-member elected Parliament, 3 for the Social Democratic Party
 and 1 for the Workers' Party. In addition to the 81 elected members, the President
 appoints 6 "prominent citizens" to serve as nominated M.P.'s for 2-year terms. The
 PAP's political success in part results from restrictions on opposition political activi-
 ties, but also from government policies which helped Singapore achieve rapid eco-
 nomic growth, thereby enabling the Government to provide a wide array of public
 services. The PAP has a broad-base of popular support, sustained in part through
 neighborhood, youth, and labor groups.
 Although political parties are legally free to organize, the authorities impose strict
 regulations on their constitutions, fundraising, and accountabiity. While the PAP
 has been able to enjoy the support of ostensibly nonpolitical organizations, the Gov-
 ernment has used its broad discretionary powers to hinder the creation of com-
 parable support organizations for opposition parties. The PAI's grip on power has
 also been enhanced by: patronage; political control of the press, and the courts;
 strong party discipline and performance; and its access to the instruments of power.
 For example, a government program to refurbish public housing gives priority to
 PAP constituencies. Government regulations also hinder attempts by opposition par-
 ties to rent office space in government housing estates or to establish community
 foundations which run private kindergartens. The PAP claims the lack of an effec-
 tive opposition is due to disorganization, lack of leadership, and lack of alternative
 policy programs.
 In August 1993, citizens elected their first President. The Presidency has ex-
 panded powers over civil service appointments, government and statutory beard
 budgts, and internal security affairs. Presidential aspirants must be certified by
 the Presidential Elections Committee (PEC), a body composed of the Chairman of
 the Public Service Commission, the Chairman of the Public Accountants Board, and
 a member of the Presidential Council for Minority Rights. The PEC was responsible
 for screening applicants on the basis of integrity, character, reputation, ability, and
 experience in managing the financial affairs of a large institution. Eligibility was
 considered automatic if the candidate had 3 years' experience as a high-ranking
 public servant or chief executive officer of a large corporation. These requirements
 limit the pool of potential Presidential candidates. The committee rejected the appli-
 cations of two opposition figures-J.B. Jeyaretnam, Secretary-General of the Work-
 ers' Party (WP) and a former M.P., and another WP member-for not satisfying the
 eligibility criteria regarding character and financial expertise.
 The threat of civil libel or slander suits continues to discourage criticism or chal-
 lenges by opposition leaders. The Legal Code also provides for criminal defamation
 offenses, but these provisions are seldom used.
 The most recent example of the use of libel or slander suits by government enti-
 ties to intimidate prominent opposition politicians was that of Dr. Chee Soon Juan,
 a lecturer at the National University of Singapore and Secretary General of the
 Singapore Democratic Party (SDP). Chee was dismissed from his teaching position
 in March 1993 for an alleged irregularities involving his use of research funds and
 sued by his department chairman, Dr. S. Vasoo, a PAP M.P., for making allegedly
 
 
 defamatory remarks. Chee had to pay $200,000 in damages to Vasoo and two other
 university employees as compensation for his allegedly defamatory remarks (see
 1994 report).
 The Government uses parliamentary censure or the threat of censure to humiliate
 or intimidate opposition leaders. For example, Parliament censured Chee Soon Juan
 and the Singapore Democratic Party           vember for allegedly endorsing at-
 tacks on the judiciary made by Chee's fellow panelists, dissident Francis Seow and
 academic Christopher Lingle, at a forum held at Williams College in September. The
 Government did not attribute any statement directly attacking the judiciary or en-
 dorsing the views of Seow and Lingle to Chee or the SDP. Instead, government par-
 liamentary leaders said that the failure of Chee and other SDP leaders to contradict
 the attacks made by Seow and Lingle constituted positive assent by "clever omis-
 sion.
 Although there is no legal bar to the participation of women in politics, they are
 underrepresented in Parliament. There are no female cabinet members, and only 2
 of the 81 elected parliamentary seats are occupied by women. Two of the six nomi-
 nated Members of Parliament are women. Women occupy 103 of 495 positions at
 the senior levels of the civil service, although they occupy none of the top 29 posi-
 tions.
 There is no restriction in law or practice against minorities voting or participating
 in politics. Malays comprise 14 percent of the general population and currently hold
 12 percent of the seats in Parliament. Indians make up 7 percent of the general pop-
 ulation and hold 9 percent of the seats in Parliament. Minority representation in
 Parliament is in part the result of government legislation requiring a minority rep-
 resentative in selected group constituencies.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no nongovernmental organizations, with the exception of the opposition
 political parties, that actively and openly onitor alleged human rights violations.
 While the Government does not formally prohibit them, efforts by any independent
 organization to investigate and criticize publicly government human rights policies
 would face the same obstacles as those faced by political parties. The Government
 denies that international organizations have any competence whatsoever to look into
 human rights matters in Singapore. Visa regulations do not recognize monitoring
 human righta s ga business purpose" for visiting Singapore, but neither is such ac-
 tivity regarded as a "social visit. Amnesty International is not allowed to operate
 in, or to visit, Singapore. The Government continued to allege a "conspiracy" be-
 tween the "liberal Western media" (see Section 2.a.) and Western human rights or-
 gnizations and other institutions which it claimed were intent on undermining its
 rule. Such allegations became the subject of a parliamentary debate in November
 in which the Goverent accused Western human rights and media organizations
 of using local opposition politicians to "debase" government rule.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution contains no explicit provision providing equal rights for women
 and minorities; instead, it states that all persons are equal before the law and enti-
 tled to the equal protection of the law. Mindful of Singapore's history of
 intercommunal tension, the Government takes affirmative measures to ensure ra-
 cial ethnic religious and cultural nondiscrimination. Social, economic, and cultural
 ilities are available to all citizens regardless of race, religion, or sex. Minorities
 constitutionally are afforded equal rights, actively participate in the political proc-
 ess and are well represented throughout the Government.
 Women.-There is no evidence of any widespread practice of violence or abuse
 against women. Laws such as the Penal Code and the Women's Charter protect
 women against domestic violence and sexual or physical harassment. A battered
 wife can obtain court orders barring the spouse from the home until the court is
 satisfied that he will stop his aggressive behavior. The Penal Code prescribes man-
 datory caning and a minimum imprisonment of 2 years for conviction on a charge
 of outraging modesty that causes the victim fear of death or injury.
 Women enjoy the same legal rights as men in most areas, including civil liberties,
 employment, commercial activity, and education. The Women's Charter, enacted in
 1961, gives women, inter alia, the right to own property, conduct trade, and receive
 divorce settlements. Muslim women enjoy most of the rights and protections of the
 Women's Charter. Muslim men may practice polygyny and may divorce unilaterally
 whereas Muslim women may not. However, polygyny occurred in only 20 of 4800
 marriages registered in 1994.
 
 
 716
 In 1962 the Government instituted the principle of equal pay for equal work in
 the civil service and announced the abolition of separate salary scales by 1965.
 Women make up over 50 percent of the labor force and are well represented in
 many professional fields, but they still hold the preponderance of low-wage jobs as
 clerks and secretaries. As a result, their average salary levels are only 70 percent
 those of men. Women hold few leadership positions in the private sector.
 Other areas of discrimination remain. For example, children born overseas to
 Singapean women are not granted citizenship automatically as are children born
 to Singaporean men. Fernmale civil servie employees who are married do not receive
 health benefits for their spouses and dependents as do male goverment employees.
 Children.-The Government is strngiy committed to the rights of children. The
 Government demonstrated its strong commitment to children s rights and welfare
 through its well-funded systems of public education and medical care. Access to pub-
 lic education and medical care is equal for all children in the society. In 1993 the
 Government updated and reenacted The Children and Young Persons Act. This re-
 vised Act establishes protective services for those children who are orphaned,
 abused, disabled, or refractory, and it creates a juvenile court system. The Ministry
 of Community Development works closely with the National Council for Social Serv-
 ices to oversee children's welfare cases. Voluntary organizations operate most of the
 homes for children while the Government funds up to 50 percent of all child costs
 which includes normal living expenses and overhead, as well as expenses for special
 schooling, health care or supervisory needs. There is no pattern of societal abuse
 directed against children.
 People With Disabiities.-The Government implemented a comprehensive code on
 barrier-free accessibility in 1990 which established standards for facilities for the
 ph ycally disabled in all new buildings and mandated the progressive upgrading of
 oler structures. Although there is no legislation that addresses the issue of equal
 opportunities for the disabled in education or employment, the National Council of
 Social Services, in conjunction with various voluntary associations, provides an ex-
 tensive job training and placement program for the disabled. Informal provisions in
 education have permitted university matriculation for visually handicapped, deaf,
 and physically disabled students. The Government allows the equivalent of a $2,500
 tax deduction for families with a disabled person.
 NationallRaciallEthnic Minorities.-Unlike the Indian or Eurasian communities,
 which have achieved economic and educational success rates on a par with the ma-
 jority Chinese, Malay Singaporeans still have a lower standard of living, although
 the gap has diminished in recent years. Malays remain underrepresented at the up-
 permost rungs of the corporate ladder, a reflection of their historically lower edu-
 cation and economic position, but also a result of de facto employment discrimina-
 tion. Advertisements sometimes specify the ethnicity and gender required of appli-
 cants or require fluent Mandarin speakers.
 The Constitution acknowledges the "special position" of Malays as the indigenous
 ple of Singapore and charges the Government to support and promote their po-
 itical, educational, religious, economic, social, and cultural interests." A Presidential
 Council on Minority Rights examines all current and pending bills to ensure that
 they are not disadvantageous to a particular group. It also reports to the Govern-
 ment on matters affecting any racial or religious community and investigates com-
 plaints.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution provides all citizens with the right
 to form associations, including trade unions. Parliament may, however, impose re-
 strictions based on security, public order, or morality grounds. The right of associa-
 tion is delimited by the Societies Act and by labor and education laws and regula-
 tions, the trades union act authorizes the formation of unions with broad rights, al-
 beit with some narrow restrictions, such as prohibitions on the unionization of uni-
 formed employees. The national labor force comprises about 1.7 million employees,
 of whom some 239,000 are organized into 82 employee unions. Seventy-three of
 these unions, representing almost 99 percent of all unionized workers, are affiliated
 with the National Trades Union Congress (NTUC), an umbrella organization which
 has a close relationship with the Government.
 The NTUC unabashedly acknowledges that its interests are closely linked with
 those of the ruling PAP, a relationship often described by both as "symbiotic." For
 example, President Ong Teng Cheong served simultaneously as NTUC Secretary
 General and Second Deputy Prime Minister before assuming his current position as
 President in 1993. His successor at the NTUC, Urn Boon Heng, was formerly Sec-
 ond Minister for Trade and Industry and continues as Minister Without Portfolio.
 In addition, several other high-ranking NTUC officials are PAP M.P.'s. NTUC policy
 
 
 717
 prohibits union members who actively support opposition parties from holding office
 i affiliated unions. While the NTUC is financaly independent of the PAP, with
 income generated by NTUC-owned businesses, the NTUC and PAP share the same
 ideology.
 Workers, other than those in essential services, have the legal right to strike but
 rarely do so; no'strikes have occurred since 1986. Most disagreements are resolved
 through informal consultations with the Ministry of Labor. If conciliation fails, the
 disputing parties usually submit their case to the Industrial Arbitration Court,
 which has representatives from labor, management, and the Government. These
 labor dispute mechanisms, along with the PAP/NTUC nexus, have played important
 roles in creating nonconfrontational labor relations. The Government also attributes
 the rarity of strikes to a cultural aversion to confrontation, high economic growth
 rates, labor shortages in recent years that have sustained regular wage increases,
 and the popular conviction that strikes would undermine Singapore's attractiveness
 to investors.
 The NTUC is free to associate regionally and internationally.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectivey.-Collective bargaining is a nor-
 mal part of management-labor relations, particularly in the manufacturing sector.
 Agreements between management and labor are renewed every 2 to 3 years, al-
 though wage increases are negotiated annually. Collective bargaining agreements
 generally follow the guidelines issued by the National Wages Council INWC), a
 group composed of labor, management and government representatives, that makes
 annual recommendations regarding saary and bonus packages. The Industrial Rela-
 tions Act makes it an offense to discriminate against anyone who is or proposes to
 become a member or an officer of a trade union. The offense is punishab y a fine
 equivalent to $1,440 and/or a 6-month prison sentence. Labor laws and regulations
 are enforced uniformly.
 There are no export processing zones, nor are special concessions given to firms
 produ i   for export.
 c.ProIbition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Under sections of the Destitute
 Persons Act, any indigent person may be required to reside in a welfare home and
 engage in suitable work. The International Labor Organization (ILO) has criticized
 the coercive terms of this Act, which includes penal sanctions, on the grounds that
 it is not in compliance with the ILO convention on forced labor, ratified by Singa-
 pore in 1965. The Government maintains that the Act is social legislation providing
 for the shelter, care, and protection of destitute persons; and that work programs
 are designed to reintegrate individuals into society.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Government enforces the Em-
 ployment Act, which prohibits the employment of children under age 12. Children
 over age 12 and under age 14 must receive written permission from the Commis-
 sioner Tor Labor for "light work suited to his capacity.  There are few such applica-
 tions, and the Commissioner for Labor has never approved one. Employers must no-
 tify the Ministry of Labor within 30 days of hiring a child between the ages of 14
 and 16 and must forward medical certification to the Commissioner. The incidence
 of children taking up permanent employment is also low, and abuses are almost
 nonexistent.
 Ministry of Labor regulations prohibit night employment of children and restrict
 industrial work to no more than 7 hours a day. Children may not work on commer-
 cial vessels, with any machinery in motion, on live electrical apparatus lacking effec-
 tive insulation, or in any underground job. The Ministry of Labor effectively enforces
 these laws and regulations.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Sin .apore has no laws or regulations on mini-
 mum wages or unemployment compensation. The labor market offers relatively high
 wages and good working conditions. The Employment Act sets the standard legal
 workweek at 44 hours and provides for 1 rest day each week. The Ministry of Labor
 effectively enforces laws and regulations establishing working conditions and com-
 prehensive occupational safety and health laws. Enforcement procedures, coupled
 with the promotion of educational and training programs, have reduced the fre-
 quency of job-related accidents by a third over the past decade. While a worker has
 the right under the Employment Act to remove himself from a dangerous work situ-
 ation, *is right to continued employment depends upon an investigation of the cir-
 cumstances by the Ministry of Labor.
 Because of the domestic labor shortage, over 360,000 foreign workers are em-
 ployed legally in Singapore, 22 percent of the total work force. Most are unskilled
 laborers and household- servants from other Asian countries. Foreign workers face
 no legal wage discrimination; however, they are concentrated in low-wage, low-skill
 jobs. About 85,000 foreign maids, mainly from the Philippines, Indonesia, and Sri
 Lanka, are employed in Singapore. While maids have made occasional complaints,
 
 
 718
 working conditions for foreign domestics generally are acceptable. The Government
 does not bar complainants  iom seeking legal redress and takes a firm stand against
 employers who abuse their domestic servants. Foreign workers are ineligible for the
 limite free legal assistance that is available to citizens. The authorities have fined
 or imprisoned employers who have abused domestics, often with great publicity.
