SINGAPORE
This year's report on Singapore correctly notes that human rights concerns in 1993 included "intimidation of opposition politicians, exclusion of opposition presidential candidates and restrictions on press freedom." What it fails to note, however, is how these same human rights concerns have pervaded Singapore's recent history and are nothing new to international human rights watchdogs. The State Department also continues to justify Singapore's stagnant human rights record by pointing to the country's rapid economic growth and wide array of public services. Although this may be standard line of defense of the ruling People's Action Party (PAP), as well as the new philosophy that Singapore extols as a model for other Asian nations, it is inappropriate for the State Department to justify the government's human rights record in the same fashion.
The report's section on torture states that caning is a legally mandated punishment for many offenses and that "[t]he law prescribes a maximum or minimum number of cane sfrokes in many of these cases." It neglects to mention, however, that the government does not necessarily comply with these standards. Last year's Critique noted the case of Qwek Kee Hong, a convicted felon who brought a court action against the government claiming damages for "grievous injury" suffered as a result of caning. (The outcome of this action is not known.) Qwek had been convicted of armed robbery in 1987 and sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment and 48 strokes of the cane twice the maximum permitted by law. Qwek required hospital treatment as a result of the caning. The section on torture again omits mention, as it did last year, of Singapore's use of the death penalty in drug trafficking cases. At least five people were sentenced to death in 1993 for drug trafficking — one Dutch national, sentenced for trafficking four kilograms of heroin, and four Malaysian nationals, sentenced for trying to sell 200 grams of heroin to an undercover police agent. One of the four Malaysians given the death sentence, Yeo Poh Choon, had been acquitted in the original trial after the judge found no evidence to link him to the attempted sale. (The government successftilly argued, however, that it was not necessary for each conspirator personally to confirm the nature of the deal in order to be liable.)
The State Department once again accurately discusses the various provisions authorizing arbitrary arrest and detention in Singapore. However, it is incorrect to state that: "No one has been under ISA [Internal Security Act] detention since 1990." Chia Thye Poh, Singapore's longest held political prisoner, is no longer technically under house arrest, and is permitted to live on the mainland at his father's home. He is not allowed, however, to address public meetings or to meet with certain people. The restriction order on Teo Soh Lung did not lapse, as the State Department says, in January 1993. It was renewed for one year in June 1992, and therefore did not expire until June 1993.
317
CRITIQUE 1993
The report also fails to discuss two detention incidents involving Burmese citizens. In June 1993, 11 Burmese seamen were held for four days at Singapore's Changi Airport and then flown back to Burma on the instructions of the Burmese First Secretary. Later, the Singapore government criticized the Singapore Airport Terminal Services for carrying out this request. On October 21, 1993, airport authorities detained another Burmese citizen, Dr. M. Martha, an opposition leader and spokesman for the Karen National Union. The government claimed that Dr. Martha, who was on his way to join a delegation of the Burmese govemment-in-exile in New York, was only deported back to Bangkok because the name on his passport did not match the name on his ticket.
In Section le, on the right to fair public trial, the State Department corrects last year's omission and mentions that retired judges may be reappointed for "brief, renewable terms at fiill salary." Although it states that "[j]udicial officials ... are well entrenched in the Singapore establishment and have close ties to the Government and its leaders," the report fails to conclude that such discretionary appointments contribute to the judiciary's lack of independence. The State Department again fails to mention the creation of the government-controlled Academy of Law, a mandatory bar association created in 1989. As last year's Critique noted, and as the report should have said, the Academy of Law violates the standard in the UN Basic Principles on the Role of Lawyers' that bar associations be independent of government control.
Regarding freedom of speech and press, the State Department again appears to justify Singapore's tight control over domestic and foreign media, explaining that the govenmient has rejected the "Western model" of journalism which allows the media unrestricted freedom to report the news. This is a troubling repetition of the tendency that the Critique noted in several of the 1992 country reports, of giving credence to the notion of cultural relativity rather than the universality of human standards. The State Department also tries to mitigate Singapore's intent to control the media and, as a result, inaccurately portrays the condition of press freedom. For example, after enumerating various legal provisions that grant the government broad powers of censorship, the State Department notes that "the [g]ovemment has in some cases applied a broad definition of these laws" to limit political opposition and criticism (emphasis added). But these laws were promulgated solely to suppress the opposition in all cases and have consistently been used to achieve that end. The report also addresses Singapore's relationship to the foreign media in 1993, stating that the government "relaxed restrictions in some areas and introduced new ones in others." This is much too indulgent: the text that follows only identifies one event that could conceivably be characterized as a "relaxed restriction" — the acceptance in Singapore of a full-time correspondent for the Asian Wall Street Journal (A WS J). This is less of an advance, however, than a return to the status quo ante. The report
318
SINGAPORE
does not mention that the paper had such a correspondent in Singapore until 1988, when the ruling PAP banned AWSJ reporters after the paper had criticized government policies. Addressing the issue of censorship, the State Department perfects the art of understatement by noting that "[pjublications by local academics and members of think tanks rarely deviate substantially from government views" because of possible sanctions.
The State Department can be praised, however, for accurately reporting two incidents in 1993 that affected the Business Times and The Economist. However, in the case of the Business Times, whose editor and four others were charged under the Official Secrets Act, it neglects to note that another hearing was scheduled for the end of February 1994. The presiding judge ruled on December 9, 1993, that the defense must answer to the amended charge of acting in a manner endangering the secrecy of classified information. The State Department also fails to note that the actions to limit the circulation of The Economist were the direct result of an article the magazine had written about the Business Times case. The Economist is the fifth foreign publication to have its circulation limited pursuant to Singapore's Newspapers and Printing Presses (Amendment) Act.
With respect to the Far Eastern Economic Review (FEER), another foreign publication that has been "gazetted" to limit its circulation, the State Department again fails this year to note that the Singapore government has been reprinting and circulating copies of FEER in violation of international copyright standards.
In the section concerning freedom of peaceful assembly and association, the State Department correctly notes that public assemblies of more than five persons require police permission. It also notes that opposition politicians experience delays of as much as 26 days before receiving a response to their applications to hold political meetings and rallies. It would have been even more illuminating if the State Department, which apparently had access to police records, had reported the percentage of applications that had been granted or denied to opposition politicians compared to those of the ruling PAP.
Regarding religious freedom, Singapore continues to view religious groups as a threat to its own political dominance. As the report notes, the 1990 Maintenance of Religious Harmony Act prohibits the involvement of religious groups and officials in political affairs. The Act, in essence, criminalizes legitimate political activities by members of religious groups. As noted in last year's Critique, many of those arrested and detained under the Internal Security Act in 1987 were active in Catholic Church organizations.
On the issue of repatriation, the State Department report correctly notes that former Singaporean members of the Communist Party of Malaya must appeal to the government for permission to return to Singapore, renounce Communism, sever all organizational ties to the party, and pledge not to indulge in activities prejudicial to Singapore's internal security. The report does not mention, however.
319
CRITIQUE 1993
that they must also, in some instances, agree to reside with their children. It also does not report that arrest warrants are still pending against a number of exiled political activists from the 1970s and 1980s.
The State Department's discussion of political rights contains an excellent description of how the ruling PAP prevents opposition candidates from gaining political power. The report discusses the presidential election campaign of 1993 which provides a clear example of these tactics. It would also have been useful in this context to give more detail on the case of J.B. Jeyaretnam, Singapore's most visible opposition politician. When Prime Minister Goh called for a district election in his own group representation constituency at the end of 1992, Jeyaretnam's Worker's Party was disqualified because only three of the four required candidates showed up on election day. Prior to this, Mr. Jeyaretnam had been banned from running for office for five years. Now, he will have to wait until the elections in 1996 to regain a parliamentary seat.
It is also important to note that when the Presidential Elections Committee disqualifies a presidential candidate, there is no legal recourse to appeal the decision. Eligibility requirements for the presidential post also essentially rule out candidates from outside the People's Action Party. This is because presidential candidates must have three years of experience in a senior government position or as the chief executive officer of a company with a paid-up capital of at least S $ 100 million (US $62.5 million). Only about 400 Singaporeans meet these thresholds.
The State Department's comments about the intimidation of Dr. Chee Soon Juan are accurate, but the report does not note that Dr. Chee has become the acting secretary-general of the opposition Singapore Democratic Party and may face even further harassment as a result. The report's comments on the case of Ashleigh Seow fail to note that he is the son of former Solicitor General and opposition politician Francis Seow. Francis Seow was convicted in absentia of tax evasion charges in 1989 and consequently lost his seat in Parliament. He now lives in exile in the United States.
In its section on discrimination, the report notes that "[mjinorities are constitutionally afforded equal rights, actively participate in the political process, and are well represented throughout the government." Thereafter, however, the State Department contradicts itself when it accurately observes that de facto employment discrimination keeps prejudices the standard of living of indigenous Malay Singaporeans and keeps them underrepresented on the uppermost rungs of the corporate ladder. This discrimination includes job advertisements that specify the ethnicity and gender required of the applicants.
In addition, the section on discrimination contradicts itself concerning women's rights. The report states that there are no female cabinet members and that "only 2 of 81 parliamentary seats are occupied by women". But these figures fly in the face of Uie report's contention that women are "well represented throughout
320
SINGAPORE
the government." It is also wrong to say that women are "constitutionally afforded equal rights," since, as the State Department acknowledges, "Singapore's Constitution contains no explicit guarantee of equal rights for women." The report also omits one further area of discrimination against women, namely that male foreign nationals married to Singaporean women are not automatically granted citizenship.
Regarding acceptable conditions of work, the report mentions that foreign workers make up 16% of the total workforce, primarily as Unskilled laborers and household servants. It makes the guarded comment that, "There have been complaints of abuse or poor working conditions" and that foreign workers "may find it difficult" to obtain legal assistance. This understates the case. In reality, foreign workers are guaranteed difficulty in securing counsel. The Geylang Catholic Center used to provide legal assistance, but was pressured to close in 1987 in the aftermath of that year's detentions of government critics. By the end of 1987, 22 foreign workers had been detained without trial under the Internal Security Act. The report also fails to note the case of Flora Contemplación, a 39-year-old Filipina maid who was sentenced to death in January 1993 for murdering another domestic worker and her employer's four-year old son.
Beyond these specific shortcomings, the State Department report should have spoken more forthrightly about Singapore's aggressive attitude toward international human rights standards, and its undisguised hostility toward what a Straits Times' editorial characterized as "the obsessive pursuit of Western-style human rights and democracy." As the report says, there are no non-govemmental organizations that openly monitor human rights violations in Singapore, and the government actively discourages any attempt at monitoring by foreign groups,
Singapore continues to espouse, to an ever-widening audience, its philosophy of an "Asian conception of human rights," evidenced by its vocal opposition to linking human rights conditions to Most Favored Nation trade status in China and its espousal of the Asian human rights philosophy at the June 1993 Vienna World Conference on Human Rights and the Bangkok regional conference that preceded it. Other Asian nations are now starting to follow Singapore's lead. In May 1993, for example, at a news conference in Singapore, the military government of Burma dismissed pleas to improve human rights, stating that the world must first reconcile differences between the East and West as to what constitutes good conduct.
321
CRITIQUE 1993
