 SINGAPORE
 Singapore has a parliamentary system under which the People's
 Action Party (PAP), headed by Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew, has
 held power since independence in 1965. The PAP continues to
 dominate Parliament, holding all but 2 of the 79 seats. That
 the Government enjoys broad public support is indicated by the
 62.9 percent share of the popular vote it received in the
 December 1984 general election. Public criticism of the
 Government flared somewhat during the 1984 election campaign,
 but lessened in 1985, with public concerns focused primarily
 on government management of the economy. The civil service is
 efficient and corruption is officially and actively
 discouraged.
 Singapore was subject to acts of terrorism by members of the
 Communist Party of Malaya (CPM) through 1974. While there
 have been no terrorist incidents in recent years, the CPM
 considers Singapore within its sphere of operation.
 Government military and security agencies work to control and,
 if possible, to eliminate the threat of internal disturbances.
 They act within what most Singaporeans consider to be the
 bounds of acceptable legal conduct.
 Singapore's strategic location and industrious population give
 it economic importance in Southeast Asia out of proportion to
 its small size. Following independence, the economy expanded
 rapidly, with foreign trade and shipping reaching record
 levels. In recent years industrialization has been rapid.
 However, 1985 saw a small downturn in the economy.
 No significant changes in the human rights situation took
 place in 1985.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no known instances of politically-motivated killing
 in 1985.
 b. Disappearance
 There is no evidence that people were abducted, secretly
 arrested, or held in clandestine detention by official or
 quasi-official security forces, other elements of.the
 Government, or opposition forces in 1985.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Torture is prohibited by law under Sections 330 and 331 of the
 Penal Code. In past years individual instances of
 mistreatment by law enforcement personnel have been alleged by
 former detainees and by Amnesty International. The Government
 has acknowledged that its interrogation procedures employ
 psychological stress, as alleged by ex-detainees, but denies
 allegations of abuse or torture.
 Prison conditions in Singapore are spartan. Singapore's eight
 prisons confine about 3,000 prisoners, with some 4,000 others
 held in drug rehabilitation centers. Political detainees are
 
 
 867
 SINGAPORE
 separated from other prisoners. Since 1981 the Government has
 stepped up efforts to rehabilitate prisoners serving sentences
 of one year or more. The prison welfare services program
 which had concentrated on young offenders and adult first-time
 offenders was extended in 1985 to include habitual offenders
 and drug abusers.
 Singapore's Penal Code mandates minimum prison sentences
 varying from 6 months to 8 years and caning from 6 to 12
 strokes for certain crimes including outrage of modesty, rape,
 theft, extortion, robbery, housebreaking, and vehicle theft.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Law enforcement authorities in Singapore follow established
 legal procedures for arrest or detention. Incommunicado
 detention does not occur. Arrest without a warrant and
 detention without charge for periods of 1 to 30 days are
 authorized under some specific provisions of the law. The
 Ministry of Home Affairs can issue an order under the Internal
 Security Act (ISA), a British measure used by Singapore
 extensively during the 1965-74 postindependence period when
 Communist-led disturbances and communal violence were
 widespread, or the Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act to
 authorize a longer period of detention of a "suspected
 person." The Director of the Central Narcotics Bureau in
 cases of a positive urinalysis can commit suspected drug users
 to a six-month term in a drug rehabilitation center. Habeas
 corpus exists in the law, but in ISA cases the Government can
 extend detention indefinitely. In others, such as those
 involving the Criminal Law (Temporary Rrovisions) Act, which
 is used primarily to detain drug traffickers and members of
 secret societies, the Government can detain people for periods
 of up to one year. People who are detained are arrested
 openly. There is a functioning system of bail, and detainees
 are entitled to legal counsel.
 The Misuse of Drugs Act allows Central Narcotics Bureau
 Officers and Customs Officials to arrest without warrant any
 person suspected of manufacturing, importing, exporting,
 possessing, consuming, or trafficking in controlled drugs.
 Such persons actually arrested are tried in court. A few
 individuals have maintained that they were not drug users and
 were improperly detained but, thus far, have failed to
 substantiate their allegations in court. The Government has
 maintained that adequate safeguards exist to prevent innocent
 persons being detained.
 One person remains held in detention under terms of the ISA.
 More than 1,000 persons are held in indefinite detention under
 the Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act, primarily for
 membership in Chinese triads (mafia-like secret societies) or
 for drug-trafficking offenses.
 Singapore law prohibits the use of forced or compulsory labor.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a public trial is observed except for persons
 detained under the provisions of the ISA and the Criminal Law
 (Temporary Provisions) Act. The Government defends its policy
 of detention without trial in these cases on the ground that
 an open trial could result in the intimidation or death of
 witnesses and officials.
 
 
 868
 SINGAPORE
 The Criminal Procedures Code provides that a charge against a
 defendant must be read and explained to him as soon as it is
 framed by the magistrate. The accused has the right to be
 defended by an attorney (advocate). Individuals are tried by
 a magistrate or judge and do not have the right to trial by
 jury. Defendants may appeal their verdicts in most cases to
 higher courts. Singapore is a member of the British
 Commonwealth and allows for further appeal to the Judicial
 Committee of the Privy Council in London.
 Judges are appointed by the President on the recommendation of
 the Prime Minister and the Cabinet. Four of the seven High
 Court judges hold what amount to contract appointments, most
 frequently for one year. Subordinate court judges
 (magistrates) and public prosecutors are civil servants and
 can be transferred by the Ministry of Law.
 Citizens can take government agencies to court over such
 matters as compulsory land acquisitions and compensation. The
 Government has not lost a case involving a challenge to its
 major policies. Members of opposition political parties have
 been taken to court frequently, as have members of the PAP,
 including government ministers.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Government acts arbitrarily through use of its wide
 discretionary powers when it believes that the security of the
 nation is threatened. Search warrants are required for
 intrusion into the home, In most cases. However, law
 enforcement officers may search a person, home, or property
 without a warrant if they have reasonable grounds to believe
 that it is necessary to do so. In most cases, the law does
 not require later judicial review of such action. Divisions
 of the Government's law enforcement agencies, including the
 Internal Security Division (ISD) and the Corrupt Practices
 Investigation Board (CPIB), have a wide network for gathering
 information.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and press are circumscribed. The Government
 forbids statements which might arouse communal tensions among
 the various races (approximately 77 percent Chinese, 15
 percent Malay, 6 percent Indian, and 2 percent other
 minorities).
 Newspapers operate as independent companies but under close
 government supervision. While there is no direct censorship
 of the press, members of the press understand the restraints
 and guidelines within which they must operate. They did not
 significantly exceed these guidelines in 1985. In the past,
 editors and reporters have been reprimanded for articles
 criticizing the Government too strongly. Some press
 representatives believe that they may lose their jobs if they
 criticize the Government too severely. However, the press
 reports the opposition's views and has frequently published
 statements critical of the Government's proposals and policies.
 The Government-owned Singapore Broadcasting Corporation (SBC)
 has a monopoly on domestic radio and television. SBC follows
 
 
 869
 SINGAPORE
 government guidelines on its news reporting and obeys
 censorship regulations on the programs which it broadcasts.
 The BBC World Service and Malaysian Radio and Television can
 be received uncensored in Singapore on local broadcast bands.
 An official board of film censors approves motion pictures,
 television, and videotapes. Additional government bodies
 censor magazines, records, plays, and other media. The
 Government censors these items primarily to prevent the spread
 of materials which it feels will undermine the morals of young
 Singaporeans, advocate excessive permissiveness, or promote
 drug abuse. A wide range of international magazines and
 newspapers can be purchased uncensored in Singapore. The
 country is a regional publishing center for a growing number
 of international magazines and newspapers.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Assemblies of more than five people in a public place,
 including political rallies, are authorized only with
 permission from the police. In practice, the Government does
 not stop gatherings of groups of more than five people for
 social purposes.
 In order to operate legally in Singapore, associations,
 societies, clubs, churches, and other organizations with more
 than 10 members must be registered with the Government under
 the Societies Act. Registration is denied to societies likely
 to be used for unlawful purposes or for purposes prejudicial
 to public peace, welfare, or good order. In the past, arrests
 have been made at gatherings of unregistered organizations,
 including some splinter religious groups which the Government
 viewed as inimical to the public interest.
 Unions are legally allowed in Singapore. However, the Trades
 Union Act places restrictions on workers' rights. Unions are
 organized under an umbrella organization, the National Trades
 Union Congress (NTUC), which has a Deputy Prime Minister as
 its Secretary General and members of Parliament on the board
 of directors. The NTUC has about 191,000 members in a
 national work force of about 1.2 million. The NTUC's campaign
 to encourage the formation of house unions, criticized by
 traditionalists in the labor sector as a government effort to
 co-opt the union movement, abated markedly in 1985. A
 government proposal in 1985 to limit the role of the National
 Wages Council in establishing wage guidelines could
 significantly alter the environment for collective bargaining,
 providing unions a more direct role in negotiating wage
 agreements with management. Although workers have the legal
 right to strike, there have been no strikes in Singapore for
 over seven years. The NTUC remains a member of the
 International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU) and
 Singapore continues its membership in the International Labor
 Organization (ILO).
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is enshrined in the Constitution and in
 practice. A Presidential Council on Minority Rights exists to
 insure that legislation does not infringe on the rights of
 ethnic or religious minorities. There is no state religion,
 but the Government has provided financial assistance to some
 religious bodies to allow them to build and maintain places of
 worship. Missionaries are permitted to work and to publish
 religious texts in Singapore.
 
 
 870
 SINGAPORE
 All religious groups are subject to government scrutiny and
 must be legally registered. The Government restricts
 religious sects holding views it considers inimical to the
 common good by application of the Societies Act and has banned
 some splinter groups in the past from practicing their faiths
 in Singapore. There are no restrictions based on religious
 affiliation to membership in the ruling People's Action Party.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no limitations on freedom of movement within the
 country other than those under the ISA. The ISA allows the
 Minister for Home Affairs to suspend or revoke a detention
 order or impose restrictions on a person's activities, place
 of residence, and travel outside of Singapore. All Singapore
 residents over the age of 13 are required to register with the
 Government, receive and carry an identification card, and
 report changes of address within 14 days. An individual may
 be denied a passport at the Government's discretion, although
 in practice this applies only to persons convicted of serious'
 crimes. Males approaching the age of 18 (when National
 Service is generally performed) must obtain an exit permit
 from the Ministry of Defense. Recipients of government-
 financed educational benefits are required to sign a bond
 obligation to serve the Government for a fixed period and may
 not emigrate without paying the balance of their bond.
 The right of voluntary repatriation is extended to holders of
 Singaporean passports. However, several hundred ethnic
 Chinese who left Singapore for China during the politically
 difficult 1940's and 1950's have encountered obstacles to
 their return.
 Refugees are granted first asylum for 90 days in Singapore
 only if they have a third-country guarantee of resettlement.
 As of October 1985, more than 25,000 Indochinese refugees had
 been brought into Singapore in asylum status.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Singapore is a self-described "socialist democracy," although
 private enterprise has been recognized as a major driving
 force contributing to the country's economic success.
 Seventy-seven of 79 members of the unicameral Parliament are
 members of the ruling People's Action Party (PAP), headed by
 Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew. General elections in 1984, which
 netted the PAP its overwhelming majority in the Parliament,
 gave government candidates nearly two-thirds of the popular
 vote and served as a reliable barometer of public support for
 the Lee Government.
 Non-Communist parties are legally free to organize, and there
 are approximately 20 registered political parties in
 Singapore. These parties are closely monitored by the
 Government, which justifies its actions on the grounds that
 Communists might participate in elections and candidates might
 make libelous statements. The successful prosecution of libel
 and defamation suits against opposition parties and candidates
 by members of the PAP bankrupted three opposition politicians
 from the Barisan Solialis Party in the mid-1970's. One of the
 two opposition MP's was convicted in September 1985 of
 financial irregularities as part of a long-running series of
 
 
 871
 SINGAPORE
 legal actions against the top two leaders of the Workers'
 Party. He has appealed the conviction and remains free to
 participate in political activity. The charges are
 sufficiently minor so that, whatever the outcome of the trial,
 his seat in Parliament is not in jeopardy.
 Minorities are constitutionally guaranteed equal rights and
 actively participate in the political process.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There are no organizations in Singapore which actively and
 openly monitor human rights violations. Governmental bodies
 such as the Minority Rights Council monitor certain aspects of
 human rights in Singapore for domestic purposes.
 Representatives of Amnesty International and other human
 rights groups are not allowed to visit Singapore in an
 official capacity. The Amnesty International 1985 Report
 expressed concern about the powers of preventive detention
 exercised by the Government under the ISA. It also criticized
 the practice of caning, which Amnesty International opposes as
 being cruel, unusual, and degrading punishment. Freedom House
 rates Singapore "partly free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Singapore is an urban city-state with a strong and prosperous
 free enterprise economy. Singapore's population in 1985 stood
 at 2.55 million, with a growth rate of 1.1 percent. The
 success of the country's population control program is based
 on wide-ranging disincentives to having more than two
 children, including educational, tax, and medical benefits
 measures. Per capita gross national product reached $6,852 in
 1984--one of the highest in Asia after Japan, Brunei, and
 Nauru. Private ownership of property is a basic feature of
 Singapore's economy, although the Government has, and
 exercises, almost unlimited right to acquire land at 1973
 prices for extensive development projects.
 The standard of living is relatively high, but the real gross
 domestic product, which grew at a rate of nearly eight percent
 in 1984, is expected to show a negative growth rate in 1985.
 While the economic downturn has tempered somewhat the steadily
 rising level of expectations, Singapore's basic housing,
 educational, and nutritional standards remain high.
 The infant mortality rate was 9.1 per 1,000 live births in
 1985. Life expectancy at birth in 1985 was 72.7 years. In
 1985 about three-quarters of the population was housed in
 well-designed, government-subsidized housing. The entire
 population has access to safe drinking water. Singapore had
 11 government and 12 private hospitals in 1985. The quality
 of health care is very high in both private and government
 facilities, and the former are subsidized heavily by the
 Government. Education is not compulsory, but free primary
 education is provided for children of all Singapore citizens.
 Secondary and tertiary education is of high quality and
 provided at modest cost. The enrollment ratio for students
 aged 6-17 years was 83.9 percent in 1982. The literacy rate
 rose to 85 percent in 1983.
 
 
 872
 SINGAPORE
 Singapore enforces child labor laws which protect young people
 from exploitation and hazardous working conditions.
 Employment below the age of 12 is prohibited, as is employment
 of young people during the night. Relatively high wage rates
 and working conditions consistent with accepted international
 standards are features of the Singapore labor market which,
 despite the economic downturn, still provided jobs for some
 50,000 foreign workers. The unemployment rate in late 1985
 stood at 4.1 percent, and the Government has predicted that
 this will rise to between 5 and 6 percent in 1986. Singapore
 has no minimum wage legislation.
 Singapore enforces comprehensive occupational safety and
 health laws. Enforcement procedures, coupled with the
 promotion of educational and training programs, have reduced
 the frequency rate of job-related accidents from 7.0 accidents
 per million man hours worked in the early 1970's to 4.7 during
 a comparable 3-year period in the 1980's. The severity rate
 of accidents has been reduced commensurately.
 Women generally enjoy equal rights, primarily under the 1969
 Women's Charter and the Constitution. Muslim women's rights
 are protected by the provisions of the 1957 Administration of
 Muslim Law, which permits Muslim women to apply for divorce
 and provides for women to hold and dispose of property. Women
 have voting rights and the right of equality of economic
 opportunity under the law.
 There are few women in the top ranks of the civil service or
 business. As a result of the 1984 election, however, there
 are now three PAP female members of Parliament. In 1983 the
 median gross monthly income of female workers was 64 percent
 of that for male workers. A shortage of workers has led the
 Government to encourage women to work. Singaporean women do
 not have equal rights with man in the transmission of
 citizenship to their children. A Singapore woman married to a
 foreigner can not pass citizenship to children born outside
 the country, although a Singaporean man can. Additionally,
 the wife of a Singaporean male can receive permanent resident
 status and citizenship based on the marriage while the husband
 of a Singaporean woman can not.
 Social, economic, and cultural facilities are available to all
 citizens regardless of race, religion, or sex. Disparities
 exist among the various races, although not as a result of
 government policies. For example, according to 1980 census
 data, 0.21 percent of Malays had a university education, while
 1.8 percent of the Chinese and 2.44 percent of the Indians
 attained that level of education.
 
 
 873
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OSLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: SINGAPORE
 1983     1984     1985
 ..........................................................
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL,,,         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............    ... 0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRAN4TS ...............     0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.AID ........................ 0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............    ...  0.0     0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.),,,         0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ................ 0.0          0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............     0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ..........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  I-TOTAL .........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV S WFP,         0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST.          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ................ 0.0          0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE  CORPS ......       0.0      0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER .............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL.  ASSIST.-TOTAL..,        0.1      0.1      0.1
 LOANS ..............    ... 0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............      0.1      0.1      0.1
 A.MAP  GRANTS ..........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 3.CREDIT FINANCING ....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MILEOTRNG ....        0.1      0.1      0.1
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER  GRANTS ........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOAL  ECON.  &  MIL ..     0.1      0.1      0.1
 LOANS ..............    ....0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............     0.1      0.1      0.1
 ----------------------------------------------------------
 OTHER US LOANS ..........    . 272.9     0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......      272.9      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER ................ 0.0          0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1983     1984     1985     1946-85
 ---------------------------------------------------------
 TOTAL ........     0.7      0.0      0.0    386.5
 IBRO               0.0      0.0      0.0    179.4
 IFC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 108                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADS                0.0      0.0      0.0    181.1
 AFDB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNDP               0.7      0.0      0.0     25.4
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0      0.0      0.6
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
 874
