 SINGAPORE
 Singapore, a city-state of 3.6 million people, is a parliamentary republic in which
 politics is dominated by the People's Action Party (PAP), which has held power since
 ingapre gained autonomy from the United Kingdom in 1959. Following January
 2 parliamentary elections, the PAP holds 81 of the Parliament's 83 elected seats.
 Goh Chok Tong completed his seventh year as Prime Minister. Lee Kuan Yew, who
 served as Prime Minister from independence in 1965 until 1990, remains active po-
 litically, holding the title of Senior Minister. The majority of the population is ethnic
 Chinese (77 percent), with Malays and Indians constitutin substantial minorities.
 The judiciary is efficient and constitutionally independent. owever, there is a per-
 ceptionit reflects the views of the executive in politically sensitive cases.
 The Government maintains active internal security and military forces to counter
 perceived threats to the nation's security. It has frequently used security legislation
 to control a broad range of activity. The Internal Security Department (ISD) is re-
 sponsible for enforcement of the Internal Security Act (ISA), including its prvisions
 for detention without trial.
 Singapore has an open free market economic system. The construction and finan-
 cial services industries and manufacturing of computer-related components are key
 sectors of the economy, which has achieved remarkably steady growth since inde-
 pendence. Gross domestic product rose approximately 7.5 percent in 1997, and the
 annual per capita gross domestic product is approximately $26,000. Wealth is dis-
 tributed relatively equally in what is essentially a full-employment economy.
 Although there were problems in some areas, the Government generaily respected
 the human rights of its citizens. The Government stepped up its intimidation of the
 opposition in 1997, an election year. After the election, PAP leaders filed a number
 of potentially ruinous defamation suits against opposition parties and their leaders.
 
 
 895
 The ruling party's continued use of the judicial system for political purposes high-
 lights concerns about the independence of the judiciary in cases that affected mem-
 bers of the opposition, or that had political implications. The Government has wide
 powers to detain people arbitrarily and subsequently restrict their travel, freedom
 of speech, and right to associate freely, and to handicap political opposition. There
 was no evidence of a change in the Government's willingness to exercise these pow-
 ers when it deemed that necessary in pursuit of its policy goals. The Government
 restricts freedom of speech and of the press and intimidates journalists into practic-
 ing self-censorship. The authorities have the technical capability to intrude on peo-
 ple's privacy and may do so in some politically sensitive cases. There is some legal
 discrimination against women, which affects only a small percentage of the popu-
 lation. The Government has moved actively to counter societal discrimination
 against women and minorities. While freedom of religion is generally respected, Je-
 hovah's Witnesses have been banned since 1972 and the Unification Church since
 1982.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extra judicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.--
 The law prohibits torture, and government leade have stated that they oppose its
 use. However, there have been credible reports in past years of police mistreatment
 of detainees. Reliable reports indicate that police have sometimes employed sleep
 deprivation or interrogation of detainees in very cold rooms where the prisoners
 may be stripped of their clothes and doused with water. In 1993, the last year for
 which statistics are available, of the 94 complaints of police abuse investigated, 14
 were substantiated.
 The Penal Code mandates caning, in addition to imprisonment, as punishment for
 some 30 offenses involving the use of violence or threat of violence against a person,
 such as rape and robbery. The law also mandates caning for certain other offenses
 including vandalism, drg-traffckin, and violation of immigration laws.
 Caning is discretionary for convictions on other charges involving the use of crimi-
 nal force, such as kidnaping, or voluntarily causing grievous hurt. The law pre-
 scribes a maximum or minimum number of cane strokes in many of these cases, al-
 though the courts do not always abide by these guidelines. Women are exempted
 from caning, as are men over 50, under 16, and those determined unfit by a medical
 officer. In 1993, the last year for which statistics are available, the courts included
 a caning sentence in 3,244 cases.
 Prison conditions are general  good and meet minimum international standards.
 Some abuses have occurred an have been reported in the press. In March 1996,
 for example, three prison officials pleaded guilty to manslaughter for causing the
 death of a prisoner in August 1995. The Government had responded quickly to the
 abuse and publicly denounced all abuses of power by prison officials.
 The Government does not allow human rights monitors to visit prisons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Internal Security Act (ISA), the
 Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act (CIA), the Misuse of Drugs Act (MDA),
 and the Undesirable Publications Act all have provisions for arrest without warrant.
 Those arrested must be charged before a magistrate within 48 hours. At that time,
 those detained under criminal charges may obtain legal counsel. A functioning sys-
 tem of bail exists for those charged.
 The ISA, the CiA, and the MDA permit detention without trial. The Government
 reserves the right to use indefinite detention without i tho pressure detainees to
 orehabilitate, themselves as well as to make admissions of wrongdoing. In the past,
 the Government has acknowledged that, in the case of detentions without trial
 under the CIA, the indefinite nature of the detentions served to pressure the de-
 tainees. Persons alleging mistreatment under detention may bring criminal charges
 against government officials who are alleged to have committed such acts, but they
 may be discouraged from making accusations by fear of official retaliation (see Sec-
 tion i.e.).
 In 1989 Parliament amended the Constitution and the ISA to eliminate judicial
 review of the substantive grounds for detentions under the ISA and subversion laws.
 This permits the Government to restrict, on vaguely defined national security
 grounds, the scope of certain fundamental liberties that had been provided for in
 the Constitution.
 
 
 The ISA empowers the police to detain a person for up to 48 hours. Any police
 officer at or above the rank of superintendent may authorize that a detainee be held
 for up to 28 days longer. Once initial interrogation has been completed, the authori-
 ties have generally allowed ISA detainees access to lawyers and visits by relatives.
 The ISA gives broad discretion to the Minister of Home Affairs to order detention
 without charges if the President determines that a person poses a threat to national
 security. The President may authorize detention for up to 2 years; the detention
 order may be renewed for 2-year periods with no limitation on renewal. Although
 persons detained without trial under the ISA are entitled to counsel, they have no
 right through the courts to challenge the substantive basis for their detention. In-
 stead, detainees may make representations to an advisory board that reviews each
 detainee's case periodically. The board may make nonbinding recommendations that
 a detainee be released prior to expiration of the detention order. If the Minister
 wishes to act contrary to a recommendation for release by the board, he must seek
 the agreement of the President.
 No one has been jailed under formal ISA detention since 1990. However, the Gov-
 ernment has maintained some restrictions on the rights of one former ISA detainee
 to travel abroad, make public statements, and associate freely. Chia Thye Poh, a
 former Member of Parliament, was released from prison in 1989 after 23 years in
 preventive detention under the ISA but was confined to a small island adjacent to
 Singapore during evening and night hours until 1992. He cannot issue public state-
 ments, attend public meetings, take part in political activity, or associate with other
 former detainees without ISD approval, but he was allowed to travel to Germany
 in the summer. Until November 1996, Chia had also been required to seek approval
 to be employed or travel abroad.
 Persons detained without trial under the CLA are entitled to counsel but may
 only challenge the substantive basis for their detention to the committee advising
 the Minister for Home Affairs on detention issues. The CLA is used almost exclu-
 sively in cases involving narcotics and secret criminal societies and has not been
 used for political puoses. According to the Government, the cumulative number
 of persons currently detained under the CLA as of July 1995, the last period for
 which statistics are available, was 570, of whom 248 were for secret society activi-
 ties and 322 for drug trafficking. Under the MDA, the Director of the Central Nar-
 cotics Bureau ma also commit-without trial-suspected drug users to a drug reha-
 bilitation center or up to 6 months, with subsequent extensions, in cases of positive
 urinalysis tests.
 The Constitution prohibits exile, and the Government respects the prohibition in
 practice.
 e. Denial of Fair Public TriaL-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, but the Government restricts the independence of the judiciary in practice
 through its control over the assignment ofjudges and through laws limiting judicial
 review. Many judicial officials, especially Supreme Court judges, have close ties to
 the ruling party and its leaders. The President appoints judges to the Supreme
 Court on the recommendation of the Prime Minister in consultation with the Chief
 Justice. The President also appoints subordinate court judges on the recommenda-
 tion of the Chief Justice. The term of appointment is determined by the Legal Serv-
 ice Commission of which the Chief Justice is the chairman. The 1989 constitutional
 amendments that eliminated judicial review of the objective grounds for detentions
 under the ISA and subversion laws allows the Government to restrict, or even elimi-
 nate, judicial review in such cases and thereby restrict, on vaguely defined national
 security grounds, the scope of certain fundamental liberties provided for in the Con-
 stitution.
 The judicial system has two levels of courts: The Supreme Court, which includes
 the High Court and the Court of Appeal; and the subordinate courts. Subordinate
 court judges and magistrates, as well as public prosecutors, are civil servants whose
 specific assignments are determined by the Legal Service Commission, which can
 decide on job transfers to any of several legal service departments. If they wish, Su-
 preme Court Justices remain in office until the mandatory retirement age of 65,
 after which they may continue to serve at the Government's discretion for brief, re-
 newable terms at full salary. The Constitution has a provision for the Prime Min-
 ister or the Chief Justice to convene a tribunal in order to remove a justice "on the
 ground of misbehavior or inability. . , to properly discharge the functions" of office,
 but it has never been used.
 In February 1994, completing a transition begun in 1989, Parliament approved a
 bill abolishing all appeals to the Privy Council in London. The Court of Appeal
 therefore became the highest court of review.
 The judicial system provides citizens with an efficient judicial process. In normal
 cases the Criminal Procedures Code provides that a charge against a defendant
 
 
 must be read and explained to him as soon as it is framed by the prosecution or
 the magistrate. Defendants enjoy a presumption of innocence and the right of ap-
 peal, in most cases. They normally have the right to be present at their trials, to
 e represented by an attorney, to confront witnesses against them, to provide wit-
 nesses and evidence on their own behalf, and to review government-held evidence
 relevant to their cases.
 The Constitution extends the above rights to all citizens. However, persons de-
 tained under the CLA are not entitled to a public trial. In addition, proceedings of
 the advisory board under the ISA are not public (see Section 1d.). In all remaining
 cases, trials are public and by judge; there are no jury trials.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Government can use its wide discretionary powers under the ISA if it determines
 that national security is threatened. In most cases, the law requires search war-
 rants, normally issued by the magistrate's court, for intrusion into the home. Law
 enforcement officers may, however, search a person, home, or property without a
 warrant if they decide that searches are necessary to preserve evidence. The CIA
 and the MDA permit warrantless searches in dealing with drug- and secret society-
 related offenses. The courts may undertake judicial review of such searches at the
 request of the defendant.
 Divisions of the Government's law enforcement agencies, including the Internal
 Security Department and the Corrupt Practices Investigation Board, have wide net-
 works for gathering information. The authorities have the capability to monitor tele-
 phone and other private conversations and conduct surveillance. It is believed that
 the authorities routinely monitor citizens' telephone conversations and use of the
 Internet. While there were no proven allegations that they did so in 1997, it is wide-
 ly believed that the authorities routinely conduct surveillance on some opposition
 politicians and other critics of the Government.
 The Government does not permit the import of newspapers from Malaysia, and
 bars the import of other publications (see Section 2.a.).
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution permits official restrictions on
 the freedom of expression, and, in practice, the Government restricts the freedoms
 of speech and the press and intimidates journalists into practicing self-censorship.
 The ISA permits the Government to prohibit or to p lace conditions on publications
 that incite violence, that counsel disobedience to thelaw, that might arouse tensions
 among the various classes (races, religions, and language groups), or that might
 threaten national interests, national security, or public order. The Government uses
 a broad defmnition of these laws to restrict political opposition and criticism. The
 Government does not tolerate discussions in the press of alleged government corrup-
 tion, nepotism, or a compliant judiciary.
 All general circulation newspapers in all four official languages-Engish, Chi-
 nese, Malay, and Tamil-are owned by Singapore Press Holdings Ltd. (SPH), a pri-
 vate holding company that has close ties to the national leadership. SPH is required
 by law to issue ordinary and management shares; holders of management shares
 have te power to ontrol all SPH personnel decisions. The Government must ap-
 prove, and can remove, holders of management shares. Hence, while newspapers
 print a large and diverse selection of articles from domestic and foreign sources, edi-
 torials and coverage of domestic events closely mirror government policies and the
 opinions of government leaders. Government leaders often criticize what they call
 the "Western model" of journalism, in which the media are free to report the news
 as they see it. Government officials argue that the role of the domestic media is to
 act responsibly, which is generally understood to mean support for the goals of the
 elected leadership and preservation of social and religious harmony.
 A wide range of international magazines and newspapers may be purchased tn-
 censored, although newspapers printed in Malaysia may not be imported. A 1990
 law requires foreign publcations that report on politics and current events in South-
 east Asia to register and post a bond the equivalent of $141,100, and name a person
 in Singapore to accept legal service. These requirements strengthen government
 control over foreign media. The Government may ban the circulation of domestic
 and foreign publications under provisions of the  aA and the Undesirable Publica-
 tions Act. Under amendments to the Newspaper and Printing Presses Act, the Gov-
 ernment may limit the circulation of foreign publications that it determines inter-
 fere in Singapore's domestic politics. It has done so on occasion in the past.
 The Asian Wall Street Journal (AWSJ), Asiaweek, and the Far Eastern Economic
 Review (FEER) are "gazetted" (limited in circulation). In July the Government re-
 laxed restrictions, raising the weekly circulation limits for the FEER from 6,000 to
 
 
 898
 8,000 and for Asiaweek from 15,000 to 18,000. The limit for the AWSJ remained
 at 9,000 per issue. It further allowed the FEER to have a full-time Singapore cor-
 respondent.
 Import of some publications is barred, and the authorities censor movies, tele-
 vision programs, video materials, and music. Censorship of materials and the deci-
 sion to deny the importation of specific publications are based on a determination
 that such materials would undermine the stability of the State, are pro-Communist,
 contravene moral norms, are pornographic, show excessive or gratuitous sex and vi-
 olence, glamorize or promote drug use, or incite racial, religious, or linguistic ani-
 mosities. The authorities say that there is strong public support for continued cen-
 sorship of sex and violence in films.
 The Singapore Broadcasting Authority (SBA), established in 1994 to regulate and
 promote the broadcasting industr, develops censorship standards with the help of
 an advisory panel whose membership represents a cross section of society. It also
 regulaes access to material on the Internet. In 1996 the SBA introduced a frame-
 work of web site licenses to encourage accountability and responsible use of the
 Internet. Internet service providers responded by installing "proxy servers" through
 which local users must route their Internet connections and which act as a filter
 for objectionable content. While the Government does not classify regulation of the
 Internet as censorship, the SBA can direct service providers to block access to web
 pages which, in the Government's view, undermine public security, national defense,
 racial and religious harmony, and public morals. In September 1996, the SBA order
 Internet service providers to block access to about a dozen sites deemed to violate
 these rules. Since then the number of prohibited sites has grown to around 100, al-
 most all of which are pornographic in nature. The list of prohibited sites is not a
 matter of public record.
 In response to recommendations by its advisory panel, the SBA announced in Oc-
 tober a new Internet Code of Practice, which aims to clarify the SBA's policy on the
 regulation of Internet material. The SBA emphasized that its primary concern was
 to limit access to material that contains pornography or excessive violence or that
 incites racial or religious hatred. The SBA assured citizens that it does not monitor
 e-mail messages, chat groups, what sites people access, or what they download. Ac-
 cording to the SBA, the new regulations are intended to address in greater detail
 what types of material are forbidden, and to better explain the responsibilities of
 Internet material and service providers.
 As a practical matter, virtually all web sites are available on the Internet. The
 Government's regulatory scheme is primarily concerned with the downloading and
 roiera tioncof objectionable material and less with the purely private use of the
 Internet. Nevertheless, a 1996 Interpl case that led the Government to arrest and
 ost al Singaporean for downloading child pornography made all citizens keenly
 aware that, even if the Government does not regularly monitor their use of the
 Internet, it has the ability to do so.
 The government-linked holding company, Singapore International Media PTE Ltd,
 has a near monopoly on broadcasting. Its 4 main subsidiaries operate all 4 free tele-
 vision channels and 10 of the 15 domestic radio stations. Of the five remaining radio
 stations, two are owned by the Singapore Armed Forces Reservists' Association
 (SAFRA) and two by the National Trade Union Congress (NTUC), which is closely
 affiliated with the Government. The only radio station not under government con-
 trol is the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) World Service, which is available
 24 hours a day. In addition to the BBC, Malaysian and Indonesian television and
 radio broadcasts can be received. An expanded cable service with links to the Gov-
 ernment began operation in June 1995 and offers more than 30 channels. Satellite
 dishes are banned with few exceptions.
 Journalists from foreign publications are required by law to apply annually for re-
 newal of the emploent pass that allows them to operate in Singapore. use Gov-
 ernment has inted the amount of time that some foreign correspondents could re-
 main in the country by denying reqnests for renewal of their employment passes,
 usually beyond a period of 3 years. The Government has denied requests in the past
 from several major publications to station correspondents in Singapore.
 Government leaders use defamation suits or the threat of such actions to discour-
 age public criticism and intimidate the press. In 1995 Prime Minister Go b Chok
 Tong, Senior Minister Lee Kuan Yew, and his son, Deputy Prime Minister Lee
 Hsien Loong, won a record defamation judgment of $678,000 against the Inter-
 national Herald Tribune (        9I9) for an article, published in August 1994, allegedly
 suggesting thatthe younger Leewasappointedtohisstonaccountofhisfather.
 The plaintiffs sought damages in addition to a printed apology, which appeared in
 the newspaper on August 31, 1994. During a widely publicized public hearng to de-
 termine the scope of the judgment against the HIT, all three plaintiffs testified that
 
 
 899
 the IHT had not apologize in good faith and demanded aggravated damages for the
 harm caused to their reputations.
 In January 1995, Dr. Christopher Lingle, an American academic who had been
 a visiting lecturer at the National University of Singapore, the IHT, and its Singa-
 pore printer were fined for contempt of court following the publication of an article
 about Asian governments by Lingle on October 7, 1994. Although Singapore was not
 mentioned in the article, the court interpreted the article's contention that some
 governments were "relying upon a compliant judiciary to bankrupt opposition politi-
 cians or buying out enough of the opposition to take control democratically as a
 reference to Singapore. Although the IRT published an apology for the article in De-
 cember 1994 Semor Minister Lee Kuan Yew filed a civil libel suit. In November
 1995, the MIT ared to pay the Senior Minister $213,000 in damages plus costs
 for the civil suit. TAngle was separately ordered by the courts in April to pay $71,000
 in damages, plus costs, to the Senior Minister. These two suits have had the effect
 of intimidating the press.
 In August the Government demanded that the Foreign Correspondents Associa-
 tion cancel a speech by Indonesian opposition leader Megawati Sukarnoputri. The
 group's executive committee acceded to the Government's demand.
 Faculty members at public institutions of higher education are government em-
 ployees. A number of university lecturers are concurrently PAP Members of Par-
 liament (M.P."s). Academics sometimes criticize government policies, but they avoid
 public criticism of individual government leaders and sensitive social and economic
 policies because of possible sanctions. Publications by local academics and members
 of think tanks rarely deviate substantially from government views.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution grants citi-
 zens the freedom of peaceful assembly and association but permits Parliament to
 impose restrictions "as it considers necessary or expedient in the interest of the se-
 curity of Singapore." The Government restricts these rights in practice. Assemblies
 of more than five persons in public, including political meetings and rallies, must
 have police permission. The Government closely monitors political gatherings re-
 gardless of the number present. Persons wishing to speak at a public function, ex-
 cluding functions provided by or under the auspices of the Government, must obtain
 a public entertainment license from the police. Opposition politicians routinely expe-
 rience delays of 3 to 4 weeks before being notified of the disposition of their applica-
 tions.
 Most associations, societies, clubs, religious groups, and other organations with
 more than 10 members must be registered with the Government under the Societies
 Act. The Government denies registration to groups it believes likely to be used for
 unlawful purposes or for purposes prejudicial to public peace, welfare, or public
 order (see Section 2.c.). The Government has absolute discretion in applying this
 _broad and vague language to register or dissolve societies. It prohibits organized po-
 litical activities, except by organizations registered as political parties. This prohibi-
 tion effectively limits opposition activities (see Section 3). It has less of an effect on
 the PAP, which uses ostensibly nonpolitical residential committees and neighbor-
 hood grou   for  litical purposes.
 c.Freedom  feigion.-Freedom of religion is provided for in the Constitution
 and the Government usually respected this right in practice. There is no state reli-
 gion. The Government ensures that all residents of public housing have access to
 religious organizations traditionally associated with their ethnic groups. It provides
 some financial assistance to build and maintain mosques.
 Missionaries are permitted to work and to publish religious texts. However, all
 religious groups are subject to government scrutiny and must be legally registered.
 The Government restricts some religious groups by application of the Societies Act
 and has banned others, such as Jehovah'its WseS     and the Unification Church.
 The Government banned the former in 1972 on the grounds that it opposes military
 service, and its roughly 2,000 members refuse to perform military service, salute the
 flag, or swear oaths of allegiance to the State. In July 1996, a 72-year-old grand-
 mother was arrested and convicted fortossession of banned Jehovah's Witness lit-
 erature. She was sentenced to a $500  re. She refused to pay and was ordered to
 jail for 7 days. She was first arrested in February 1995, along with 69 other sus-
 pected Jehovah's Witnesses, at which time the police seized books, magazines, peri-
 odicals, and other materials believed to be related to the group. Of the 69 persons
 arrested, 28 were triedtad o found guilty of holding a meeting of a "banned societ
 and were fred between $500 and $2,000.
 The 1990 Maintenance of Religious Harmony Act made illegal what the Govern-
 ment deems to be the inappropriate involvement of religious groups and officials in
 political affairs. The act also prohibits judicial review of its enforcement or of any
 possible denial of rights arising from it.
 
 
 900
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution grants citizens the right to move freely throughout
 the country, though Parliament may pass laws restricting that right on the basis
 of "the security of-Singa .., the public order, public health, or the punishment
 of offenders." The Government requires all citizens and permanent residents over
 the age of 12 to register and to carry identification cards. The Government may
 refuse to issue a passport and has done so in the case of former ISA detainees. In
 January the Government seized the passport of the wife of opposition leader Tang
 Liang Hong. Tang himself had left the country earlier that month. Her passport was
 returned to her in June (see Section 3).
 The ISA allows the Ministers for Law and Home Affairs to suspend or revoke a
 detention order or to impose restrictions on former detainees' activities, places of
 residence, and travel abroad (see Section 1.d.). The right of voluntary repatriation
 is extended to holders of Singaporean passports. In 1985 Parliament provided for
 the loss of citizenship by Singaporeans who reside outside the country for more than
 10 years consecutively. Action under this law is discretionary and has been taken
 in at least one case involving a well-known government opponent, Tan Wah Piaow.
 After the completion of national service, former enlisted men are required to par-
 ticipate in reserve training until age 40 and former officers until age 50. Reservists
 who plan to travel overseas for less than 6 months must advise the Ministry of De-
 fense; for trips longer than 6 months, reservists must obtain an exit permit. Begin-
 ning at age 11, boys passports are restricted to 6 months. Males who are eligible
 for national service must obtain an exit permit for travel outside Singapore of more
 than 6 months, with the exception of travel to peninsular Malaysia on a restricted
 passport.
 The law stipulates that Singaporean former members of the Communist Party of
 Malaya (CPM) residing outside the country must apply to the Government to be al-
 lowed to return. They must renounce communism, sever all organizational ties with
 the CPM, and pledge not to take part in activities prejudicial to the State's internal
 security. In addition, the law requires them to submit to interview by the ISD and
 to any restrictive conditions imposed on them.
 Singapore neither accepted the Comprehensive Plan of Action for Indochinese
 seeking refugee status nor offered first asylum to refugees. Prior to 1991, the Gov-
 ernment permitted Indochinese asylum seekers to disembark if a resettlement coun-
 try promised to remove them within 90 days and if the rescuing vessel was in
 Singapore on a scheduled port of call. In June 1991, the Government halted disem-
 barkation on the grounds that resettlement countries had not honored their guaran-
 tees of removal. Approximately 140 Vietnamese boat people were placed in an open
 camp in Singapore. All were interviewed to determine refugee status and a number
 were resettled in resettlement countries. Ninety-nine Vietnamese boat people were
 repatriated in 1996 under the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
 (    CR) voluntary repatriation program. Five other Vietnamese asylum seekers
 have been allowed to remain in Singapore. The authorities permit persons of other
 nationalities who make claims for asylum to have their status determined by the
 UNHCR for possible resettlement elsewhere. There are no reports of a person hav-
 ing been returned to a country where they feared persecution.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides citizens with the right to change their government
 peacefully through democratic means, and the voting and vote-counting systems in
 elections are fair, accurate, and free from tampering. However, the PAP, which has
 held power continuously for 3 decades, uses the Government's extensive powers to
 lace formidable obstacles in the path of political opponents. It attempts to intimi-
 ate the members of the opposition through the threat of libel suits and the subse-
 quent loss of their political future, since large judgments in libel suits can lead to
 bankruptcy, and under the law bankrupt persons are ineligible to sit in Parliament.
 The Government also intimidates the opposition through the threat of potential loss
 of employment or professional licenses. Opposition politicians report that potential
 employers are reluctant to hire them or their supporters. As a result, opposition par-
 ties have been unable seriously to challenge the PAP's domination of the political
 system since the late 1960's.
 Parliamentary elections may be called at any time but must be held no later than
 5 years from the date Parliament first sits. Following January 2 parliamentary elec-
 tions, opposition politicians hold 2 of the 83 elected seats in the Parliament; the
 Singapore People's Party and the Workers' Party (WP) each hold 1 seat. In addition,
 the WP holds 1 "non-constituency" seat based on a law that assures at least 3 oppo-
 sition members in Parliament, though this member's parliamentary voting rights
 
 
</pre>
<pre>
 901
 are restricted. In addition to the 83 elected members, the President appoints "promi-
 nent citizens" to serve as nominated members for 2-year terms. The number of nom-
 inated members was raised from 6 to 9 for the current term of Parliament.
 Singapore's economic success and generally honest, effective government under
 the PAP has strengthened the Party's leadership role. However, its grip on power
 has also been enhanced by: patronage; political control of the press and the courts;
 strong party discipline; restrictions on opposition political activities; and complete
 control of the political process. For example, during the campaign leading to the
 January elections, senior government officials pointedly warned voters that pre-
 cincts that elected opposition candidates would have the lowest priority in govern-
 ment plans to upgrade public housing facilities. This heightened concerns among
 some observers about voters' genuine freedom of choice.
 Although political parties are legally free to organize, the authorities impose strict
 regulations on their constitutions, fundraising, and accountability. Government reg-
 ulations also hinder attempts by opposition parties to rent office space in govern-
 ment housing or to establish community foundations. In 1996 the Government de-
 nied an opposition party request to produce and distribute video tapes on the
 grounds that visual images can be usedto evoke emotional rather than rational re-
 sponses. Moreover, according to the Government, the use of videos could allow politi-
 cal parties to sensationalize or distort information to capture the maximum atten-
 tion of the viewer.
 Opposition political figures claim that such impediments are the root cause of the
 weakness of the opposition parties. The PAP claims that the lack of an effective op-
 position is due to disorganization, lack of leadership, and lack of alternative policy
 programs.
 Another example of the PAPs manipulation of the political process was the 1993
 selection of candidates to be Singapore's first elected president, who has some 'pow-
 ers over civil service appointments, government and statutory board budgets, and
 internal security affairs. By law, a Presidential Elections Committee (PEC) must
 certify the suitability of potential candidates on the basis of integrity, character,
 reputation, ability, and experience in managing the financial affairs of a large insti-
 tution. The PEC is composed of the Chairman of the Public Service Commission, the
 Chairman of the Public Accountants Board, and a member of the Presidential Coun-
 cil for Minority Rights. Eligibility for the presidency was considered automatic if the
 candidate had 3 years' experience as a high-ranking public servant or chief execu-
 tive officer of a large corporation. These requirements limit the pool of potential
 presidential candidates. Using these criteria, the committee rejected the applications
 of two opposition figures--Secretary General of the WP J.B. Jeyaretnam, and an-
 other WP member-for not satisfying the eligibility criteria regarding character and
 financial expertise.
 In addition, the Government directly or indirectly controls institutions supposedly
 outside its orbit, including academia, community service organizations, anl nearly
 all other nongovernmental organizations. While the PAP Government enjoys the
 support of these ostensibly nonpolitical organizations, it has used its broad discre-
 tionary powers to hinder the creation of comparable support organizations for oppo-
 sition parties.
 The threat of civil libel or slander suits continues to discourage criticism or chal-
 lenges by opposition leaders. The Legal Code also provides for criminal defamation
 offenses, but these provisions are seldom used.
 In the wake of the January elections, a group of senior PAP leaders-Prime Min-
 ister Goh Chok Tong, Senior Minister Lee Kuan Yew, and nine other current or
 former M.P.s-sued defeated WP candidate Tang Liang Hong for defamation. Most
 of the suits arose from responses Tang had made to the PAP leaders' claim, made
 during and after the election, that he was an "anti-Christian, anti-English-educated,
 Chinese-language chauvinist." Immediately after the election, Tang fled Singapore,
 citing death threats, and has yet to return. In May the Singapore High Court or-
 dered Tang to pay the PAP leaders a record $5.77 million in damages.
 Also in May, revenue authorities charged Tang with 33 counts of criminal tax eva-
 sion. In addition, the Government had seized the passport of Tang's wife when she
 attempted to leave Singapore in late January, ostensibly because her name is in-
 cluded on some of Tang's tax documents. Her passport was later returned and she
 was eventually allowed to leave the country in June.
 In January the same PAP leaders who had sued Tang also filed defamation claims
 against Tang's WP colleague, Party Secretary Genera1 and non-constituency M.P.
 J.. Jeyaretnam. The plaintiffs claimed that Jeyaretnam defamed them by implying
 that the were guilty of a serious crime when he told a rally on January 1 that Tang
 had fied police reports against "Goh Chok Tong and his people."
 
 
 902
 Yet another recent example of the use of libel or slander suits by government enti-
 ties to intimidate prominent opposition politicians was that of Chee Soon Juan, a
 lecturer at the National University of Singapore and Secretary General of the Singa-
 pore Democratic Party (SDP). Chee was dismissed from his teaching position in
 March 1993 for alleged irregularities involving his use of research funds and sued
 by his department chairman, S. Vasoo, a PAP M.P., for making allegedly defamatory
 remarks. Chee was ordered to pay $200,000 in damages to Vasoo and two other uni-
 versity employees as compensation.
 The Government also uses parliamentary censure or the threat of censure to hu-
 miliate or intimidate opposition leaders. For example, Parliament censured Chee
 Soon Juan and the SDP in November 1995 for allegedly endorsing attacks on the
 judiciary made by (hee's fellow panelists, dissident Francis Seow and academic
 Christopher Lingle, at a forum held in the United States in Sptember 1995. The
 Government did not attribute any statement directly attacking the judiciary or en-
 dorsing the views of Seow and Lingle to Chee or the SDP. Rather, government par-
 liamentary leaders said that the failure of Chee and other SDP leaders to contradict
 the attacks made by Seow and Lingle constituted positive assent by "clever omis-
 sion." In addition, in December 1996 Parliament levied fines in excess of $36,000
 against Chee and three other SDP members, claiming that they had committed per-
 jury and other offenses during the proceedings of a special parliamentary committee
 examining government health care subsidies. Parliament accused the SDP of fab-
 ricating statistics about the extent of these subsidies in a written submission and
 subsequent testimony to the committee. Chee and his colleagues claimed that they
 had submitted some incorrect figures to the committee in error but that they had
 not intended to mislead anyone.
 Although there is no legal bar to the participation of women in politics, they are
 underrepresented in Parliament. There are no female ministers. The highest rank-
 ing woman in the Government is a senior minister of state. Only 4 of the 83 elected
 parliamentary seats are occupied by women. From 1994-96, two of the six M.P.'s
 then sitting as nominated Members were women.
 There is no restriction in law or practice against minorities voting or participating
 in politics. Malaya, 14 percent of the general population, currently hold 13 percent
 of the seats in Pariament. Indians make up 7 percent of the general population and
 hold 10 percent of the seats in Parliament. Minority representation in Parliament
 is in part the result of laws requiring a minority representative in selected group
 constituencies.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no nongovernmental organizations, with the exception of the opposition
 political parties, that actively and openly monitor alleged human rights violations.
 While the Government does not formally prohibit them, efforts by any independent
 organizations to investigate and criticize publicly government human rights policies
 would face the same obstacles as those faced by political parties. In the past, the
 Government denied that international organizations had any competence whatso-
 ever to look into human rights matters in Singapore. For years Amnesty Inter-
 national had not been allowed to visit Singapore. However, in August the Govern-
 ment allowed observers from both Amnesty International and the International
 Commission of Jurists to observe the proceedings in the defamation suits brought
 against WP Secretary General J.B. Jeyaretnam (see Section 3).
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution contains no explicit provision providing equal rights for women
 and minorities; instead, it states that all persons are equal before the law and enti-
 tled to the equal protection of the law. Mindful of Singapore's history of intercom-
 munal tension, the Government takes affirmative measures to ensure racial, ethnic,
 religious, and cultural nondiscrimination. Social, economic, and cultural facilities
 are available to all citizens regardless of race, religion, or sex. Minorities actively
 participate in the political process, and are well represented throughout the Govern-
 ment, except in sensitive military positions.
 Women.-There is no evidence of any widespread practice of violence or abuse
 against women. Laws such as the Penal Code and the Women's Charter protect
 women against domestic violence and sexual or physical harassment. A battered
 wife can obtain court orders barring the spouse from the home until the court is
 satisfied that he will stop his aggressive behavior. The Penal Code prescribes man-
 datory caning and a minimum imprisonment of 2 years for conviction on a charge
 of "outraging modesty" that causes the victim fear of death or injury.
 
 
 903
 Women enjoy the same legal rights as men in most areas, including civil liberties,
 employment, commercial activity, and education. The Women's Charter, enacted in
 1961, gives women, among other rights, the right to own property, conduct trade,
 and receive divorce settlements. Muslim women enjoy most oft te rights and protec-
 tions of the Women's Charter. Muslim men may practice polygyny; they also may
 divorce unilaterally, whereas Muslim women may not. Polygyny occurred in 106 of
 4,121 marriages registered in 1996.
 Women make up 41 percent of the labor force and are well represented in many
 professional fields, but they still hold the preponderance of low-wage jobs such as
 clerks and secretaries. As a result, their average salary levels are only 78_percent
 those of men. Women hold few leadership positions in the private sector. In 1962
 the Government instituted the principle of equal pay for equal work in the civil
 service and abolished separate salary scales in 1965.
 Some areas of discrimination remain. Children born overseas to female citizens
 are not granted citizenship automatically, while those of male citizens are. Female
 civil service employees who are married do not receive health benefits for their
 spouses and dependents as do male government employees. Noncitizen spouses of
 female citizens are unable to obtain full residency rights, but the Prime Minister
 in his August National Day speech indicated that the Government would review this
 policy.
 Children.-The Government demonstrates its strong commitment to children's
 rights and welfare through its well-funded systems of public education and medical
 care. Access to public education and medical care is equal for all children in society.
 In 1993 the Government updated and reenacted the Children and Young Persons
 Act. This revised act establishes protective services for those children who are or-
 phaned, abused, disabled, or refractory, and it creates a juvenile court system. The
 Ministry of Community Development works closely with the National Council for
 Social Services to oversee children's welfare cases. Voluntary organizations operate
 most of the homes for children, while the Government funds up to 50 percent of all
 child costs, which includes normal living expenses and overhead, as well as ex-
 penses for special schooling, health care, or supervisory needs. There is no societal
 pattern of abuse of children.
 People With Disabilities.-The Government implemented a comprehensive code on
 barrier-free accessibility in 1990, which established standards for facilities for the
 physically disabled in all new buildings and mandated the progressive upgrading of
 older structures. Although there is no legislation that addresses the issue of equal
 opportunities for the disabled in education or employment, the National Council of
 Social Services, in conjunction with various voluntary associations, provides an ex-
 tensive job training and placement program for the disabled. Informal provisions in
 education have permitted university matriculation for visually impaired, deaf, and
 physically disabled students. The Government allows the equivalent of a $2,400 tax
 deduction for families with a disabled person.
 National IRacial/Ethnic Minorities.-The Indian and Eurasian communities have
 achieved economic and educational success rates on a par with the majority Chi-
 nese. Malay citizens, however, still have a lower standard of living, although the
 gap has diminished in recent years. Malays remain underrepresented at the upper-
 most rungs of the corporate ladder, and, some have claimed, in certain sectors of
 government and the military, a reflection of their historically lower education and
 economic position, but also a result of employment discrimination. Advertisements
 sometimes specify ethnicity and gender requirements or require fluent Mandarin
 speakers.
 The Constitution acknowledges the "special position of Malays as the indigenous
 people of Singapore" and charges the Government to support and promote their "po-
 litical, educational, religious, economic, social, and cultural interests." A Presidential
 Council on Minority Rights examines all pending bills to ensure that they are not
 disadvantageous to a particular group. It also reports to the Government on matters
 affecting any racial or religious community and investigates complaints.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution provides all citizens with the right
 to form associations, including trade unions. Parliament may, however, impose re-
 strictions based on security, public order, or morality grounds. The right of associa-
 tion is delimited by the Societies Act and by labor and education laws and regula-
 tions. Under these laws any group consisting of 10 or more persons is required to
 register with the Government. The Trade Unions Act authorizes the formation of
 unions with broad rights, albeit with some narrow restrictions, such as prohibitions
 on the unionization of uniformed employees. The national labor force comprises
 about 1.8 million employees, more than 255,020 of whom are organized into 83 em-
 
 
 ployee unions. Seventy-five of these unions, representing almost 73 percent of all
 unionized workers, are affiliated with the National Trades Union Congress (NTUC),
 an umbrella organization that has a close relationship with the Government.
 The NTUC unabashedly acknowledges that its interests are closely linked with
 those of the ruling PAP, a relationship often described by both as "symbiotic." For
 example, President Ong Teng Cheong served simultaneously as NTUC Secretary
 General and Second Deputy Prime Minister before assuming his current position as
 President in 1993. His successor at the NTUC, Lir Boon Heng, was formerly Sec-
 ond Minister for Trade and Industry. He continues as Minister without Portfolio,
 and also now has a seat on the board of Singapore Airlines. In addition, several
 other high-ranking NTUC officials are PAP M.P"s. NTC policy prohibits union
 members who actively suPPOrt opposition parties from holding office in affiliated
 unions. While the NC is financially independent of the PA, with income gen-
 erated by NTUC-owned businesses, the    TC and PAP share the same ideoogy.
 Workers, other than those in essential services, have the legal right to strike but
 rarely do so. No strikes have occurred since 1986. Most disagreements are resolved
 through informal consultations with the Ministry of Labor. If conciliation fails, the
 disputing parties usually submit their case to the Industrial Arbitration Court,
 which has representatives from labor, management, and the Government. These
 labor dispute mechanisms, along with the PAP/NTUC nexus, have played important
 roles in creating nonconfrontational labor relations. The Government also attributes
 the rarity of strikes to high economic growth rates, labor shortages in recent years
 that have sustained regular wage increases, the popular conviction that strikes
 would undermine SingaPOre's attractiveness to investors, and a cultural aversion to
 confrontation.
 The NTUC is free to associate regionally and internationally.
 b. The Right to Organize and' Bagain Collectivey.-Collective bargaining is a nor-
 mal part of management-labor relations, particularly in the manufacturing sector.
 Agreements between management and labor are renewed every 2 to 3 years, al-
 though wage increases are negotiated annually. Collective bargaining agreements
 generally follow the guidelines issued by the National Wages Council, a  up com-
 posed of labor, management, and government representatives, that maes annual
 recommendations regarding salary and bonus packages. The Industrial Relations
 Act makes it an offense to discriminate against anyone who is orpropses to become
 a member or an officer of a trade uon. The offense is punishable by a fine equiva-
 lent to $1,414 and/or a 12-month prison sentence. Labor laws and regulations are
 enforced uniformly.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Cornpulsory Labor.-The Government prohibits forced
 and bonded labor and enforces thisprvision effectively (see Section 6.d.). Under
 sections of the Destitute Persons Act, any~ indigent person may be required to reside
 in a welfare home and engage in suitable work. The International Labor Organiza-
 tion (ILO) has criticized the coercive terms of this act, which includes penal sanc-
 tions, as not in compliance with the ILO Convention on Forced Labor, ratified by
 Singapore in 1965. The Government maintains that the act is social legislation pro-
 viding for the shelter, care, and protection of destitute persons; and that work pro-
 grams are desiged to reintegrate individuals into society.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The Gov-
 ernment enforces the Employment Act, which prohibits the employment of children
 under age 12. A child over age 12 and under age 14 must receive written permission
 from the Commissioner for Labor for "light work suited to his capacity in a non-
 industrial undertaking." There are few such applications, and the Comssioner for
 Labor has never approved one. Employers must notify the Ministry of Labor within
 30 days of hiring a child between t      n aes of 14 and 16 and must forward medical
 certification to the Commissioner. The incidence of children taking up permanent
 employment is low, an  a abuses are almost nonexistent. The Government prohibits
 forced and bonded labor and enforces this prvision effectively (see Section 6.c.).
 Ministry of Labor regulations prohibit night employment of children and restrict
 industrial work for children between the ages of 14 and 16 to no more than 7 hours
 a day. Children may not work on commercial vessels, with any machinery in motion,
 on live electrical apparatus lacking effective insulation, or in any underground job.
 The Ministry of Lab or effectively enforces these laws and regulations.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There are no laws or regulations on minimum
 wages or unemployment compensation. The labor market offers relatively high
 wages and good working conditions. The Employment Act sets the standard legal
 workweek at 44 hours and provides for one rest day each week. The Ministry of
 Labor effectively enforces laws and regulations establishing working conditions and
 comprehensive occupational safety and health laws. Enforcement procedures, cou-
 
 
 905
 pled with the promotion of educational and training programs, have reduced the fre-
 quency ofjob-relatd accidents by a third over the past decade. While a worker has
 the right under the Employment Act to remove himself from a dangerous work situ-
 ation, his right to continued employment depends upon an investigation of the cir-
 cumstances by the Ministry of Labor.
 Because of a domestic labor shortage, a pproximately 400,000 foreign workers (ac-
 cording to government statistics) are employed legally, 20 percent of the total work
 force. There are no reliable estimates of the number of foreigners working illegally.
 Most foreign workers are unskilled laborers and household servants from other
 Asian countries. Foreign workers face no legal wage discrimination. However, they
 are concentrated in low-wage, low-skill jobs and are often required to work long
 hours. Foreign construction workers often live in substandard housing on construc-
 tion sites. There are about 90,000 foreign maids, mainly from the Phipines, Indo-
 nesia, and Sri Lanka. Maids, foreign or domestic, are not covered under the Employ-
 ment Act. Most work 6 days per week from very early morning until late in the
 evening. Many contracts allow only 1 day off per month. Contracts often stipulate
 that, even when she is ostensibly not working, a maid must remain on the premises
 except for official duties or on her day off. According to Ministry of Labor statistics,
 wages average around $230 per month (not including free room and board). Maids
 must often put aside most or all of their wages for the first several months of em-
 ployment to reimburse their placement agents. Work permits for low-wage workers
 stipulate the cancellation of such permits if workers apply to marry or marry a
 Singapore citizen or permanent resident. Maids only occasionally complain since
 they trmd the wages and working conditions to be generally acceptable. Although
 many lower p aid workers not covered under the Employment Act are ineligible or
 the limited fnte legal assistance that is available to citizens, the Ministry of Labor
 also offers mediation services for all employees, foreign or local. The Government
 allows complainants to seek legal redress and takes a firm stand against employers
 who abuse their domestic servants. The authorities have fned or imprisoned em-
 ployers who have abused domestics, often with great publicity.
