 SINGAPORE
 Singapore is governed under a parliamentary system modeled
 generally along British lines, with members of Parliament
 who are elected to maximum five-year terms on the basis of
 compulsory universal adult sufferage. Political power,
 however, is concentrated in one ruling party. The People's
 Action Party completely dominates Singapore, having won all
 seats in the past four general elections with approximately
 70 percent of the vote. Public criticism of the government
 tends to be circumspect, although there is virtually no
 formal censorship process. Persons are subject to arrest
 for pro-communist activities, activities that incite
 communal tensions, espionage, and drug use and trafficking.
 The government enjoys broad popular support. Its civil
 service is efficient and honest, and the government's
 leadership is free from corruption. In economic and social
 matters, Singapore's record for raising the standard of
 living and the quality of life of its population is
 excellent.
 A multi-racial society with a dominant majority of ethnic
 Chinese, but with Malay, Indian and other minorities,
 Singapore has experienced communal tension in the past and
 the possibility of it arising again is a constant threat to
 the nation's stability. In addition, Singapore was subject
 to acts of terrorism by elements of the Communist Party of
 Malaya through 1974. There have been no terrorist incidents
 in recent years, although the Communist Party of Malaya
 includes Singapore in its sphere of operations. The Govern-
 ment of Singapore cites both the threat of insurgency and
 the possibility of renewed communal conflict as justification
 for legislation that makes legal the arrest and detention
 without trial of persons suspected of activities that
 threaten general civil order. Such legislation was
 inherited from the British government that ruled Malaya
 and Singapore before Singapore became an independent
 republic.
 In the past three years several prominent political detainees
 were released, including some held for periods of up to
 fifteen years. There were about 35 persons detained under
 the Internal Security Act at the end of 1980.
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Torture is prohibited by the government under sections 330
 and 331 of the Penal Code, although individual instances of
 mistreatment by law enforcement officers have been alleged.
 Such behavior is illegal and punishable. Prime Minister Lee
 Kuan Yew publicly announced in February 1978 that any
 interrogating officer who assaulted a detainee would be
 liable to civil and criminal charges. There have been no
 reports of instances in which such charges have been brought.
 Allegations of torture have been denied by the government.
 In a report published in January 1980, Amnesty International
 stated its concern that people held in preventive detention
 under the Internal Security Act were subject to physical
 and psychological ill-treatment in some cases amounting to
 torture, and recommended establishment of an independent
 commission to investigate these allegations. In reaction,
 the Prime Minister appointed a three-man panel (consisting
 
 
 692
 of two Ministry of Foreign Affairs officials and the Dean of
 the Law Faculty of the University of Singapore) to investi-
 gate the procedures in interrogation and detention centers.
 The panel acknowledged that the process of interrogation
 involves psychological stress, but concluded that Amnesty
 International's reports of torture and assault were un-
 substantiated and based on misleading reports by certain
 detainees wishing to discredit the government. Amnesty
 International claims, however, that the panel investigated
 only 3 of the 21 detainees listed as having been ill-treated.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 There are no summary executions in Singapore. The govern-
 ment does impose the death penalty for offenses such as drug
 trafficking.
 Under the Internal Security Act (ISA), a person may be held
 for an initial 30-day period for investigation and interro-
 gation. After that initial detention, a person can be
 detained only under an Order of Detention. To obtain such
 an order, the Internal Security Department has to satisfy
 both the Ministry of Home Affairs and the Cabinet that there
 is justification to detain the person.  The cabinet, if
 satisfied, will then recommend to the President of the
 Republic that an Order of Detention be issued. The detained
 person has a right of appeal to an independent Advisory
 Board within three months, and thereafter to make represen-
 tations at the annual review of the case by the Advisory
 Board.
 In its 1980 annual report, Amnesty International asserted
 that the government used "techniques to induce mental and
 spiritual collapse, such as the denial of medication with
 the aim of extracting self-incriminating statements to be
 used as confessions." In the report, Amnesty International
 also stated that the situation of "a few long-term detainees
 was reported to have improved."
 Detention conditions are described by some detainees as
 reasonably good; a number were housed in cottages with
 individual bedrooms and communal dining and recreation
 rooms. Political detainees are kept separately from
 ordinary prisoners. Solitary confinement has been used
 as a disciplinary measure. Diet and access to medical care
 are described as adequate by some former detainees, although
 there are limits on food that may be brought from outside.
 Weekly family visits are permitted, and lawyers have access
 to their clients on request.
 c. Disappearances
 There is no information that people are abducted, secretly
 arrested, or held in clandestine detention by official or
 quasi-official security forces, or by elements whose acti-
 vities are condoned by the government. Neither are people
 subject to prolonged or permanent "disappearance."
 d. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Article Nine of the Constitution recognizes the right of
 habeas corpus. However, the government makes use of
 detention without trial in security and some criminal cases,
 including those involving organized secret society crime,
 under the Internal Security Act and the Criminal (Detention)
 Law. A Banishment Act, under which persons deprived of
 
 
 693
 their citizenship may be held awaiting deportation, remains
 on the books, but has not been used since 1959. Nevertheless,
 detainees under the ISA who are naturalized citizens may be
 stripped of their citizenship and are subject to deportation
 as undesirable aliens. Those who refuse deportation may
 then be held without trial. In late 1980 there were no
 detainees being held who had refused deportation.
 The Internal Security Act is a preventive-detention statute.
 The government states that its use is necessary to counter
 the Communist Party of Malaya (CPM), which is still active
 both in Malaysia and in Singapore. Although CPM membership
 is illegal in Singapore, the CPM maintains a small network
 in Singapore with a modest capacity to recruit cadre,
 solicit funds, and procure supplies for its armed insurgency
 in Malaysia. It is estimated that there is a hardcore
 communist cadre of several hundred either in Singapore or
 with easy access into Singapore from nearby Johore State in
 Malaysia, and that there are several hundred more communist
 sympathizers in Singapore. In the application of the ISA,
 however, the definition of a "security case" on past
 occasions has been extended to include the following
 categories of individuals: those who have had contact with
 communists or some other element of the radical left, but
 who are not necessarily themselves supporters of violent
 revolution, those who portray Singapore as a state in which
 individual liberties are curtailed or portray the Singapore
 government as undemocratic, totalitarian, autocratic, and
 oppressive, and those journalists whose reporting is
 considered by the government to be slanted and therefore
 susceptible to exploitation by communists.
 Persons detained under the Internal Security Act or the
 Criminal Law (temporary provisions) Act (d~scribed below)
 are informed of the charges against them and are entitled
 to an internal review of their case. The ISA permits the
 issuance of a two-year renewable detention order, which is
 subjected to automatic review by an advisory board at
 twelve-month intervals. The number of detainees held under
 the ISA fluctuates as detainees are released and others
 arrested. Since mid-1978, releases of detainees have
 predominated over arrests. There were approximately 35
 detainees at the end of 1980. All are said by the Singapore
 government to have some connection with the CPM, although
 some detainees claim they have no such ties.  Five of the
 detainees have been held for a long period because, according
 to a public statement by Prime Minister Lee, they refuse to
 abjure either forceful overthrow of the government or support
 of the CPM. The policy of detention without trial in these
 cases is defended by the government on the grounds that
 "open trial of communists is not possible as witnesses and
 officials have been intimidated or killed."
 The government appears to be adjusting its policy regarding
 political detainees. Two detainees conditionally released
 in November 1978 did not abjure the forceful overthrow of
 the Government or support of the CPM. The conditions of
 release of one of those persons, Said Zahari, were further
 lightened in August 1979 and he has since been employed in
 a responsible position as an editorial coordinator with
 Singapore's principal English-language media enterprise,
 The Times Organization.
 Perhaps 200 persons, approximately seventy of whom are
 believed to be narcotics traffickers, are detained under the
 Criminal Law Ctemporary provisions) Act, which is designed
 for and used mainly against members of criminal secret
 
 
 694
 societies and narcotics traffickers. A few persons within
 that group may be held for security reasons. A written
 order for temporary detention for one year may be issued
 by the Minister of Home Affairs. Each order must be
 reviewed within 25 days by an advisory committee, which is
 required to submit a written report to the President of the
 Republic.
 The Misuse of Drugs Act assigns responsibility to the
 Central Narcotics Bureau for identification and apprehension
 of drug users for detention in drug rehabilitation centers.
 The Bureau may summarily force any person to submit to a
 urinalysis in order to detect drug use. If the test is
 positive, the Bureau Director is empowered, without further
 process, to commit the user to a six-month term in a drug
 rehabilitation center. Upon release, the former detainee
 remains under close Bureau supervision for a period of two
 years. Thus, the Bureau fulfills a function that is left to
 probation authorities in most other countries. As a result
 of Singapore's drug rehabilitation program, the recidivist
 rate in Singapore is among the lowest in the world.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a fair public trial is observed except for
 persons detained under the provisions of the Internal
 Security Act and the Criminal (detention) Law, although
 the right to trial by jury has been replaced by trial by
 magistrate or judge. The Singapore judicial system operates
 in accordance with the basic tenets, practices, and prece-
 dents of British jurisprudence. Defendants may appeal civil
 verdicts to the Court of Appeal; criminal verdicts to the
 Court of Criminal Appeal; and from those appellate courts,
 defendants may appeal on up to the Judicial Committee of
 the Privy Council in London (because Singapore is a member
 of the British Commonwealth).
 Defendants are entitled to counsel at the time formal
 charges are made. Counsel has unimpeded and private access
 to defendants. The right to have an attorney present
 during the investigative stage is not rebognized, but a
 person called to appear before the police during an investi-
 gation may refrain from answering questions until he is
 able to obtain advice of counsel. There are no incidents
 of harassment of legal counsel, and, in some cases, at the
 investigating officers' discretion, counsel have been
 allowed to be present during questioning prior to the
 statement of formal charges. Defendants are made aware
 of the full nature of the charges against them, and discovery
 methods are available for determining the nature of the
 evidence against them.
 The courts are independent from executive and military rule.
 Military courts apply only to military cases and do not have
 jurisdiction over civilians, or even over military personnel
 involved in a civil crime off a military reservaticn.
 Appeals of military verdicts go to the President of the
 General Courts Martial Center, and from there to the Privy
 Council in London.
 f. Invasion of the Home
 The sanctity of the home is protected by law and custom.
 Search warrants normally are issued by a magistrate. If a
 magistrate is unavailable, a senior police officer may issue
 the warrant. In cases involving narcotics where the possi-
 
 
 695
 bility of destruction of evidence is present, a warrant is
 not needed. Officers making such an entry are subject to
 "post-invasion" investigation of the facts to show some
 degree of probable cause. There is no pattern of unlawful
 entry on the part of the authorities. Demolition and
 sealing doors and windows is not practiced by the government.
 2.   Government Policies Relating to the Fulfillment of
 Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care and
 Education
 Singapore is an urban city-state with a strong and prosperous
 free-enterprise economy. The government plays an active
 role by setting general goals and guidelines (although
 regulation is kept to a minimuml, and through the parti-
 cipation of government-owned firms. In recent years the
 development of manufacturing industries has contributed to
 the diversification of the economy, but since Singapore
 depends heavily on trade it remains vulnerable to inter-
 national economic conditions.
 The Singapore government has a deserved image of unbending
 honesty and exceptional efficiency. Its achievements in
 assuring the well-being of its people are internationally
 recognized. The standard of living is rising steadily with
 an average real annual growth rate of 9.4 percent during the
 1970's (10 percent for the first half of 1980). The per
 capita gross national product was $3,800 in 1979.
 Unemployment and inflation rates remained relatively low
 at 3.3 and 4.0 percent, respectively, in 1979, and 3.3 and
 9.8 percent (at an annual rate), respectively, for the first
 half of 1980.
 Singapore's pattern of income distribution, typical of a
 developing country, has remained relatively stable despite
 the rapid economic growth of the past decade. It is esti-
 mated that in 1976, as in 1966, the lowest 40 percent of
 income earners received approximately 13 percent of total
 income, the middle 40 percent received approximately 30
 percent, and the top 20 percent received approximately 57
 percent. The Singapore government does not sanction ethnic
 job discrimination (the constitution expressly forbids
 discrimination on the grounds of religion, race, descent,
 or place of birth), but the government does not regulate
 private practices. The government has moved in the past
 two years to increase the wages of the lowest paid workers
 differentially more than those of better paid workers, and
 the government plans to do the same for at least one more
 year. Further, although the median gross monthly income
 is approximately $165, only wages over $233 per month are
 subject to income tax, and the tax is progressive.
 There is no general sales tax.
 In 1980, 68 percent of the population was housed in well-
 designed apartments that the government built mostly over
 the last decade. Of people living in public housing
 estates, 59 percent purchased their apartments, largely
 through a scheme that permits down payments to be made
 from social security accounts.
 Free primary education is provided for the children of all
 Singapore citizens, and education through the university
 level is of high quality and is provided at modest cost.
 There are scholarships guaranteed by law for members of the
 Malay minority who receive high secondary examination scores
 and need financial help. In 1979 the overall literacy rate
 was 77 percent, and for persons under 35 years of age was
 over 90 percent.
 
 
 696
 Women have equal educational opportunities, and comprise
 half the primary and secondary school population and over a
 third of the students enrolled in universities and teacher
 training and technical institutions.
 The civil service has generally followed the principle of
 equal pay for equal work for men and women since 1962,
 although this is not always true of private employers.
 In 1979, the median gross monthly income of female workers
 was 75 percent of that of male workers. The gap partly
 reflects the concentration of women in traditional low-paying
 occupations and their lack of seniority in the work force.
 Over the past decade, there has been a trend toward increasing
 female participation in the work force. This has been
 encouraged by the government to counter serious labor
 shortages.
 Singapore has 13 government and eight private hospitals, and
 an extensive system of clinics. The quality of health care
 is high in both private and government facilities, and the
 charges in the latter are at subsidized rates. The effec-
 tiveness of Singapore's family planning program is inter-
 nationally acknowledged (1.2 percent population growth rate
 in 1977, 1978, and 1979, which is down from 4.4 percent in
 1957 and 2.8 in 1970). Its infant mortality rate was 1.3
 percent in 1979. Life expectancy is 70 years.
 The right to own private property is protected by law.
 Government regulations promote healthful and safe conditions
 in the work place.
 3.   Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 Singapore, although preponderantly Chinese, is a multi-
 racial society. There is complete freedom of religion
 for a wide variety of religious beliefs. A Presidential
 Council for Minority Rights is charged with insuring that
 no proposed legislation infringes on the rights of ethnic
 or religious minorities.
 Freedom of speech, press, and assembly is circumscribed
 in several areas. First, the government forbids activities
 or public statements that might arouse communal tensions
 between the dominant Chinese and the Malay or Indian
 minorities. Second, assemblies of more than five persons
 in a public place, including political rallies, must have
 a police permit.
 To operate legally in Singapore, societies and clubs with
 over ten members must be registered with the government.
 Registration is denied to societies with Triad (Chinese
 Secret Society) rituals, those likely to be used for
 unlawful purposes or for purposes prejudicial to public
 peace, welfare, or good order, or those whose registration
 would be contrary to the national interest.
 While there is no formal censorship other than prohibition
 of pornography and of discussion of certain ethnically-
 sensitive topics, the press is circumspect in its treatment
 of the government, and is mindful of the need for annual
 renewal of publishing licenses. In recent years, however,
 the press has broadened its reporting into criticism of some
 areas of public policy, and also publishes opposition
 viewpoints. The Singapore Broadcasting Corporation is
 owned by the government.
 
 
 697
 In the past, the government has invoked the Internal
 Security Act to arrest and detain persons accused of
 arousing communal tension, but no one is currently being
 held. Communist political activities are proscribed.
 The government promptly detains suspected communist
 activists under the Internal Security Act, and the
 definition of "security cases" is sufficiently broad
 that it has the effect of tending to stifle radical
 dissent.
 b. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 There are no limitations on freedom of movement within the
 country, although changes of address must be reported to the
 government within 14 days. All Singapore residents are
 required to register with the government, and receive an
 identity card. Passports are issued routinely, but an
 individual may be denied a passport at the Government's
 discretion. Travel to Kampuchea, North Korea, Laos, and
 Vietnam generally is not authorized. Travel to China also
 is controlled, but generally is authorized. Also, males
 liable for National Service may be required to post bond
 to insure their return before they are issued a passport.
 Passport fees are moderate, just over $11.00.
 Women are not subjected to different rules in matters of
 internal or foreign travel, emigration or repatriation.
 The right of voluntary repatriation is extended to holders
 of Singaporean passports. Several hundred ethnic Chinese
 who left Singapore during the 1950's and 1960's to go to
 China, however, have encountered difficulties in returning.
 When they decided that they wanted to return to Singapore,
 they found themselves stranded in China or in Hong Kong
 because they were unable to prove both that they were
 entitled to Singaporean nationality, and that they did not
 expatriate themselves during their stay in China.
 To date, according to the government, no one has been
 able to prove both points, and none has gained reentry to
 Singapore.
 Refugees are granted first asylum in Singapore based on the
 following criteria set by the Singapore government:
 -- Direct arrivals are not accepted. Only those
 refugees rescued at sea are permitted to land;
 -- A third-country guarantee of resettlement must
 be received before a vessel is allowed to disembark
 refugees in Singapore;
 -- Refugees are allowed to remain only 90 days
 before they must depart for a regional processing center
 or resettlement elsewhere;
 -- There is a population ceiling of 2,500 persons
 at the sole refugee camp in Singapore (this limit has
 occasionally been exceeded).
 As of December 15, 1980, a total of 19,860 Indochinese
 refugees have been granted temporary safehaven in Singapore.
 Except for a handful of direct arrivals by boat or stowaways,
 this total is composed entirely of Indochinese refugees
 rescued at sea by foreign-registered vessels and brought to
 Singapore. Ethnic groupings are: Vietnamese 92.5 percent,
 Chinese 7 percent, and Khmer 0.5 percent.
 
 
 698
 The government does not now accept Indochinese refugees for
 permanent resettlement, and only 28 of the refugee arrivals
 have managed to find a home in Singapore.
 The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees staff,
 other international organizations, and United States
 Refugee Program personnel have free access to the refugees
 as required during processing for resettlement, medical
 screening, etc. The Department of State believes that the
 general treatment received by the refugees is good.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Singapore is a republic with a parliamentary system of
 government organized along British lines. The 75-member
 Parliament is elected to maximum five-year terms on the
 basis of compulsory universal adult suffrage. A ceremonial
 President is elected by Parliament for a four-year term.
 The government is controlled by the People's Action Party
 (PAP), which is headed by Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew.
 Membership in the PAP is open to non-communist Singaporeans
 of any race.
 Non-communist, non-communal parties are legally free to
 organize, but no opposition representatives have been
 elected to the past four parliaments, in which the PAP
 won all seats with approximately 70 percent of the vote.
 There are 17 registered opposition political parties in
 Singapore. Only seven, however, ran candidates in the
 general electioh in December 1980. The activities of
 opposition parties are closely monitored by the government,
 particularly for evidence of links with the illegal Commu-
 nist Party of Malaya. Campaign speeches are tape-recorded
 by the Internal Security Department. The successful
 prosecution of at least eight libel and defamation suits
 against opposition parties and politicians following the
 1972 and 1976 elections have bankrupted several opposition
 politicians, thus removing them from the political arena.
 (Bankrupts are barred from political activities by law.)
 Although strict procedures are followed, such cases
 inhibit the opposition.
 Women enjoy the full panoply of legal rights. The 1969
 Women's Charter safeguards the position of women through
 regulation of marriage and divorce based on the principle of
 monogamous marriage, and protects women from exploitation
 for purposes of prostitution. The Charter also guarantees
 married women the right to engage in their own trade or
 profession, to acquire, hold, and dispose of property in
 their own right, and to use their own names. Muslim women's
 rights are protected by the provisions of the 1957 Admini-
 stration of Muslim Law Act, which permits women to apply for
 divorce, requires consent of both parties for divorce to be
 registered, and provides for women to hold and dispose of
 property. Women have voting rights and the right to
 equality of economic opportunity under the law, although the
 government has not yet been able to eliminate all discrimi-
 nation against women workers. Although there are no women
 members of Parliament, and few in the top ranks of the civil
 service, there are no legal restrictions on full participation
 by women in the political process.
 Singapore has approximately 257,000 union members (about 25
 percent of the labor force). There were 136 registered
 trade unions at the end of 1979, comprised of 85 employee
 unions, 50 employer unions, and a federation of employee
 trade unions. Ninety-five percent of the unionized workers
 
 
 699
 belong to 51 employee unions affiliated with the National
 Trade Union Congress (NTUC), which is formally and closely
 associated with the ruling People's Action Party. Several
 of the top leaders of the NTUC are members of that party and
 of Parliament. The right of registered trade unions to
 organize workers, strike, and bargain collectively is provided
 by law, within strict limits. Accordingly, strikes are
 rare, with none since June 1977. Procedures are provided
 for arbitration and conciliation of disputes.
 In April 1979, the Singapore government denounced its
 adherence to International Labor Organization (ILO)
 Convention 105 on forced labor. Since 1974, the ILO had
 asserted that persons detained under the ISA and other
 acts were subject to punitive labor. When the ILO rejected
 Singapore's description of such labor as vocational
 rehabilitation (to which only criminal offenders and not
 political detainees are subject), the government denounced
 the convention.
 4.   Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-governmental Investigations of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 In general, the government reacts defensively to foreign
 criticism. For example, Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew with-
 drew the People's Action Party from the Socialist Inter-
 national in 1976 when one of the other members criticized
 Singapore's use of the Internal Security Act.
 An Amnesty International mission visited Singapore from
 November 30 to December 5, 1978, to investigate the extent
 and conditions of political imprisonment. The Government
 refused its requests for interviews with the Prime Minister,
 the Minister of Home Affairs, and other senior officials
 responsible for the administration of political detainees.
 There are no active domestic organizations which observe,
 report and contest allegations of human rights violations.
 
 
 700
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: SINGAPORE
 1978     1979     1980
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.AID .................        0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.}...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACEE....           0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL .......          0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS.....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR...           0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL ........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.         0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS.............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 CONTR. TO IFI....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS......         0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST -TOTAL...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............       0.0        0.0      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS..........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREOIT SALES-FS...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TNG...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 O.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON' & IL...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER US LOANS..........         0.0    154.7      0.0
 EX-Im BANK LOANS.......         0.0    154.7      0.0
 ALL OTHER..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1978     1979     1980     1946-80
 -----------------------------------------------------
 TOTAL........      0.2     19.5     18.8    364.8
 IBRD               0.1      0.0      0.0    179.4
 IFC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADB                0.0     19.0     15.1    162.1
 AFOB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNDP               0.1      0.5      3.7     22.7
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0      0.0      0.6
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
701
