 SINGAPORE
 Singapore, a city-state of 3 million people, has a republican
 form of government based on the Westminster parliamentary
 system.- The majority of the population is ethnic Chinese (78
 percent), with Malays (14 percent) and Indians (7 percent)
 constituting substantial minorities.
 Politics are dominated by the People's Action Party (PAP),
 which has held power since Singapore gained autonomy from Great
 Britain in 1959. Lee Kuan Yew's chosen successor, Goh Chok
 Tong, completed his first year as Prime Minister in November.
 Lee remains active politically, holding the title of Senior
 Minister and serving as Secretary General of the PAP. In  he
 August 1991 general election, the PAP received 61 percent of
 valid ballots cast and won 77 of 81 parliamentary seats.
 The Government maintains active internal security and military
 forces to counter perceived threats to the nation's security.
 It has frequently used security legislation to control a broad
 range of activity. All young males are subject to national
 service (mostly in the military) and receive nationalistic
 indoctrination conforming to the credos held by the PAP. The
 Internal Security Department (ISD) is responsible for
 enforcement of the Internal Security Act (ISA), including its
 provisions for detention without trial.
 Singapore's economic system is one of the most open in the
 world. The economy in recent years has made impressive
 gains--gross domestic product grew by 6.5 percent in
 1991--enabling Singaporeans to enjoy a relatively high per
 capita income. Individual ownership of housing, mostly
 government-built, is enjoyed by 90 percent of Singaporean
 families. Wealth is distributed relatively equally in what is
 essentially a full-employment economy.
 The major human rights development in 1991 was the August
 general election, which marked the emergence of a more credible
 opposition to the PAP. Voting and vote-counting were fair,
 accurate and free from tampering, but, during the campaign, the
 Government used its extensive powers to keep its opponents at a
 disadvantage. Other important developments in 1991 were an
 agreement with the Asian Wall Street Journal allowing its
 return to limited circulation and passage of h constitutional
 amendment creating an elected presidency. This amendment
 changed Singapore's ceremonial presidency into one with
 extensive veto powers over budget decisions and key
 appointments, without a veto override mechanism in most cases.
 There were no ISA detainees in 1991; all remaining detainees
 had been released in 1990, and no new detentions occurred in
 1991. While the overall trend in human rights developments was
 positive, the Government continued to have .ide powers at its
 disposal, including the authority to detain people and
 subsequently to restrict their travel, their right to make
 public statements, their right to associate freely, and other
 activities without judicial review, and there was no evidence
 of a chaige in the Government's basic view of human rights
 issues.
 
 
 978
 SINGAPORE
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no known instances of such killing.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no known instances of politically motivated
 abduction, secret arrests, or clandestine detentions by either
 the Government or the opposition.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Torture is prohibited by law, and government leaders have
 stated that they oppose its use. There were no credible
 reports of mistreatment in 1991, although such reports do exist
 for 1990 and earlier years. In contrast to previous years,
 there were no reports in 1991 of government efforts to use the
 indefinite length of confinement to pressure detainees to
 "rehabilitate" themselves as well as to make admissions of
 wrongdoing. The Government has acknowledged that, in the case
 of detentions without trial under the Criminal Act, the
 indefiniteness of the detentions served to pressure detainees.
 Theoretically, persons alleging mistreatment under detention
 may bring criminal charges against those in the Government who
 are alleged to have committed such acts, but the Government in
 the past has not investigated or otherwise responded to such
 claims. Fear of government retaliation, e.g., redetention
 under the ISA, also discourages the making of such allegations.
 The Penal Code mandates caning in addition to imprisonment as
 punishment for certain offenses, including rape, theft,
 robbery, extortion, housebreaking, and vehicle theft. The
 courts routinely order caning for convictions for these
 offenses. Since 1989 illegally working aliens and their
 employers are subject to the same punishment (see Section
 6.e.), although no one has been caned under this provision.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Arrest without warrant is legally permitted under the ISA, the
 Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act, and the Misuse of
 Drugs Act. Those arrested must be charged before a magistrate
 within 48 hours. At that time, those detained under criminal
 charges may obtain legal counsel. There is a functioning
 system of bail for those charged. There were no reported
 abuses of the bail system in 1991.
 The ISA and the Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act
 authorize detention without trial. This latter act is used
 almost exclusively in cases involving narcotics and secret
 criminal societies and is not used for political purposes. The
 Director of the Central Narcotics Bureau (CNB) can also commit
 suspected drug users to a 6-month term in a drug rehabilitation
 center in cases of positive urinalysis tests. Singapore law
 does not treat involuntary commitment for drug rehabilitation
 as a criminal matter, but suspected drug-abusers have a legal
 right to challenge such findings through the court system.
 Those persons detained without trial, under the ISA and the
 Criminal Law Act are entitled to counsel but have no legal
 
 
 979
 SINGAPORE
 recourse through the courts to challenge the substantive basis
 for their detention.
 The ISA also permits the Minister-of Home Affairs to order
 detention without charges if the President determines that a
 person poses a threat to national security. The Government has
 broad discretion in determining what constitutes such a threat.
 The President may authorize detention for up to 2 years;
 thereafter, he must redetermine whether the detainee should be
 held, and may so order for up to 2 more years. There is no
 limitation on the number of times a detention order may be
 renewed. A detainee's case is reviewed periodically by an
 advisory board, to which the detainee may make representations.
 The board can make nonbinding recommendations that a detainee
 be released prior to expiration of the detention order.
 Persons are released when the Minister for Home Affairs
 determines they no longer pose a threat to national security
 and are unlikely to resume subversive activity. The Minister
 may also revokethe order for release. The ISA empowers the
 police to detain a person for up to 48 hours; any police
 officer at or above the rank of superintendent may authorize
 that the detainee be held for up to 28 days longer. ISA
 detainees normally have been allowed access to lawyers and
 visits by relatives once initial interrogation has been
 completed.
 No one was detained under the ISA in 1991, and the last two
 remaining ISA detainees were released in 1990. However,
 government-imposed restrictions on the right to travel, make
 public statements, and associate freely are in effect against
 some former ISA detainees. For example, Chia Thye Poh, a
 former Member of Parliament (M.P.) released in 1989 after 23
 years of preventive detention under the ISA, was originally
 allowed freedom only on a small island adjacent to Singapore,
 from which he could not leave without permission from the ISD.
 In September 1990, the Government relaxed the restriction,
 granting Chia permission to visit Singapore proper from 6 a.m.
 to 9 p.m. daily. Chia can be employed, subject to the ISD's
 approval. Vincent Cheng, a detainee released in 1990, must
 still appear at the ISD monthly, cannot issue public statements
 or publish without ISD's prior consent and cannot travel
 outside of Singapore without ISD's prior written approval. Teo
 Soh Lung, an ISA detainee released in 1990, also must seek
 ISD's approval for foreign travel, and was refused permission
 to attend a meeting in New York in 1990.
 According to the Government, 1,092 persons'were in detention
 under the Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act as of
 October 31.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Singapore judiciary system is based on the British model.
 There are. two levels of courts--the Supreme Court, which
 includes the High Court and the Appellate Courts, and the
 subordinate courts. In normal cases, the Criminal Procedures
 Code provides that a charge against a defendant must be read
 and explained to him as soon as it is framed by the
 magistrate. The accused has the right to be represented by an
 attorney. Trial is by judge rather than by jury. Persons
 detained under the ISA and the Criminal Law (Temporary
 Provisions) Act are not entitled to a public trial, which is
 accorded in- all other cases. In 1989, the Government amended
 the Constitution and the ISA to eliminate any judicial review
 
 
 980
 SINGAPORE
 of the objective grounds for detentions made under the ISA.
 The constitutional amendment also prevents the courts from
 reviewing the constitutionality of any law passed by Parliament
 to prevent subversion and allows such statutes to restrict, or
 even eliminate, judicial review in cases of alleged
 subversion. This constitutional amendment was made valid
 retroactive to 1971. The ISA amendment placed ISA detentions
 outside of the purview of judicial review, except with respect
 to compliance with procedural requirements of the act. These
 amendments in essence put the executive in charge of
 delimiting, on vaguely defined national security grounds, the
 scope of certain fundamental liberties provided for by the
 Constitution. In 1989 a High Court judge ruled that no legal
 challenge to these amendments can be sustained.
 Judges of the Supreme Court are appointed by the President on
 the recommendation of the Prime Minister in consultation with
 the Chief Justice. A Supreme Court justice may remain in
 office until the mandatory retirement age of 65, after which he
 may continue to serve at the Government's discretion for brief,
 renewable terms at full salary. Subordinate-court judges are
 appointed by the President on the recommendation of the Chief
 Justice. These appointments are for fixed periods and may be
 revoked. Subordinate-court judges and magistrates, as well as
 public prosecutors, are civil servants whose specific
 assignments are determined by the Legal Service Commission
 which can decide on job transfers to any of several legal
 service departments. The Legal Service Commission is headed by
 the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court; other members include
 the Attorney-General, a Supreme Court justice, and three
 members from the Public Service Commission. Judicial
 officials, especially in the High and Appellate Courts, are
 well entrenched in the Singapore establishment and have close
 ties to the Government and its leaders.
 The Constitution allows for the appointment of "judicial
 commissioners" to the Supreme Court as a stopgap measure to
 clear up case backlogs. Judicial commissioners have the same
 powers and perform the same functions as a Supreme Court
 judge. In 1991 there were 7 judicial commissioners, 11 judges
 and 1 chief justice on the Supreme Court. Most judicial
 commissioners are subsequently offered permanent appointments
 to the bench. Critics of the Government have charged that the
 judicial commissioner system in fact serves as a probationary
 period and gives the Government an opportunity to review
 rulings made by a judicial commissioner before offering an
 appointment to the bench.
 In 1989 Parliament greatly restricted appeals to the judicial
 committee of the Privy Council in London. This made
 Singapore's appellate courts the final courts of appeal in most
 cases. In explaining this change, the Government said that
 political, social, and economic circumstances in Singapore had
 become different from those in the United Kingdom and
 Singapore's laws were thus best interpreted by its own judges.
 In the view of government critics, however, the legislation was
 adopted in response to a Privy Council decision reinstating
 prominent oppositionist J.B. Jeyaretnam to the Singapore bar
 and strongly criticizing what it termed the miscarriage of
 justice perpetrated against him. At the discretion of the
 courts, Commonwealth Queen's Counsels (Q.C.'s) are allowed to
 argue cases in Singapore. Following habeas corpus hearings on
 an ISA case in 1989, however, the Government barred the Q.C.
 representing the petitioner on the grounds that he had involved
 himself in Singapcre's domestic politics by championing his
 
 
 981
 SINGAPORE
 client's cause outside of the courtroom, even though the
 remarks were made in London.
 Government leaders continued their unbeaten string of libel or
 slander suits against domestic opposition defendants. In
 August Senior Minister Lee Kuan Yew won a defamation suit
 against Quek Teow Chuan, formerly a member of the opposition.
 The court awarded Lee the equivalent of $237,000 in damages for
 remarks made by Quek at an 1984 election rally. In November
 J.B. Jeyaretnam paid Lee Kuan Yew the equivalent of $214,000 in
 legal costs resulting from a 1989 libel case filed by Lee. By
 paying those costs, Jeyaretnam averted being declared bankrupt,
 which would have resulted in his being barred by the Legal
 Profession Act from practicing law and by the Constitution from
 running for Parliament.
 In October Francis Seow, a prominent opposition lawyer now
 living in the United States, was found guilty of failing to
 submit tax information to the Inland Revenue Department, in a
 case dating back to 1987. Seow was also found guilty, in
 absentia, of tax evasion and ordered to pay a fine equivalent
 to $268,000 or face a prison sentence of 95 months. Human
 rights observers and legal scholars have protested Seow's
 conviction on the grounds that neither he nor legal counsel for
 him was present at the trial. This conviction in absentia has
 been described as an unprecedented breach of international
 human rights standards in Singapore.
 Legislative action in recent years has tended to expand the
 discretionary power of the Government, with judicial review
 limited to the examination of adherence to procedures.
 Examples include a 1989 amendment eliminating judicial review
 in the ISA, the explicit denial of judicial review in the 1990
 Religious Harmony Act, and 1990 amendments to the Newspaper and
 Printing Presses Act which strengthened governmental controls
 over the foreign press. The result of these measures has been
 to reduce the authority of the judiciary to act as a check on
 the Government.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Government uses its wide discretionary powers when it
 believes that the security of the nation is threatened. In
 most cases, search warrants are required for intrusion into the
 home. Law enforcement officers may, however, search a person,
 home, or property without a warrant if they decide searches are
 necessary to preserve evidence. Warrantless searches can also
 be conducted under the Misuse of Drugs Act and the Criminal Law
 (Temporary Provisions) Act in dealing with drug- and secret
 society-related offenses. Judicial review of such searches can
 be undertaken by the courts at the request of the defendant but
 it is not automatic.
 Divisions of the Government's law enforcement agencies,
 including the Internal Security Department and the Corrupt
 Practices Investigation Board (CPrB), have wide networks for
 gathering information. The authorities have the capability to
 monitor telephone and other private conversations and conduct
 surveillance, but there were no credible allegations that they
 used this capability in 1991.
 
 
 982
 SINGAPORE
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution permits official restrictions on the freedom
 of expression, and, in practice, freedoms of speech and press
 are circumscribed. The law forbids statements that might
 arouse tensions among the various races and religions or might
 threaten national security or public order. The Government has
 in some cases applied a broad definition of these laws to
 restrict political opposition and criticism of the Government.
 Inflammatory discussion of race, religion, and language is
 illegal. The government-owned Singapore Broadcasting
 Corporation (SBC) follows government guidelines and has a near
 monopoly on broadcasting, with all 3 television channels and 9
 of 10 radio stations. The Government, however, is moving in
 the direction of deregulation and liberalization of the flow of
 information into Singapore. Television broadcasts from
 Malaysia and radio broadcasts from Malaysia and Indonesia can
 be received uncensored in Singapore. SBC allowed live, all-day
 news broadcasts from Cable Network News (CNN) during the Gulf
 War, and 1-hour live CNN broadcasts are now a permanent feature
 twice daily. The British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) world
 service broadcasts locally on the FM band, and the BBC's
 television service is discussing with SBC placement of its
 service on a new SBC subscriber (pay television) news channel.
 In March the Government announced that it would allow up to
 three subscription television channels over SBC, although the
 Government would still be able to censor programs deemed
 undesirable; talks are under way with a Hong Kong-based
 company. In April the Government ended a prohibition of
 installation of satellite dishes, and allowed businesses and
 financial institutions--but not hotels and households--to apply
 for licenses. At least 37 institutions, mainly banks, have
 obtained approval to install satellite dishes.
 All newspapers, except for a small-circulation Tamil-language
 daily, are published by Singapore Press Holdings (SPH), which
 has close ties to the national leadership. The Newspaper and
 Printing Presses Act creates two classes of stock for newspaper
 companies: ordinary shares that are freely traded, and
 management shares whose ownership is restricted to persons
 approved by the Government. Through a weighted voting system,
 holders of management shares can control all SPH personnel
 decisions. Holders of management shares, as government
 nominees, can be removed at the Government's discretion.
 Hence, while Singaporean newspapers, especially the
 English-language Straits Times, print a large and diverse
 selection of articles from a variety of foreign sources, their
 editorials and coverage of domestic events closely parallel
 government policies and the opinions of government leaders. In
 November the Government suspended publication of a local
 lifestyle magazine, Woman's Affair, because of a supposedly
 unflattering article on Singapore's female M.P.'s, all of whom
 belong to the PAP.
 A wide range of international magazines and newspapers can be
 purchased uncensored in Singapore, although newspapers printed
 in Malaysia are not circulated. The Government can limit the
 circulation of foreign publications that, by the Government's
 broad determination, interfere in Singapore's domestic
 affairs. The Asian Wall Street Journal (AWSJ), Asiaweek, and
 the Far Eastern Economic Review (FEER) are still restricted on
 this basis. The Government prints and distributes in Singapore
 a limited number of unauthorized photocopy editions of the FEER
 
 
 983
 SINGAPORE
 without advertisement, while a prescribed number of copies--per
 issue--of FEER (270), AWSJ (2,500) and Asiaweek'(12,500) can be
 distributed in full. The Government has allowed neither the
 FEER nor the AWSJ to post a correspondent in Singapore since
 1987 and 1988 respectively. The Government did permit a
 journalist from the Wall Street Journal's Tokyo bureau to cover
 the August election, and, beginning in November, the Government
 has allowed an AWSJ correspondent to spend 7 workdays each
 month in Singapore.
 The Government and the AWSJ in 1991 reached a partial solution
 to their dispute, which dates back to a government charge in
 1987 that the AWSJ had interfered in Singapore's domestic
 affairs. A second problem developed in 1990, when the AWSJ
 voluntirily ceased circulation in Singapore altogether rather
 than adhere to the Press Law amendment of that year which
 required offshore newspapers to post a bond equal to $118.000.
 In March Lee Kuan Yew and the AWSJ settled all outstanding
 lawsuits stemming from 1987. After additional negotiations in
 September, Dow Jones, the U.S. parent company of the AWSJ,
 reluctantly agreed to post the required $118,000 bond. The
 AWSJ returned to circulation in October, but the Government
 imposed a 2,500 circulation limit, half the AWSJ's former
 circulation. Dow Jones would have preferred that market demand
 determine the AWSJ's circulation. Under the 1990 amendments,
 the Government initially required three foreign publications to
 obtain circulation permits and post bonds of $118,000, but for
 the time being exempted 14 others from these requirements.
 Faculty members at Singapore public institutions of higher
 education are government employees. A number of university
 lecturers are concurrently PAP M.P.'s. Academics sometimes
 criticize government policies, but criticism of individual
 government leaders and government authoritarianism is
 infrequent because of possible sanctions. Tenure and renewal
 of appointments can be, and have been, refused to academics
 whose work deviates substantially from government views.
 Published social science and think-tank papers generally
 support government policies.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Assemblies of more than five people in public, including
 political meetings and rallies, must have police permission.
 The Government closely monitors political gatherings regardless
 of the number present. Associations, societies, clubs,
 churches, and other organizations with more than 10 members
 must be registered with the Government under the Societies
 Act. The Government denies registration to societies it
 believes likely to be used for unlawful purposes or for
 purposes prejudicial to public peace, welfare, or public
 order. The Government has absolute discretion in applying this
 broad and vague language to register or dissolve societies. It
 prohibits organized political activities, except by
 organizations registered as political parties. This
 prohibitioh extends to the opposition, but it is not clear that
 it applies to the PAP, which enjoys the support of residential
 committees and neighborhood groups ostensibly organized for
 nonpolitical purposes but whose leadership contains many
 grass-roots PAP members. (See also Section 3).
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is provided for in the Constitution and
 usually respected in practice. Missionaries are permitted to
 
 
 984
 SINGAPORE
 work and to publish religious texts. However, all religious
 groups are subject to government scrutiny and must be legally
 registered. The Government restricts some religious sects by
 application of the Societies Act and has banned others, such as
 the Jehovah's Witnesses and the Unification Church. A
 Presidential Council on Minority Rights exists to ensure that
 legislation does not infringe upon the rights of religious or
 ethnic minorities. There is no state religion, although there
 are periodic campaigns to make Confucian ethics the "national
 ideology" of. Singapore. The Government has provided financial
 assistance to build and maintain mosques. There is no
 religious test for employment in the Government or for
 membership in the PAP.
 In 1990 Parliament passed the "Maintenance of Religious Harmony
 Act," making it illegal to proselytize in a manner that could
 inflame religious enmity and proscribing what the Government
 deemed to be the inappropriate involvement of religious groups
 and officers in political affairs. There were no cases in 1991
 resulting from this legislation, but the Act has had the effect
 of causing some religious groups to exercise more self-
 restraint. The Act explicitly denies the judiciary the
 competence to review possible denials of rights which could
 arise from the application of the Act, and specifically denies
 judicial review of the enforcement of the Act. The Government
 justified adoption of the Religious Harmony Act by citing
 concern over the growth of charismatic Christian groups which
 do not recognize the unofficial agreement among establishment
 religious organizations not to proselytize among those of other
 faiths. A 1990 government white paper on religious harmony
 cited the Reverend Rick Seaward and his church as an example of
 such groups. Seaward was charged in 1990 with criminal breach
 of trust (fraud) in a case involving the lease-purchase of
 sound equipment by his church from a firm affiliated with
 Seaward. In January government prosecutors requested a delay
 in the trial until August, when the trial was again delayed,
 until February 1992.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 All Singapore citizens and permanent residents over the age of
 13 are required to register with the Government and carry
 identification cards. The Government may deny a passport, and
 it frequently does so in the case of released detainees, one of
 many devices that seem to inhibit such persons from resuming
 opposition to or criticism of the Government.
 The ISA allows the Minister for Law and Home Affairs to suspend
 or revoke a detention order or to impose restrictions on former
 detainees' activities, places of residence, and travel abroad.
 Chia Thye Poh is restricted in his movements within Singapore,
 while foreign travel of others formerly detained under the ISA
 is subject to approval by the ISD.
 The right of voluntary repatriation is extended to holders of
 Singaporean passports. In 1985 Parliament provided for the
 loss of citizenship by Singaporeans who reside outside
 Singapore for more than 10 years consecutively. Action under
 this law is discretionary and has been taken in at least one
 case involving a well-known government opponent, Tan Wah Piaow.
 Singapore does not offer first asylum to refugees. Government
 policy permits Vietnamese asylum-seekers rescued at sea to
 disembark and remain for up to 90 days only if Singapore was
 
 
 985
 SINGAPORE
 the rescuing vessel's next scheduled port of call and if a
 resettlement country provides a removal guarantee. The
 Government agreed in July 1991 to permit the United Nations
 High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCt) to make status
 determinations for those Vietnamese in the Hawkins Road camp in
 accordance with the Comprehensive Plan of Action (CPA) adopted
 in Geneva at the June 1989 International Conference on
 Indochinese Refugees. However, the Government has not
 permitted the UNHCR to announce the results. of the
 status-determination interviews, thereby blocking-both
 resettlement for those eligible and repatriation counselling
 for those ineligible for resettlement. Singapore has not
 accepted the CPA, and continues to insist that its policy
 requires Vietnamese asylum-seekers to depart within 90 days.
 In practice, Singapore limited the disembarkation of rescued
 Vietnamese in July 1990 and halted it completely in June 1991
 because removal within 90 days could not be guaranteed. Ten
 asylum-seekers- who were rescued at sea by an LPG-carrier in
 October were denied permission to enter Singapore; they were
 forced to leave Singapore on the same ship after it had waited
 unsuccessfully in port for 5 days to disembark them. As of
 September 1, 1991, there were 150 asylum-seekers at the Hawkins
 Road camp which has a stated capacity of approximately 1,000
 persons. Persons of other nationalities who enter Singapore
 and who come to the attention of UNHCR are permitted to have
 their status determined for possible resettlement elsewhere.
 There is no systematic procedure for ensuring that
 asylum-seekers are referred to the UNHCR.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Theoretically, Singaporeans have the right to change their
 Government peacefully. The voting and vote-counting systems in
 elections are fair, accurate, and free from tampering.
 However, the Government has extensive powers which it can use
 to place formidable obstacles in the path of current and
 would-be opponents. Despite these PAP advantages, the August
 elections marked the emergence of a somewhat more credible
 opposition to the PAP. Opposition candidates received 39
 percent of the popular vote and won 4 seats. In addition, in 8
 constituencies, there were substantial vote swings against the
 PAP. As a result of the election, the PAP occupied 77 of
 Parliament's 81 seats, the Singapore Democratic Party (SDP) 3,
 and the Workers' Party (WP) 1. In a post-election interview,
 Prime Minister Gob Chok Tong said he was against having an
 opposition for fear it would prove divisive fQr -a country as
 small as Singapore. It remained to be seen how the new
 Parliament, which will be seated in January 1992, will
 implement legislation enacted in 1990 providing for a system of
 "Nominated Members of Parliament" (N.M.P.'s). This legislation
 allows for the appointment of as many as six N.M-P.'s, usually
 neutral and talented-individuals not interested in running for
 office, who can raise the level of debate and decisionmaking in
 Parliament. The actual implementation of this bill is
 determined by each new Parliament, which decides how many
 N.M.P.'s, if any, it wishes to appoint.. The system of N.M.P.'s
 is similar to an arrangement developed in 1988 allowing for
 four to six "Non-Constituency Members of Parliament"
 (N.C.M.P.'s), should no opposition candidate win an election.
 Both N.M.P.'s and N.C.M.P.'s enjoy restricted voting
 privileges.
 The Government introduced N.M.P.'s and N.C.M.P.'s in response
 to a popular call for alternative voices in Parliament to
 
 
 986
 SINGAPORE
 provide debate and checks on government action. This role now
 devolves on the four elected opposition representatives.
 While opposition parties have contested every election, none
 has been able seriously to challenge the PAP since the late
 1960's. The PAP attributes the lack of effective opposition to
 disorganization, lack of leadership, and lack of alternative
 policy programs. Political parties, while legally free to
 organize, are subject to strict regulations on party
 constitutions, fund-raising, and accountability. While the PAP
 has been able to enjoy the support of ostensibly nonpolitical
 organizations, the Government has used its broad discretionary
 powers to hinder the creation of support organizations for the
 opposition parties.
 The PAP's access to the instruments of power and its ability to
 intimidate opposition parties was much in evidence during the
 August election campaign. Press coverage throughout the
 campaign was heavily pro-PAP. PAP leaders indirectly
 threatened to invoke the ISA against one WP candidate for
 supposedly agitating the voters on racial issues. The PAP also
 held out the threat of future slander suits. Halfway into the
 campaign, the local press prominently reported that Lee Kuan
 Yew had just won a defamation suit against Quek Teow Chuan, an
 ex-opposition member, for remarks made by Quek at an 1984
 election rally. One opposition figure, WP candidate Gopalan
 Nair, was found guilty in November of contempt of court for
 questioning the independence of Singapore's judiciary in an
 August 28 campaign speech, and fined the equivalent of $4,800.
 Despite the stronger showing by opposition parties in the
 August election, the PAP's domination of politics in Singapore
 continues, as it has for three decades under the authoritarian
 leadership of Lee Kuan Yew. The PAP's grip on power has been
 enhanced by patronage, such as the network of town councils;
 political control of the press, courts, and religion; and
 strong party discipline and performance. Under the PAP's
 leadership, Singapore has achieved rapid economic growth,
 enabling the Government to provide a wide array of public
 services. The PAP's broad base includes representatives of all
 racial communities in Singapore and is rooted in neighborhood,
 youth, and labor associations. National servicemen receive
 indoctrination based on ideas derived from the PAP. The
 still-forming national ideology is replete with PAP themes.
 National holidays are usually celebrated with PAP members in
 highlighted roles. PAP members regularly preside at
 dedications and ribbon-cuttings.
 In January Parliament passed a constitutional amendment
 changing Singapore's ceremonial presidency into one with veto
 powers over government budgets and key public appointments.
 The amendment went into effect in November. There is no
 mechanism for overriding presidential vetoes, except in the
 case of "supply bills," legislation that authorizes government
 expenditures. The elected President, who will serve a 6-year
 term, can withhold concurrence to ISA detentions contrary to
 recommendations of a special advisory board; this provides a
 check on decisions by the Minister responsible for internal
 security to continue detentions despite the advisory board's
 recommendation for release. The elected President may also
 cancel, vary, confirm, or reject restraining orders made under
 the 1990 Religious Harmony Act. Aspiring presidential
 candidates must receive certificates of eligibility from a
 three-member committee, which will-consider such factors as the
 prospective candidate's character and ability. The first
 
 
 987
 SINGAPORE
 election must take place before the term of Singapore's
 incumbent President expires in September 1993. The amendment
 to establish an elected President had been debated at length
 since its proposal in 1988. The Government defended the bill
 as an additional safeguard against bad government. Some
 critics saw the new post as tailored to fit Lee Kuan Yew,
 although he had said he would not serve as Singapore's first
 elected president.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Governmental bodies, such as the presidentially appointed
 Minority Rights Council, monitor alleged violations of minority
 rights, primarily those concerning the Malay minority. There
 are, however, no nongovernmental organizations, with the
 exception of the opposition political parties, that actively
 and openly monitor alleged human rights violations. The
 Government denies that international organizations have any
 competence whatsoever to look into human rights matters in
 Singapore. Visa regulations do not recognize monitoring human
 rights as a "business purpose" for visiting Singapore, but
 neither is such activity regarded as a "social visit." Amnesty
 International is not allowed to operate in Singapore, but in
 1989 the Government allowed a group of observers from a foreign
 human rights group to attend the habeas corpus hearings of ISA
 detainees. The Government did not receive any requests in 1991
 from human rights organizations asking to examine the human
 rights situation in Singapore.;
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Because of Singapore's history of intercommunal tension, the
 Government takes affirmative measures to ensure racial, ethnic,
 religious, and cultural nondiscrimination. Social, economic,
 and cultural facilities are available to all citizens
 regardless of race, religion, or sex. Minorities are
 constitutionally afforded equal rights-and actively participate
 in the political process.
 The Singapore Constitution acknowledges the "special position"
 of Malays as the indigenous people of Singapore, and charges
 the Government to support and promote their "political,
 educational, religious, economic, social, and cultural
 interests." The Government has concentrated on creating
 equality of opportunity, especially in education, and does-not
 promote the concept of equality in result, instead leaving it
 up to the ethnic communities, individual initiative, and the
 marketplace to determine economic success.
 While precise statistics are not readily available, government
 officials acknowledge that Malay Singaporeans are represented
 disproportionately in the bottom quarter of Singapore's
 economy. De facto employment discrimination against Malays and
 Indians exists. Job advertisements often specify the ethnicity
 and gender required of applicants.
 Women have the same rights as men in employment, education,
 child care and custody, and in the running of. a household, but
 do not have equal rights with men in the transmission of
 citizenship to their children or in the conferral of the right
 to residence of a foreign spouse in Singapore.. Women can vote
 and hold any public office. Although the political and
 
 
 988
 SINGAPORE
 business elite is still overwhelmingly male, women are found
 throughout the rest of the job spectrum, enjoying equal pay for
 equal work. There is no evidence of any widespread practice of
 violence or abuse against women. Singapore's laws protect
 women against domestic violence and against sexual or physical
 harassment. Domestic violence can be dealt with under either
 the Penal Code or the Women's Charter. The Women's Charter,
 enacted in 1961, abolished arranged marriages and gave husband
 and wife equal rights with respect to property ownership and
 divorce. Muslim women are not covered by the Women's Charter,
 but enjoy the same rights and protections under other laws,
 except that Muslim men may divorce unilaterally whereas Muslim
 women may not. The Government enforces the Women's Charter as
 a fundamental aspect of the Republic's family law. Through the
 latter, a battered wife can obtain court orders barring the
 spouse from the home until the court is satisfied that he will
 stop his aggressive behavior. The Penal Code prescribes
 mandatory caning and a minimum imprisonment of 2 years for
 conviction on a charge of outraging modesty so as to cause the
 victim fear of death or injury.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Singapore's Constitution gives all citizens the right to form
 associations, including trade unions. Parliament may, however,
 impose restrictions based on security, public order, or
 morality grounds. The right of association is delimited by the
 Societies Act and labor and education laws and regulations. In
 practice, Communist labor unions are not permitted. The Trades
 Union Act authorizes the formation of unions with broad rights,
 albeit with some narrow restrictions, such as prohibitions on
 the unionization of uniformed employees and of the holding of
 union office by persons with criminal records. The national
 work force comprises about 1.5 million workers, of whom some
 213,000 are organized into about 83 trade unions. Some 74 of
 these unions, which represent about 98 percent of the unionized
 workers, are affiliated with the National Trades Union Congress
 (NTUC), an umbrella organization which has a close relationship
 to the Government.
 The NTUC unabashedly acknowledges that its interests are
 closely linked with those of the ruling PAP. The Second Deputy
 Prime Minister, Ong Teng Cheong, serves as NTUC Secretary
 General. Several NTUC officials are PAP M.P.'s. After
 August's general election, Lim Boon Heng, NTUC Deputy Secretary
 General, resigned his union position to become Senior Minister
 of State for Trade and Industry. NTUC policy prohibits
 unionists who actively tupport opposition parties from holding
 office in affiliated unions. While the NTUC is financially
 independent of the PAP, with income generated by NTUC-owned
 businesses, the NTUC and PAP share the same ideology.
 Workers have the legal right to strike'but rarely do so; the
 most recent strike took place in 1986. Reasons given include a
 cultural aversion to confrontation, concern about maintaining
 Singapore's attractiveness to investors, a labor shortage that
 has increased wages, and economic success that has allowed
 employers to pay higher wages.
 The NTUC is free to associate regionally and internationally.
 
 
 989
 SINGAPORE
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Collective bargaining is a normal part of management-labor
 relations, particularly in the manufacturing sector. However,
 the International Labor Organization's Committee of Experts
 noted in 1991 that certain issues are excluded by law from
 collective bargaining and that the Industrial Arbitration Court
 has the power to refuse to register the collective agreement of
 newly established enterprises in certain instances. On
 average, collective bargaining agreements are renewed every 2
 to.3 years. A National Wages Council (NWC) brings business,
 labor, and government representatives together to establish
 guidelines for annual wage packages. Collective agreements
 negotiated between labor and management generally follow the
 wage guidelines issued annually by the NWC. In recent years,
 the NWC has issued its guidelines in the form of qualitative
 recommendations rather than the quantitative form used
 previously. The NWC continued to recommend in 1991 that
 employers follow a "flexiwage" system wherein the annual
 increase in the fixed portion of employee income (wages) is
 kept small, with greater emphasis on varying the amount of
 bonuses based on employee performance. This system, under
 which the NWC fosters cooperation between the NTUC and employer
 organizations--allows management to reward workers for
 performance and sacrifices made during bad times, yet allows
 those in sectors experiencing downturns to let wages reflect
 the circumstances. The NWC also recommended that the rate of
 compensation increases be less than the increase of the rate of
 productivity, in order to curb inflation and keep salaries in
 line with productivity. The Industrial Relations Act makes it
 an offense to discriminate against anyone who is or proposes to
 become a member or an officer of a trade union. The offense is
 punishable by a fine equivalent to $600 and/or a 12-month
 prison sentence. Labor laws and regulations are enforced
 uniformly. There are no export-processing zones, nor are
 special concessions given to firms producing for export.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Singapore law forbids the use of forced or compulsory labor,
 and such labor is not found in Singapore.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The Government enforces the Employment Act, which sets the
 minimum age for the employment of children at age 12. Children
 under age 14 are not allowed to work in any "industrial
 undertaking." Industrial employers.must notify the Ministry of
 Labor within 30 days of hiring a child between the ages of 14
 and 16.
 Ministry of Labor regulations prohibit night employment of
 children and restrict-industrial work to no more than 7 hours a
 day. Children cannot work on commercial vessels, with any live
 electrical apparatus lacking effective insulation, or in any
 underground job. These laws and regulations are effectively
 enforced by the Ministry of Labor.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Singapore has no minimum wage or unemployment compensation, but
 the labor market offers relatively high wages and working
 conditions. The standard legal workweek under the Employment
 Act (Section 38) is 44 hours. Laws and regulations
 establishing working conditions are effectively enforced by the
 
 
 990
 SINGAPORE
 Ministry of Labor. The Ministry of Education enforces
 comprehensive occupational safety and health laws. Enforcement
 procedures, coupled with the promotion of educational and
 training programs, have reduced the frequency of job-related
 accidents by a third over the past decade. The average
 severity of occupational accidents has also been reduced.
 Because of the domestic labor shortage, more than 250,000
 foreign workers are employed legally in Singapore, 16 percent
 of the total work force. Most are unskilled laborers and
 household servants from other Asian countries. Foreign workers
 face no legal wage discrimination; however, they are
 concentrated in low-wage, low-skill jobs. Some 30,000 Filipina
 maids are employed in Singapore, and there have been occasional
 complaints of abuse or poor working conditions. The Government
 does not bar complainants from seeking legal redress, and there
 are reports that employers who have abused domestic servants
 have been fined or imprisoned. The Government acknowledged the
 problem of illegal aliens working in Singapore by passing a law
 in 1989 imposing a caning penalty on aliens who overstay in
 Singapore by more than 90 days. Parliament has passed a law to
 impose a caning sentence and fines on businessmen who employ
 more than five workers illegally. No one has been caned under
 either law.
 
 
 991