 SINGAPORE
 
 Singapore is governed by a parliamentary system modeled
 generally after that of the British. Members of parlia-
 ment are elected to maximum five-year terms on the basis
 of compulsory:universal adult sufferage. Political power
 is concentrated in the People's Action Party, which has
 won all seats in the past four general elections, with
 approximately 70 percent of the.vote (75.5 percent in the
 1980 election), but which lost one seat in a 1981 by-
 election for the first time since Singapore gained inde-
 pendence.in 1965. Public criticism of the government is
 circumspect. Persons are subject to-prolonged detention and
 arrest without trial for-pro-communist activities, activities
 that incite communal tensions, espionage, and drug use and
 trafficking. The government enjoys broad popular support.
 Its civil service is efficient and honest, and the government's
 leadership is free from-corruption. In economic and social
 matters, Singapore's record for raising the standard of
 living and the quality of life of its population is excellent.
 A multi-racial society with a dominant majority of ethnic
 .Chinese, but with Malay, Indian and other minorities,
 Singapore has experienced communal tension in the past,
 and the possibility of it arising again is a constant
 threat to the nation's stability. In addition, Singapore
 was subject to acts of terrorism by elements of the
 Communist Party of Malaya through 1974. There have been
 no terrorist incidents in recent years, although the
 Communist Party of Malaya includes Singapore in its sphere
 .of operations. The government of Singapore cites both
 the threat of insurgency and the possibility of renewed
 communal conflict as justification for legislation that makes
 legal the arrest and detention without trial of persons
 suspected of activities that threaten general civil order.
 .Such legislation was inherited from the British government
 that ruled Malaya and Singapore before Singapore became an
 independent republic.
 Several prominent political detainees were released in 1981,
 including those Amnesty International had classified as
 being among the longest-term political prisoners in the
 world. There were about 20 people detained under the
 Internal Security Act at the end of 1981. -
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Torture is prohibited by the government under sections 330
 and 331 of the penal code, although individual instances
 of mistreatment by law enforcement officers have been
 alleged. Such behavior is illegal and punishable.
 Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew publicly announced in February
 1978, that any interrogating officer'who assaulted a detainee
 would be liable to civil and criminal charges. There have
 been published reports of-instances in which such charges
 have been brought by criminal-law detainees, and punitive
 action taken. Allegations of torture have been denied by
 the government.
 (675)
 
 
 676
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 There are no summary executions in Singapore; however, the
 death penalty is incorporated in the Singapore penal code,
 the Misuse of Drugs (Amendment) Act, and the Arms Offences
 Act. The death penalty is mandatory for murder, unauthorized
 trafficking in more than 30 grams of morphine or more than
 15 grams of heroin, and intending hurt, death, imprisonment,
 or restraint of the president.
 Detention conditions are described by some detainees as
 reasonably good; a number were housed in cottages with
 individual bedrooms and communal dining and recreation
 rooms. Political detainees are separated from other
 prisoners. Solitary confinement has been used as a
 disciplinary measure. Diet and access to medical care are
 described as adequate by some former detainees, although
 there are limits on food that may be brought from outside.
 weekly family visits are permitted, and lawyers have
 access to their clients on request.
 The Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions)(Amendment) Act,
 which was enacted in 1981, provided for the temporary
 release, at the discretion of the home affairs minister,
 of detainees (usually secret sodiety members and drug
 traffickers) to engage in employment. This act also
 empowers the minister of home affairs to release detainees
 in order to spend leave at specified places.
 c. Disappearances
 There is no information that people are abducted, or held
 in clandestine detention by official or quasi-official
 security forces, or by elements whose activities are condoned
 by the government. Neither are people subject to prolonged
 or permanent "disappearance."
 d. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Detention and arrest without a warrant is authorized under
 the criminal procedure code, the Banishment Act, the
 Internal Security Act, the Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions)
 Act and the Misuse of Drugs Act. The right to counsel during
 detention and arrest is guaranteed only under the criminal
 procedure code. The criminal procedure code allows any
 police officer to arrest without a warrant and detain a
 person for up to 24 hours.
 The Internal Security Act, usually applied in political
 detention cases, validates detention without a warrant of
 "suspected persons" for an initial 30-day period for
 investigation and interrogation. After that initial
 detention period, and provided the president is satisfied
 that there is justification, a person may be detained only
 under an order issued by the minister of home affairs.
 To obtain such an order, the internal security department
 has to satisfy both the ministry of home affairs and the
 cabinet that there is justification to detain the person.
 The cabinet, if satisfied, will then recommend to the
 president that an order of detention be issued. The detainee
 has a right to appeal to an independent advisory board
 headed by a high court judge within 14 days of being served
 with the detention order. Within three months after the
 date of detention, the advisory board must submit its
 recommendations to the president who in turn makes the final
 decision. According to Singapore statutes, detention under
 the act is authorized for a period not exceeding two years.
 This act provides for an advisory board's annual review of
 every detention order.
 
 
 677
 The Internal Security Act is a preventive detention statute.
 The government states that its use is necessary to counter
 the Communist Party of Malaya (CPM), which is active still
 both in Malaysia and in Singapore, and which seeks to
 overthrow the elected governments of both countries.
 Although CPM membership is illegal in Singapore, the CPM
 reportedly maintains a small network in Singapore with a
 modest capacity to recruit cadre, solicit funds, and procure
 supplies for its armed insurgency in Malaysia. It is
 estimated that there is a hardcore communist cadre of
 several hundred either in Singapore or Malaysia, and that
 there are several hundred more communist sympathizers in
 Singapore. In its application of the Internal Security Act,
 the government-,has extended the definition of a "security
 case" to include the following categories of individuals:
 .(1) those who have had contact with communists or some other
 element bf -he radical left, but who are not necessarily
 themselves supporters of violent revolution; (2) those who
 portray Singapore as a state in which individual liberties
 are curtailed or portray the Singapore government as un-
 democratic, totalitarian, autocratic, and oppressive in
 order to incite disaffection for the government; and
 (3) those journalists whose reporting is considered by the
 government to be deliberately slanted and therefore suscep-
 tible to exploitation by communists.
 There are approximately 20 detainees at the end of 1981.
 The Singapore government alleges that all the detainees
 have some connection with the CPM. Some detainees claim
 they have no such ties. Developments during 1981 indicated
 that the government would continue its policy of flexibility
 vis-a-vis political detainees, and appeared willing to end
 the political detention stalemate resulting from Prime
 Minister Lee's public statement that political detainees
 continued to be held because they refused to abjure either
 forceful overthrow of the government or support of the
 Communist Party of Malaya.
 In June 1981, the government released former assemblyman
 Lee Tee Tong (aka Lee Tze Tong); Ho Toon Chin (aka Ho Piao),
 former secretary general of the proscribed Singapore National
 Seamen's Union; and Chwa Seh Kea, alleged communist activist.
 All three were arrested and detained on charges of active
 involvement in communist united front activities. In the
 cases of Lee and Ho, public abjuration was not a condition
 of their release (as it usually is), although one of the
 five restrictions imposed on them by the government stated
 that they "shall not associate with or take part in, or in
 any way assist in the activities of any organization which...
 has shown itself to be sympathetic to the communist cause..."
 According to a published internal security department (ISD)
 report, which Chwa did not dispute, he assured ISD officers
 that he would agree to abide by conditions imposed on him
 and would not be involved in subversive or undesirable
 activities.
 In August 1981, the government removed all restrictions
 imposed on Said Zahari, another political detainee, who
 was released in 1979. There are still, some. detainees,
 notably Dr. Lim Hock Siew, a former leader of the Socialist
 Front, who claim that they are not communists and refuse to
 abide by the restrictions that -have been imposed on the
 other three recently released:detainees. Dr. Lim is
 currently restricted to an offshore island, but is not
 guarded and is permitted to come to the main island of
 Singapore as long as he applies for prior permission from
 the government. His family, on the other hand, is permitted
 to visit the island of restriction at will.
 
 
 678
 This release of political detainees, and the accompanying
 government press release, suggest that a government-imposed
 restriction, rather than an individual public renunciation,
 may now be a condition of release.
 According to the Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act,
 usually applied in cases involving secret societies and
 narcotics traffickers, the police may detain and arrest
 without a detention order or a warrant, for up to 16 days,
 any person suspected of association with criminal activities.
 After the initial detention or arrest, a person can be
 detained for up to one year only under an order issued
 by the home affairs minister. This detention order is
 subject to review within 28 days of its issuance by an
 advisory committee, which in turn submits its recommend-
 ations for the president's final decision.
 The Misuse of.Drugs Act allows the central narcotics
 bureau (CNB) officers, or customs officials, to arrest
 without a warrant any person suspected of manufacturing,
 importing, exporting, possessing, consuming, or trafficking
 in controlled drugs. Those people arrested are tried.
 The act also allows CNB officers, or immigration officers,
 to require a suspected person to submit to a urinalysis in
 order to detect drug use. If the test is positive, the
 bureau director is empowered, without further process, to
 commit the user to a drug rehabilitation center for a
 six-month term. Upon release, the former detainee remains
 under CNB supervision for two years. As a result of this
 drug rehabilitation program, the recidivist rate in
 Singapore is among the lowest in the world.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a fair public trial is observed except for
 persons detained under the provisions of the Internal
 Security Act and the Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions)
 Act, although the right to trial by jury has been replaced
 by trial by magistrate or judge. The government defends
 its policy of detention without trial in security cases
 on the grounds that "open trial of communists is not
 possible, as witnesses and officials have been intimidated
 or killed."
 The Singapore judicial system operates in accordance with
 the basic tenets, practices, and precedents derived from
 British jurisprudence. Defendants may appeal civil verdicts
 to the court of appeals; criminal verdicts to the court of
 criminal appeal; and from those appellate courts (because
 Singapore is A member of the British Commonwealth),
 defendants may appeal to the judicial committee of the
 privy council in London.
 The right to counsel is not provided under the Internal
 Security Act, the Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act
 or the Misuse of Drugs Act; however, according to the
 criminal procedure code, defendants are entitled to counsel
 at the time formal charges are made in a criminal court.
 Counsel does not have unimpeded and private access to
 defendants during interrogation. The right to have an
 attorney present during the investigative stage is not
 recognized, but a person being investigated may refrain from
 answering questions until he is able to obtain advice of
 counsel.
 
 
 679
 There are no recent incidents of harassment of legal counsel;
 and in some cases, at the investigating officer's discretion,
 counsel has been allowed to be present during questioning
 prior to the statement of formal charges. Defendants are
 made aware of the full nature of the charges against them,
 and discovery methods are available for determining the
 nature of the evidence against them.
 The courts are independent from executive and military
 rule. Military courts apply only to military cases and
 do not have jurisdiction over civilians, or even over
 military personnel involved in a civil crime off of a
 military reservation. Appeals of military verdicts go to
 the president of the general courts martial center, and
 from there to the privy council in London.
 f. Invasion of the Home
 The sanctity of the home is protected by law and custom.
 Search warrants normally are issued by a magistrate.
 If a magistrate is unavailable a senior police officer
 may issue the warrant. The criminal procedures code and
 the Misuse of Drugs Act provide for search without a
 warrant; the former is justified on the grounds of fore-
 stalling escape, and the latter is justified on the grounds
 of forestalling the destruction of evidence. Officers making
 such an entry are subject to "post-invasion" investigation
 of the facts to show some degree of probable cause.
 There is no pattern of unlawful entry by the authorities.
 2.   Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 Freedom of speech, press, and assembly is circumscribed.
 The government forbids activities or public statements
 that might arouse communal tensions between the dominant
 Chinese and the Malay or Indian minorities.
 There is censorship of motion pictures, magazines, and
 plays -- primarily to prevent the spread of pornography
 and of discussion of certain ethnically sensitive topics.
 There is no prior restraint of the press, but the press
 understands the limits within which the government expects
 it to operate. The press is also mindful of the need for
 annual renewal of publishing licenses. In recent years,
 however, the press has broadened its reporting into
 criticism of some areas of public policy, and also publishes
 opposition viewpoints on occasion. The Singapore Broad-
 casting Corporation is owned by the government.
 There is complete freedom of religion in Singapore.
 A presidential council for minority rights is charged
 with insuring that no proposed legislation infringes on
 the rights of ethnic or religious minorities.
 Assemblies of more than five persons in a public place,
 including political rallies, are allowed only if a police
 permit is obtained beforehand. To operate legally in
 Singapore, societies and clubs with over ten members must
 be registered with the government. Registration is denied
 to societies with Triad (Chinese secret society) rituals,
 those likely to be used for unlawful purposes or for
 purposes prejudicial to public peace, welfare, or good
 order, or those whose registration would be contrary to
 the national interest.
 
 89-510 0 - 82 - 44
 
 
 680
 In the past, the government has invoked the Internal
 Security Act to arrest and detain persons accused of
 arousing communal tension, but no one is currently being
 held.for that charge. The definition of "security cases"
 is sufficiently broad that it has the effect of tending
 to stifle dissent.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 The Internal Security Act empowers the minister of home
 affairs to suspend a detention order, subject to the
 execution of a bond,. and to impose restrictions on an
 individual's activities, places of residence, and travels
 outside of Singapore without permission of a specified
 authority. The power of revocation rests with the. home
 affairs minister.
 There are-no other limitations on freedom of movement
 within the.country, although changes of address must be
 reported to the government within 14 days. All Singapore
 residents are required to register with the government,
 and receive an-identity card. Passports-are issued
 routinely, but an individual may be denied a passport at
 the government's discretion. Travel to Kampuchea, North
 Korea, Laos, and-Vietnam generally is not authorized.
 Travel to China also is controlled, but generally is
 authorized. Males liable for national service may be
 required to post bond to insure their return before
 they are issued a passport. Passport fees are moderate,
 amounting to approximately US$12.00. Women are not subject
 to, different rules in matters of internal or foreign travel,
 emigration, or repatriation.
 The right-of voluntary repatriation is extended to holders
 of Singaporean passports; however, several hundred ethnic
 Chinese who left Singapore during the 1950's and 1960's
 to go to China have encountered difficulties in returning
 .because they were unable  o prove both their entitlement
 to Singaporean nationality and the fact that they had not
 expatriated themselves while they were in China.
 The government has-confirmed that to date, no one has
 been able to prove both points, and none has gained re-
 entry to Singapore.
 Refugees are granted first asylum in Singapore based on
 the following criteria established by the Singapore
 government:
 -- Direct arrivals are not accepted. Only those
 refugees rescued at sea are permitted to land;
 -- A third-country guarantee of resettlement must
 -.be received-before a vessel is allowed to dis-
 embark refugees in Singapore;
 -- Refugees are allowed to remain only 90 days before
 they must depart for a regional processing center
 or resettlement elsewhere;
 -- There.is a population ceiling of 1,000 persons
 at Singapore's only refugee camp (this limit has
 frequently been exceeded, however).
 
 
 681
 As of August 1981, a total of 24,210 Indochinese refugees
 had been granted temporary safehaven in Singapore.
 Except for a handful of direct arrivals by boat or stow-
 aways, this total is composed entirely of Indochinese
 refugees rescued at sea by foreign-registered vessels and
 brought to Singapore. Ethnic groupings are: Vietnamese
 92.5 percent, Chinese 7 percent, and Cambodian 0.5 percent.
 Only 109 refugees have been accepted by the government for
 permanent resettlement.
 The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees staff,
 other international organizations, and United States
 refugee program personnel have free access to the
 refugees as required during processing for resettlement,
 medical screening, etc. The Department of State believes
 that the general treatment received by the refugees is
 good.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Singapore is a republic with a parliamentary system of
 government organized along British lines. The 75-member
 parliament is elected to maximum five-year terms on the
 basis of compulsory universal adult sufferage. A cere-
 monial president is elected by parliament for a four-year
 term. The government is controlled by the People's Action
 Party (PAP), which is headed by Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew.
 Membership in the PAP is open to non-communist Singaporeans
 of any race.
 Non-communist, non-communal parties are legally free to
 organize, but only one opposition member of the 17
 registered opposition political parties is currently
 serving in parliament. The opposition parties attribute
 their repeated electoral losses to historical, institutional,
 and security factors which inhibit their full participation
 in the political process.
 Under the balloting system inherited from the British, there
 exists a possibility of determining how specific persons
 voted. Only parties fielding six candidates or more were
 given access to election programming on the government-owned
 Singapore Broadcasting Corporation (SBC). No paid adver-
 tisements are allowed. The government justifies the close
 monitoring of opposition parties, and the tape recording
 of campaign speeches, on the grounds of possible prohibited
 communist participation in the elections. The successful
 prosecution of at least eight libel and defaisation suits
 against opposition parties and politicians following the
 1972 and 1976 elections has bankrupted several opposition
 politicians, and since bankrupts are barred by law from
 political activities, this has resulted in removing them
 from the political arena. Although strict judicial proce-
 dures are followed, such cases inhibit the opposition.
 Women enjoy the full panoply of legal rights. The 1969
 women's charter safeguards the position of women through
 regulation of marriage and divorce based on the principle
 of monogamous marriage, and protects women from exploitation
 for purposes of prostitution. The charter also guarantees
 married women the right to engage in their own trade or
 profession, to acquire, hold, and dispose of property in
 their own right, and to use their own names. Muslim women's
 rights are protected by the provisions of the 1957 Admini-
 stration of Muslim Law Act, which permits women to apply
 for divorce, requires consent of both parties for divorce
 to be registered, and provides for women to hold and
 
 
 682
 dispose of property. Women have voting rights and the
 right to equality of economic opportunity under the law,
 although the government has not yet been able to eliminate
 all discrimination against women workers. Although there
 are no women members of parliament, and few in the top
 ranks of the civil service, there are no legal restrictions
 on full.participation by women in the political process.
 Singapore has approximately 250,657 union members (about 23
 percent of the labor force). By the end of 1980, there were
 132 registered trade unions, 83 employee unions, 49 employer
 unions, and a federation of employee trade unions.
 Ninety-five percent of the unionized workers belong to 53
 employee unions affiliated with the National Trade Union
 Congress (NTUC), which is formally and closely associated
 with the ruling People's Action Party. Several of the top
 leaders of the NTUC are members of that party and of
 parliament. The right of registered trade unions to
 organize workers, strike, and bargain collectively is
 provided by law, within strict limits defined and cited
 by the government in its dealings with labor unrest.
 According to the Trade Unions Act, the registrar of trade
 unions may .dissolve the union if he believes "...that it
 is necessary in the interests of the workmen...." This has
 a chilling effect on the willingness to strike, and, there-
 fore, strikes are rare, with none since June 1977.
 Procedures are provided for arbitration and conciliation
 of disputes.
 In October 1980, members of the. Singapore Airlines Pilots
 Association (SIAPA) participated in work-to-rule actions
 .following a wage and working conditions dispute. The govern-
 ment interceded and charged 15 union officials with illegal
 industrial action, and served notice of the deregistration
 of the union. These actions were justified on the grounds
 that the union failed to obtain majority consent through a
 secret ballot. The union was fined and dissolved by the
 registrar of trade unions. It was subsequently allowed to
 reform, with some changes in its governance, and the case
 against the 15 officials, all of whom pleaded guilty, was
 dropped.
 In August 1981, the government announced that the unions'
 Sobjectives, as defined in the Trade Unions Act, would be
 updated to reflect the unions' current positive role
 vis-a-vis labor/management relations.
 InApril 1979, the Singapore government denounced its
 adherence to International Labor Organization (ILO)
 Convention 105 on forced labor. Since 1974, the ILO had
 asserted that persons detained under the Internal Security
 Act and other acts were subject.to punitive labor.
 When the ILO rejected Singapore's description of such
 labor as vocational rehabilitation (to which only criminal
 offenders and not political detainees are subject), the
 government denounced the convention.
 3.. Government'Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 .national and Non-Governmental Investigations of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 In.general, the government reacts defensively to foreign
 critici.sm. For example, Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew
 withdrew the People's Action Party from the Socialist
 International in 1976 when one of the other members
 criticized Singapore's use of the Internal Security Act.
 
 
 683
 An Amnesty International mission visited Singapore from
 November 30 to December 5, 1978, to investigate the extent
 and conditions of political imprisonment. The government
 refused its requests for interviews with the prime minister,
 the minister of home affairs, and other senior officials
 .responsible for the administration of political detainees.
 There are no active domestic organizations which observe,
 report, and contest allegations of human rights violations,
 although, this year, Singapore students belonging to the
 Federation of United Kingdom and Eire Malaysian and Singa-
 pore Student Organizations in London picketed at the annual
 meeting of the International Transport Workers Federation
 (ITWF), seeking the release of four Singaporean political
 detainees.,
 4.   Economic and Social Circumstances
 Singapore is an urban city-state with a strong and prosperous
 free-enterprise economy. The standard of living is rising
 steadily, with an average real annual growth rate-of 9.4
 percent during the 1970's (10.2 percent for 1980). The per
 capita gross national product was US$4,200 in 1980.
 Unemployment and inflation rates remained relatively low at
 3.0 and 6.0 percent, respectively, in 1980.
 In 1979, the population growth rate was 1.4 and the total
 fertility rate was 2.1. In 1979, life expectancy at birth
 was 71.4 years, and the infant mortality rate was 12.6
 percent per 1000. One hundred percent of the population
 had access to safe water by 1979.
 In 1980, 68 percent of the population was housed in well-
 designed apartments that the government built mostly over
 the last decade. Of people living in public housing
 estates, 61.8 percent purchased their apartments, largely
 through a scheme that permits down payments to be made
 from the equivalent of social security accounts.
 Education is not compulsory. Free primary education is
 provided for children of all Singapore citizens.
 Education through the university level is of high quality
 and is provided at modest cost. In 1970, the overall
 literacy rate was 69 percent, while by 1980, it had
 increased to 94 percent.
 Women have equal educational opportunities, and comprise
 half the primary and secondary school population.and
 almost half of the student enrollment in universities and
 teacher-training and technical institutions.
 The civil service generally has followed the principle of
 equal pay for equal work for men and women since 1962,
 although this is not always true of private employers.
 In 1979, the median gross monthly income of female workers
 was 75 percent of that of male workers. The gap partly
 reflects the concentration of women in traditional low-
 paying occupations and their lack of seniority in the work
 force. Over the past decade, there has been a trend toward
 increasing female participation in the work force.
 This has been encouraged by the government to counter
 serious labor shortages.
 The Singapore government does not sanction ethnic job
 discrimination (the constitution expressly forbids dis-
 crimination on the grounds of religion, race, descent,
 or place of birth), but the government does not regulate
 private practices. During the past three years, the
 
 
 684
 government, through the national wages council, has decreed
 wage increases to raise the wages of the lowest paid workers
 differentially more than those of better paid workers.
 Furthermore, although the median gross monthly income in
 1979 was approximately US$165, only monthly wages over
 US$271, earned by a person with three dependents, are
 subject to income tax. The tax is progressive. There is
 no sales tax.
 Singapore has 13 government and 13 private hospitals, and
 an extensive system of clinics. The quality of health care
 is high in both private and government facilities, and the
 charges in the latter are at subsidized rates.
 
 
 685
 U.S.UVERSEAS -LC'ANS %,ND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS ANO LOAN AUTHORIZATIW
 (U.b.FISCAL YEAkS - MILLIONS OF DULLAKS)
 COUNTRY: S iNGAPORE
 197V     1980     190 1
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOIAL...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.AIO .................         0.0      0.0     rl.0
 LOANS ...............       0.0      0.0 0     .
 GRANTS ................    0.0      0.0     0u.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 B. FOOD FOR PLACE.......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS...............     0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LUANS.....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CORK....o         0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE 11-TOTAL.......           0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.RELItF.El(.OEV & WFP.        0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY.o..         0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER LCOI. ASSIST...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS...     ......... . .0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............       00       0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS..oe.          0.0      0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS.....           0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER... ...........   .0.0        0.0      G.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TTAL...         0.0      0.01     0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS    .....,..          0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS...... o...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREOIT SALES-i-MS....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.E.TRNG...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 O.TRAN-EXCESS STOLK...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHEk GRANIS.....            0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECuN. 6 ML...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS................       0.0      0,0      0.0
 GRANTS.............0.0               0.0      0.0
 OTHER US LOANS.........  ..    154.7      0.0      0.0
 EX-114 BANK LOAN!e-.e.e       154.7      0.0      o.o
 ALL OTHER.......... ...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSI.TANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1979     1980     1981     1946-81
 TOTAL........ .19.5        18.8     19.9    414.6
 IRO               .0.0      0.0      0.0    209.4
 IFC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 lOB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AOB               19.0     15.1     19.0    181.1
 AFOB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNOP               0.5      3.7      0.9     23.5
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0      0.0      0.6
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
