SINGAPORE
This year's report on Singapore, like last year's, is disappointii^. While it touches on most of the major human rights-related developments in 1988, the report suffers from serious distortions and omissions.
The report's introduction is misleading in its description of Singapore's eighth general election, which it characterizes as being "fairly conducted and contested by the largest number of opposition candidates in 20 years." The report also states that "[cjampaign activities by both the People's Action Party (PAP) and opposition party candidates were open and were covered extensively, if somewhat selectively, by the Singapore media." While this may be technically accurate with respect to the mechanics of the election, several factors prevented the 1988 national elections in Singapore from being free and fair, including the detentions without trial of a number of opposition figures who might have sought political office, the- deterrent effect of the detentions on other potential opposition candidates and supporters, government control of the broadcast media, arbitrary restrictions on the ri^ts of opposition groups to assemble freely, and politically motivated criminal prosecutions of opposition figures.
The introduction states that eight persons re-detained in April 1988 were arrested "for recanting their sworn statement in which they denied mistreatment during their original detention." This is inaccurate and misleading. The detainees were indeed rearrested for making a public statement alleging mistreatment and denying government allegations that they had been involved in a Marxist conspiracy. However, we are unaware of any sworn statement — or in Singaporean legal terminology, "statutory declaration" — on the mistreatment issue made by the eight detainees prior to their re-arrest. The report may be referring to interrogation statements, which are not statutory declarations, that detainees were forced to write (and rewrite until their Internal Security Department officers were satisfied) and/or coerced "confessions" that
149
Critique
were broadcast on Singaporean television follovsing the arrests in 1987. (The introduction does not mention that these statements were coerced.) But no information has emerged to suggest that the issue of mistreatment was mentioned in the interrelation statements, and it was certainly not mentioned in any of the televised confessions.
This very serious error is repeated in the sections on torture and arbitrary arrest. Concerning torture, the repwrt states that "[a]ll but one of the persons detained [in 1987] were released later in 1987 after making statutory declarations that they were not subjected to mistreatment by Singapore authorities," and that they "publicly recanted their declarations and alleged that they had in fact been subjected to abuse during their initial detention period in 1987." (In addition, no mention is made of the fact that the detainees denied government allegations against them.)
The report appears to accept the rationale that the government rearrested the ex-detainees "for investigation of the circumstances of their denial of the veracity of the 1987 statutory declarations and for a determination of whether they constituted a threat to Singapore's national seciu'ity." In addition to repeating the error regarding the alleged "statutory declarations," this statement ignores abundant evidence that the re-arrests were designed to punish the ex-detainees for issuing the pubhc statement.
After describing statutory declarations that do not exist, the report ignores the statutory declarations that were extracted from the ex-detainees after their re-arrests. The authorities hoped that these coerced declarations - in which some of the detainees stated that they were not physically assaulted — would discredit the public statement that the detainees issued in April 1988. However, despite the threat of indefmite detention without trial, only five of the eight rearrested detainees stated in the declarations that they had not been assaulted or physically abused. The others remained silent on the issue, and none of the statutory declarations retracted the general claim that most of the signatories to the public statement had been physically assaulted during their earlier detention.
The report also states without comment or analysis:
150
Singapore
The Government has answered charges of mistreatment by noting that persons have the right to bring charges against those in Government alleged to have committed such criminal acts. One detainee has filed a police report and has also filed a civil suit alleging false imprisonment and assault. The cases are pending.
These comments are misleading because they do not indicate that this procedure is unlikely to prove an effective remedy for a victim of mistreatment. Few detainees, ex-detainees or experienced lawyers in Singapore would be wUling to accept the risks of reprisal involved in lodging such a complaint. For example, Teo Soh Lung, the only person to have done so, remains in detention despite the release of all others detained in 1988.
The section on arbitrary arrest, detention or exile fails to make the most important point regarding the arrests of the alleged Marxist conspirators and of lawyers Patrick Seong and Francis Seow, and the continued imprisonment of long-term detainee Chia Thye Poh: that all of these persons have been detained for the peaceful expression of their views.
The section on the denial of fair public trial omits an analysis of the issue of judicial independence. The report indicates that the Privy Council criticized the Singapore High Court's role in convicting opposition figure J.B. Jeryaretnam of a crime which led to his disbarment and also states that the political opposition has accused the government leadership of interfering in the judical process. However, as we indicated in last year's critique, the report should have noted the many factors contributing to the lack of judicial independence in Singapore: the political dominance of the ruling party, the power of the executive to affect personnel decisions involving the judiciary, and the power of the government to act arbitrarily against its critics. In this respect, the report could also have noted that criminal convictions of major opposition figures in Singapore in recent years have followed campaigns of public threats, harassment and vilification by government officials. Discussion of these campaigns would also have been appropriate in the section on freedom of speech.
The section on freedom of speech and press does not convey the f^ extent of government controls over the domestic media. There is no mention of the laws that have been used in the past to imprison journalists and ban publi-
151
Critique
cations and which still have a strong deterrent effect. Nor is there mention of provisions of the Newspaper and Printing Presses Act that facilitate government control of the domestic media.
The report also understates the government's control and manipulation of the print and broadcast media to further its agenda. This was graphically illustrated with respect to "confessions" of the alleged Marxist conspirators that were broadcast by the Singapore Broadcasting Corporation (SBC) in 1987. Interviews conducted by Asia Watch over the past two years reveal that these SBC broadcasts were manipulated by the Internal Security Department, and that SBC employees, including interviewers, worked closely with officials of the Internal Security Department in preparing these programs.
The section on governmental attitude toward international and nongovernmental investigation of alleged violations of human rights is misleading. The report states that "[tjhere are...no non-governmental organizations which actively and openly monitor alleged general human rights violations," but neglects to mention that the government has actively deterred and/or suppressed efforts at domestic human rights monitoring by, among other things, harassing and imprisoning human rights lawyers and persons who have published allegations of ill-treatment.
In addition to these major concerns, there are a number of minor inaccuracies worth noting:
•	The introduction states that the government arrested "eight persons and their defense attorney" in April 1988. In fact, the attorney in question, Patrick Seong, had not served as lawyer for all of the eight.
•	The introduction observes that the government arrested a "prominent government opponent" without mentioning that the opponent, Francis
152
Singapore
Seow, was also a lawyer who was defending one of the rearrested detainees. In fact, he was arrested while attempting to visit his client, and appears to have been arrested due in part to his vigorous defense of her interests.
The section on torture and other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment mentions the detentions of 10 persons under the Internal Security Act in April and May 1988, but fidls to mention the detention of an eleventh, attorney and opposition leader Francis Seow.*
The section on freedom of speech and press incorrectly suggests that the circulation of the Far Eastern Economic Review was restricted in 1987 because the publication refused to accord the government an unrestricted right of reply. As the section later states accurately, the magaâne "consistently accorded the Government the r^t of reply."
The sections on freedom of association and movement neglect to mention that detainees imprisoned durii^ 1987 and 1988 have faced continuing restrictions on these freedoms following their release. The report fails to point out the government's pervasive and harassing surveillance of ex-detainees and opposition political figures. The report does note that a recently passed law provides the government wth discretionary authority to deprive of their citizenship Singaporeans who reside outside Singapore for more than ten years, and mentions that the law has been used in at least one case. However, it obscures the discriminatory application of the provision when it neglects to mention that this case involved a prominent political opponent of the government.
The State Department should also have mentioned reports of physical assaults against detainees. With respect to the 1987detentions, the Sute Department has apparently characterized such reports as credible. "Recent Developments in Malaysia and ^ngapore, 1988," Hearings before the Subcommittee on Human Rights and International Or^niza-tions of the Committee on Foreign AR^airs, House of Representatives, 100th Congress, 2nd Session, July 7 and September 22,1988, at 273. (We have only limited information on treatment accorded those detained in 1988. However, the information that we have received indicates that detainees were subjected to treatment that would also constitute assault.)
153
»wueeiz ahfaiBb «biw . jWUttéèwwdâdéwNttsor k «I 3iCt » »nifciwhiqt poisnimm . dewiq s fa»Hovm 986» aid) ted)
lietrodeetioe tUl«* tMt Ü» |p»miflK at arrc^tcU
.. . _____»liisir ^OBC töorocy^ k Ajwil lofsict, the aitocney "uv «í»*«^«^__
lud not lervr^ «i lawyor for alt of tiie «»s^ . -
„ ^ 1	oUrnm ihe f4>vcn(n!aom Arreste^ it "premioeaí:
- J^'-v... tffiivn'nm^fii MMMBenl* «^Koitf aM;aíinúno thai Ilu* iwrtttrutmt FTAIUSÍL'
bSMiSaSM «VMt ÛOiX tttKMÌM HtMBlMlpa ùttO. t^V
mm tát	ngt •ai0êMq^màiiWM>aiàMi9b
«12 .afefttwE» u ífto^ das« bash«
..r-tMMa^ia MHM .ffiiiAA 00 »MiiaM^
■	iiiia»W) M JX t«fM«$q«2 bm ? ttul .«oittaP
piiliwujlti adi.iwgiimH J88gi w toaktfafc mMU MsmmHum
