SINGAPORE
The report on Singapore is marked by distortions, omissions and inaccuracies. The tone of the report is set in the introduction, which gives a sanguine and misleading summary of the human rights situation in Singapore. Human rights concerns are often described as theoretical rather than real, and the report ignores concerted efforts by the government to undermine the rule of law, intimidate political opponents and control civil society. Harsh conclusions are reported not as the State Department's expert opinion but as the observations of government "critics" or human rights organizations. In several instances, the report uncritically repeats government rationalizations for actions that violate human rights, thereby lending credence to the government position. In sum, the report fails to provide a full and complete accounting of the human rights situation in Singapore.
One of the most significant events in 1989 was the passage of amendments to the Constitution and the Internal Security Act (ISA) abolishing substantive judicial review of executive action in cases allegedly involving national security. The report's introduction mentions the amendments, but does not indicate their severely repressive effect. The report fails to state that the government has frequently interpreted "national security" to include perceived threats to the dominance of the ruling People's Action Party (PAP). The introduction further blunts the significance of the amendments by stating without qualification that the amendments were "designed to reassert" a longstanding interpretation of the law accepted until a 1988 ruling of the Singapore Court of Appeals. While technically correct, this statement omits the fact that the Court of Appeals' decision followed consistent British and Commonwealth precedents expanding judicial scrutiny of administrative detentions. The report should also have noted that the constitutional amendment was made retroactive to 1971.
The report's misleading account of the ISA amendments is matched by errors and omissions concerning those detained under the ISA. The report fails to note that Vincent Cheng and Teo Soh Lung, the two ISA detainees who have refused to withdraw habeas corpus and administrative challenges to their detentions, were served with new one-year detention orders in June 1989 and were held in solitary confinement. Moreover, although it presents convincing evidence that the government extends the detentions of detainees who pursue legal and administrative challenges, the report fails to reach a
187
Singapore
conclusion on this issue and takes pains to present government denials of the practice.
The section on the denial of fair public trial gives no inkling of the government's efforts to eliminate judicial independence. There is only minimal discussion of the impact of an April 1989 amendment to the Judicial Committee Act prohibiting appeals to the Privy Council in London in all criminal cases, except those involving the death penalty, and in all civil cases except those in which the parties have given prior written consent. The report should have noted two factors which make this law significant and threatening. First, the government frequently uses the courts to muzzle free expression and hobble political opponents through trumped up libel, tax evasion and other actions. Second, Singapore's domestic courts lack independence from the state and the PAP. As we have pointed out in previous Critiques, factors contributing to the court's lack of independence include: the political dominance of the ruling party, the power of the executive to influence personnel decisions involving the judiciary and the power of the government to act arbitrarily against its critics. Thus, the April 1989 law removes the only independent judicial check on government abuses and will give the government virtually unrestricted power to use the courts to implement its policies and attack its opponents.
The Singapore government's assault on the judiciary has been paralleled by significant intimidation of the legal profession. The report recounts a single incident — the government's barring of Queen's Counsel Anthony Lester from representing detainee Teo Soh Lung -- without placing it in the context of the Singapore government's vilification, prosecution and jailing of attorneys who have represented ISA detainees, challenged government policy or gained a public following as opposition politicians. In this regard, the report should have included references to several events: the 1988 arrests of Patrick Seong and Francis Seow, two attorneys who represented persons detained under the ISA; the government's passage of laws limiting the activities of the Law Society, particularly its power to comment on proposed legislation; and the establishment of the government-controlled Singapore Law Academy, to which attorneys are required to belong, as an alternative to the Law Society.
The government also has taken a wide variety of actions to neutralize effective political opposition. However, the introduction to the report misleadingly implies that the PAP's electoral strength results solely from the country's "political stability and economic
188
Singapore
success." Only in the body of the report does the State Department admit that "the Government has used its extensive powers to place formidable obstacles in the path of would-be opponents." These "obstacles" are later described (by "critics") as:
the Government's exercise of broad discretionary powers through arbitrary detentions and criminal prosecutions, control of the media, and restrictions on the right of assembly [which] have vitiated opposition efforts by hindering the formation of associations or organizations that could provide a basis of support for opposition parties.
In 1989, the most prominent opposition politician targeted for government persecution was Francis Seow. The report blandly describes Seow's conviction in absentia on tax evasion charges, the resulting loss of his parliamentary seat and the government's extraordinary surveillance of him in the United States. The report, however, fails to place these events in the context of the government's harassment, persecution and jailing of Seow which began in 1985 when, as president of the Law Society, he attempted to promote a more activist role for the Society on public policy issues. The report also fails to note the Singapore President's refusal to pardon J.B. Jeyaretnam, leader of the Worker's Party, who was disbarred and removed from Parliament as a result of his convictions for criminal offenses that the Privy Council harshly criticized. Most disappointingly, the State Department avoids reaching its own conclusions about these events. Instead, the report gingerly concludes that "critics charge that the Government uses judicial process to harass opposition politicians" and gratuitously includes the government's denial that its repeated prosecutions of opposition politicians are politically motivated.
On the issue of freedom of association, the report dryly states that the government "denies registration to societies believed likely to be used for unlawful purposes or for purposes prejudicial to public peace, welfare, or public order." The government's absolute discretion to register or dissolve societies is not made clear, and there is no mention of the deterrent effect of the Societies Act's vague and broad language. Also omitted is discussion of a key tactic which the government has used to neutralize organized dissent: a prohibition on all political activity, broadly defined, by organizations other than registered political parties.
189
Singapore
The government's control and manipulation of the domestic press has been a potent weapon in the PAP's continued domination of Singapore politics. Although the report describes the press's "close ties to the national leadership," it fails to discuss the innuendo, vilification and mockery which a captive press has repeatedly aimed at opposition figures. Also missing is an account of the government's use of the Singapore Broadcasting Corporation to produce, edit and televise the coerced "confessions" of persons detained in 1987 as supposed "Marxist conspirators."
In its discussion of press freedoms, the report significantly understates government restrictions on the press and the extent to which the domestic press observes unstated limitations on expression. The report's bland statement that the government forbids statements "which it thinks might arouse [racial] tensions ... or might threaten national security or public order," hides the fact that Singapore has an array of vaguely worded statutes covering the press which the government interprets broadly, thereby chilling expression. The report also gives no indication that the government has closed newspapers and jailed journalists for violations of these statutes. In an unfortunate change from last year, this year's report does not discuss the government's frequent use of defamation actions to punish and deter government critics. This omission is particularly regrettable because the 1989 amendment to the Judicial Committee Act restricting appeals to the Privy Council is likely to make the threat of libel actions an even greater deterrent to free expression. (In January 1990, Prime Minister Lee initiated libel suits in Malaysia against the Far Eastern Economic Review (PEER) and the Asian Wall Street Journal (AWSJ) for publishing statements regarding the court's decision in the Prime Minister's libel suit against the PEER).
The discussion of Singapore's attempts to control the foreign press is similarly misleading and incomplete. Although the report mentions that the government has restricted the circulation of the AWSJ and the PEER, it should have added that Time and Asiaweek have also been restricted and only Time has since been permitted to resume its full circulation.
The report also should have noted the government's dissemination of counterfeit copies of PEER in 1988 after the publication chose to cease distribution in Singapore in response to the restriction placed on its circulation. Moreover, in its account of the June 1, 1989 Appeals Court decision dismissing the AWSJ's challenge to its circulation restriction, the report should have noted the Appeals
190
Singapore
Court's denial of the AWSJ's request for an expedited judgment that would have permitted the newspaper to appeal to the Privy Council prior to the effective date of the amendment restricting such appeals.
The section on arbitrary interference with privacy treats the issue chiefly as a theoretical concern. There is little indication that the government exercises its "wide discretionary powers" frequently and interprets national security extremely broadly. Amazingly, the section omits any reference to the most egregious and well-publicized recent example of interference with personal privacy: the government's hiring of American private investigators to follow and eavesdrop upon opposition leader Francis Seow for over seven weeks in the United States. As a further invasion of his privacy, the information gathered was released to the Straits Times, which published a story on Seow in February 1989.
The section on freedom of movement describes the ISA's restrictions on travel but omits the most important point: the Singapore authorities in recent years have repeatedly invoked the restrictions against former ISA detainees. The report should have included a reference to the restriction orders imposed on Chia Thye Poh and the 1987 detainees as well as the government's surveillance of Francis Seow. This section should also have identified Tan Wah Piaow as the "well-known government opponent" who has been stripped of his citizenship pursuant to a 1985 law permitting such actions against Singaporeans who reside outside the country for over 10 years. In addition, it would have been appropriate for the report to note that the government appears to have pushed the 1985 law through Parliament for the specific purpose of preventing Tan's return to Singapore.
In addition to these major concerns, the report includes several other shortcomings worth noting:
The report fails to mention a 1989 amendment to the Legal Professions Act which prohibits appeals of disbarments to the Privy Council in London. The amendment was enacted shortly after the Privy Council overturned the politically-motivated disbarment of opposition leader J.B. Jeyaretnam.
• The section on freedom of religion should have included a discussion of the government's campaign to make "Confucian ethics" the "national ideology" of Singapore. According to government leaders, "Confucian ethics" teaches respect for
191
Singapore
authority and the elevation of societal goals over individual rights. As such, "Confucian ethics" appears to be an ideology which the government hopes to use to inculcate conformity and eliminate dissent.
The section on freedom of speech and press should have mentioned the government's intent to ban the sale of satellite dish antennas because of the alleged danger that foreign television broadcasts will expose Singaporeans to "unacceptable values or harmful lifestyles."
The brief discussion of academic freedom in the section on free expression is misleading because it states only that academic criticism of "government leaders and alleged authoritarian tendencies is infrequent." The report should have added that the limited criticism results from a well-founded fear of government retaliation. In past years, academics critical of the government have lost their university positions.
The report's statement that foreign human rights observers have attended habeas corpus hearings in ISA cases is incomplete without mention that the Singapore government has closely monitored human rights missions, including a 1989 mission of the Association of the Bar of the City of New York.
In the section on governmental attitudes toward independent human rights monitoring, the report relies on the observations of human rights organizations, rather than the State Department's own opinion, to make the point that Singapore's lack of domestic monitors results from "fear of government retaliation, a fear fueled by the jailing in 1988 of those who publicly claimed mistreatment and of lawyers who represented them." The State Department should have reached this conclusion on its own.
Similarly, in the section on torture, the report cites the observations of human rights organizations, rather than the State Department's opinion, to indicate that the risk of governmental reprisal negates the authorities' claim that detainees may bring charges of mistreatment against government employees.
192
