Singapore
In January 2010 Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong said that “updating” the political
system to “ensure a more diverse set of voices in Parliament” was a top priority
but did not commit to far-reaching changes. Current Singaporean laws and policies
on freedom of expression, assembly, and association sharply limit peaceful
criticism of the government and have been used repeatedly to stymie the development
of opposition political parties and dissenting voices. Of particular concern
is the 2009 Public Order Act, which requires a permit for any “cause-related
activity,” defined as a show of support for or against a position, person, group, or
government, even if only one person takes part.
The ruling People’s Action Party (PAP) has been in power since 1959, occupies 82
of the 84 parliamentary seats that have full voting rights, controls all mainstream
media outlets, and presides over a government with extensive powers to regulate
citizen’s lives.
Freedoms of Assembly, Expression, and Association
Singapore’s constitution guarantees rights to free expression, peaceful assembly,
and association, but also permits restrictions in the name of security, the protection
of public order, morality, parliamentary privilege, and racial and religious harmony.
The restrictions are interpreted broadly.
Censorship extends to broadcast and electronic media, films, videos, music,
sound recordings, and computer games. The Newspaper and Printing Presses Act
requires yearly registration and permits authorities to limit circulation of foreign
papers which “engage in the domestic politics of Singapore.”
The Films Act, which since revisions in March 2009 allows some room for political
themes and online election advertising, still restricts political speech. Films and
video must still be submitted to censors, “partisan… references” on any political
matter are still off-limits, and the Ministry of Information, Communication and the
Arts may still ban any film deemed to run contrary to public interest. In July 2010
the Media Development Authority ordered a Martyn See video, “Ex-political prisoner
speaks out in Singapore,” removed from Youtube and from See’s blog.
In November 2010 British author and journalist Alan Shadrake was found guilty
on charges of “scandalizing the judiciary” and sentenced to six weeks in jail in
addition to a fine and court costs. He claimed in his book, Once a Jolly Hangman:
Singapore Justice in the Dock, that Singapore’s mandatory death penalty for murder,
treason, and some 20 drug trafficking-related offenses is not being applied
as equitably as the government contends. Shadrake’s book concludes that the
judicial process is subject to political and economic pressures, including from the
ruling party, and biased against the “weak,” “poor,” or “less-educated.” During
the trial, the prosecution warned media outlets that publicizing Shadrake’s allegations
could lead to charges against them.
Government authorities continue to closely regulate public meetings, demonstrations,
and processions. In May 2010 Vincent Cheng, held under the Internal
Security Act in 1987 as the alleged leader of a Marxist conspiracy, agreed for the
first time to speak publicly about his treatment in detention at a seminar,
Singapore’s History: Who Writes the Script, organized by students from the
History Society of the National University of Singapore. The National Library
Board, the venue’s sponsor, however, rescinded the invitation and the event went
ahead without Cheng’s participation.
A lower court’s 2009 acquittal of three leaders and two supporters of the opposition
Singapore Democratic Party (SDP) charged with conducting a procession
without a permit became in 2010 yet another setback for free assembly when a
high court reversed the decision on appeal. Siok Chin Chee, a member of the central
committee of the SDP, was sentenced to five short jail terms in 2010 for distributing
political flyers without a permit.
The liberalization of regulations governing Singapore’s “Speakers’ Corner” in
Hong Lim Park in 2008 has had little impact. Although processions and demonstrations
are permitted and a police permit is no longer required, the park site is
ringed with five CCTVs and speakers must register online and show their IDs
before they begin. Speaking at the Corner provides no protection from application
of sedition and criminal defamation laws.
The Societies Act requires any organization with more than 10 members to register.
However, registration may be denied on grounds that an organization’s “purposes [are] prejudicial to public peace, welfare or good order” or that registration
would be “contrary to the national interest.”
Criminal Justice System
Singapore’s Internal Security Act and Criminal Law (Temporary Provision Act and
Undesirable Publications Act) both permit arrest and detention without warrant or
judicial review. The Misuse of Drugs Act permits confinement of suspected drug
users in “rehabilitation” centers for up to three years without trial. Second-time
offenders face prison terms and may be caned.
Singapore continues to implement its mandatory death sentences for some 20
drug-related offenses, which has been repeatedly criticized by United Nations
human rights bodies and experts. In August a court postponed the scheduled
execution of Malaysian Yong Vui Kong, 22 years old, accused of transporting 47
grams of heroin into Singapore in 2007, following international attention to the
case.
Judicial caning, an inherently cruel punishment, is a mandatory additional punishment
for medically fit males between 16 and 50 years old who have been sentenced
to prison for a range of crimes including drug trafficking, rape, and immigration
offenses. In addition, a sentencing official may at his discretion order caning
in cases involving some 30 other violent and non-violent crimes. The maximum
number of strokes at any one time is 24.
The US State Department reported that “through November [2009] 4,228 convicted
persons were sentenced to caning, and 99.8 percent of caning sentences were
carried out.” The case of Oliver Fricker, a Swiss national, drew international attention
in June 2010 when he was sentenced to five months in jail and three strokes
of the cane for breaking into a subway system depot and spray painting one of its
cars. On appeal, Fricker’s sentence was increased by two months.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
In violation of international standards, Penal Code section 377A criminalizes sexual
acts between consenting adult men. In September a defendant brought a constitutional
challenge to the law on grounds that it is discriminatory.
On May 15, 2010, the second annual Pink Dot festival, bringing together over
4,000 LGBT individuals and their families and friends, took place at the government-
established Speaker’s Corner in Hong Lim Park.
Migrant Domestic Workers and Trafficking
Singapore continues to make improvements in working conditions for some
196,000 foreign domestic workers through vigorous prosecution of employers
and recruiters who physically abuse workers or fail to pay wages. However, it
refuses to include domestic workers under the Employment Act or to regulate
recruitment fees, which can run to 40 percent of the total salary a worker will earn
during a two-year contract. Instead, it preserves a sponsorship system that ties a
domestic worker to a specific employer who, in turn, retains the right to cancel
the migrant worker’s contract, making her subject to immediate deportation.
Unscrupulous employers often use the threat of contract cancellation to intimidate
workers to accept unlawful work conditions, restrict their movements, and
prevent them from filing complaints.
A government-mandated standard contract for migrant workers does not address
issues such as long work hours and poor living conditions. Instead of guaranteeing
one day off per month and a set number of rest hours a day, it makes such
breaks a matter of negotiation between employer and employee. It also fails to
provide protections against denial of annual or medical leave, requires immediate
deportation of pregnant workers, and stipulates that no foreign domestic workers
may marry a Singaporean.
Human Rights Defenders
To actively defend human rights in Singapore is to risk being repeatedly fined,
jailed, bankrupted, and forbidden from travel outside the country without government approval. Although the number of human rights defenders has increased,
the community remains small.
Key International Actors
In March 2010 confirmation hearings before the US Senate, US Ambassador-designate
Daniel Adelman said he would “use public diplomacy to work for greater
press freedom, greater freedom of assembly and ultimately more political space
for opposition parties” in Singapore. Following his confirmation, Adelman backtracked,
stating that democracy and press freedom “are for Singaporeans to
decide for themselves.”
Singapore continues to play an important role in the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN), driving forward its economic integration agenda and
pressing for full implementation of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) Free Trade Agreement. As an important financial center for Southeast
Asia, Singapore continues to face criticism for reportedly hosting bank accounts
containing ill-gotten gains of corrupt leaders and their associates, including billions
of dollars of Burma’s state gas revenues hidden from national accounts.