 SINGAPORE
 Singapore is governed by a parliamentary system modeled
 generally after that of the British. However, political power
 is concentrated in the People's Action Party which has won all
 seats in the past four general elections, with approximately 70
 percent of the vote (75.5 percent in the 1980 election).
 The Pirty lost one seat in a 1981 by-election, its first
 electoral defeat since Singapore gained independence in 1965.
 Public criticism of the Government tends to be circumspect.
 Persons seen to be involved in pro-communist activities,
 activities that incite communal tensions, espionage, or drug
 use and trafficking are subject to prolonged detention and
 arrest without trial. The Government enjoys broad popular
 support. Its civil service is regarded as efficient and
 honest, and the Government's leadership is, by all accounts,
 free from corruption. In economic and social matters,
 Singapore's record for raising the standard of living
 and the quality of life of its population is excellent.
 A multi-racial society with a dominant majority of ethnic
 Chinese, but with Malay, Indian, and other minorities, Singapore
 has experienced communal tension in the past, and the possi-
 bility of tension arising again is regarded as a threat to the
 nation's stability. In addition, Singapore was subject to acts
 of terrorism by elements of the Communist Party of Malaya
 through 1974. There have been no terrorist incidents in recent
 years, although the Communist Party of Malaya includes Singapore
 in its sphere of operations. In January of 1982, a group of
 Muslim extremists was arrested for attempting to distribute
 subversive literature at a large gathering. The Government of
 Singapore cites both the threat of insurgency and the
 possibility of renewed communal conflict as justification for
 legislation, inherited from the British colonial administration,
 that makes legal the arrest and detention without trial of
 persons suspected of activities that threaten civil order.
 Two prominent political detainees were granted their freedom in
 1982, subject to restrictions on future political activity.
 Both had been the subject of Amnesty International inquiries
 and had been classified among the longest-term political
 prisoners in the world. There were nine people under detention
 under the Internal Security Act in September 1982, versus 17 in
 February 1982 and an estimated 20 in 1981. According to a
 Government statement in March 1982, 10 persons were then under
 detention under the Immigration Act and 1,019 under the Criminal
 Law (Temporary Provisions) Act.
 The trend during 1982 was towards a lessening of the reliance
 on preventive detention to control potentially subversive
 elements. The release of prominent detainees without the
 once-mandatory public confession and abjuration of communism is
 one sign of the Government's perception of the reduced threat
 Singapore faces from communist subversion. The trial of Muslim
 extremists in January was pursued through a regular court,
 rather than via detention under the Internal Security Act.
 At the same time, the Government has moved to tighten its
 control over some aspects of society. It has banned certain
 religious groups such as the Jehovah's Witnesses, the local
 branch of Sun Myung Moon's Unification Church, and the Divine
 Light Mission, none of which had a significant following.
 The activities of these movements were seen by the Government
 as potentially disruptive. The Government has reorganized the
 trade unions and the press, moves which could lead to greater
 control of these institutions.
 
 
 799
 1. Respect for the Intergrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a.   Killing
 There have been no reports of politically-motivated killings in
 Singapore.
 b.   Disappearance
 There is no evidence that people are abducted or held in
 clandestine detention by official or quasi-official security
 forces or by elements whose activities are condoned by the
 Government.
 c.   Torture
 Torture is prohibited under the Penal Code, although individual
 instances of mistreatment by law enforcement officers have been
 alleged. Amnesty International has claimed that political
 detainees are subject to mistreatment during interrogation.
 The Government, while acknowledging that interrogation
 procedures employ psychological stress, denies that detainees
 are abused or tortured. Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew publicly
 announced in February 1978, that any interrogating officer
 who assaulted a detainee would be liable to civil and criminal
 charges. There have been published reports of instances in
 which such charges have been brought by criminal law detainees,
 and punitive action taken.
 d.   Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 There are no summary executions in Singapore. Prison conditions
 are spartan but adequate. Conditions for political detainees
 are described by some detainees as reasonably good; a number
 were housed in cottages with individual bedrooms and communal
 dining and recreation rooms. Political detainees are separated
 from other prisoners. Solitary confinement has been used as a
 disciplinary measure. Diet and access to medical care are
 described as adequate by some former detainees, although there
 are limits on food that may be brought from outside. Weekly
 family visits are permitted, and lawyers have access to their
 clients on request.
 e.   Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Detention and arrest without a warrant are authorized under
 the Criminal Procedure Code, the Banishment Act, the Internal
 Security Act, the Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act, the
 Immigration Act, and the Misuse of Drugs Act. The right to
 counsel during detention and arrest is guaranteed only under
 the Criminal Procedure Code. The Criminal Procedure Code
 allows any police officer to arrest without a warrant and
 detain a person up to 24 hours. The Internal Security Act
 is a preventive detention statute. Investigations under that
 act and responsibility for detainees rest with the Internal
 Security Department, whose director reports to the Minister
 for Home Affairs.
 The Internal Security Act, usually applied in political cases,
 validates detention without a warrant of "suspected persons'
 for an initial 30-day period for investigations and
 interrogation. After that initial detention period, a person
 may be detained only under an order issued by the Minister for
 Home Affairs.
 The Government states that the Internal Security Act is
 necessary to counter the Communist Party of Malaya, which is
 active still both in Malaysia and in Singapore, and which seeks
 to overthrow the elected governments of both countries.
 
 
 800
 Although Communist Party membership is illegal in Singapore,
 the Party reportedly maintains a small network in Singapore
 with a modest capacity to recruit cadre, solicit funds, and
 procure supplies for its armed insurgency in Malaysia.
 In January 1982, Singapore arrested ten Muslim extremists.
 The ten, all members of a group called the Singapore People's
 Liberation Organization, were charged with inciting communal
 unrest and plotting the overthrow of the Government. Five were
 tried and convicted in regular courts and the other five
 released. Those convicted received relatively lenient
 sentences (2-4 years in prison). The Government did not invoke
 the Internal Security Act to detain the group without trial.
 As of September 1982, there were nine Internal Security Act
 detainees, according to the Government. The Singapore
 Government claims that all the detainees have some connection
 with the Communist Party of Malaya.
 In January 1982, the Government released three female detainees.
 All three accepted conditions of release which included a prohi.-
 bition on associating with or taking part in the activities of
 any organization which is sympathetic to the communist cause or
 which allows itself to be used in propagating communist
 ideology.
 In August 1982, the Government conditionally released Dr. Poh
 Soo Kai. Dr. Poh had been arrested and detained in 1963 for
 communist-front activities. He was conditionally released in
 1974 but re-arrested in 1976 for allegedly giving aid to
 Communist Party of Malaya terrorists. Public abjuration of
 communism was not a condition of his 1982 release, a pattern of
 the past two years; however, conditions included restrictions
 on movement, association, and employment. Dr. Poh accepted
 these conditions although he publicly denied being a communist
 in an interview after his release.
 In September 1982, the Government ended Dr. Lim Hock Siew's
 exile on an offshore island. Dr. Lim is under restrictions
 similar to those imposed on Dr. Poh.
 These releases, and the accompanying government press
 statements, suggest that acceptance of government-imposed
 restrictions on future political activity, rather than the
 once-mandatory individual public renunciation, may now be
 the normal condition of release.
 Under the Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act, usually
 applied in cases involving secret societies and narcotics
 traffickers, the police may detain and arrest, without a
 detention order or warrant for up to 16 days, any person
 suspected of association with criminal activities. As of
 February 15, 1981, 1,019 persons were under detention under
 this Act, about evenly divided between drug traffickers and
 secret society members.
 The Misuse of Drugs Act allows Central Narcotics Bureau
 officers or customs officials to arrest without a warrant
 any person suspected of manufacturing, importing, exporting,
 possessing, consuming, or trafficking in controlled drugs.
 Persons actually arrested are tried in court. A few indivi-
 duals have maintained that they were not drug-users and were
 improperly detained but, so far, have failed to substantiate
 their allegations in court. The Government has maintained that
 adequate safeguards exist to prevent innocent persons being
 detained.
 
 
 801
 f.   Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a fair public trial is observed except for persons
 detained under the provisions of the Internal Security Act and
 the Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act, although the right
 to trial by jury has been replaced by trial by magistrate or
 judge. The Government defends its policy of detention without
 trial in security cases on the grounds that 'open trial' of
 communists is not possible, as witnesses and officials have
 been intimidated or killed. The basic tenets, practices, and
 precedents of the Singapore judicial system are derived from
 British jurisprudence. Defendants may appeal civil verdicts
 to the Court of Criminal Appeal and from those appellate courts
 (because Singapore is a member of the British Commonwealth),
 defendants may appeal to the Judicial Committee of the Privy
 Council in London.
 The judiciary's independence from the Government is not
 complete. Subordinate court judges (magistrates) and
 prosecutors are civil servants in the legal service.
 The Ministry of Law can freely transfer them from magistrate
 to prosecutor positions or to the legal offices of other
 ministries and statutory boards. Superior Court (High Court)
 judges, including the Chief Justice, are normally appointed to
 retirement age (65) by the President on the recommendation of
 the Prime Minister and cabinet. Some of the seven high court
 judges, however, hold what am6unt to probationary appointments
 for fixed terms, frequently one year. Lawyers practice free
 from Government interference. Citizens can successfully take
 Government agencies to court over such matters as compulsory
 land acquisitions and compensation but the Government has not
 lost a case which questioned a major aspect of its policy.
 While habeas corpus exists in theory, the Government, as noted
 earlier, has adequate legal powers to detain persons free from
 court intervention.
 g.   Invasion of the Home
 Search warrants are normally issued by a magistrate. If a
 magistrate is unavailable a senior police officer may issue
 the warrant. The Criminal Procedures Code and the Misuse of
 Drugs Act provide, however, for search without a warrant.
 The former is justified on the grounds of forestalling escape,
 and the latter is justified on the grounds of forestalling the
 destruction of evidence. Officers making such an entry are
 subject to "post-invasion" investigation of the facts to show
 some degree of probable cause.
 Under a recent amendment to the Prevention of Corruption Act,
 officers of the Corrupt Practices Investigation Bureau down to
 the grade of assistant investigator are authorized to carry out
 searches without warrant in cases of persons suspected of
 bribery or other forms of corruption.
 2. Respect for Civil and Political Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and press are circumscribed. The Government
 forbids activities or public statements that might arouse
 communal tensions between the dominant Chinese and the Malay or
 Indian minorities. In the past, the Government has invoked the
 Internal Security Act to arrest and detain persons accused of
 arousing communal tension, but no one is currently being held
 for that charge.
 There is censorship of motion pictures, magazines, TV, plays,
 and VTRs -- primarily to prevent the spread of pornography and
 drug abuse and to limit discussion of certain ethnically
 sensitive topics. There is no prior restraint of the press,
 
 
 802
 but the press understands the limits within which the Government
 expects it to operate: as a partner in informing and educating
 people rather than as a critic of broad policies. The Minister
 for Culture said in a March 25, 1982 statement in parliament
 that the Government would not allow 'any room for anyone to
 disturb the internal peace or stability of our nation.'
 The press is also mindful of the need for annual renewal of
 publishing licenses. In recent years, however, the press has
 broadened its reporting into criticism of some areas of public
 policy, and also publishes opposition viewpoints on occasion.
 Singapore's lone opposition member of parliament has been given
 the chance to air his views in the press although People's
 Action Party attacks on those views have been given much greater
 prominence. The Government monitors the press and has been
 known to call editors to task for what it sees as incorrect
 or irresponsible reporting.
 In 1982 a recently retired senior civil servant was appointed
 as the executive chairman of the 'Strait Times Press,*
 Singapore's leading English language newspaper, and the Prime
 Minister's press secretary was made a board member of the
 "Singapore Monitor' group. While it is popularly believed that
 these appointments would result in greater government role in
 the press, it has thus far not been demonstrated that this is
 the case.
 In April 1982, the Government carried out a major reorgani-
 zation of Singapore's press. The Prime Minister's office
 announced the reorganization with a statement that the changes
 were undertaken to ensure the viability of the Chinese press.
 The Singapore Broadcasting Corporation, which is owned by the
 Government, has a monopoly on locally produced domestic radio
 and television. The BBC world service is available on FM in
 Singapore and Malaysian radio and television can be received.
 Virtually all major English language news publications from the
 US and the UK are readily available, free from censorship.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Assemblies of more than five persons in a public place,
 including political rallies, are allowed only if a police
 permit is obtained beforehand. Except during election
 campaigns, the Government forbids open-air political rallies
 or meetings.
 The Societies Act gives the Government considerable leverage
 over associations. To operate legally in Singapore, associa-
 tions, societies, clubs, and churches with more than ten
 members must be registered with the Government. Registration
 is denied to societies with triad (Chinese secret society)
 rituals, those the Government views as likely to be used for
 unlawful purposes or for purposes prejudicial to public peace,
 welfare, or good order, or those whose registration would be
 contrary to the national interest.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 There is no established religion in Singapore. A Presidential
 Council on Minority Rights exists to ensure that legislation
 does not infringe on the rights of ethnic or religious
 minorities. The Government has, through the Societies Act,
 restricted religious sects with views the Government considers
 inimical to social order. In 1972, the Jehovah's Witnesses
 were banned and their registration under the Societies Act
 revoked because their teachings opposed national service and
 urged male adherents to refuse to report for military duty.
 In June 1982, police arrested and fined 29 persons for holding
 illegal meetings in defiance of the Societies Act and seized a
 quantity of the Witnesses' publications.
 
 
 803
 In April 1982, the Government similarily banned the Holy Spirit
 Association for the Unification of World Christianity, the
 Singapore branch of the Unification Church, as being
 .prejudicial to public welfare and good order.' The Divine
 Light Mission was denied registration on similar grounds in
 April and in July police arrested seventeen members of the
 sect. Two were fined $470 each for carrying on the group's
 activities without an approved registration. In March, the
 Government closed a religious school, The School of Missions
 run by the Jesus Saves Mission, after parents complained that
 students were being coerced into abandoning their other studies
 in order to become mission workers.
 d. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Internal Security Act empowers the Minister for Home Affairs
 to suspend a detention order, subject to the execution of a
 bond, and to impose restrictions on an individual's activities,
 places of residence, and travels outside of Singapore without
 permission of a specified authority. The power of revocation
 rests with the Home Affairs Minister.
 There are no other limitations on freedom of movement within
 the country, although changes of address must be reported to
 the Government within 14 days. All Singapore residents over
 the age of 13 are required to register with the Government and
 to receive an identity card. An individual may be denied a
 passport at the Government's discretion. Passports are also
 generally denied to persons convicted of serious crimes,
 including drug trafficking, kidnapping, murder, or assault
 committed during a robbery.
 As of August 1982, a total of 27,521 Indochinese refugees had
 been granted temporary safehaven in Singapore. Except for a
 handful of direct arrivals by boat or stowaways, this total is
 composed entirely of Indochinese refugees rescued at sea by
 foreign-registered vessels and brought to Singapore. only 109
 refugees have been accepted by the Government for permanent
 resettlement.
 Singap6re also permits refugee transits of Singapore into and
 out of the regional refugee processing center at Galang Island,
 Indonesia. The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
 staff, other international organizations, and United States
 refugee program personnel have free access. The general treat-
 ment received by the refugees is good. However, refugees are
 not admitted unless their departure is guaranteed, and
 Singapore has shoved off boats in the past.
 e. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Non-communist, non-communal parties are legally free to
 organize. There are 17 registered opposition political parties
 but only one opposition party member is currently serving in
 parliament. The opposition parties attribute their repeated
 electoral losses to historical, institutional, and security
 factors which inhibit their full participation in the political
 process. Participation in the political process outside of the
 People's Action Party is discouraged. Trade unions, student
 unions and other groups have been denied by law any function of
 an opposition.
 The Government justifies the close monitoring of opposition
 parties and tape recording of campaign speeches, on the grounds
 of possible prohibited communist participation in the elections
 and potentially libelous statements. The successful prosecution
 of libel and defamation suits against opposition parties and
 politicians following the 1972 and 1976 elections bankrupted
 several opposition politicians, and since bankrupts are barred
 
 
 804
 by law from political activities, this has resulted in removing
 them from the political arena.
 Women generally enjoy equal legal rights. The 1969 Women's
 Charter safeguards the position of women through regulation of
 marriage and divorce based on the principle of monogamous
 marriage, and protects women from exploitation for purposes of
 prostitution. The Charter also guarantees married women the
 right to engage in their own trade or profession, to acquire,
 hold, and dispose of property in their own right, and to use
 their own names. Muslim women's rights are protected by the
 provisions of the 1957 Administration Muslim Law Act, which
 permits women to apply for divorce, requires consent of both
 parties for divorce to be registered, and provides for women to
 hold and dispose of property. Women have voting rights and the
 right to equality of economic opportunity under the law,
 although the Government has not yet been able to eliminate
 all discrimination against women workers. There are no legal
 restrictions on full participation by women in the political
 process. However, there are no women members of parliament,
 and few in the top ranks of the civil service.
 Singaporean women do not have equal rights with men in the
 transmission of citizenship to their children. A Singaporean
 woman, married to a foreigner, does not pass Singaporean
 citizenship to a child born outside of Singapore whereas a
 Singaporean male does pass the right to Singapore citizenship
 to children born outside the country regardless of the mother's
 nationality. This rule derives from nationality laws based on
 the British model.
 Singapore has approximately 224,362 union members (about 30
 percent of the organizable labor force). At the end of 1981
 there were 86 registered trade unions. Ninety-six percent of
 the unionized workers belong to unions affiliated with the
 National Trades Union Congress, which is closely associated
 with the ruling People's Action Party. The right of registered
 trade unions to organize workers, strike, and bargain collec-
 tively is provided by law within strict limits defined and
 cited by the Government in its dealings with labor unrest.
 According to the Trade Unions Act, the Registrar of Trade
 Unions may dissolve the union if he believes "...that it is
 necessary in the interests of the workmen...' This has a
 chilling effect on the willingness to strike, and therefore,
 strikes are rare, with none since June 1977. Procedures are
 provided for arbitration and conciliation of disputes.
 The National Trades Union Congress recently restructured its
 two omnibus unions into nine industrial unions, in the process
 assuring itself of greater centralized control over union
 actions in industrial disputes. Unions and professional
 associations do maintain relations with recognized inter-
 national bodies in their fields. In September 1982, the
 Government proposed amendments to the Trade Unions Act which
 would more carefully define a union. Some 45 unions
 representing employers or self-employed persons would cease to
 be recognized as unions and revert to the status of trade
 associations. These amendments await action in parliament.
 In April 1979, the Singapore Government renounced its adherence
 to International Labor Organizations (ILO) Convention 105 on
 forced labor. Since 1974, the 110 had asserted that persons
 detained under the Internal Security Act and other acts were
 subject to punitive labor. When the ILO rejected Singapore's
 description of such labor as vocational rehabilitation (to
 which only criminal offenders and not political detainees are
 subject), the Government renounced the convention.
 
 
 805
 3. Government Attitude Regarding International and Non-
 Governmental Investigations of Alleged Violation of
 Human Rights
 In general, the Governmnent reacts defensively to foreign
 criticism. For example, Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew withdrew
 the People's Action Party from the Socialist International in
 1976 when one of the other members criticized Singapore's use
 of the Internal Security Act.
 Amnesty International's latest report describes its continuing
 concern in 1981 about political prisons, but also discussed;the
 release of some political prisoners. Freedom House rates
 Singapore 'partly free."
 4. Economic, Social, and Cultural Situation
 Singapore is an urban city-state with a strong and prosperous
 free enterprise economy. Private ownership of property is a
 basic feature of Singapore's economy. The standard of living
 is rising steadily, with an average real annual growth rate of
 9.4 percent during the 1970's (9.8 percent for 1981). The per
 capita gross domestic product was $5,112 in 1981. Unemployment
 was very low (2.9 percent in 1981) and inflation relatively
 moderate (10.4 percent).
 In 1981, the population growth rate was 1.2 percent and total
 fertility rate was 1.7. The success of Singapore's population
 program is based on wide-ranging disincentives to third children
 including restricted access to the better schools, the tax code,
 and provision of medical benefits. In 1981, life expectancy at
 birth was 71.4 years, and the infant mortality rate was 11.7
 per 1,000 live births. One hundred percent of the population
 had access to safe water by 1979.
 In 1982, 71 percent of the population was housed in well-
 designed apartments built by the Government mostly over the
 last decade. Of people living in public housing estates, two
 thirds have purchased their apartments, largely through a
 program that finances the purchase through the equivalent of
 social security accounts.
 Education is not compulsory, but free primary education is
 provided for children of all Singapore citizens. Education
 through the university level is of high quality and is provided
 at modest cost, although entrance to tertiary education is
 highly competitive. The primary school enrollment ratio was
 107 percent in 1979. In 1970, the adult literacy rate was 69
 percent, while by 1981, it had increased to 84.2 percent.
 Women have equal educational opportunities and comprise half
 the primary and secondary school population and almost half of
 the student enrollment in universities and teacher-training and
 technical institutions.
 The civil service generally has followed the principle of equal
 pay for equal work for men and women since 1962, although a 1981
 seminar on the status of women identified instances where civil
 service benefits are not equal for men and women. Equal pay is
 not the rule with private employers. In 1980, the median gross
 monthly income of female workers was 74 percent of that of male
 workers. The gap partly reflects the concentration of women in
 traditional low-paying occupations and their lack of seniority
 in the work force.
 
 
 806
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS 4NO GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AN. LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF OOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: SINGAPORE
 1930     1981     1982
 -----        ------------------------------------------------
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL..          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ........ a ....      0.0       0.0      0.0
 A.AIO. .................       0.0       0.0      0.0
 LOANS .................      0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     0.0       0.0      0.0
 (SEC.SUPPASSIST.)e,,         0.0      0.0       0.0
 6.FOO FOR PLACE .......         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS. ............        0.0      0.0      0M0
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN 4-LOANS .....         n.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR,,..,         0.0       0.0      0.0
 TITLE II-TUTAL .........        0.0       0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.tC.0EV & WFP.        0.0       0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        0.0       0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER iCON. ASSIST,.           0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS... ...........       0.3       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.0       0.0      0.0
 PEAC: CORPS......         0.0      0.0       0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0       0.0
 OTHER ..........         0.0       0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST-TTAL,..          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .......  .......      0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.. ..............      0.0     0.0      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........        0.0       0.0      0.0
 b.CREOIT SALES-FMS ....        0.0       0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.eO.TRNG ....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 O.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0       0.0      0.0
 E.OTMER GRANTS ........        0.0       0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...          0.0     .0.0      0.0
 LOANS ................      0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ....    ...... 0.0            0.0      0.0
 --------..--------------------------------------------------
 OTHER US LOANS ..........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......         0.0      0.0      0.0
 .ALL OTHER ............. 10.0             0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE PROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1980     1981     1932     1946-82
 TOTAL .........   18.8      19.9      0.0    414.6
 IORO               0.0      0.0       0.0    Z09.4
 IFC                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 IDA                0.0      0.0       C.0      0.0
 lOb                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 AO               15.1      1.9.0     0.0    181.1
 AFOS               0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNOP               3.7       0.9      0.0     23.5
 OTHER-UN           0.0       0.0      0.0      0.6
 EEC                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
 87
