 SINGAPORE
 Singapore, a city-state of 3.3 million people, is a parliamenty republic in which
 politics are dominated by the People's Action Pariy (PAP), which has held power
 since Singapore gained autonomy from the United Kingdom in 1959. The PAP   holds
 77 of the 81 seats in Parliament. -oh Chok Tong completed his fourth year as
 Prime Minister, and Lee Kuan Yew, who served as Prime Minister from independ-
 ence in 1965 until 1990, remains active politically, holding the e lof Senior Min-
 ister. The majority of the population is ethnic Chinese (78 percent), with Malays and
 Indians constituting substantial minorities.
 The Government maintains active internal security and military forces to counter
 perceived threats to the nation's security. It has frequently used security legislation
 to control a broad range of activity. The Internal Security Department (IS) is re-
 sponsible for enforcement of the Internal Security At (ISA), including its provisions
 
 
 680
 for detention without trial. All young males are subject to national service (mostly
 in the military).
 Singapore has an open free market economic system. The construction and finan-
 cial services industries and manufacturing of computer-related components are key
 sectors of the economy which has achieved remarkably steady growth since inde-
 pendence. Gross domestic product rose 9.5 percent in 1994, and Singaporeans have
 an annual per capita income over $18,000. Wealth is distributed relatively equally
 in what is essentially a full-employment economy.
 There was no improvement or deterioration in the human rights situation. The
 Government continued to intimidate opposition parties and their candidates. There
 continued to be credible reports of police mistreatment of detainees. The Govern-
 ment has wide powers to detain people arbitrarily and subsequently restrict their
 travel, freedom of speech and right to associate freely, and to handicap political op-
 position. There was no evidence of a change in the Government's willingness to re-
 strict human rights when it deemed that necessary in pursuit of its policy goals.
 There is some legal discrimination against women, which, in practice, affects only
 a small percentage of the population. The Government has moved actively to
 counter societal discrimination against women and the Malay minority.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killing.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or De ading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The law prohibits torture, and government leaders have stated that they oppose its
 use. However, there have been credible reports during the past year of police mis-
 treatment of detainees, some of which has been reported in the press. Reliable re-
 ports indicate that police sometimes interrogate prisoners in very cold rooms where
 the prisoners may be stripped of their clothes and doused with water. In August,
 after 16 months in custody, murder charges were withdrawn against a suspect who
 claimed that he was forced to confess as a result of police interrogation methods.
 The police maintained that all proper procedures had been followed in obtaining the
 confession. The court said that it appeared the accused had been assaulted while
 he was in police custody and that his confession, therefore, could have been coerced.
 In 1993, of the 94 complaints of police abuse investigated, 14 were substantiated.
 The Government reserves the right to use indefinite confinement to pressure de-
 tainees to "rehabilitate" themselves as well as to make admissions of wrongdoing.
 In the past, the Government has acknowledged that in the case of detentions with-
 out trial under the Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act, the indefinite nature
 of the detentions served to pressure the detainees. Persons alleging mistreatment
 under detention may bring criminal charges against government officials who are
 alleged to have committed such acts, but they may be discouraged from making ac-
 cusations for fear of official retaliation.
 The Penal Code mandates caning in addition to imprisonment as punishment for
 offenses involving the use of violence or threat of violence against a person, such
 as rape, robbery and extortion. The law also mandates caning in other areas, such
 as for certain convictions under the Vandalism Act and for specific immigration of-
 fenses. The Government opted to apply the Vandalism Act in the widely publicized
 case of foreign teenagers accused of spray painting privately owned automobiles.
 Previously, damage against private propethad been classified as mischief, which
 does not include caning as a means of punishment. Many critics expressed the view
 that caning was an excessive penalty for youthful, nonviolent, first-time offenders
 whose actions were reparable and questioned why the Government chose to punish
 these teenagers mre harshly than in past cases.
 Caning is discretionary for convictions on other charges involving the use of crimi-
 nal force, such as kidnaping or voluntarily causing grievous hurt. The law prescribes
 a maimum or minimum number of cane strokes in many of these cases, although
 the court does not always abide by these guidelines. Women are exempted from
 caning, as are men over 50, under 16, and those determined unfit by a medical offi-
 cer. In 1993 the judgment included a caning sentence in 3,244 cases.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The ISA, the Criminal Law (Temporary
 Provisions) Act, the Misuse of Drugs Act, and the Undesirable Publications Act all
 have prvisions for arrest without warrant. Those arrested must be charged before
 a magistrate within 48 hours. At that time, those detained under criminal charges
 may obtain legal counsel. A functioning system of bail exists for those charged, and
 there were no reported abuses of it.
 
 
 681
 The ISA, the Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act and the Misuse of Drugs
 Act authorize detention without trial The Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act
 is used almost exclusively in cases involving narcotics and secret criminal societies
 and has not been used for political purposes. According to the Government, 46 de-
 tention orders were issued under the Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act dur-
 ing 1993, of which 27 were for secret society activities and 19 for drug trafficldng.
 Under the Misuse of Drugs Act, the Director of the Central Narcotics Bureau (CNB)
 may also commit-without trial-suspected drug users for up to 6 months, with sub-
 sequent extensions, to a drug rehabilitation center in cases of positive urinalysis
 tests.
 Those persons detained without trial under the ISA are entitled to counsel but
 have no legal recourse through the courts to challenge the substantive basis for
 their detention. Persons detained without trial under the Criminal Law (Temporary
 Provisions) Act are also entitled to counsel but may only challenge the substantive
 basis for their detention to the committee advising the Minister for Home Affairs
 on detention issues. The ISA gives broad discretion to the Minister of Home Affairs
 to order detention without charges if the President determines that a person poses
 a threat to national security. The President may authorize detention for up to 2
 years; the detention order may be renewed for 2-year periods with no limitation on
 renewal. An advisory board reviews each detainee's case periodically, and detainees
 may make representations to it. The board may make nonbinding recommendations
 that a detainee be released prior to expiration of the detention order. If the Minister
 wishes to act contrary to a recommendation for release by the board, he must seek
 the agreement of the President.
 The ISA empowers the police to detain a person for up to 48 hours; any police
 officer at or above the ran of superintendent may authorize that the detainee be
 held for up to 28 days longer. Once initial interrogation has been completed, the au-
 thorities normally aow 2A detainees access to lawyers and visits by relatives.
 No one has been jailed under formal ISA detention since 1990. However, the Gov-
 ernment maintains some restrictions on the rights of two former ISA detainees to
 travel abroad, make public statements, and associate freely. Chia Thye Poh, a
 former member of Parliament, was released from prison in 1989 after 23 years in
 preventive detention under the ISA, but was confined to a small island ajacent to
 Singapore during evening and night hours until 1992. Now resident in Singapore
 proper, he cannot be employed, travel abroad, or issue public statements without
 ISI approval. Vincent Cheng, a detainee released in 1990, may not issue public
 statements, publish, or travel abroad without ISD consent.
 While the law does not specifically prohibit exile, the Government has never prac-
 ticed exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Wal.-The judicial system has two levels of courts: the
 Supreme Court, which includes the high court and the court of appeal; and the sub-
 ordinate courts. In normal cases the Criminal Procedures Code provides that a
 charge against a defendant must be read and explained to him as soon as it is
 framed by the prosecution or the magistrate. The accused has the right to be rep-
 resented by an attorney. Trial is by judge rather than jury. Persons detained under
 the ISA and the Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act, as well as suspected
 drug users detained under the Misuse of Drugs Act, are not entitled to a public
 trial, which is accorded in all other cases.
 In 1989 the Government amended the Constitution and the ISA to eliminate judi-
 cial review of the objective grounds for detentions under the ISA and subversion
 laws. This allows the Government to restrict, or even eliminate, judicial review in
 such cases and thereby restrict, on vaguely defined national security grounds, the
 scope of certain fundamental liberties provided for in the Constitution.
 In February, completing a transition begun in 1989, Parliament approved a bill
 abolishing all appeals to the Privy Council in London. The single Court of Appeal,
 established in 1993, combining the former court of appeal (for civil cases) and court
 of criminal appeal, therefore became the highest court of review in Singapore.
 The President appoints judges to the Supreme Court on the recommendation of
 the Prime Minister in consultation with the Chief Justice. Supreme Court justices
 may remain in office until the mandatory retirement age of 65, after which they
 may continue to serve at the Governments discretion for brief, renewable terms at
 full salary.
 The President also appoints subordinate court judges on the recommendation of
 the Chief Justice. The term of appointment is determined by the Legal Service Com-
 mission of which the Chief Justice is the chairman. Subordinate court judges and
 magistrates, as well as public prosecutors, are civil servants whose specific assign-
 ments are determined by the Legal Service Commission, which can decide on job
 transfers to any of several legal service departments. Judicial officials, especially in
 
 
 682
 the Supreme Court, have close ties to the ruling party and its leaders. These factors
 call into question the judiciary's independence.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Government can use its wide discretionary powers if it determines that national se-
 curity is threatened. In most cases, the law requires search warrants, normally is-
 sued by the magistrate court, for intrusion into the home. Law enforcement officers
 may, however, search a person, home, or property without a warrant if they decide
 searches are necessary to preserve evidence.
 The Misuse of Drugs Act and the Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act also
 permit warrantless searches in dealing with drug- and secret society-related of-
 fenses. The courts may undertake judicial review of such searches at the request
 of the defendant. Divisions of the Government's law enforcement agencies, including
 the ISD and the Corrupt Practices Investigation Board (CPIB), have wide networks
 for gathering information. The authorities have the capability to monitor telephone
 and other private conversations and conduct surveillance, but there were no proven
 allegations that they did so in 1994.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution permits official restrictions on
 the freedom of expression and, in practice, the Government restricts the freedoms
 of speech and the press. The ISA permits the Government to prohibit or to place
 conditions on publications that incite violence, that counsel disobedience to the law,
 that might arouse tensions among the various classes (races, religions, and language
 groups) or that might threaten national interests, national security, or public order.
 The Government uses a broad definition of these laws to restrict political opposition
 and criticism. It is clear from recent events that the Government will not tolerate
 discussions in the press of government corruption, nepotism, or a compliant judici-
 azy.
 rThe Government owns the Singapore Broadcasting Corporation (SBC) and oper-
 ates it under a statutory board of the Ministry of Information and the Arts. On Oc-
 tober 1, the SBC was divided into four government-owned subsidiaries under a hold-
 ing company, Singapore International Media PTE Ltd. Also, the new Singapore
 Broadcasting Authority (SBA) came into effect to regulate and promote the broad-
 casting industry. The SBA develops censorship standards with the help of advisory
 panels whose membership represents a cross-section of society. Government-owned
 corporations have a near monopoly on broadcasting, operating all 3 free television
 channels and 10 of 14 radio stations. The three pa television channels are jointly
 owned by government-owned corporations and the US. Cablevision company. Two
 of the other three radio stations are operated by the National Trade Union Congress
 (NTUC), which is closely affiliated with the Government; the third is the British
 Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) world service, available 24 hours a day on the FM
 band. In addition to the BBC World Service, Malaysian television and radio broad-
 casts and Indonesian radio broadcasts are received uncensored in Singapore. Cable
 News Network International, carried live, is available almost 24-hours a day on pay
 television. Satellite dishes are banned with few exceptions.
 All general circulation newspapers, with the exception of a small circulation Tamil
 language newspaper, are owned by Singapore Press Holdings Ltd. (SPH), a private
 corporation which has close ties to the national leadership. SPH also owns 20 per-
 cent of Singapore Cablevision, which operates the cable television system. The S PH
 is required by law to issue ordinary and "management" shares; holders of manage-
 ment shares have the power to control all SPH personnel decisions. The Govern-
 ment must approve, and can remove, holders of management shares. Hence, while
 Singaore newspapers, especially the English-language Straits Times, print a large
 and dverse selection of articles from their domestic and a variety of foreign re-
 sources, editorials and coverage of domestic events closely parallel government poli-
 cies and the opinions of government leaders. Government leaders often criticize
 what they call the 'Western model" of journalism, in which the media have unre-
 stricted freedom to report the news as they see it. Government officials argue that
 the role of the domestic media is to support the goals of the elected leadership.
 A case by the Government against the editor of the Business Times, the leading
 business daily owned by Singapore press holdings, and four other persons was set-
 tled in March. The editor and four others-a government official, a journalist, and
 two employees of a foreign securities firm-were convicted of failing to protect the
 secrecy of official information in regard to a December 1992 report in the Business
 Times of unreleased government growth figures. The defendants were fined but re-
 ceived no jail sentences.
 
 
 683
 
 A wide range of international magazines and newspapers may be purchased un-
 censored, although newspapers printed in Malaysia may not be imported (and vice
 versa). A 1990 law requires foreign publications that report on politics and current
 events in Southeast Asia to register, post a bond the equivalent of $132,000, and
 name a person in Singapore to accept legal service. These requirements strengthen
 government control over foreign media. The Government may ban the circulation of
 domestic and foreign publications under provisions of the ISA and the Undesirable
 Publications Act. Under amendments to the Newspaper and Printing Presses Act
 it may limit the circulation of foreign publications wiich, by the Government's broad
 determination, interfere in Singapore s domestic politics. It has done so on occasion
 in the past.
 In its relations with foreign media, the Government relaxed restrictions on the
 circulation of some foreign publications. In January the restrictions on the circula-
 tion of The Economist were lifted. The Asian Wall Street Journal (AWSJ), Asiaweek,
 and the Far Eastern Economic Review, all "gazetted" (limited in circulation) in
 1987, remained gazetted. However, the limits were raised to 7,000 per issue on the
 AWSJ, 15,000 per issue for Asiaweek, and 2,000 per issue of the Far Eastern Eco-
 nomic Review. The Government also permitted the AWSJ to station a correspondent
 full time in Singapore beginning in 1993. From 1988 to 1991, the AWSJ was not
 permitted to have a correspondent in Singapore, and from 1991 to 1993, a eor-
 respondent was permitted on a part-time basis only. However, in June the Immigra-
 tion Department refused the application from the Asiaweek correspondent to renew
 his employment pass. Journalists from regional publications are required by law to
 apply annually or renewal of the employment pass which allows them to operate
 in  ngapore.
 Government leaders sometimes use libel or slander suits or the threat of such ac-
 tions to discourage public criticism. In June a Former Singapore Law Minister sued
 the International Herald Tribune for publishing an allegedly defamatory letter
 about him in May. The letter compared the leniency shown to the former law min-
 ister after a car crash when he had been convicted of "drunk driving and refusing
 a breathalyzer test" with the harsh punishment for persons convicted of vandalism.
 In fact, the former law minister had not been convicted of the former, but was
 charged with "driving without care" and "failing to give a blood sample." The suit
 was settled out of court after the IHT printed an apology and paid an unspecified
 amount in damages.
 Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong, Senior Minister Lee Kuan Yew, and his son, dep-
 uty Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong, are seeking damages from the IHT for an arti-
 cle published in August, which suggested that the younger Lee had been appointed
 to Wis post on account of his father. Damages of an unspecified amount are being
 sought, in spite of a prned apology, which appeared in the newspaper on August
 31. Lawyers for the two sides are still negotiating the amount of the damages.
 In January 1995 Dr. Christopher L     an    rican academic who had been a
 visiting lecturer at the National University of Singapore, the International Herald
 Tribune, and others were fined for contempt of court following the publication of an
 article about Southeast Asian governments by Lingle on October 7, 1994. Although
 Singapore was not mentioned in the article, the court focused on the article's ref-
 erence to some governments as being "more subtle: relying upon a compliant judici-
 ary to bankrupt opposition politicians or buying out enough of the opposition to take
 control democratically" as a reference to Singapore. Although the IHT published an
 apology for the article in December, Senior Minister Lee Kuan Yew filed a civil libel
 suit. That action is pending. In at least the three incidents cited above, the use of
 slander or libel suits appears to have successfully intimidated the press.
 The authorities censor movies, video materials, and music. Some publications are
 barred from importation. Censorship of materials and the decision to deny the im-
 portation of specific publications are based on a determination that such materials
 would undermine the stability of the State; are pro-Communist, contravene moral
 norms, are pornographic, show excessive and/or gratuitous sex and violence, glamor-
 ize or promote drug use, or incite racial, religious, or language animosities. The au-
 thorities report that there is strong public support for continued censorship of sex
 and violence in films.
 In January, after a performer's actions in a nude entertainment, the Government
 tightened its restrictions on drama groups. It now requires organizers of scriptless
 ea synopsis when applying for a liense. The founder of the group
 rponie for the above performance was prosecuted for providing entertainment
 ithout a license because the play ran overtime. The performer was fined and
 barred from future public performances.
 Faculty members at pubic    etitutions of higher education aregovernment em-
 ployees. A number of university lecturers are concurrently PAP Members of Par-
 
 
 684
 liament (M.P.'s). Academics sometimes criticize government policies, but avoid pub-
 lic criticism of individual government leaders and sensitive social and economic poli-
 cies because of possible sanctions, such as in the cases of Dr. Christopher Lingle
 and Dr. Chee Soon Juan (see also Section 3). Publications by local academics and
 members of think tanks rarely deviate substantially from government views.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Assemblies of more than five
 persons in public, including political meetings and rallies, must have police permis-
 sion. Individuals wishing to speak at a public function, excluding functions provided
 by or under the auspices of the Government, must obtain permission from the Pub-
 lie Entertainment Licensing Unit, a division of the  lie Criminal Investigation De-
 partment. Opposition politicians have experienced delays as long as 26 days, accord-
 ing to police records, before receiving notification of action on their applications. The
 authorities do not approve all applications. For example, according to a police
 spokesman, opposition M.P. Ling How Doon was not aowed to speak at his con-
 stituency's national day celebration dinner in August because the function was orga-
 nized bya political party and held outdoors. On the other hand, PAP M.P. and Min-
 ister Without Portfolio Lim Boon Heng was allowed to speak at a similar open-air
 function in August because it was organized by the Citizens' Consultative Commit-
 tee under the People's Association, which is not a political party.
 The Government closely monitors political gatherings regardless of the number
 present. Most associations, societies, clubs, churches, and other organizations with
 more than 10 members must be registered with the Government under the Societies
 Act. The Government denies registration to societies it believes likely to be used for
 unlawful purposes or for purposes prejudicial to public peace, welfare, or public
 order. The Government has absolute discretion in applying this broad and vague
 language to register or dissolve societies. It prohibits orgaized political activities,
 except by organizations registered as political parties. This prohibition effectively
 limits opposition activities. t has less of an effect on the PAP, which enjoys the sup-
 port of residential committees and neighborhood groups ostensibly organized for
 nonpolitical purposes but whose leadership contains many grassroots PAP members
 (see also Section 3).
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Freedom of religion is provided for in the Constitution
 and usually respected in practice. There is no state religion. The Government has
 determined that every public housing estate must have a mosque. It therefore pro-
 vides some financial assistance to build and maintain mosques. The Government
 also facilitates contributions to the construction of Indian and Chinese temples.
 Missionaries are permitted to work and to publish religious texts. However, all
 religious groups are subject to government scrutiny and must be legally registered.
 The Government restricts some religious sects by application of the Societies Act
 and has banned others, such as Jehovah's Witnesses and the Unification Church.
 Four Jehovah's Witnesses were convicted, and their appeals dismissed, for possess-
 ing banned publications under the Undesirable Publications Act. All four were fined.
 The 1990 "Maintenance of Religious Harmony Act' made illegal what the Govern-
 ment deems to be the ina pro riate involvement of religious groups and officials in
 political affairs. The Act also denies the judiciary the competence to review possible
 denial of rights which could arise from the application of the Act, and it specifically
 denies judicial review of its enforcement.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Fore *n Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Government requires all citizens and permanent residents over the
 age of 12 to register and to carry identification cards. After the completion of na-
 tional service, enlisted men remain liable for reserve training until the age of 40
 and officers to age 50. Reservists who plan to travel overseas for less than 6 months
 must advise the Ministry of Defense; for trips longer than 6 months, reservists must
 obtain an exit permit. Males approaching national service age must obtain an exit
 permit in order to study outside Singapore. The Government may deny a passport,
 and has done so in the case of former ISA detainees.
 The ISA allows the Minister for Law and Home Affairs to suspend or revoke a
 detention order or to impose restrictions on former detainees' activities, places of
 residence, and travel abroad. The right of voluntary repatriation is extended to hold-
 er of Singaprean passports. In 1985 Parliament proided for the loss of citizenship
 by Singapreans who reside outside Singapore for more than 10 years consecutively.
 Action under this law is discretionary and has been taken in at least one case in-
 vlving a well-known government opponent, Tan Wa Piaow.
 The law stipulates that former Singaporean members of the Communist Party of
 Maaya (CPM) residing outside Singapore must appeal to the Government to be al-
 lowed to return. They must renounce Communism, sever all organizational ties with
 the CPM, and pledge not to take part in activities prejudicial to the nation's internal
 
 
 685
 security. In addition, the law recuires them to be subject to interview by the ISD
 and to any restrictive conditions imposed on them.
 Singapore neither accepts the Comnprehensive Plan of Action for Indochinese seek-
 ing refugee status nor offers first alumto refugees. Prior to 1991, the Government
 permitted Indochinese asylum seekers to disembark if a resettlement country prom-
 ised to remove them within 90 days and if the rescuing vessel was in Singapore on
 a scheduled port of csll. In June 1991, the Government halted disembarkation on
 the grounds that resettlement countries had not honored their guarantees of re-
 moval. As of September 1, there were 98 asylum seekers at the Hawkins Road
 camp, all of whom were denied refugee status through screening procedures con-
 ducted by the local office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
 (UNHCR). The authorities permit persons of other nationalities who make claims
 for asylum to have their status determined by the UNHCR for possible resettlement
 elsewhere. There is no forcible repatriation.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides citizens with the right to change their government
 peacefully through democratic means and the voting and vote-counting systems in
 elections are fair, accurate, and free from tampering. In practice, however, the Gov-
 ernment uses its extensive powers to place formidable obstacles in the path of politi-
 cal opponents. It also attempts to intimidate the opposition through libel suits and
 potential loss of employment or professional licenses. Parliamentary elections may
 be called at any time, but must be held no later than 5 years from the date Par-
 liament first sits.
 Opposition parties have been unable seriously to challenge the PAP since the late
 1960's. Consequently, the PAPs domination of the political system continues as it
 had for three decades under Lee Kuan Yew. Opposition politicians currently hold
 only 4 seats in the 81-member elected Parliament, 3 for the Social Democratic Party
 and 1 for the Workers' Party. In addition to the 81 elected members, the President
 appoints 6 "prominent citizens" to serve as nominated M.P.'s for 2-year terms. The
 PAPas political success in part results from restrictions on opposition political activi-
 ties, but also from government policies which helped Singapore achieve rapid eco-
 nomic growth, thereby enabling the Government to provide a wide array of public
 services. The PAP has a brad-base of popular support, sustained in part through
 neigh brhood, youth, and labor associations.
 Although political parties are legally free to organize, the authorities impose strict
 regulations on their onstitutions, fundraising, and accountabilty. While the PAP
 has been able to enjoy the support of ostensibly nonpolitical organizations, the Gov-
 ernment has used its broad discretionary powers to hinder the creation of com-
 parable support organizations for opposition parties. The PAP's grip on power has
 also been enhanced by patronage; political control of the press, courts, and religion;
 strong party discipline and performance; and its access to the instruments of power.
 For example, a government program to refurbish public housing gives priority to
 PAP constituencies. Government regulations also hinder attempts by opposition par.
 ties to rent office space in government housing estates or to establish community
 foundations which run private kindergartens. The PAP claims the lack of an effec-
 tive opposition is due to disorganization, lack of leadership, and lack of alternative
 policy programs.
 In August 1993, citizens elected their first President. The Presidency has ex-
 panded powers over civil service appointments, government and statutory board
 dgets, and internal security affairs. Presidential aspirants must be certified by
 the Presidential Elections Committee (PEC), a body composed of the Chairman of
 the Public Service Commission, the Chairman of the Public Accountants Board, and
 a member of the Presidential Council for Minority Rights. The PEC was responsile
 for screening applicants on the basis of integrity, character, reputation, ability, and
 experience in managing the financial affairs of a large institution. Eligibility was
 considered automatic if the candidate had 3-years' experience as a high-ranking
 public servant or chief executive officer of a large corporation. These requirements
 limit the pool of potential presidential candidates. The Committee rejected the appli-
 cations of two opposition figures-J.B. Jeyaretnam, Secretary-General of the Work-
 ers' Party (WP) and a former M.P., and another WP member-for not satisfying the
 eligibility criteria regarding character and financial expertise.
 Government leaders continued to use civil libel or slander suits or the threat of
 them to discourage criticism or challenges by opposition leaders. The Legal Code
 also provides for criminal defamation offenses, but these provisions are seldom used.
 A prominent opposition figure who was the target of investigation by government
 entities was Dr. Chee Soon Juan, a lecturer at the National University of Singapore
 
 
 686
 and Deputy Secretary General of the Singapore Democratic Party (SDP). Chee was
 dismissed from his teaching position in March 1993 after a university audit of his
 financial records uncovered an alleged irregularity involving his use of research
 funds to express mail his wife's doctoral thesis to her university adviser in the Unit-
 ed States. He defended his action by arguing that his wife's thesis was relevant to
 his own research and that he had received prior approval for the mailing from his
 Department Chairman, Dr. S. Vasoo, a PAP M.P. Chee, one of the first university
 lecturers to join an opposition part, rose to prominence during an unsuccessful bid
 against Prime Minister Goh in the December 1992 by-election.
 In April 1993, Chee was sued by Vasoo for making allegedly defamatory remarks.
 After selling his house, Chee paid $200,000 in damages to his former university de-
 partment chairman and two other university employees as compensation for his al-
 legedly defamatory remarks. The high court also ordered Chee to pa all legal costs
 and refrain from repeating his allegedly defamatory remarks. A d   to the law,
 if Chee had been unable to pay and had declared bankruptcy, he would have been
 ineligible to run for Parliament for at least 5 years.
 Although there is no legal bar to the participation of women in politics, they are
 under represented in government. There are no female cabinet members and only
 2 of the 81 elected parliamentary seats are occupied by women. Two of the six nomi-
 nated members of Parliament are women. Women are also under represented in the
 highest levels of the civil service. There is no restriction in law or practice against
 minorities voting or participating in politics. Malays currently hold 12 percent of the
 seats in Parliament, in part the result of government legislation requiring a minor-
 ity representative in selected group representation constituencies.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no nongovernmental organizations, with the exception of the opposition
 political Parties, that actively and openly monitor alleged human rights violations.
 While the Government does not formally prohibit them, efforts by any independent
 organization to investigate and criticize publicly government human rights policies
 would face the same obstacles as those faced by political parties. The Government
 denies that international organizations have any competence whatsoever to look into
 human rights matters in Singapore. Visa regulations do not recognize monitoring
 human rights as a 'business purpose' for visiting Singapore, but neither is such ac-
 tivity regarded as a "social visit.' Amnesty International is not allowed to operate
 in or to visit Singapore.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Mindful of Singapore's history of intercommunal tension, the Government takes
 affirmative measures to ensure racial, ethnic, religious, and cultural nondiscrimina-
 tion. Social, economic, and cultural facilities are available to all citizens regardless
 of race, religion, or sex. Minorities are constitutionally afforded equal rights, actively
 participate in the political process, and are well represented throughout the Govern-
 ment.
 Women.-Women enjoy the same legal rights as men in most areas, including civil
 liberties, employment, commercial activity, and education. The Constitution contains
 no explicit provision of equal rights for women; instead, it states that all persons
 are equal before the law and entitled to the equal protection of the law. The Wom-
 en's Charter, enacted in 1961, gave women, inter alia, the right to own property,
 conduct trade, and receive divorce settlements. Muslim women enjoy most of the
 rights and protections of the Women's Charter, except that Muslim men are allowed
 to practice polygyny and may divorce unilaterally whereas Muslim women may not.
 In 1962 the Government instituted the principle of equal pay for equal work in
 the civil service and announced the abolition of separate salary scales by 1965.
 Other areas of discrimination remain. For example, children born overseas to Singa-
 porean women are not granted citizenship automatically as are children born to
 Singaporean men. Female civil service employees who are married do not receive
 health benefits for their spouses and dependents as do male government employees.
 There is no evidence of any widespread practice of violence or abuse against
 women. Laws such as the Penal Code and the Women's Charter protect women
 against domestic violence and sexual or physical harassment. A battered wife can
 obtain court orders barring the spouse from the home until the court is satisfied
 that he will stop his aggressive behavior. The Penal Code prescribes mandatory
 caning and a minimum imprisonment of 2 years for conviction on a charge of
 outraging modesty that causes the victim fear of death or injury.
 
 
 687
 Women make up over 50 percent of the labor force and are well represented in
 many professional fields, but they still hold the preponderance of low-wage jobs as
 clerks and secretaries. As a result, their average salary levels are only 70 percent
 those of men. Women hold few leadership positions in the private sector.
 Children.-The Government is strongly committed to the rights of children. In
 1993 the Government updated and reenacted the Children andYoung Persons Act.
 This revised Act establishes protective services for those children who are orphaned,
 abused, disabled, or refractory, and it creates a jvenile ourt system. The Ministry
 of Community Development works closely with the National Council for Social Ser-
 ices to oversee children's welfare cases. Voluntaiy organizations operate most of the
 homes for children while the Government funds up to 50 percent of all child costs,
 which includes normal living expenses and ovehead, as well as expenses for special
 schooling or supervisory needs.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minoritie-The Constitution acknowledges the "special
 position" of Malays as the indigenous people of Singactre and charges the Govern-
 ment to support and promote their "political, edcational, religious, economic, social,
 and cultural interests.  The Government has concentrated on creating equality of
 opportunty, especially in education and does not promote the concept of equality
 in result. A Presidntial Council on Mdinority Rights examines all current and pend-
 ing bills to ensure that they are not disadvantageous to a particular group. It. also
 reports to the Government on matters affecting any racial or religious community
 and investigates complaints.
 Unlike the Indian or Eurasian communities, which have achieved economic and
 educational success rates on a par with the majority Chinese, Malay Singapreans
 still have a lower standard of living, although the gap has diminished in recent
 years. Malays remain under represented at the uppermost rungs of the corporate
 ladder, a reflection of their historically lower education and economic position, but
 also a result of de facto employment discrimination. Advertisements sometimes
 specify the ethnicity and gender required of applicants or require fluent Mandarin
 speakers.
 People With Discabiities.-The Government implemented a comprehensive code on
 barrier-free accessibility in 1990 which established standards for facilities for the
 ph sically disabled in all new buildings and mandated the progressive upgrading of
 older structures. Although there is no legislation that addresses th e sof equal
 opportunities for the disabled in education or employment, the National Council of
 Social Services, in conjunction with various voluntary associations, provides an ex-
 tensive job training and placement program for the disabled. Informal prvisions in
 education have permitted university matriculation for visually handicapped, deaf,
 and physically disabled students. The Government allows the equivalent ofa $2,000
 t ededuction for families with a disabled person.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.The Constitution provides all citizens with the right
 to form associations, including trade unions. Parliament may, however, impose re-
 strictions based on security, public order, or morality grounds. The right of associa-
 tion is delimited bsthe Societies Act and by labor and education laws and regula-
 tions. The Trades mnion Act authorizes the formation of unions with bread rights,
 albeit with some narrow restrictions, such as prohibitions on the unionization of
 uniformed employees. The national labor force comprises about 1.6 million employ-
 ees, of whom some 233,000 are organized into 83 employee unions. Seventy-four of
 these unions, representing almost 99 percent of all unionized workers, are affiliated
 with the National Trades Union Congress (NTUC), an umbrella organization which
 has a close relationship with the Government.
 The NTUC unabashedly acknowledges at it interests are closely linked with
 those of the ruling PAP, a relationship often described by both as "symbiotic." For
 example, President Ong Teng Cheong served simultaneously as NTIUC Secretary
 General and Second Deputy Prime Minister before assuming his current position as
 President in 1993. His successor at NTUC, Lir Boon Heng, was formerly Second
 Minister for Trade and Industry and continues as Minister Without Portfolio, In ad-
 dition, several other high-ranking NTUC officials are PAP M.P.'s. NTUJC policy pro-
 hibits union members mho actively sup port opposition parties from holding oflice in
 affiliated unions. While the NTUC is financially independent of the PAP, with in-
 come generated by NTUC-owned businesses, the NTUC and PAP share the same
 ideology.
 Workers, other than those in essential services, have the legal right to strike but
 rarely do so; no strikes have occurred since 1986. Most disagreements are resolved
 through informal consultations with the Ministry of Labor. Ifconciliation fails, the
 disputing parties usually submit their case to the Industrial Arbitration Court,
 
 
 688
 which has representatives from labor, management, and the Government. These
 labor dispute mechanisms, along with the PAP/NTUC nexus, have played important
 roles in creating nonconfrontational labor relations. The Government also attributes
 the rarity of strikes to a cultural aversion to confrontation, high economic growth
 rates, labor shortages in recent years that have sustained regular wage increases,
 and the popular conviction that strikes would undermine Singapore's attractiveness
 to investors.
 The NTUC is free to associate regionally and internationally.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Collective bargaining is a nor-
 mal part of management-labor relations, particularly in the manufacturing sector.
 Agreements between management and labor are renewed every 2 to 3 years, al-
 though wage increases are negotiated annually. Collective bargaining agreements
 generally follow the guidelines issued by the National Wages Council (NWC), a
 group composed of labor, management, and gvernment representatives, that makes
 annual recommendations regarding salary and bonus packages. The Industrial Rela-
 tions Act makes it an offense to discriminate against anyone who is or proposes to
 become a member or an officer of a trade union. The offense is punishable by a fine
 equivalent to $1,250 andlor a 2-month prison sentence. Labor laws and regulations
 are enforced uniformly.
 There are no export processing zones, nor are special concessions given to firms
 producing for export.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Under sections of the Destitute
 Persons Act, any indigent person may be required to reside in a welfare home and
 engage in suitable work. The International Labor Organization (ILO) has criticized
 the coercive terms of this Act, which includes penal sanctions on the grounds that
 it is not in compliance with the ILO Convention on Forced Labor, ratified by Singa-
 pore in 1965. The Government maintains that the Act is social legislation providing
 for the shelter, care, and protection of destitute persons; that no one is coerced to
 work; and that work programs are designed to reintegrate individuals into society.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Government enforces the Em-
 ployment Act, which prohibits the employment of children under age 12. Children
 over age 12 and under age 14 must receive written permission from the Commis-
 sioner for Labor for "light work suited to his capacity." There are few such applica-
 tions and the Commissioner for Labor has never approved one. Employers must no-
 tify the Ministry of Labor within 30 days of hiring a child between the ages of 14
 and 16 and must forward medical certification to the Commissioner. The incidence
 of children taking up permanent employment is also low, and abuses are almost
 nonexistent.
 Ministry of Labor regulations prohibit night employment of children and restrict
 industrial work to no more than 7 hours a day. Children may not work on commer-
 cial vessels, with any machinery in motion, on live electrical apparatus lacking effec-
 tive insulation, or in any underground job. The Ministry of Labor effectively enforces
 these laws and regulations.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Singapore has no laws or regulations on mini-
 mum wages or unemployment compensation. The labor market offers relatively high
 wages and good working conditions. The Employment Act sets the standard legal
 workweek at 44 hours and provides for 1 rest day each week. The Ministry of Labor
 effectively enforces laws and regulations establishing working conditions and com-
 prehensive occupational safety and health laws. Enforcement procedures, coupled
 with the promotion of educational and training programs, have reduced the fre-
 quency of job-related accidents by a third over the past decade. While a worker has
 the right under the Employment Act to remove himself from a dangerous work situ-
 ation, his right to continued employment depends upon an investigation of the cir-
 cumstances by the Ministry of Labor.
 Because of the domestic labor shortage, over 360,000 foreign workers are em-
 ployed legally in Singapore, 22 percent of the total work force. Most are unskilled
 laborers and household servants from other Asian countries. Foreign workers face
 no legal wage discrimination; however, they are concentrated in low-wage, low-skill
 jobs. About 65,000 foreign maids, main from the Philippines, Indonesia, and Sri
 Lanka, are employed in Singapore, and some have complained of abuse or poor
 working conditions. The Government does not bar complainants from seeking legal
 redress and takes a firm stand against employers who abuse their domestic serv-
 ants. Foreign workers are ineligible for the limited free legal assistance that is
 available to Singapore citizens. The authorities have fined or imprisoned employers
 who have abused domestics, often with great publicity.
 
 
