 SINGAPORE
 Singapore is governed under a parliamentary system modeled
 generally along British lines, with members of Parliament
 who are elected to maximum five year terms on the basis
 of universal adult sufferage. However, political power
 is concentrated in one ruling party. The People's Action
 Party completely dominates the Parliament, having won all
 seats in the past three elections with approximately 70%
 of the vote. Public criticism of the Government tends to
 be circumspect although there is virtually no formal
 censorship process. Persons are subject to arrest for
 pro-Communist activities and activities which incite
 communal tensions. The Government appears to enjoy broad
 popular support -- its Civil Service is efficient and
 honest, and the Government's leadership free from corruption.
 In economic and social matters, Singapore's record for
 raising the standard of living and the quality of life, of
 its population is excellent.
 A multi-racial society with a dominant majority of ethnic
 Chinese but with both Malay and Indian minorities, Singapore
 has experienced communal tension in the past. In addition,
 Singapore was subject to acts of terrorism by elements of
 the Communist Party of Malaya prior to the mid-1960's.
 There has been'little recent evidence of communal tensions
 and there have been no terrorist incidents in recent years.
 Nevertheless, the Government of Singapore cites both the
 threat of insurgency and the possibility of renewed communal
 conflict as justification for emergency legislation which
 makes legal the arrest and detention without trial of
 persons suspected of activities that threaten general civil
 order.
 During the past year several prominent political detainees,
 including some held for periods up to fifteen years, were
 released. Although persons suspected of involvement in
 communist party activities continue to be arrested and
 detained most of those arrested on such charges in 1976-77
 have been released.
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Torture is prohibited by the Government of Singapore,
 although individual instances of mistreatment by law
 enforcement officers have been alleged. Such behavior
 is illegal and punishable. The Prime Minister publicly
 announced in February, 1978, that any interrogating
 officer who assaulted a detainee would be liable to civil
 and criminal charges. There have been no reports of instances
 in which such charges have been brought. Allegations of
 torture have been categorically denied by the Government of
 Singapore.
 In its ]979 annual report, Amnesty International states that
 with respect to persons considered to have acted in a manner
 prejudicial to the State's security, Amnesty International
 has received evidence "that intense pressure, including
 physical and psychological torture, has been used to secure
 'confessions'".
 
 (516)
 
 
 517
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Under the Internal Security Act (ISA), persons are held
 for an initial 60-day period for interrogation purposes.
 Amnesty International in its 1979 annual report, asserts
 that such persons "are routinely subjected to round-the-
 clock interrogation." With respect to political detainees
 Amnesty International indicates it receives "frequent
 reports concerning ill-treatment of political prisoners
 and inadequate medical care." The State Department has
 no information to confirm or refute such reports.
 On the other hand, detention conditions are described by
 some detainees as reasonably good; a number were housed
 in cottages with individual bedrooms and communal dining
 and recreation rooms. Political detainees are kept separately
 from ordinary prisoners. Solitary confinement has been used
 as a disciplinary measure. Diet and access to medical care
 are described aS adequate by some former detainees.
 Weekly family visits are permitted and lawyers have access
 to their clients on request.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 The Government makes use of detention without trial in
 security and some criminal cases, including those involving
 organized secret society crime, under the Internal Security
 Act (ISA) and the Criminal (Detention) Law. A Banishment
 Act, under which persons deprived of their citizenship may
 be held awaiting deportation, remains on the books, but has
 not been used since 1959. Nevertheless, detainees under the
 ISA who are naturalized citizens are frequently stripped of
 their citizenship and are subject to deportation as undesir-
 able aliens. Those who refuse deportation (to China or
 Malaysia) may then be held without trial.
 The Internal Security Act is a preventive detention statute
 inherited from the British colonial administration.
 The Government of Singapore states its use is necessary
 to counter the Communist Party of Malaya (CPM), which is
 active both in Malaysia and in Singapore. The CPM maintains
 a small network in Singapore with a. modest capacity to
 recruit cadre, solicit funds and procure supplies for its
 armed insurgency in Malaysia. It is estimated that there
 is a hardcore communist cadre of several hundred either in
 Singapore or with easy access into Singapore from nearby
 Johore State in Malaysia, and that there are several hundred
 more communist sympathizers in Singapore. In the enforcement
 of the ISA, however, the definition of a "security case"
 on past occasions has been extended to include the following
 categories of individuals: those who have had contact
 with communists or some other element of the radical Left,
 but who are not necessarily themselves supporters of
 violent revolution; those who portray Singapore as a state
 in which individual liberties are curtailed or portray the
 Government of Singapore as undemocratic, totalitarian,
 autocratic and oppressive; and those journalists whose
 reporting is considered by the Government of Singapore to
 be slanted and therefore susceptible to exploitation by
 communists.
 The Internal Security Act permits the issuance of a two-year
 renewable detention order which is subjected to automatic
 review by an advisory board at twelve month intervals.
 The number of detainees held under the ISA fluctuates as
 detainees are released and others arrested. Since mid-1978
 
 
 518
 releases of detainees seemed to predominate over incidents
 of further arrests. There were approximately 70-75 detainees
 at the end of the year. All are said by the Singapore
 Government to have some connection with the CPM. Five of
 the detainees have been held for a long period because,
 according to a public statement by Prime Minister Lee, they
 refuse to abjure either forceful overthrow of the
 Government or support of the CPM. Two such detainees are
 said to have influenced two prison officials to aid them
 in transcribing and distributing broadcasts of the Voice
 of Malayan Revolution (clandestine transmitter of the CPM
 Central Committee faction).
 The Government, however, appears to be adjusting its
 policy regarding political detainees. Two detainees
 conditionally released in November, 1978, did not abjure
 the forceful overthrow of the Government or support of the
 CPM. The conditions of release of one of these persons,
 Said Zahari, were further lightened in August, 1979, and he
 has since been employed in a responsible position as an
 editorial coordinator with Singapore's principal English
 language media enterprise, the Times Organization.
 Perhaps 200 persons, approximately seventy of whom are
 believed to be narcotics traffickers, are detained under the
 Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act, which is designed
 for and used mainly against members of criminal secret
 societies and narcotics traffickers. A few persons within
 that group may be held for security reasons. A written order
 for temporary detention for one year may be issued by the
 Home Minister. Each order must be reviewed within 25 days
 by an advisory committee which is required to submit a
 written report to the President.
 Singapore law recognizes the right of habeas corpus.
 Persons detained under the ISA or the Criminal Law
 (Temporary Provisions) Act are informed of the charges
 against them and are entitled to an internal review of
 their case. Persons are not held clandestinely nor do
 they simply "disappear".
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a fair, public trial is observed except for
 persons detained under the Internal Security Act and the
 Criminal (Detention) Law, which apply only to a small
 minority of all cases. The Singapore judicial system
 operates in accordance with the basic tenets, practices
 and precedents of British jurisprudence.
 Defendants are entitled to counsel at the time formal
 charges are made. Counsel has unimpeded and private access
 to defendants. The right to have an attorney present
 during the investigative stage is not recognized, but a
 person called to appear before the police during an
 investigation may refrain from answering questions until
 he is able to obtain advice of counsel. There are no
 incidents of harassment of legal counsel and in some cases,
 at the investigating officers' discretion, counsel have
 been allowed to be present during questioning prior to the
 statement of formal charges. Defendants are made aware
 of the full nature of the charges against them and discovery
 methods are available for determining the nature of the
 evidence against them.
 
 
 519
 The courts are independent from executive and military rule.
 Military courts apply only to military cases and generally
 do not have jurisdiction over civilians.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 The sanctity of the home is safeguarded by law and custom.
 Search warrants are issued by. a magistrate or if a magis-
 trate is unavailable a senior police officer. It also
 appears that in cases involving narcotics where the
 possibility of destruction of evidence is present, a
 warrant is not needed. Officers making such an entry are
 subject to "post invasion" investigation of the facts to
 show some degree of probable cause. The Department of
 State has no knowledge of any pattern of unlawful entry
 on the part of the authorities.
 2.   Government Policies Relating to the Fulfillment of
 Such Vital Human Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 Singapore is an urban city-state with a strong and propserous
 free enterprise economy. The Government plays an active
 role by setting general goals and guidelines (although
 regulation is kept to a minimum) and through the parti-
 cipation of government-owned firms. In recent years the
 development of manufacturing industries has contributed to
 the diversification of the economy, but since Singapore
 depends heavily on trade it remains vulnerable to inter-
 national economic conditions.
 The Singapore Government has a deserved image of unbending
 honesty and exceptional efficiency. Its achievements in
 assuring the well-being of its people are internationally
 recognized. The standard of living is rising steadily
 and is now the second highest in Asia (after Japan) with
 a per capita gross national product of $3,300 in 1978.
 Singapore's pattern of income distribution, typical of a
 developing country, has remained relatively stable despite
 the rapid economic growth of the past decade. It is
 estimated that in 1976, as in 1966, the lowest 40% of
 income earners received approximately 13% of total income
 the middle 40% received approximately 30%, and the top 20%
 received approximately 57%. The Government has moved in the
 past two years to increase the wages of the lowest paid
 workers differentially more than those of better paid
 workers, and the Government plans to do the same for the
 ner= two years. Further, although the median gross monthly
 income is approximately U.S.$155, only wages over U.S.$233
 per month are subject to income tax and the tax is pro-
 gressive.
 in 197r, 64% of the population was housed in well-designed
 apartments which the Government has built mostly over the
 last decade. Of people living in public housing estates,
 55% have purchased their apartments, largely through a
 scheme which permits down payments to be made from social
 security accounts.
 Free primary education is provided for the children of all
 Singapore citizens and education through the university
 level is of high quality and provided at modest cost.
 Women have equal educational opportunities and comprise
 half of the primary and secondary school population and
 over a third of students enrolled in universities, teacher
 training and technical institutions.
 
 
 520
 Singapore has 13 government and eight private hospitals and
 an extensive system of clinics. The quality of health care
 is high in both private and Government facilities, and the
 charges in the latter are at subsidized rates. The effec-
 tiveness of Singapore's family planning program is inter-
 nationally acknowledged. Its infant mortality rate, 12.5%
 in 1978, is among the lowest in the world.
 The right to own private property is protected by law.
 3.   Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 Singapore, although preponderantly Chinese, is a multi-
 racial society. There is complete freedom of religion
 for a wide variety of religious beliefs. A Presidential
 Council for Minority Rights is charged with insuring that
 no proposed legislation infringes on the rights of ethnic
 or religious minorities.
 However, freedom of speech, press and assembly are curtailed
 in several areas. First, the Government forbids activities
 or public statements which might arouse communal tensions
 between the dominant Chinese and the Malay or Indian minor-
 ities. In addition, assemblies of more than five persons in
 a public place, including political rallies, must have a
 police permit.
 To operate legally in Singapore, societies and clubs with
 over ten members must be registered with the Government.
 Registration is denied to societies with Triad (Chinese
 secret society) rituals, those likely to be used for
 unlawful purposes or for purposes prejudicial to public
 peace, welfare or good order; or those whose registration
 would be contrary to the national interest.
 While there is no formal censorship other than prohibition
 of discussion of certain ethnically sensitive topics, the
 press is circumspect in its treatment of the Government
 and is mindful of the need for annual renewal of publishing
 licenses. In recent years, however, the press has broadened
 its reporting into criticism of some areas of public policy.
 In the past the Government has invoked the Internal Security
 Act to arrest and detain persons accused of arousing communal
 tension, but none is currently being held. Communist political
 activities are proscribed. The Government promptly detains
 suspected communist activists under the Internal Security
 Act and the definition of "security cases" is sufficiently
 broad that it has the effect of tending to stifle radical
 dissent.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 There are no limitations on freedom of movement within the
 country. All Singapore residents are required to register
 with the Government and receive an identity card. The
 Government does not obstruct nor regulate the travel of
 its citizens abroad except for males liable for national
 service. The latter may be required to post bond before
 being issued a passport to insure their return. Passport
 fees are moderate, just over U.S.$11.00.
 
 
 521
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Singapore is a republic with a parliamentary system of
 government organized along British lines. The 69 member
 parliament is elected to maximum five year terms on the
 basis of compulsory universal adult suffrage. A ceremonial
 president is elected by parliament for a four-year term.
 The Government is controlled by'the People's Action Party
 headed by Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew. Membership in the
 PAP is open to non-communist Singaporeans of any race.
 Non-communist, non-racist parties are free to organize, but
 no opposition representatives have been elected to the past
 three parliaments, in which the PAP won all seats with
 approximately 70 percent of the vote. There are 15
 registered opposition political parties in Singapore.
 However, only six ran candidates in the last general
 election in December, 1976, and only these participated
 in by-elections in February, 1979. The activities of
 opposition parties are closely monitored by the Government,
 particularly for evidence of links with the illegal Communist
 Party of Malaya. Campaign speeches are tape-recorded by the
 internal Security Department. The successful prosecution
 of at least eight libel and defamation suits against
 opposition parties and politicians following the 1972
 and 1976 elections have bankrupted several opposition
 politicians, thus removing them from the political arena.
 Although following strict legal procedures, such cases
 inhibit the opposition.
 Women enjoy the full panoply of legal rights. The 1969
 Women's Charter safeguards the position of women through
 regulation of marriage and divorce based on the principle
 of monogamous marriage and protects women from exploitation
 for purposes of prostitution. The Charter also guarantees
 married women the right to engage in their own trade or
 profession; to acquire, hold and dispose of property in
 their own right; and to use their own names. Muslim women's
 rights are protected by the provisions of the 1957 Admini-
 stration of Muslim Law Act which permits women to apply
 for divorce, requires consent of both parties for divorce
 to be registered, and provides for women to hold and dispose
 of property. Women have voting rights and are given equality
 of economic opportunity under the law.
 Although there are no women Members of Parliament, and few
 in the top ranks of the Civil Service, there are no legal
 restrictions on full participation by women in the political
 process. The Civil Service has followed the principle of
 equal pay for equal work since 1962, although this is not
 always true of private employers.
 In 1978, the average gross monthly income of female workers
 was 38% of that of male workers; the gap partly reflects the
 concentration o  women in traditional female occupations
 and the tendency of women to drop out of the work force
 before they attain much seniority. Over the past decade,
 there has been a trend for increasing female participation
 in the work force. This has been encouraged by the Govern-
 ment to counter serious labor shortages.
 Singapore has approximately 235,000 workers organized
 into trade unions. Some 220,000 of these belong to the
 National Trades Union Congress (NTUC), which is informally
 but closely associated with the ruling People's Action
 Party. Many of the top leaders of the NTUC are Members
 
 
 522
 of Parliament. The right of registered trade unions to
 organize workers, strike and bargain collectively is
 provided by law within strict limits. Strikes are rare.
 Procedures are provided for arbitration and conciliation
 bf disputes.
 In April, Singapore denounced its adherence to ILO Convention
 105 on Forced Labor. Since 1974, the ILO had criticized the
 enforced labor aspects of the criminal punishment sections
 of the ISA, the Undesirable Publications Act, the Trade
 Disputes Act, and the Newspaper and Printing Presses Act of
 1974 and several other laws. In 1978, the ILO again asked
 for full implementation of the Convention and for further
 information. The response of the Government of Singapore
 was to denounce the Convention.
 4.   Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-Governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violation of Human Rights
 In general, Singapore reacts defensively to foreign criticism.
 For example, Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew withdrew the People's
 Action Party from the Socialist International in 1976 when
 one of the other members criticized Singapore's use of the
 Internal Security Act.
 An Amnesty International mission visited Singapore -in
 November 1978 to investigate the extent and conditions
 of political imprisonment. The Government refused its
 requests for interviews with the Prime Minister, the
 Minister of Home Affairs and other senior officials
 responsible for the administration of political detainees.
 
 
 523
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: SINGAPORE
 1977     1978     1979
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL,..        0.1      0.0      0.0
 LOANS..............         0.0     0.0      0.0
 GRANTS..............        0.1     0.0      0.0
 A.AID ...................      0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS..............        0.0     0.0      0.0
 GRANTSS............         0.0     0.0      0.0
 (SEC.SUPPASSIST.|...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE.......         0.1     0.0      0.0
 LOANS .............         0.0     0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............         0.1     0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL,.........         0.0     0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS.....         0.0     0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR,....         0.0     0.0      0.0
 TITLE II-TOTAL,........         0.1     0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.         0.1     0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY...           0.0     0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...         0.0     0.0      0.0
 LOANS............         0.0     0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...........          0.0     0.0      0.0
 CONTR. TO IFI....         0.0     0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS,.....         0.0     0.0      0.0
 OTHER ........           0.0     0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL,..        0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .............         0.0     0.0      0.0
 GRANTS..............        0.0     0.0      0.0
 A.NAP GRANTS..........         0.0     0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT SALES-FNS.,,         0.0     0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MILEDTRNG..,,         0.0     0.0      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK .          0.0     0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS .......         0.0     0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. L IL...        0.1      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .............         0.0     0.0      0.0
 GRANTS..............        0.1     0.0      0.0
 OTHER US LOANS,.....,...         0.0     0.0    155.2
 EX-IM BANK LOANSo...o..         0.0     0.0    155.2
 ALL OTHER............         0.0     0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES-COMMITMENTS
 1977     1970     1979    1946-79
 TOTAL........      0.0      0.2    19.5    345.9
 IBRD               0.0     0.1      0.0    179.4
 IFC                0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDA                0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDS                0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADS                0.0      0.0    19.0    147.0
 AFDB               0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 UNDP               0.0      0.1     0.5     18.8
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0     0.0      0.7
 EEC                0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 
 
