Singapore
The introduction to the report on Singapore states that in 1992, "[t]here was no evidence of a change in the Government's basic willingness to restrict human rights when it deemed that necessary in the pursuit of its policy goals." This is an important and welcome statement by the State Department, although it gives away too much by suggesting that the government of Singapore restricts rights only when it deems it "necessary." The recent history of Singapore makes it clear that the government is all too willing to restrict basic rights even when it is by no means necessary to fulfill a policy goal.
All too often in the report, as in past reports, the State Department appears compelled to explain away the Singapore government's repressive policies by pointing to Singapore's successful economy and "broad base of popular support" for the ruling People's Action Party. In light of state policies that rule out a meaningful opposition and party inroads in all aspects of Singapore life, conclusions about the popularity of the PAP are not meaningful; they are certainly not appropriate in a report on state respect for human rights.
The report's discussion of arbitrary arrest under the Internal Security Act (ISA) is generally strong. While mentioning the Chia Thye Poh case, it still neglects to state that Chia was detained for the peaceful expression of his political views, that he was mistreated during his long years of detention, and that he never received a trial. The report states that he is now allowed to live in Singapore proper
and that his activities are still restricted, but the report does not state what those restrictions are. Chia cannot participate in any membership organization or association without written consent of the Internal Security Department (ISD) Director; he cannot address public meetings or take part in any political activity without the consent of the ISD Director; and he cannot associate or communicate with any present or former detainee of Singapore or Malaysia except with members of the Singapore Ex-Political Detainees Association, provided that he is also a member. The report states that Chia can be employed subject to the approval of the ISD, but neglects to add that possible employers are unwilling to hire him because of this required approval.
This year's report again fails to note that the government has conditioned the right of former left-wing politicians banished during the 1950s and 1960s to visit or return to Singapore on their relinquishment of all political activity and, in some instances, a guarantee that they reside with their children. Exiled political activists from the 1970s and 1980s, although not technically forbidden from entering Singapore, still have arrest warrants pending against them.
The section on torture criticizes the government's use of caning as a form of punishment. The report makes no mention of the frequent [CHECK] use of the death penalty in cases involving drug trafficking. The report should have mentioned the case of Qwek Kee Chong, a convicted felon who brought a court action against the government claiming
339
Singapore
damages for "grievous injury" suffered as a result of caning. Qwek had been convicted of armed robbery in 1987 and sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment and 48 strokes of the cane -- twice the maximum permitted by law. Qwek required hospital treatment as a result of the caning.
In the section on denial of a fair public trial, the report again fails to note the practice of provisional appointments of judges as a contributing factor to the judiciary's lack of independence from the ruling party. By stating that most judicial commissioners "subsequently receive permanent appointments to the bench," the report ignores the converse: judicial commissioners who disagree with the government are likely to be denied permanent appointments.
The creation of the government-controlled Academy of Law, a mandatory bar association, by the 1989 amendments to the Legal Professions Act, continues to be left out of the report. The UN Basic Principles on the Role of Lawyers require that bar associations be independent of government control; Singapore's Academy of Law fails on this count. The report also does not mention the formation by the government of a committee under Attorney-General Chan Sek Keong to study how to limit the number of new lawyers joining the work force. Opposition party spokesmen see the government's move as politically motivated since young, idealistic lawyers often join the opposition.
The section on freedom of speech and press is generally accurate and detailed. In the introduction, the report
unfortunately characterizes the government's severe restrictions on the distribution of Dow Jones publications as a "longstanding disagreement," as if the government's actions were not in violation of international standards of freedom of expression. The government's continued printing of the Far Eastern Economic Review in violation of international copyright standards is again ignored in this year's report. The self-censorship that goes on in Singapore also is not mentioned -- for example, an anthology of political cartoons that mildly teased government leaders made booksellers in Singapore so nervous that they initially only sold the book under the counter.
In the section on freedom of religion, the report appears to treat the 1990 Maintenance of Religious Harmony Act as a legitimate means of deterring charismatic groups from proselytizing. The report notes but understates the provision of the act that criminalizes legitimate political activities by members of religious groups. Many of those arrested and detained under the ISA in 1987 were active in Catholic Church organizations.
The report at points notes official hostility to what it deems are "Western" values. In this context, the report should have noted the movement against the English language that is presently taking place in Singapore. Some Singapore leaders consider English as the conveyor of Western values (and openly critical thinking) in a predominantly Chinese community where "Asian" values should prevail.
The report glosses over an event which occurred this year by noting that
340
Singapore
"government programs announced in 1992 to refurbish public housing and sell government-owned shop space give priority to PAP constituencies." In fact, a vote for the opposition in the 1992 by-election would have put one's public housing block up last for such refurbishment. This linkage goes as far back as 1984 when voters were warned that electing an opposition member of Parliament would lead to poor services and drops in property values.
This year's report does mention the new elected presidency in Singapore, but again fails to note that there is no judicial review of a determination by the Presidential Elections Committee disqualifying a candidate or that certain individuals, including former ministers, are exempt from the Committee's review.
The report states that nominated members of Parliament (NMPs) have restricted voting privileges, but does not say what these restrictions are. NMPs are not allowed to vote on constitutional amendments, confidence motions or money and supply bills. The Far Eastern Economic Review wrote that the government's appointment of NMPs in September 1992 undermined any possible opposition gains in the by-election that was soon to follow.
One of the most glaring omissions from this year's report is its failure to mention that democracy itself has come under fire in Singapore. Senior Minister Lee Kuan Yew gave a speech in the Philippines stating that "[w]hat a country needs to develop is discipline rather than democracy .... The exuberance of democracy leads to undisciplined and
disorderly conditions which are inimical to development." Lee's comments indicate that he sees democracy as another Western import that does not necessarily belong in a predominantly Chinese community. Such a community, according to Lee, should be embracing Confucian values. Whether the government will give any teeth to Lee's beliefs still remains to be seen.
The report corrects last year's omission of any reference to Singapore's Destitute Persons Act, under which any indigent person may be required, subject to penal sanctions, to reside in a welfare hotel and engage in suitable work. However, it repeats a government justification for the provision that is wholly preposterous -- the work is not mandatory and is intended to prepare people for employment -- and backs this justification up with unexplained statistics: in 1992 there were 1,360 residents in government-run welfare hotels, only 609 of whom were employed.
This year's report no longer attempts to minimize the abuse or poor working conditions faced by foreign domestic workers by quantifying such complaints as "occasional." Instead, it states that "[t]he Government does not bar complainants from seeking redress" without at all addressing the difficulty of doing so. As noted in last year's critique, the government shut down the Geylang Catholic Centre for Foreign Workers in the aftermath of the 1987 ISA detentions. Foreign workers therefore currently have no place at which they can receive legal aid or other important assistance.
341
