 SINGAPORE
 Singapore has a parliamentary system under which the People's
 Action Party headed by Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew has held
 power since independence in 1965. The Party had held all the
 seats in Parliament until November 1981 when a member of the
 opposition won a seat in a by-election. While the party enjoys
 broad general support, a variety of measures, including law
 suits for alleged misuse of campaign funds and defamation of
 character filed against the Worker's Party and its lone Member
 of Parliament, have tended to reduce the influence of the
 opposition.
 Singapore's multiracial society is composed of about 76 perent
 Chinese, 15 percent Malays, 7 percent Indians, and 2 percent
 Europeans and others. The ruling party has used the powers of
 the government to exercise tight control over the press and
 labor unions in order to prevent actions likely to threaten
 political stability. Singapore was subject to acts of
 terrorism by members of the Communist Party of Malaya through
 1974. While there have been no terrorist incidents in recent
 years, the Communist Party of Malaya and its offshoots consider
 Singapore within its sphere of operation. The government
 military and security agencies work to control and if possible
 eliminate the threat of internal disturbances and subversion.
 Singapore witnessed little basic change in its human rights
 situation in 1983. The Government stated that it had released
 in the past year eight persons detained under the Internal
 Security Act and that only one remained in detention under the
 Act. There were no known detentions in 1983 for political
 reasons, pro-Communist activities, or alleged incitement of
 communal tensions. In 1983, laws expanded government authority
 over trade unions and at the same time further restricted their
 activities. Religious groups from major world religions are
 generally free to organize and meet; however, two unregistered
 religious organizations were temporarily barred from meeting.
 The standards of living and health are high. The country has
 the third highest per capita income in East Asia after Brunei
 and Japan. The Government provides extensive subsidized
 housing and medical and welfare services. Free enterprize
 flourishes alongside Government owned or financed enterprises.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Unlawful or Arbitrary Deprivation of Life
 There were no known instances of politically-motivated killings
 or unlawful or arbitrary deprivation of life in 1983.
 b. Disappearance
 There is no evidence that people were abducted, secretly
 arrested, or held in clandestine detention in 1983.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Torture is prohibited by law, but individual instances of
 
 (872)
 
 
 873
 SINGAPORE
 mistreatment by law enforcement personnel have been alleged by
 former detainees.
 Prime Minister Lee announced in 1978 that any interrogating
 officer who assaulted a detainee would be liable to criminal
 and civil charges. While there have been reports in the past
 of such charges by detainees and of punitive action taken,
 there are no known instances of such charges having oeen filed
 in 1983.
 Prison conditions in Singapore are spartan. Singapore's eight
 prisons and eight drug rehabilitation centers hold about 7,000
 male and female prisoners. The Government denied allegations
 in 1983 by medical doctors that wardens in the centers commit
 homosexual or brutal acts and that conditions in the centers
 are worse than in prisons. The Government said that it
 investigated any complaints and that investigations often
 showed that no marks could be found on the prisoners' bodies or
 that wardens who had been exceptionally strict or punished
 inmates did so because the inmates had broken rules. One
 newspaper reported that a prisoner died in the maximum security
 prison in 1982 as the result of a beating by other inmates;
 there was no evidence of collusion or neglect by the Government
 in this case. Some minimum security prisons have "half-way"
 programs. Political detainees are separated from other
 prisoners.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Law enforcement authorities in Singapore follow established
 legal procedures for arrest and detention. There are no secret
 arrests. Arrest without a warrant and detention without charge
 for periods of one to thirty days are authorized under specific
 provisions of the law. The Ministry of Home Affairs can issue
 an order under the Internal Security Act or the Criminal Law
 (Temporary Provisions) Act to authorize a longer period of
 detention. If suspected drug users have a positive urinalysis,
 the Director of the Central Narcotics Bureau can commit them
 without a trial to a six month term in a drug rehabilitation
 center. Habeas corpus exists in the law, but in internal
 security cases the Government can extend detention
 indefinitely. In others cases, such as those involving the
 Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act, the Government can
 detain people for periods of up to one year.
 The Internal .Security Act was established during the British
 colonial regime and was also used by Singapore extensively
 during the 1965-74 post-independence period when Communist-led
 disturbances and communal violence were widespread.
 People who are detained are arrested openly. There is a
 functioning system of bail, and detainees are entitled to legal
 counsel and may receive bail.
 The Misuse of Drugs Act allows Central Narcotics Bureau
 officers or customs officials to arrest without a warrant any
 person suspected of manufacturing, importing, exporting,
 possessing, consuming, or trafficking in controlled drugs.
 Such persons actually arrested are tried in court. A few
 individuals have maintained that they were not drug users and
 were improperly detained but, so far, have failed to
 substantiate their allegations in court. The Government has
 
 
 .874
 maintained that adequate safeguards exist to prevent innocent
 persons being detained.
 The Government stated in late 1983 that it had released eight
 internal security detainees during the past year and still held
 only one person in detention under the Act. In March 1982 the
 Government said that it held 1,019 persons in indefinite
 detention under other statutes, primarily for membership in
 Chinese triads (Mafia-like secret societies) or for drug
 related offenses. It has not updated this figure.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a public trial is observed, except for persons
 detained under the provisions of the Internal Security Act and
 the Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act. The Government
 defends its policy of detention without trial in these security
 cases on the ground that an open trial could result in the
 intimidation or death of witnesses and officials.
 The criminal procedure code provides that a charge against a
 defendant must be read and explained to him as soon as it is
 framed by the magistrate. The accused has the right to be
 defended by an attorney. Individuals are tried by a magistrate
 or judge and do not have the right to trial by jury. Defendants
 may appeal their verdicts in most cases to higher courts. From
 there they may appeal to the Judicial Committee of the Privy
 Council in London since Singapore is a member of the British
 Commonwealth.
 The judiciary's independence from the Government is not
 complete. Subordinate court judges and prosecutors are civil
 servants in the legal service. The Ministry of Law can freely
 transfer them from magistrate to prosecutor positions or to the
 legal offices of other ministries and statutory boards.
 Superior Court judges, including the Chief Justice, are
 appointed by the President on the recommendation of the Prime
 Minister and Cabinet. Some of the seven Superior Court judges
 however, hold what amount to probationary appointments for
 fixed terms, frequently one year. Lawyers practice free from
 Government interference.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home,
 or Correspondence
 In general the Government does not interfere with the private
 lives of its citizens, but in the past it has used its wide
 discretionary powers when it believed that the security of the
 nation was threatened. Normally, search warrants are obtained
 for intrusion into the home. However, a law enforcement
 officer may search a person's home or property without a
 warrant if he has reasonable grounds to believe that it is
 necessary to do so. In most cases, the law does not require
 later judicial review of the law enforcement officer's action.
 Divisions of the Government's law enforcement agencies,
 including the Internal Security Division and the Corrupt
 Practices Investigation Board, have a wide network for
 gathering information.
 The Government does not prohibit the use of different languages
 or restrict the number of children in each family, although it
 has promoted the use of Mandarin Chinese rather than other
 
 
 875
 Chinese dialects and provided financial incentives to limit the
 number of children in each family.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and press are limited. The Government
 forbids statements which it considers might arouse communal
 tenions between the various races in Singapore.
 Newspapers operate as independent companies but come under
 close governmental supervision. The Government required the
 reorganization and merger of Chinese language newspapers in
 1983, stating that such mergers were needed for the newspapers
 to remain viable. There is no direct censorship of the press,
 but the press is mindful of the restraints and guidelines under
 which it must operate and did not exceed them in 1983.
 Reporters have been taken to task for articles that criticize
 the Government too severely. However, the press reported the
 opposition's views and published statements critical of the
 Government's proposals and policies in 1983. The Singapore
 Broadcasting Corporation owned by the Government has a monopoly
 on domestic radio and television. The Corporation follows
 government guidelines and obeys censorship regulations on the
 programs which it broadcasts. Opposition political views and
 activities receive very limited coverage. The British
 Broadcasting System and Malaysian radio and television stations
 can also be received in Singapore.
 An official Board of Film censors approves motion pictures,
 television, and videotapes. Additional government bodies
 censor magazines, records, plays, and other media products.
 The Government censors these items primarily to prevent the
 spread of materials which it feels will undermine the morals of
 young Singaporeans, advocate excessive permissiveness, or
 promote drug abuse. Many international magazines and
 newspapers can be purchased uncensored in Singapore.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Assemblies of more than five people in a public place,
 including political rallies, are legal only with the prior
 permission of the police. In practice, the Government does not
 stop gatherings of groups of more than five people for social
 purposes nor disrupt gatherings of the opposition. To operate
 legally in Singapore, associations, societies, clubs, churches,
 and other organizations with more than 10 members must be
 registered with the Government. Registration is denied to
 societies with triad (Chinese secret society) rituals and to
 those whose purposes the Government deems would be unlawful;
 prejudicial to public peace, welfare, or good order; contrary
 to the national interest. In 1983 several arrests were made at
 gatherings of unregistered organizations, including some
 religious groups which the Government viewed as inimical to the
 public interest.
 Unions are legally allowed to form in Singapore. However, the
 Trade Unions (Amendment) Bill, passed in March 1983, curtailed
 workers' rights to form or continue unions in some
 circumstances, or to strike. Unions comprising 96 percent of
 organized workers are organized under an umbrella organization,
 the National Trades Union Congress, which is closely associated
 
 
 876
 with the ruling party and, has a Cabinet minister as its
 Secretary General and Members of Parliament on its Board of
 Directors. The Congress has about 210,000 members in a national
 work force of about 1.1 million. Although workers have the legal
 right to strike, there have been no strikes in Singapore for over
 five years. The Singapore Government renounced its adherence to
 the Internatonal Labor Organization Convention in 1979, after the
 International Labor Organization rejected Singapore's position
 that work by imprisoned criminal offenders was vocational
 rehabilitation rather than punitive labor.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is guaranteed in the Constitution and
 generally practiced. The Government, however, restricts
 religious sects with views it considers inimical to the common
 good and has banned a few sects from practicing their faith in
 Singapore. The Government arrested or fined members of several
 unregistered religious groups in 1983 and temporarily banned
 their meetings. All religious groups are subject to governmental
 scrutiny and must be legally registered. A Presidential Council
 on Minority Rights exists to ensure that legislation does not
 infringe on the rights of ethnic or religious minorities. There
 is no state religion but the Government has provided financial
 assistance to some religious bodies to allow them to build and
 maintain places of worship. Missionaries are permitted to work
 and to publish religious texts in Singapore, and at least one
 religious organization moved its regional publishing facilities
 to Singapore in 1983.
 d.   Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel,
 Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no limitations on the freedom of movement within the
 country other than those under the Internal Security Act. This
 permits the Minister for Home Affairs to restrict a person's
 activities, place of residence, and travel outside of Singapore.
 All Singapore residents over the age of 13 are required to
 register with the Government, receive and carry an identity card,
 and report changes of address within 14 days. Recipients of
 government-financed educational benefits, who are required to
 sign a bond obligation to serve the Government for a fixed
 period, cannot emigrate without paying the balance of their
 bond.
 The right of voluntary repatriation is extended to holders of
 Singaporean passports. However, several hundred ethnic Chinese
 who left Singapore for China during the politically difficult
 1950's and 1960's have encountered obstacles to their return.
 Refugees are granted first asylum for 90 days in Singapore only
 if they have a third-country guarantee of resettlement. Between
 1975 and September 1983 a total of approximately 28,200
 Indochinese refugees were brought into Singapore in temporary
 asylum status.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to
 Change Their Government
 The Government refers to Singapore as a "socialist" democracy,
 although private enterprise is a major feature of life in the
 Republic. Seventy-four of 75 members of the unicameral
 Parliament are members of the People's Action Party headed by
 
 
 877
 Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew. The Secretary General of the
 Workers' Party, elected in 1981 is the sole opposition Member of
 Parliament and was the first elected since independence. No
 People Action Party-sponsored bills failed and no opposition-
 sponsored bills were passed in Parliament during 1983.
 Non-Communist parties are legally free to organize, and there are
 20 registered political parties in Singapore. These opposition
 parties are closely monitored by the Government. The Government
 justifies this monitoring on the grounds that the prohibited
 Communists might participate in elections and candidates might
 make libelous statements. The successful prosecution of libel
 and defamation suits against opposition parties and candidates by
 members of the People's Action Party has bankrupted several
 opposition politicians. Since individuals convicted of bank-
 ruptcy or sentenced to one year in jail or to a fine of Singapore
 t2,000 are legally barred from political activities and member-
 ship in Parliament, successful prosecutions have resulted in
 removing some politicians from the political arena. Several
 lawsuits were brought by the Government and People Action Party
 supporters in 1983 against the opposition Member of Parliament as
 well as against other members of the Workers' Party. The
 opposition member and the chairman of his party were arrested in
 August on charges involving alleged violations in raising and
 accounting for campaign funds; they were subsequently released on
 bail. The cases have not yet been decided.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There are no private organizations in Singapore which actively
 and openly monitor human rights violations. Governmental bodies,
 such as the Minority Rights Council, monitor certain aspects of
 human rights in Singapore for domestic purposes.
 Amnesty International in its 1983 report expressed concern about
 political prisoners held in preventive detention without trial
 and about arrests of opposition politicians in 1982. Freedom
 House rated Singapore "partly free." It stated that the economic
 and other pressures against all opposition groups executed in
 part through control of the media) made elections very unfair.
 It added that University facilities were under considerable
 pressure to conform and that most opposition was treated as a
 Communist threat and therefore treasonable. Representatives of
 these and other human rights groups are not allowed to visit
 Singapore in an official capacity.
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Singapore is an urban city-state with a strong, prosperous free
 enterprise economy. Private ownership of property is a basic
 feature of Singapore's economy, though the Government has and
 exercises an almost unlimited right to acquire land at 1973
 prices for its extensive development projects.
 Singapore's population as of 1983 stood at 2.5 million, with a
 growth rate of 1.2 percent.  The success of Singapore's
 population control program is based on wide-ranging disincentives
 to having more than two children, including educational, tax, and
 medical benefits measures. The infant mortality rate was 10.3
 per 1,000 live births in 1983. Life expectancy at birth in 1981
 was 72 years.
 
 
 878
 The standard of living is high and has been rising steadily,
 with an average Gross National Product growth rate of 6.3
 percent in 1982. Per capita income was approximately $5,700 in
 1982.
 In 1983 over 70 percent of the population was housed in
 well-designed, publicly subsidized housing. The entire
 population had access to safe drinking water.
 Education is not compulsory, but free primary education is
 provided for children of all Singapore citizens. Secondary and
 tertiary education is of high quality and is provided at modest
 cost. The enrollment ratio for students aged 6-17 years rose
 to 83.9 percent in 1982. The literacy rate rose to 84.8
 percent in 1983.
 Women generally enjoy equal legal rights, primarily under the
 1969 Women's Charter and the Constitution. Muslim women's
 rights are protected by the provisions of the 1957
 administration of Muslim law, which permits Muslim women to
 apply for divorce and provides for women to hold and dispose of
 property. Women have voting rights and the right of equality
 of economic opportunity under the law.
 There are no women in Parliament and few women in the top ranks
 of the civil service or business. In 1983, the median gross
 monthly income of female workers was 64 percent of that for
 male workers. A serious shortage of workers has led the
 Government to encourage women to work. Singaporean women do
 not have equal rights with men in the transmission of
 citizenship to their children. A Singaporean woman married to
 a foreigner will not pass Singapore citizenship to children
 born outside the country, although a Singaporean male will pass
 the right of citizenship. Additionally, the wife of a
 Singaporean male can receive permanant resident status and
 citizenship based on the marriage while the husband of a
 Singaporean woman cannot.
 Social, economic, and cultural facilities are available to all
 citizens regardless of race, religion, or sex. Disparities do
 exist among the various races although not as a result of
 Government policy. For example, only 0.21 percent of Malays
 had a university education in 1980, while 1.8 percent of the
 Chinese and 2.44 percent of the Indians had that level of
 education.
 Singapore had 13 government and 13 private hospitals in 1982.
 The quality of health care is high in both private and
 government facilities, and the former are subsidized heavily by
 the Government.
 
 
 879
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: SINGAPORE
 1981     1982     1983
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ......  .....     ... 0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.AID  ........... ....... ... .0.0    0.0      0.0
 LOANS .............. ..  . 0.0     0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ..........     ....  0.0     0.0      0.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......        .      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ............. ,0.0            0.0      0.0
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ..........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 E AY, |l tL0AN5             0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY: IN FOR. CURR.....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  1I-TOTAL .........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.         0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        0.0      0.0     0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..................   0.0      0.0      0..0
 GRANTS .............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS ......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL            0.0      0.0      0.1
 LOANS ........ ........   0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.0      0.0      0.1
 A.MAP  GRANTS ..........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG ....        0.0      0.0      0.1
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS.........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...         0.0      0.0      0.1
 LOANS ..................   0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0      0.0      0.1
 OTHER US LOANS ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER .............. ....  0.0      0.0      0.0
 . ................. ........... .............. ..-  .�oo.....  ....
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1981     1982     1983     194 -83
 TOTAL .........   19.9      1.3      0.0    385.9
 IBRD.              0.0      0.0      0.0    179.4
 IFC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADB               19.0      0.0      0.0    181.1
 AFDB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0 0
 UNDp               0.9      1.3      0.0     24.8
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0      0.0      0.6
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
