 SINGAPORE
 Singapore, a city-state of 3.4 million people, is a parliamentary republic in which
 politics is dominated by the People's Action Party (PAP), which has held power since
 Singapore gained autonomy from the United Kingdom in 1959. The PAP holds 77
 of the 81 elected seats in Parliament. Goh Chok Tong completed his sixth year as
 Prime Minister. Lee Kuan Yew, who served as Prime Minister from independence
 in 1965 until 1990, remains active politically, holding the title of Senior Minister.
 The majority of the population is ethnic Chinese (78 percent), with Malays and Indi-
 ans constituting substantial minorities.
 The Government maintains active internal security and military forces to counter
 perceived threats to the nation's security. It has frequently used security legislation
 to control a broad range of activity. The Internal Security Department (ISD) is re-
 sponsible for enforcement of the Internal Security Act (ISA), including its provisions
 for detention without trial. All young males are subject to national service (mostly
 in the military).
 Singapore has an open free market economic system. The construction and fman-
 cial services industries and manufacturing of computer-related components are key
 sectors of the economy, which has achieved remarkably steady growth since inde-
 pendence. Gross domestic product rose a projected 8.8 percent in 1996, and citizens
 have an annual per capita gross domestic product of more than $24,000. Wealth is
 distributed relatively equally in what is essentially a full-employment economy.
 Although there were problems in some areas, the Government generally respected
 the human rights of its citizens. The Government continued to intimidate opposition
 parties and their candidates and to restrict the independence of the judiciary in
 cases with political implications or affecting members of the ruling party. The Gov-
 ernment has wide powers to detain people arbitrarily and subsequently restrict
 their travel, freedom of speech, and right to associate freely, and to handicap politi-
 cal opposition. There was no evidence of a change in the Government's willingness
 to restrict these human rights when it deemed that necessary in pursuit of its policy
 goals. The Government restricts press freedom and intimidates journalists into prac-
 ticing self-censorship. There is some legal discrimination against women, which af-
 fects only a small percentage of the population. The Government has moved actively
 to counter societal discrimination against women and minorities. While freedom of
 religion is generally respected, the Jehovah's Witness organization has been banned
 since 1972.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Kiling.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 Three prison officers pleaded guilty to manslaughter for causing the death of a
 prisoner in August 1995 (see Section 1.c.).
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The law prohibits torture, and government leaders have stated that they oppose its
 use. However, there have been credible reports in past years of police mistreatment
 
 
 765
 of detainees. Reliable reports indicate that police have sometimes employed sleep
 deprivation or interrogation of detainees in very cold rooms where the prisoners
 may be stripped of their clothes and doused with water. In 1993, the last year for
 which statistics are available, of the 94 complaints of police abuse investigated, 14
 were substantiated.
 The Government reserves the right to use indefinite detention without trial to
 pressure detainees to "rehabilitate themselves as well as to make admissions of
 wrongdoing. In the past, the Government has acknowledged that, in the case of de-
 tentions without trial under the Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act (CIA),
 the indefinite nature of the detentions served to pressure the detainees. Persons al-
 leging mistreatment under detention may bring criminal charges against govern-
 ment officials who are alleged to have committed such acts, but they may C  dis-
 couraged from making accusations for fear of official retaliation (see Sections 1.d.
 and I.e.).
 The Penal Code mandates caning, in addition to imprisonment, as punishment for
 some 30 offenses involving the use of violence or threat of violence against a person,
 such as rape, robbery and extortion. The law also mandates caning in other areas,
 such as for certain convictions under the Vandalism Act and for specific immigration
 and drug-trafficking offenses.
 Caning is discretionary for convictions on other charges involving the use of crimi-
 nal force, such as kidnaping, or voluntarily causing grievous hurt. The law pre-
 scribes a maximum or minimum number of cane strokes in many of these cases, al-
 though the court does not always abide by these guidelines. Women are exempted
 from caning, as are men over 50, under 16, and those determined unfit by a medical
 officer. In 1993, the last year for which statistics are available, the courts included
 a caning sentence in 3,244 cases.
 Prison conditions are generally good and meet minimum international standards.
 Some abuses have occurred and have been reported in the press. In March, for ex-
 ample, three prison officials pleaded guilty to manslaughter for causing the death
 of a prisoner in August 1995. The Government had responded quickly to the abuse
 and publicly denounced all abuses of power by prison officials. The Government does
 not allow human rights monitors to visit prisons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Internal Security Act, the Criminal
 Law (Temporary Provisions) Act, the Misuse of Drugs Act (MDA), and the Undesir-
 able Publications Act all have provisions for arrest without warrant. Those arrested
 must be charged before a magistrate within 48 hours. At that time, those detained
 under criminal charges may obtain legal counsel. A functioning system of bail exists
 for those charged, and there were no reported abuses of it.
 The ISA, the CLA, and the MDA authorize detention without trial. The CLA is
 used almost exclusively in cases involving narcotics and secret criminal societies and
 has not been used for political purposes. According to the Government, the cumu-
 lative number of persons currently detained under the CIA as of July 1995, the last
 period for which statistics are available, was 570, of whom 248 were for secret soci-
 ety activities and 322 for drug trafficking. Under the MDA, the Director of the
 Central Narcotics Bureau may also commit-without trial-suspected drug users to
 a drug rehabilitation center for up to 6 months, with subsequent extensions, in
 cases of positive urinalysis tests.
 Those persons detained without trial under the ISA are entitled to counsel but
 have no legal recourse through the courts to challenge the substantive basis for
 their detention. Persons detained without trial under the CIA are also entitled to
 counsel but may only challenge the substantive basis for their detention to the com-
 mittee advising the Minister for Home Affairs on detention issues. The ISA gives
 broad discretion to the Minister of Home Affairs to order detention without charges
 if the President determines that a person poses a threat to national security. The
 President may authorize detention for up to 2 years; the detention order may be re-
 newed for 2-year periods with no limitation on renewal. An advisory board reviews
 each detainee's case periodically, and detainees may make representations to it. The
 board may make nonbinding recommendations that a detainee be released prior to
 expiration of the detention order. If the Minister wishes to act contrary to a rec-
 ommendation for release by the board, he must seek the agreement of the President.
 The ISA empowers the police to detain a person for up to 48 hours; any police
 officer at or above the rank of superintendent may authorize that the detainee be
 held for up to 28 days longer. Once initial interrogation has been completed, the au-
 thorities have generally allowed ISA detainees access to lawyers and visits by rel-
 atives.
 No one has been jailed under formal ISA detention since 1990. However, the Gov-
 ernment has maintained some restrictions on the rights of two former ISA detainees
 to travel abroad, make public statements, and associate freely. Chia Thye Poh, a
 
 
 766
 
 former Member of Parliament, was released from prison in 1989 after 23 years in
 preventive detention under the ISA but was confined to a small island aant to
 Singaore during evening and night hours until 1992. Now resident in Singapore
 proper, he cannot be employed, travel abroad, issue public statements, or associate
 with other former detainees without ISD approval. Vincent Cheng, a detainee re-
 leased in 1990, could not issue public statements, publish, or travel abroad without
 ISD consent until July 1995, when the ISD removed the restriction order against
 him.
 The Constitution prohibits exile, and the Government respects the prohibition in
 practice.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, but the Government restricts the independence of the judiciary in practice
 through its control over the assignment of judges and through laws limiting judicial
 review. In 1989 the Government amended the Constitution and the ISA to eliminate
 judicial review of the objective grounds for detentions under the ISA and subversion
 aws. This allows the Government to restrict, or even eliminate, judicial review in
 such cases and thereby restrict, on vaguely defined national security grounds, the
 scope of certain fundamental liberties provided for in the Constitution.
 The judicial system has two levels of courts: The Supreme Court, which includes
 the High Court and the Court of Appeal; and the subordinate courts. The President
 appoints judges to the Supreme Court on the recommendation of the Prime Minister
 in consultation with the Chief Justice. The President also appoints subordinate
 court judges on the recommendation of the Chief Justice. The term of appointment
 is determined by the Legal Service Commission of which the Chief Justice is the
 chairman. Subordinate court judges and magistrates, as well as public prosecutors,
 are civil servants whose specific assignments are determined by the Legal Service
 Commission, which can decide on job transfers to -any of several egal service depart-
 ments. Supreme Court Justices may remain in office until the mandatory retirement
 age of 65, after which they ma continue to serve at the Government's discretion
 for brief, renewable terms at fullsalaiy. Judicial officials, especially in the Supreme
 Court, have close ties to the ruling party and its leaders.
 In February 1994, completing a transition begun in 1989, Parliament approved a
 bill abolishing all appeals to the Privy Council in London. The single Court of Ap-
 peal, established in 1993, combining the former Court of Appeal (for civil cases) and
 Court of Criminal Appeal, therefore became the highest court of review in Singa-
 pThe judicial system provides citizens with an efficient judicial process. In normal
 cases the Criminal Procedures Code provides that a charge against a defendant
 must be read and explained to him as soon as it i s framed by the prosecution or
 the magistrate. Defendants enjoy a presumption of innocence and the right of ap-
 peal, in most cases. They normally have the right to be present at their trials, to
 be rep resented by an attorney, to confront witnesses against them, to provide wit-
 nesses and evidence on their own behalf, and to review government-held evidence
 relevant to their cases.
 The Constitution extends the above rights to all citizens. However, persons de-
 tained under the ISA and the MDA are not entitled to a public trial see Section
 1.d.). In all remaining cases, trials are public and by judge; there are no jury trials.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 hf. Arbitray Interference with Pritvacy, Family, Home, or Correspondene.-The
 Government can use its wide discretionary powers under the ISA if it determines
 that national security is threatened. In most cases, the law requires search war-
 rants, normally issued by the magistrate court, for intrusion into the home. Law en-
 forcement officers may, however, search a person, home, or property without a war-
 rant if they decide that searches are necessary to preserve evidence.
 The CL an the MDA Act ato permit warrantless searches in dealing with drug
 and secret society-related offenses. The courts may undertake judicial review of such
 searches at the request of the defendant. Divisions of the Government's law enforce-
 ment agencies, including the Internal Security Department and the Corrupt Prac-
 tices Investigation Board(CPIB), have wide networks for gathering information. The
 authorities have the capability to monitor telephone and other private conversations
 and conduct surveillance. While therswere no proven allegations that they did so
 in 1996, it is widely believed that the authorities routinely conduct surveillance on
 some opposition politicians and other critics of the Government.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution permits official restrictions on
 the freedom of expression and, in practice, the Government restricts the freedoms
 of speech and the press and intimidates journalists into practicing self-censorship.
 
 
 767
 The ISA permits the Government to prohibit or to place conditions on publications
 that incite violence, that counsel disobedience to the law, that might arouse tensions
 among the various classes (races, religions, and language groups), or that might
 threaten national interests, national security, or public order. The Government uses
 a broad definition of these laws to restrict political opposition and criticism. It is
 clear from recent events that the Government will not tolerate discussions in the
 press of alleged government corruption, nepotism, or a compliant judiciary.
 All general circulation newspapers in all four official languages-English, Chi-
 nese, Malay, and Tamil-are owned by Singapore Press Holdings Ltd. (SPH), a pri-
 vate corporation that has close ties to the national leadership. SPH also owns 20
 percent of Singapore Cablevision, which operates the expanding cable television sys-
 tem. SPH is required by law to issue ordinary and management shares; holders of
 management shares have the power to control all SPH personnel decisions. The
 Government must approve, and can remove, holders of management shares. Hence,
 while Singapore newspapers print a large and diverse selection of articles from their
 domestic and a variety of foreign sources, editorials and coverage of domestic events
 closely parallel government policies and the opinions of government leaders. Govern-
 ment leaders often criticize what the call the "Western model" of journalism, in
 which the media are free to report the news as they see it. Government officials
 argue that the role of the domestic media is to support the goals of the elected lead-
 ership.
 A wide range of international magazines and newspapers may be purchased un-
 censored, although newspapers printed in Malaysia may not be imported. A 1990
 law requires foreign publications that report on politics and current events in South-
 east Asia to register, post a bond the equivalent of $141,100, and name a person
 in Singapore to accept legal service. These requirements strenghen government
 control over foreign media. The Government may ban the circulation of domestic
 and foreign publications under provisions of the ISA and the Undesirable Publica-
 tions Act. Under amendments to the Newspaper and Printing Presses Act, it may
 limit the circulation of foreign publications which, by the Governmenvs broad deter-
 mination, interfere in Singapore's domestic politics. It has done so on occasion in
 the past.
 The Asian Wall Street Journal (AWSJ), Asiaweek, and the Far Eastern Economic
 Review (FEER) are "gazetted" (limited in circulation). In July the Government re-
 laxed restrictions and raised the limits for the FEER from 4,000 per issue to 6,000
 per issue and the AWSJ from 7,000 per issue to 9,000 per issue. The limit for
 Asiaweek remained at 15,000 per issue.
 Some publications are barred from importation, and the authorities censor movies,
 television programs, video materials, and music. Censorship of materials and the de-
 cision to deny the importation of specific publications are based on a determination
 that such materials would undermin e   stability of the state, are pro-Communist,
 contravene moral norms, are pornographic, show excessive or gratuitous sex and vi-
 olence, glamorize or promote drug use, or incite racial, religious, or linguistic ani-
 mosities. The authorities report that there is strong public support for continued
 censorship of sex and violence in -ims.
 The Singapore Broadcasting Authority (SBA) was established in 1994 to regulate
 and promote the broadcasting industry. The SBA develops censorship standards
 with the help of advisory panels whose membership represents a crss section of so-
 ciety. In July the SA assumed responsibility for regulating access to the Internet.
 While the Government does not classify regulation of the Internet as censorship, ac-
 cess to web pages that undermine public security national defense, racial andreli-
 gious harmony, and public morals is banned. In addition, content that tends to bring
 the Goveuoent into hatred or contempt, or that excites disaffection against the
 Government is forbidden. In September Internet service providers were required to
 fiter Internet access for the more than 120,000 Internet subscribers through proxy
 servers. These proxy servers are designed to prevent subscribers from seeing about
 a dozen sites, deemed to violate the government's ban. The list of banned sites is
 not a matter of public record.
 The government-linked holding company, Singapore International Media PTE Ltd,
 has a near monopoly on broadcasting. Its 4 main subsidiaries operate all 4 free tele-
 vision channels and 10 of the 15 domestic radio stations. Of the five remaining radio
 stations, two are owned by the Ministry of Defense and two by the National Trade
 Union Conference (NTUC), which is closely affiliated with the Government. The
 only radio station not under government control is the British Broadcasting Cor-
 poration (EEC) World Service, which is available 24 hours a day. In addition to the
 BBC, Malaysian and Indonesian television and radio broadcasts are available. An
 expanded cable service, Singapore Cable Vision (SCV), jointly held by government-
 linked orporations an d t             Continental ablevision Company, begn
 
 
 768
 operation in June 1995. The island nation currently is being wired for a fiber-optic
 network. When the project is complete by the year 2000, more than 30 channels,
 including BBC and other international news and entertainment programs, will be
 available to subscribers. Cable News Network International, carried live, is avail-
 able 24 hours a day on SCV's pay television. Satellite dishes are banned with few
 exceptions.
 Journalists from foreign publications are required by law to apply annually for re-
 newal of the employment pass that allows them to operate in Singapore. The Gov-
 ernment continued to limit the amount of time that some foreign correspondents
 could remain in the country by denying requests for renewal of their employment
 passes, usually beyond a period of 3 years. The Government has denied requests in
 the past from several major publications to station correspondents in Singapore.
 Tension between the Government and foreign correspondents remained because of
 earlier government allegations that the "liberal western media" had carried out a
 "conspiracy" to undermine PAP rule and had engaged in irresponsible reporting in
 Singapore and abroad.
 Government leaders sometimes use defamation suits or the threat of such actions
 to discourage public criticism. In July 1995, Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong, Senior
 Minister Lee Kuan Yew, and his son, Deputy Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong, won
 a libel suit against the International Herald Tribune (l-IT) for an article, published
 in August 1994, allegedly suggesting that the younger Lee was appointed to his pst
 on account ofhis father. The plalntiffs sought damages in addition to a printed apol-
 ogy, which appeared in the newspaper on August 31, 1994. In June 1995, during
 a widely pubicized public hearing to determine the scope of the judgment agalst
 the IHT, all three plainiffstestified that the JIlT did not aplogize in good faith
 and demanded aggravated damages for the harm caused to their reputations. In
 July 1995, the HiP Court awarded a record defamation judgment of $678,000.
 In January 1995, Dr. Christopher Lingle, an American academic who had been
 a visiting lecturer at the National University of Singapore, the HIT, and the Singa-
 pore printer were feed for contempt of court following the publication of an article
 about Asian governments by Lingle on October 7, 1994. Although Singapore was not
 mentioned in the article, the court focused on the article's reference to some govern-
 ments as being "more subtle: Relying upon a compliant judiciary to bankrupt opposi-
 tion pliticians or buying out enough of the opposition  o take control democrat-
 icallya al reference to Singapore. Although the HIT published an apology for the
 article in December 1994, Senior Minister e Kuan Yew filed a civil libel suit. The
 IT agred in November 1995, to pay the Senior Minister $213,000 in damages plus
 costs for the civil suit. Lingle was separately ordered bthe courts in April to pay
 $71,000 in damages, plus costs, to the Senior Minister i  t least the two incidents
 cited abeve, the use of libel suits appears to have intimidated the press successfully.
 Faculty members at public institutions of higher education aregovernment em-
 ployees. A number of university lecturers are concurrently PAP Members of Par-
 liament (MP.'s). Academics sometimes criticize government policies, but they avoid
 public criticism of individual government leaders and sensitive social and economic
 policies because of possible sanctions, such as in the cases of Christopher Lingle and
 Chee Soon Juan (see also Section 3). Publications by local academics and members
 of think tanks rarely deviate substantially from government views.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution grants citi-
 zens the freedom of peaceful assembly and association but permits Parliament to
 impose restrictions "as it considers necessary or expedient in the interest of the se-
 curity of Singapore." The Government restricts those rights in practice. Assemblies
 of more than five persons in public, including political meetings and rallies, must
 have police permission. Persons wishing to speak at a public function, excluding
 functions provided by or under the auspices of the Government, must obtain ermis-
 sion from the public entertainment licensing unit, a division of the Crimina Inves-
 tigation Department. Oposition politicians routinely experience delays of 3 to 4
 weeks before being notified of the disposition of their applications.
 The Government closely monitors political gatherings regardless of the number
 present. Most associations, societies, clubs, religious groups, and other organizations
 with more than 10 members must be registeredwith the Government under the So-
 cieties Act. The Government denies registration to groups it believes likely to be
 used for unlawful purposes or for purposes prejudicial to public peace, welfare, or
 public order (see Section 2.c.). The Government has absolute discretion in applying
 this broad and vague language to register or dissolve societies. It prohibits org
 nized political activities, except by organizations registered as poitical parties. ris
 prohibition effectivel limits opposition activities (see Section 3). It has less of an
 effect on the PAP, wih enjoys the support of residential committees and neighbeor-
 
 
 769
 hood groups ostensibly organized for nonpolitical purposes but whose leadership
 contains many grassroots PAP members.
 c. Freedom  oRelgion.-Freedm of religion is provided for in the Constitution
 and usually respected in practice. There is no state religion. The Government has
 determined that all residents of public housing should have access to religious orga-
 nizations traditionally associatedl with their ethnic groups. It therefore provides
 some fluancial assistance to build and maintain mosques. The Government also fa-
 cilitates contributions to the construction of Indian and Chinese temples.
 Missionaries are permitted to work and to publish religious texts. However, all
 religious groups are subject to government scrutiny and must be legally registered.
 The Government restricts some religious groups by application of the Societies Act
 and has banned others, such as Jehovah's Witnesses and the Unification Church.
 The Government banned the former in 1972 on the grounds that it opposes military
 service, and its roughly 2,000 members refuse to perform military service, salute the
 flag, or swear oaths of allegiance to the State. In July a 72-year-old grandmother
 was arrested and convicted for possession of banned Jehovah's Witness literature.
 She was sentenced to a $500 fine. She refused to pay and was ordered to jail for
 7 days. She was first arrested in February 1995, along with 69 other suspected Je-
 hovah's Witnesses at which time the police seized books, magazines, periodicals,
 and other materiafs believed to be related to the group. Of the 69 persons arrested,
 28 were tried and found guilty of holding a meeting of a "banned society" and were
 fined between $500 and $2,000.
 The 1990 Maintenance of Religious Harmony Act made illegal what the Govern-
 ment deems to be the inappropriate involvement of religious groups and officials in
 political affairs. The act also prohibits judicial review of any possible denial of rights
 arising from the act, and it specifically denies judicial review of its enforcement.
 d. Feedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution grants citizens the right to move freely throughout
 the country, though Parliament may pass laws restricting that right on the basis
 of "the security of Singapore ** * the public order, pubic health, or the punish-
 ment of offenders." The Goverent requires all citizens and permanent residents
 over the ag of 12 to register and to carry identification cards. After the completion
 of nationalservice, enlisted men are required to participate in reserve training until
 age 40 and officers to age 50. Reservists who plan to travel overseas for less than
 6 months must advise the Ministry of Defense; for trips longer than 6 months, re-
 servists must obtain an exit permit. Beginning at age 11, boys' passports are re-
 stricted to 6 months. Males approaching national service age must obtain an exit
 permit in order to study outside the country. Boys over the age of 17 1/2, who have
 not already obtained a deferment, cannot obtain an exit permit until they have at
 least begun their national service. The Goverment may refuse to issue a passport
 and has done so in the case of former ISA detainees.
 The ISA allows the Ministers for Law and Home Affairs to suspend or revoke a
 detention order or to impose restrictions on former detainees' activities, places of
 residence, and travel abroad (see Section 1.d.). The right of voluntary repatriation
 is extended to holders of Singaporean passports. In 1985 Parliament provided for
 the loss of citizenship by Singaporeans who reside outside the country for more than
 10 years consecutively. Action under this law is discretionary and has been taken
 in at least one case involving a well-known government opponent, Tan Wah Piaow.
 The law stipulates that former Singaporean members of the Communist Party of
 Malaya (CPM) residing outside must apply to the Government to be allowed to re-
 turn. They must renounce communism, sever all organizational ties with the CPM,
 and pledge not to take part in activities prejudicial to the State's internal security.
 In addition, the law requires them to be subject to interview by the ISD and to any
 restrictive conditions imposed on them.
 Singapore neither accepted the Comprehensive Plan of Action for Indochinese
 seeking refugee status nor offered first asylum to refugees. Prior to 1991, the Gov-
 ernment permitted Indochinese asylum seekers to disembark if a resettlement coun-
 try promised to remove them within 90 days and if the rescuing vessel was in
 Singapore on a scheduled port of call. In June 1991, the Government halted disem-
 barkation on the grounds that resettlement countries had not honored their guaran-
 tees of removal. Approximately 140 Vietnamese boat people were placed in an open
 camp in Singapore. All were interviewed to determine refugee status and a number
 were resettled in resettlement countries. Ninety-nine Vietnamese boat people were
 repatriated on June 29, under the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
 (UNHCR) voluntary repatriation program. Five other Vietnamese asylum seekers
 have been allowed to remain in Singapore. The authorities permit persons of other
 nationalities who make claims for asylum to have their status determined by the
 UNHCR for possible resettlement elsewhere.
 
 
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides citizens with the right to change their government
 peacefully through democratic means, and the voting and vote-counting systems in
 elections are fair, accurate, and free from tampering. In practice, however, the Gov-
 ernment uses its extensive powers to place formidable obstacles in the path of politi-
 cal opponents. It also attempts to intimidate the opposition through the threat of
 libel suits and potential loss of employment or professional licenses. Parliamentary
 elections may be called at any time but must be held no later than 5 years from
 the date Parliament first sits.
 Opposition parties have been unable seriously to challenge the PAP since the late
 1960's. Consequently, the PAP's domination of the political system continues as it
 has for 3 decades under Lee Kuan Yew. Opposition politicians hold 4 seats in the
 81-member elected Parliament, 3 for the Social Democratic Party and 1 for the
 Workers' Party. In addition to the 81 elected members, the President appoints 6
 "prominent citizens" to serve as nominated M.P.'s for 2-year terms. The PAPs politi-
 cal success in part results from restrictions on opposition political activities, but also
 from government policies that helped Singapore achieve rapid economic growth,
 thereby enabling the Government to provide a wide array of public services. The
 PAP has a broad base of popular support, sustained in part through neighborhood,
 youth, and labor groups.
 Although political parties are legally free to organize, the authorities impose strict
 regulations on their constitutions, fundraising, and accountability. While the PAP
 has been able to enjoy the support of ostensibly nonpolitical organizations, the Gov-
 ernment has used its broad discretionary powers to hinder the creation of com-
 parable support organizations for opposition parties. Singapore's economic success
 under the PAP has strengthened the party's leadership role. However, its grip on
 power has also been enhanced by: Patronage; political control of the press andthe
 courts; strong party discipline; and access to the instruments of power. For example,
 during the    ecember election campaign senior government officials pointedly
 warned voters that precincts that elected opposition candidates would have the low-
 est priority in extensive government plans to upgrade public housing facilities,
 heightening concerns among some observers about the degree of freedom of choice
 within the electorate. Government regulations also hinder attempts by opposition
 parties to rent office space in government housing or to establish community foun-
 ations for, among other purposes, running private kindergartens. In August the
 Government denied an opposition party request to produce and distribute video
 tapes on the grounds that visual images can be used to evoke emotional rather than
 rational responses. Moreover, according to the Government, the use of videos could
 allow political parties to sensationalize or distort information to capture the maxi-
 mum attention of the viewer. The PAP claims that the lack of an effective opposition
 is due -to disorganization, lack of leadership, and lack of alternative policy programs.
 In August 1993, citizens elected their first president. The presidency has some
 powers over civil service appointments, government and statutory board budgets,
 and internal security affairs. Presidential aspirants must be certified by the Presi-
 dential Elections Committee (PEC), a body composed of the Chairman of the Public
 Service Commission, the Chairman of the Public Accountants Board, and a member
 of the Presidential Council for Minority Rights. The PEC was responsible for screen-
 ing applicants on the basis of integrity, character, reputation, ability, and experi-
 ence in managing the financial affairs of a large institution. Eligibility was consid-
 ered automatic if the candidate had 3 years' experience as a high-ranking public
 servant or chief executive officer of a large corporation. These requirements limit
 the pool of potential presidential candidates. The Committee rejected the applica-
 tions of two opposition figures-J.B. Jeyaretnam, Secretary General of the Workers'
 Party (WP) and a former M.P., and another WP member-for not satisfying the eli-
 gibility criteria regarding character and financial expertise.
 The threat of civil libel or slander suits continues to discourage criticism or chal-
 lenges by opposition leaders. The Legal Code also provides for criminal defamation
 offenses, but these provisions are seldom used.
 The most recent example of the use of libel or slander suits by government enti-
 ties to intimidate prominent opposition politicians was that of Chee Soon Juan, a
 lecturer at the National University of Singapore and Secretary General of the Singa-
 pore Democratic Party (SDP). Chee was dismissed from his teaching position in
 March 1993 for alleged irregularities involving his use of research funds and sued
 by his department chairman, S. Vasoo, a PAP M.P., for making allegedly defamatory
 remarks. Chee had to pay $200,000 in damages to Vasoo and two other university
 employees as compensation for his allegedly defamatory remarks.
 
 
 771
 The Government uses parliamentary censure or the threat of censure to humiliate
 or intimidate opposition leaders. For example, Parliament censured Chee Soon Juan
 and the SDP m November 1995 for allegedly endorsing attacks on the judiciary
 made by Chee's fellow panelists, dissident Francis Seow and academic Christopher
 Linge, at a forum held in the United States at Wiliams College in September 1995.
 The Government did not attribute any statement directly attacking the judiciary or
 endorsing the views of Seow and Lingle to Chee or the SDP. Instead, government
 parliamentary leaders said that the failure of Chee and other SDP leader to con-
 tradct the attacks made by Seow and Lingle constituted positive assent by "clever
 omission." In December Parliament levied fines in excess of $36,000 against Chee
 and three other SDP members, claiming that they had committed perjuy and other
 offenses during the proceedings of a special parliamentary committee examining
 government health care subsidies. Parliament accused the opposition party of fab-
 ricating statistics about the extent of these subsidies in a written submission and
 subsequent testimony to the committee. (hee and his colleagues claimed that they
 had submitted some incorrect figures to the committee in error but that they had
 not intended to mislead anyone.
 Although there is no legal bar to the participation of women in politics, they are
 underrepresented in Parliament. There are no female cabinet members, and only 2
 of the 81 elected parliamentary seats are occupied by women. Two of the six nomi-
 nated Members of Parliament are women. Women occupy 128 of 560 positions at
 the senior levels of the civil service, although they occupy none of the top 29 posi-
 tions.
 There is no restriction in law or practice against minorities voting or participating
 in politics. Malaya comprise 14 percent of the general population and currently hold
 12 percent ofthe seats in Parliament. Indians make up 7percent of the general pop-
 ulation and hold 9 percent of the seats in Pariiament. Minority representation mn
 Parliament is in part the result of laws requiring a minority representative in se-
 lected group constituencies.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vest igation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no nongovernmental organizations, with the exception of the opposition
 political parties, that actively and openly monitor alleged human rights vilations.
 Wile the Government does not formally prohibit them, efforts by any independent
 organization to investi ate and criticize publicly government human rights policies
 would face the same obstacles as those faced by political parties. The Government
 denies that international organizations have any competence whatsoever to look into
 human rights matters in     Pare. Visa regulations do not recoguize monitoring
 human right s   a "business purpose' for visiting the country, but neither is such
 activity regarded as a "social visit." Amnesty International is not allowed to operate
 in, or to visit, Singapore. The Government continued to allege a "conspiracy" be-
 tween the "liberal Western media (see Section 2.a.) and international human rights
 organizations and other institutions which it claimed were intent on undermining
 its rule.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution contains no explicitprovision providing equal rights for women
 and minorities; instea i states that all persns are equalbe ore the law and enti-
 tled to the equal protection of the law. Mindful of Singapore's history of intercom-
 munal tension, the Government takes afoirmative measures to ensure racial, ethnic,
 religious, and cultural nondiscrimination. Social, economic, and cultural facilities
 are available to all citizens regardless of race, religion, or sex. Minorities actively
 participate in the political process, and are well represented throughout the Govern-
 ment.
 Women.-There is no evidence of any widespread practice of violence or abuse
 against women. Laws such as the Penal Code and the Women's Charter protect
 women against domestic violence and sexual or physical harassment. A battered
 wife can obtain court orders barring the spouse from the home until the court is
 satisfied that he will stop his aggressive behavior. The Penal Code prescribes man-
 datery caning and a minmum imprisonment of 2 years for conviction on a charge
 of "outraging modesty" that causes the victim fear of death or injury.
 Women enjoy the same legal rights as men n most areas, including civil liberties,
 employment, commercial activity, and education. The Women's Charter, enacted in
 1961, gives women, among other rights, the right to own property, conduct trade,
 and receive divorce settlements. Muslim women enjoy most of the rights and protec-
 tions of the Women's Charter. Muslim men may practice polygyny; they also may
 
 
 772
 divorce unilaterally, whereas Muslim women may not. Polygyny occurred in 104 of
 4,412 marriages registered in 1995.
 In 1962 the Government instituted the principle of equal a% for equal work in
 the civil service and abolished separate salary scales in 1965. Women make up 39
 plerent of the labor force and are well represented in many professional fields, but
 they still hold the preponderance of low-wage jobs such as clerks and secretaries.
 As a result, their average salary levels are only 74 percent those of men. Women
 hold few leadership positions in the private sector.
 Other areas of discrimination remain. For example, children born overseas to fe-
 male citizens are not grranted citizenship automatically, while those of male citizens
 _are. Female civil service employees who are married do not receive health benefits
 for their spouses and dependents as do male government employees.
 Children.-The Government demonstrated its strong commitment to children's
 rightsand welfare through its well-funded systems of public education and medical
 care._Access to pubic education and medical care is equal for all children in society.
 In 1993 the Government updated and reenacted the Children and Young Persons
 Act. This revised act establishes protective services for those children who are or-
 phand, abused, disabled, or refratory, and it reates a juvenle court system. The
 Ministry of Community Development works closely with the National Council for
 Social Services to oversee children's welfare cases. Voluntary organizations operate
 most of the homes for children, while the Government funds up to 50 percent of all
 child costs, which includes normal living expenses and overhead, as well as ex-
 penses for special schooling, health care, or supervisory needs. There is no societal
 pattern of abuse directed against children.
 People With Disabilities.-The Government implemented a comprehensive code on
 barrier-free accessibility in 1990, which established standards for facilities for the
 physically disabled in all new buildings and mandated the progressive upgrading of
 older structures. Although there is no legislation that addresses the issue of equal
 opportunities for the disabled in education or employment, the National Council of
 Social Services, in conjunction with various voluntary associations, provides an ex-
 tensive job training and placement program for the disabled. Informal provisions in
 education have permitted university matriculation for visually impaired, deaf, and
 physically disabled students. The Government allows the equivalent of a $2,400 tax
 deduction for families with a disabled person.
 National/RaciallEthnic Minorities.-The Indian and Eurasian communities have
 achieved economic and educational success rates on a par with the majority Chi-
 nese. Malay Singaporeans, however, still have a lower standard of living, alt ough
 the gap has diminished in recent years. Malays remain underrepresented at the up-
 permost rungs of the corporate ladder, and, some have claimed, in certain sectors
 of the Government, a reflection of their historically lower education and economic
 position, but also a result of employment discrimination. Advertisements sometimes
 specify ethnicity and gender requirements or require fluent Mandarin speakers.
 The Constitution acknowledges the "special position" of Malays as the indigenous
 people of Singapore and charges the Government to support and promote their "po-
 litical, educati'onal, reli~ous, economic, social, and cultural interests." A Presidential
 Council on Minority Rights examines all pending bills to ensure that they are not
 disadvantageous to a particular group. It also reports to the Government on matters
 affecting any racial or religious community and investigates complaints.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution provides all citizens with the right
 to form associations, including trade unions. Parliament may, however, impose re-
 strictions based on security, public order, or morality grounds. The right of associa-
 tion is delimited by the Societies Act and by labor and education laws and regula-
 tions. The Trade Unions Act authorizes the formation of unions with broad rights,
 albeit with nme narrow restrictions, such as prohibitions on the unionization of
 uniformed employees. The national labor force comprises about 1.75 million employ-
 ees, tore than 237,000 of whom are organized into 84 employee unions. Seventy-
 five .of these unions, representing almost 73 percent of all unionized workers, are
 afftliated with the National Trades Union Congress (NTUC), an umbrella organiza-
 tion that has a close relationship with the Government.
 The NTUC unabashedly acknowledges that its interests are closely linked with
 those of the ruling PAP, a relationship often described by both as "symbiotic." For
 example, President Ong Teng Cheong served simultaneously as NTUC Secretary
 General and Second Deputy Prime Minister before assuming his current position as
 President in 1993. His successor at the NTUC, Lim Boon Heng, was formerly Sec-
 ond Minister for Trade and Industry and continues as Minister Without Portfolio.
 In addition, several other high-ranking NTUC officials are PAP M.P.'s. NTUC policy
 
 
 773
 rhibits union members who actively support opposition parties from holding office
 naffiliated unions. While the NTUC is fmancially independent of the PAP, with
 income generated by NTUC-owned businesses, the NTUC and PAP share the same
 ideology.
 Workers, other than those in essential services, have the legal right to strike but
 rarely do so; no strikes have occurred since 1986. Most disagreements are resolved
 through informal consultations with the Ministry of Labor. If conciliation fails, the
 disputing parties usually submit their case to the Industrial Arbitration Court,
 which has representatives from labor, management, and the Government. These
 labor dispute mechanisms, along with the PAPI/NTUC nexus, have played important
 roles in creating nonconfrontational labor relations. The Government also attributes
 the rarity of strikes to a cultural aversion to confrontation, high economic growth
 rates, labor shortages in recent years that have sustained regular wage increases,
 and the popular conviction that strikes would undermine Singapore's attractiveness
 to investors.
 The NTUC is free to associate regionally and internationally.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectiely.-Collective bargaining is a nor-
 mal part of management-labor relations, particularly in the manufacturing sector.
 Agreements between management and labor are renewed every 2 to 3 years, al-
 though wage increases are negotiated annually. Collective bargaining agreements
 generally follow the guidelines issued by the National Wages Council, a group com-
 posed of labor, management, and government representatives, that makes annual
 recommendations regarding salary and bonus packages. The Industrial Relations
 Act makes it an offense to discriminate against anyone who is or proposes to become
 a member or an officer of a trade union. The offense is punishable by a fine equiva-
 lent to $1,414 and/or a 6-month prison sentence. Labor laws and regulations are en-
 forced uniformly.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsoy Labor.-Under sections of the Destitute
 Persons Act, any indigent person may be required to reside in a welfare home and
 engage in suitable work. The International Labor Organization (ILO) has criticized
 the coercive terms of this act, which includes penal sanctions as not in compliance
 with the ILO Convention on Forced Labor, ratified by Singapore in 1965. The Gov-
 ernment maintains that the act is social legislation providing for the shelter, care,
 and protection of destitute persons; and that work programs are designed to re-
 integrate individuals into society.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Government enforces the Em-
 ployment Act, which prohibits the employment of children under age 12. A child
 over age 12 and under age 14 must receive written permission from the Commis-
 sioner for Labor for "light work suited to his capacity." There are few such applica-
 tions, and the Commissioner for Labor has never approved one. Employers must no-
 tify the Ministry of Labor within 30 days of hiring a child between the ages of 14
 and 16 and must forward medical certification to the Commissioner. The incidence
 of children taking up permanent employment is also low, and abuses are almost
 nonexistent.
 Ministry of Labor regulations prohibit night employment of children and restrict
 industrial work to no more than 7 hours a day. Children may not work on commer-
 cial vessels, with any machinery in motion, on live electrical apparatus lacking effec-
 tive insulation, or in any underground job. The Ministry of Labor effectively enforces
 these laws and regulations.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There are no laws or regulations on minimum
 wages or unemployment compensation. The labor market offers relatively high
 wages and good working conditions. The Employment Act sets the standard legal
 workweek at 44 hours and provides for 1 rest day each week. The Ministry of Labor
 effectively enforces laws and regulations establishing working conditions and com-
 prehensive occupational safety and health laws. Enforcement procedures, coupled
 with the promotion of educational and training programs, have reduced the fre-
 quency of job-related accidents by a third over the past decade. While a worker has
 the right under the Employment Act to remove himself from a dangerous work situ-
 ation, his right to continued employment depends upon an investigation of the cir-
 cumstances by the Ministry of Labor.
 Because of the domestic labor shortage, over 350,000 foreign workers are em-
 ploed legall in Singspore, 20 percent of the total work force. Most are unskilled
 aborers and household servants from other Asian countries. Foreign workers face
 no legal wage discrimination, however, they are concentrated in low-wage, low-skill
 jobs and are often required to work long hours. Foreign construction workers often
 live in substandard housing on construction sites. About 85,000 foreign maids,
 mainly from the Philippines, Indonesia, and Sri Lanka, are employed in Singapore.
 
 
 Maids, foreign or domestic, are not covered under the Employment Act. Most work
 6 days per week from very early morning until late in the evening. Many contracts
 allow only 1 day off per month. Contracts often stipulate that a maid must remain
 on the premises except for official duties or on her day off. Wages average around
 $210 per month (not including free room and board). Maids often work for several
 months without pay because they must reimburse their placement agents. Labor
 law requires that employers contribute to a central provident fund for maids. Work
 permits for low-wage workers stipulate that their work permit will be cancelled if
 tey apply to marry or marry a Singapore citizen or permanent resident. Maids only
 occasiony complain since they find the wages and working conditions to be gen-
 erally acceptable. Although many lower-paid workers not covered under the Employ-
 ment Act are ineligible for the limited free legal assistance that is available to citi-
 zens, the Government does not bar complainants from seeking legal redress and
 takes a firm stand against employers who abuse their domestic servants. The au-
 thorities have fined or imprisoned employers who have abused domestics, often with
 great publicity.
