 SINGAPORE
 Singapore is a city-state of 2.6 million people; the majority
 (75 percent) is ethnic Chinese, with Malays (15 percent) and
 Indians (7 percent) constituting substantial minorities.
 Singapore has a republican form of government based on a
 parliamentary system and dominated by the People's Action
 Party (PAP), headed by Prime Minister Lee Kuan Kew, which has
 held power since Singapore gained autonomy from Great Britain
 in 1959. The PAP received 62.9 percent of the popular vote in
 the most recent elections (1984) and holds 76 of 77 seats in
 Parliament; 2 additional seats are currently vacant. The
 civil service is efficient, and corruption is officially and
 actively discouraged.
 The Government maintains active internal security and military
 forces to counter threats to the nation's security. The
 authorities maintain that the Communist Party of Malaya (CPM)
 has not abandoned its intent to overthrow the Government by
 force and that the need for continuing social harmony requires
 special measures.
 Singapore's economic system is one of the most open in the
 world. In 1987 Singapore ccntinued its recovery from the
 recession of 1985-1986, posting a 7.2 percent gross domestic
 product (GDP) growth in the first half of the year.
 Singaporeans enjoy the third highest per capita income in Asia.
 In May and June 1987, 22 people were detained without trial
 under the Internal Security Act (ISA) for alleged involvement
 in a Communist conspiracy. By December, all but one had been
 released. The remaining person has been ordered detained for
 2 years. Various international human rights organizations,
 including Amnesty International, Asia Watch, and the New
 Zealand Committee for Human Rights in Singapore, have stated
 that the Government used psychological stress during
 interrogation, and Amnesty International declared the detainees
 "prisoners of conscience." There were also allegations of
 physical abuse by the police from members of the New Testament
 Church. The Government denies that it allows the use of
 torture.
 In April four persons were detained without trial under the
 ISA on charges of preparing for race riots to mark the
 anniversary of an outbreak of communal violence in May 1969.
 According to the Government, the detentions were not made
 public until June to avoid arousing tension during the
 anniversary period.
 The Government imposed severe restrictions on the circulation
 of the Far Eastern Economic Review, The Asian Wall Street
 Journal, and Asiaweek in 1987 for "engaging in the domestic
 politics of Singapore." The domestic press operates under
 longstanding, informal limits on its activities.
 The ruling party's political and economic management record
 provides a continuing source of popular political support.
 However, in recent years human rights-related developments,
 including the disqualification from Parliament of an outspoken
 opposition leader, the tightening of controls on the Law
 Society, curbs on the foreign press, arrests under the ISA of
 grassroots activists, and proposals for electing parliamentary
 candidates by "teams," have also served to reinforce the PAP's
 political dominance, which had begun to show signs of erosion
 following the last general election:
 
 
 798
 SINGAPORE
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section I Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no known incidents of politically motivated killing.
 b. Disappearance
 There is no evidence of abduction, secret arrests, or of
 clandestine detentions not subsequently acknowledged by the
 Government. No such activity occurred on the part of
 opposition elements.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Torture is prohibited under Sections 330 and 331 of the Penal
 Code. Government leaders, including Prime Minister Lee, have
 stated that they oppose the use of torture. The New Testament
 Church (NTC) has alleged torture of several of its members
 arrested in Singapore for unlawful assembly and for disrupting
 court proceedings. According to NTC members, those arrested
 were subjected to sexual and other physical abuse. There has
 been no independent corroboration of those allegations.
 Amnesty International and Asia Watch, among others, reported
 abuses in 1987 in connection with some of the detentions under
 the ISA for alleged Marxist-related activities. Some detainees
 reportedly were subjected to continuous interrogation lasting
 up to 5 days, deprived of sleep during initial interrogations,
 and kept'in cells too small to'lie down in, and in which the
 lights were kept on during limited rest periods to prevent
 sleep.
 The Home Minister responded in Parliament to questions on the
 treatment of ISA detainees by reiterating that torture is not
 practiced in Singapore, but he did not specifically address
 the issue of psychological stress and sleep deprivation.
 Singapore's penal code mandates caning in addition to
 imprisonment as punishment for certain offenses, including
 rape, theft, robbery, extortion, housebreaking, and vehicle
 theft. Although a prisoner may be sentenced to any number of
 strokes for multiple offenses, 24 strokes are the maximum
 which may be administered.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, Exile, or Forced Labor
 Arrest without warrant and detention without trial are
 permitted in some cases under Singapore law. Arrest without
 warrant is authorized under Section 43 of the Criminal Law
 (Temporary Provisions) Act and Sections 8 and 65 of the
 Internal Scurity Act (ISA). Detention without trial is
 authorized under Section 30 of the Criminal Law (Temporary
 Provisions) Act and Section 8 of the ISA.
 The Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act is used almost
 exclusively in secret criminal society and drug cases. The
 Misuse of Drugs Act allows Central Narcotics Bureau (CNB)
 officers and customs officials to arrest without warrant any
 person suspected of manufacturing, importing, exporting,
 possessing, consuming, or trafficking in controlled drugs.
 
 
 799
 SINGAPORE
 The Director of the Central Narcotics Bureau can commit
 suspected drug users to a 6-month term in a drug rehabilitation
 center in cases of positive urinalysis tests. Suspects have a
 legal right to challenge the finding and can appeal through
 the court system. It is generally accepted that the CNB has
 exercised its limited detention powers within the strict
 bounds of its authority. There is a functioning system of
 bail, and those charged in both criminal and security cases
 are entitled to legal counsel.
 The ISA permits the Minister of Home Affairs to order the
 detention of persons whom the Minister determines pose a
 threat to national security. Under the ISA an individual may
 be held for an initial 30-day period; within the initial 30
 days the Minister of Home Affairs must determine whether the
 detainee should be held longer. ISA detainees are allowed
 access to lawyers and visits by relatives. The Minister may
 authorize detention for up to 2 years. After 2 years, the
 Minister must again determine whether the detainee should be
 held longer, and may so order, again for up to 2 years. A
 detainee's case is reviewed periodically by an advisory board.
 to which the detainee may make representations. The board can
 recommend to the Minister of Home Affairs that a detainee be
 released prior to expiration of the detention order. The
 board's recommendations are not binding; persons are released
 when the Minister determines that they no longer pose a threat
 to national security and that they are unlikely to resume
 subversive activity.
 The Government used its powers under the ISA twice in 1987.
 In May and June 1987, 22 people were detained without trial
 under the Internal Security Act (ISA) for involvement in an
 alleged Communist conspiracy. Most of the detainees were
 released after a few months, although they were forbidden to
 leave Singapore or join any society or organization without
 government permission. By December only the alleged leader of
 the group, Vincent Cheng, remained in custody. The Government
 has said he may be held for 2 years.
 In the other ISA case, four Malay Singaporeans were detained
 in April on charges of spreading rumors of and preparing for
 race riots in connection with the anniversary of the 1969
 ethnic strife in Malaysia and Singapore. The men were detained
 on April 23, but their detentions were not made public until
 June 2, after the anniversary period, when their confessions
 were televised. Detainees' families were privately informed
 of the Government's action. 'The detention order permits them
 to be held for up to 2 years.
 Chia Thye Poh, a former Member of Parliament also remains in
 detention under the ISA for alleged membership in the Communist
 Party of Malaya. He has been held without trial since 1966.
 According to the Government, he will be released when he
 publicly renounces the use of force to effect political
 change; government officials have also commented to foreign
 critics of his detention that he would be allowed to leave the
 country if arrangements are made to resettle him elsewhere.
 Some 1,100 people are held in indefinite detention under the
 Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act, approximately half
 for membership in mafia-like secret societies and half for
 drug-related offenses.
 No formal charges have been brought against any of the
 detainees held under the ISA. Most-of the new detainees have
 appeared in interviews on government television to recount
 
 
 800
 SINGAPORE
 their activities, but human rights groups have criticized
 these interviews, stating that these public statements were
 coerced and, in some cases, edited before broadcast. The
 Government has commented publicly-that in security cases it
 will not be bound by the evidentiary and due process standards
 otherwise required by law.
 Singapore law forbids the use of forced or compulsory labor,
 and it is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a public trial is observed except for persons
 detained under the provisions of the ISA and the Criminal Law
 (Temporary Provisions) Act. In normal cases the Criminal
 Procedures Code provides that a charge against a defendant
 must be read and explained to him as soon as it is framed by
 the magistrate. The accused has the right to be defended by
 an attorney (advocate). Trial is by a magistrate or judge
 rather than by jury. Defendants may appeal their verdicts in
 most cases to higher courts. Singapore is a member of the
 British Commonwealth and allows for further appeal to the
 Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in London.
 Judges are appointed by the President on the recommendation of
 the Prime Minister in consultation with the Chief Justice.
 Subordinate court judges (magistrates) and public prosecutors
 are civil servants and can be transferred by the Public
 Service Commission.
 Citizens can take government agencies to court over such
 matters as compulsory land acquisitions and compensation. The
 Government has not lost a case involving a challenge to its
 major policies. Members of both the ruling and opposition
 political parties have been taken to court in recent years on
 nonpolitical charges. The political opposition has accused
 the government leadership of interfering in the judicial
 process in politically related cases. The Government has
 denied allegations of executive interference in the judiciary.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Government uses its wide discretionary powers when it
 believes that the security of the nation is threatened. In
 most cases, search warrants are required for intrusion into
 the home. Law enforcement officers may, however, search a
 person, home, or property without a warrant if they have
 reasonable grounds to believe that it is necessary to do so.
 In the relatively small number of ISA cases, warrantless
 searches are common. Judicial review of. such searches can be
 undertaken by the courts at the request of the defendant, but
 is not automatic. Divisions of the Government's law
 enforcement agencies, including the Internal Security
 Department and the Corrupt Practices Investigation Board
 (CPIB), haVe a wide network for gathering information.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution permits official restrictions on the freedom
 of expression, and the Government stated flatly in 1987 that
 it sets its own standards and has no obligation to.uphold a
 free and unrestricted press. In practice, freedom of speech
 
 
 801
 SINGAPORE
 and press are circumscribed, and the Government forbids
 statements which it believes might arouse tensions among the
 various races. Inflammatory discussion of race, religion, and
 language is officially forbidden.
 Newspapers are published by private firms with close ties to
 the national leadership. While there is no direct censorship
 of the press, editors have acknowledged the restraints, and
 journalists understand the guidelines within which they must
 operate. The local media did not significantly exceed these
 guidelines in 1987. The foreign media is monitored closely
 and must adhere to terms and conditions set by the Government.
 The Newspaper and Printing Press Act was ammended in 1986 to
 allow the Government to restrict the sales and distribution of
 foreign publications deemed to have "engaged" in Singapore's
 domestic politics. The Government has interpreted this law to
 include an obligation to publish government letters correcting
 alleged errors in reporting.
 The Government restricted distribution of three foreign
 publications in 3987. In February circulation of the Asian
 Wall Street Journal was cut to 400. In October Asiaweek's
 circulation was reduced to 500 copies. In December circulation
 of the Far Eastern Economic Review was also cut to 500. (In
 1986 authorities had imposed similar curbs on Time Magazine.)
 The Government contends that it has an unrestricted right of
 reply to foreign media coverage of Singapore. The Journal has
 challenged the Government's action in Singapore courts, arguing
 that failure to publish without editing a letter from a
 government official cannot be construed to be "engaging in the
 domestic politics of Singapore," the law's operative provision.
 The Government's initial legal position holds that action under
 the law involves political considerations and is not open to
 judicial review, and that foreign entities have no standing to
 challenge such actions in local courts. In the Journal case,
 the newspaper contended that it had no unqualified obligation
 to print letters and that the original letter from the
 Government's press secretary unjustifiably questioned the
 integrity and motives of its correspondent. In the Asiaweek
 case, authorities announced curbs because the magazine had not
 published "without alteration" two government letters "to
 correct errors" in a September article about ISA arrests of
 alleged Marxists. The Government accused the Far Eastern
 Economic Review of printing "malicious criticism" and
 "damaging statements" against the Prime Minister, even though
 the magazine consistently accorded the Government the right of
 reply. Prime Minister Lee's lawyers are also suing for
 damages.
 In July restrictions imposed in 1986 on the circulation of
 Time magazine were rescinded, and it now circulates freely.
 A wide range of international magazines and newspapers can be
 purchased uncensored in Singapore, although Malaysian
 newspapers are not circulated. The country is a regional
 publishing center for a number of international magazines and
 newspapers.
 The government-owned Singapore Broadcasting Corporation has a
 monopoly on domestic radio and television broadcasting, and
 follows government guidelines similar to those pertaining to
 local print media. Malaysian radio and televisicn can be
 received uncensored in Singapore; the BBC World Service also
 broadcasts locally on the FM band. .An official board of film
 censors approves motion pictures, including video cassettes
 
 
 802
 SINGAPORE
 and television programs. Other government bodies censor other
 media; such censorship is aimed at material which the
 Government believes would undermine morals, advocate excessive
 permissiveness, promote drug abuse, or increase social tension.
 Literature and films featuring sexual or drug-related themes
 are therefore banned.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Assemblies of more than five people in public, including
 political rallies, are authorized only with permission from
 the police. In practice, the Government does not stop
 gatherings of groups of people for social purposes, whatever
 their number.
 Associations, societies, clubs, churches, and other
 organizations with more than 10 members must be registered
 with the Government under the Societies Act. Registration is
 denied to societies that the Government believes are likely to
 be used for unlawful purposes or for purposes prejudicial to
 public peace, welfare, or public order. Arrests have been
 made at gatherings of unregistered organizations which the
 Government has viewed As inimical to.the public interest. In
 March 1987, several members of the New Testament Church were
 arrested.,after conducting a demonstration in the central
 shopping district  to protest the arrest and deportation of
 other church members. Eines of about $1,000 or imprisonment
 of 3 imonths were imposedon seven church members.
 Unions are legal and play an important role in conveying
 labor's concerns to both management and government in
 Singapore. The Trades Union Act places restrictions on some
 workers' Kights, including prohibitions on the unionization of
 uniformed employees and the holding of union office by persons
 with criminal records.. The national work force is comprised
 of about 1.2 million workers, of which some 200,000 are
 organized into 83 trade unions. Seventy of these, including
 about 90 percent of the unionized workers, are affiliated with
 an umbrella organization, the National Trades Union Congress
 (NTUC), which has a close relationship with the Government. A
 deputy prime minister serves as its secretary general, and
 members of Parliament are on its board of directors. The
 American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial
 Organizations (AFL-CIO) has criticized the Government's trade
 union policies as being designed to further its development
 goals. It has noted unfavorably that there has been only one
 strike in 8 years and that senior government officials serve
 as members of the NTUC Board of Directors. It has also
 alleged that the Government makes it difficult for unions to
 be formed and exist outside of .the NTUC, that the National
 Wage Council is biased in favor of the Government, and that
 Council guidelines dictate that wage increases not interfere
 with economic growth, not decrease productivity, and not deter
 investment. Some observers in Singapore claim that the fact
 that members of the Government serve as ranking officers in
 the NTUC works as much to the advantage of the trade unions as
 to the Government, especially because Singapore is in effect a
 one-party State. Several unions outside of the NTUC,
 representinq catering staff and pilots for Singapore Airlines,
 function freely and have a reputation for aggressively
 representing members' interests.
 Workers have the legal right to strike, but strikes are rare.
 In the only recent strike (in 1986), NTUC officials, including
 PAP members of Parliament, joined the picket line. Reasons
 
 
 808
 SINGAPORE
 given for the paucity of strikes include a cultural aversion
 to confrontation on the part of the workers, the fact that
 there is a functional institutional framework for resolving
 industrial disputes, and a widespread belief chat the
 Government would intervene in activities which would reflect
 badly on Singapore's attractiveness as an investment locale.
 Another probable factor is the fact that from 1980 to 1986
 wage increases averaged 7 percent while the gross domestic
 product grew at an average annual rate of 6.1 percent.
 Collective bargaining is a normal part of management-labor
 relations. On the average, collective bargaining agreements
 are rernewed every 2 to 3 years. As the wage increase figures
 cited above indicate, labor has fared relatively well at the
 bazgaining table. This result may be attributable in part to
 Singapoie's small size and population, which means that the
 labor supply is constrained. Workers with increasingly higher
 skill levels have a record of job hopping if they are
 dissatisfied with, their workplaces  The Government seeks to
 make Singapore highly competitive in international trade and,
 as part of that effort, strives continuously to upgrade the
 skills of workers.
 The NTUC is a member of the International Confederation of
 Free Trade Unions; Singdpore is a member of the International
 Labor Organization.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedcm of religion is protected by the Constitution and
 generally respected in practice, although the Government
 restricts religious sects holding views it considers inimical
 to the common good by application of the Societies Act, and
 has banned some splinter groups. A Presidential Council on
 Minority Rights exists to ensure that legislation does not
 infringe on the rights of ethnic or religious minorities.
 There is no state religion; the Government, however, does
 provide financial assistance to some religious bodies to allow
 them to build and maintain places of worship. There is no
 religious test for membership in the PAP. Missionaries are
 permitted to work and to publish religious texts.
 Proselytizing, although permitted, is a sensitive issue among
 some religious minorities.
 All religious groups are subject to government scrutiny and
 must be legally registered. The Government draws a sharp
 distinction between purely religious activities and social
 activism flowing from religious beliefs. In December the
 Government expelled five expatriate officials of a Christian
 organization for alleged involvement in domestic political
 activities. Also, some of the 22 persons detained in
 connection with the alleged Marxist conspiracy were connected
 with social action groups affiliated with the Roman Catholic
 Church, and were critical of government policies on such
 issues as the treatment of foreign workers. Four priests
 active in Catholic social organizations resigned their
 positions under government pressure.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no limitations on freedom of movement within the
 country other than those under the ISA. The ISA allows the
 Minister for Home Affairs to suspend or revoke a detention
 order or impose restrictions on a person's activities, place
 
 
 804
 SINGAPORE
 of residence, and travel outside of Singapore. All Singaporean
 residents over the age of 13 are required to register with the
 Government, receive and carry an identification card, and
 report changes of address within 14 days. A person may be
 denied a passpott at the Government's discretion, although in
 practice this applies only to those convicted of a serious
 crime. Males approaching the age of 18 (when national service
 is generally performed) must obtain an exit permit from the
 Ministry of Defense. Recipients of government-financed
 educational benefits are required to sign a bond obligation to
 serve the government for a fixed period and may not emigrate
 without paying the balance of their bond.
 The right'of voluntary repatriation is extended to holders of
 Singaporean passports. Several hundred ethnic Chinese who
 left Singapore for China during the politically difficult
 1940's'ahd 1950's have encountered obstacles to their return.
 In 1985 Parliament provided for the loss of citizenship by
 Singaporeans who remain outside Singapore for more than 10
 years. Action under this'new law is discretionary and has
 been taken selectively in cases where foreign residents with a
 prior claim to Singaporean citizenship have attempted to
 return, and most recently in the case of alleged Marxist
 ringleader Tan Wah'Piow, who resides in the United Kingdom.
 Refugees are granted first asylum for 90 days in Singapore if
 they arrive legally in the country and have third-country
 guarantees of resettlement.
 In September two Vietnamese stowaways who swam ashore from a
 Vietnamese ship were returned to the ship before resettlement
 guarantees wete given to the Government. The ship sailed back
 to Vietinam. -In December five Vietnamese stowaways were forced
 to remain-on board a Liberian ship which stopped in Singapore
 en route'to Malaysia. Another group of five stowaways,
 however, was admitted in November. Government officials have
 stated that Singapore will only admit stowaways when a
 resettlementguarantee exists and when the ship in question is
 returning directly to Vietnam.
 Section 3' Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government.
 Lee Kuan Yew has served as Prime Minister since independence.
 The party which he heads, the People's Action Party (PAP), is
 a broadly based institution, with roots in neighborhood
 organizatibns, and-it is the dominant political party in
 Singapore.. It includes representatives from all racial
 communities in Singap6re. Non-Communist parties are legally
 free to organize, in accordance with strict regulations on
 party constitution, fund raising, and accountability. There
 are now 19 registered political parties in Singapore in
 addition to the PAP, although most are dormant. These parties
 are closely monitored by the Government, which justifies its
 action on the grounds of possible Communist infiltration and
 enforcement of libel laws in connection with election
 campaigning.
 Several of the persons detained in 1987 in connection with the
 alleged Marxist conspiracy had links with the Workers' Party,
 headed by former MP J.B. Jeyaretnam. None of the detainees
 were formal members of the party, according to Jeyaretnam, who
 alleges that the arrests were aimed at discouraging
 participation in opposition political parties in general and
 the Workers' Party in particular. Jeyaretnam lost his seat in
 Parliament in 1986 after sentencing was adjusted in a losing
 
 
 SINGAPORE
 court battle over a case involving the mishandling of party
 funds. He was also fined approximately 9,000 dollars in May
 1987 for abuse of parliamentary privilege and disbarred in
 October 1987. With the expulsion of Jeyaretnam, there is only
 one opposition party member in Parliament.
 PAP leaders have introduced a bill in Parliament calling for
 the redistricting of parliamentary constituencies. Under the
 proposed "team MP" concept, up to half of the candidates for
 Parliament would run for office in groups of three candidates
 and would be elected as a bloc. Critics of the proposal charge
 that the concept provides yet another advantage to the large
 and well-organized ruling party. The concept has been refined
 by PAP officials to include a proviso that teams of candidates
 should be racially balanced to preserve parliamentary
 representation for all of Singapore's ethnic groups.
 Opposition political figures continue to charge that the intent
 of the proposal is to dilute opposition voting strength among
 larger constituencies.
 Despite the controversy over the team proposal and other PAP
 political tactics, it is widely conceded that the voting and
 vote-counting system is fair, accurate, and free from
 tampering.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There are no organizations in Singapore which actively and
 openly monitor human rights violations. Governmental bodies,
 such as the Presidentially appointed Minority Rights Council,
 monitor for violations of minority rights, primarily for any
 concerning the Malay minority. Amnesty International is not
 allowed to operate in Singapore. Representatives of Amnesty
 International and other human rights groups are not allowed to
 visit Singapore in an official capacity. In July an Amnesty
 International-sponsored committee visited Singapore in the
 wake of the ISA detentions but was not granted interviews with
 government officials. The committee consisted of a member of
 Amnesty International's International Secretariat and an
 Advocate of the Supreme Court of India. An Asia Watch team
 also visited Singapore in December. A scheduled meeting
 between the team and Singaporean officials was canceled when
 the Far Eastern Economic Review printed a letter from Asia
 Watch condemning the ISA detentions. The Government said the
 letter showed that Asia Watch had a closed mind about the
 situation in Singapore.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Social, economic, and cultural facilities are available to all
 citizens regardless of race, religion, or sex. Minorities are
 constitutionally afforded equal rights and actively participate
 in the political process. Disparities exist among the various
 races, although not as a result of government policies.
 According to 1980 census data, for example, 0.21 percent of
 Malay Singaporeans had a university education, while 1.8
 percent of Chinese citizens and 2.44 percent of Indian
 Singaporeans attained that level of education.
 Women generally enjoy equal rights, primarily under the 1969
 Women's Charter and the Constitution., but they do not have
 equal rights with men in the transmission of citizenship to
 
 
 -806
 SINGAPORE
 their children or in the right to residence of a foreign spouse
 * in Singapore. Muslim women's rights are protected by the
 provisions of the 1957 Administration of Muslim Law, which
 permits Muslim women to apply for-divorce and permits them to
 hold and dispose of property. Women have voting rights and
 the right of economic equality under the law.
 There are few women in the top ranks of the civil service or
 business. As a result of the 1984 election, however, there
 are three female members of Parliament. In 1986 the median
 gross monthly income of female workers was 76 percent of that
 for male workers.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 The Singapore labor market offers relatively high wage rates
 and working conditions consistent with accepted international
 standards. Singapore has no minimum wage or unemployment
 compensation; the Government enforces comprehensive
 occupational safety and health laws. Enforcement procedures,
 coupled with the promotion of educational and training
 programs, have reduced the frequency of job-related accidents
 by a third from the early 1970's to the early 1980's. The
 average severity of occupational accidents has also been
 reduced.
 Child labor law protect young persons from exploitation and
 hazardous working conditions. Employment of children below
 the age of 12 is -prohibited, as is nighttime work by those
 below the age ofj16.
 
 
 807
