 SINGAPORE
 Singapore, a city-state of about 2.6 million people, has a
 republican form of government based on the Westminster
 parliamentary system. The majority (75 percent) of the
 population is ethnic Chinese, with Malays (15 percent) and
 Indians (7 percent) constituting substantial minorities.
 Politics have been dominated by the People's Action Party
 (PAP), headed by Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew, which has held
 power since Singapore gained autonomy from Great Britain in
 1959. Thirty years of political stability and economic
 success have provided a continuing source of popular political
 support to the PAP. In the September 1988 general election,
 the PAP received 61.9 percent of the popular vote and won 80
 of the 81 parliamentary seats.
 The Government maintains active internal security and military
 forces to counter perceived threats to the nation's security.
 The Internal Security Department (ISD) is responsible for
 enforcement of the Internal Security Act (ISA), including its
 provisions for detention without trial.
 Singapore's economic system is one of the most open in the
 world and it is marked by impressive economic gains--gross
 domestic product (GDP) grew by 9.1 percent in the first half
 of 1989. Singaporeans enjoy the third highest per capita
 income in Asia (after Japan and oil-rich Brunei).
 The major human rights issues in Singapore continue to be
 detentions-without trial under the ISA, mistreatment of
 detainees, and restrictions on press freedom. Through the ISA
 and other laws, the Government has broad powers to interfere
 with privacy and to restrict freedom of assembly and of
 movement. In practice, however, it rarely invokes its
 draconian authority.
 In January Parliament amended both the Constitution and the
 ISA so as virtually to eliminate both judicial review of
 detention orders and appeals of ISA cases to the Privy Council
 (a panel of senior jurists in London which hears cases on
 appeal from many Commonwealth countries). These amendments
 were designed to reassert the interpretation of the law
 accepted until a December 1988 ruling by the Singapore Appeals
 Court which ordered the release of four ISA detainees. Over
 the course of 1989, six ISA detainees, including one who had
 been held for more than 22 years, were released subject to
 restrictive conditions on their movements and associations.
 Two persons are still detained under that law.
 The Appeals Court upheld in June a government restriction on
 the circulation of a foreign journal for "engaging in domestic
 politics," and in January a prominent government opponent was
 disqualified from holding a "nonconstituency" seat in
 Parliament as a result of his conviction in absentia on tax
 evasion charges.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no known instances of politically motivated killing.
 
 
 970
 SINGAPORE
 b. Disappearance
 There is no evidence of abduction, secret arrests, or of
 clandestine detentions that were not subsequently acknowledged
 by the Government. Opposition elements did not engage in such
 activities.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Although torture is prohibited by law under sections 330 and
 331 of the Penal Code and government leaders have stated that
 they oppose its use, credible reports of mistreatment
 continued to surface.
 Vincent Cheng, a detainee held under the ISA, stated in an
 affidavit made for a September habeas corpus hearing that
 following his detention in May 1987 he had been placed in an
 extremely cold room, deprived of sleep, subjected to prolonged
 interrogation, and physically assaulted by an ISD officer.
 His affidavit also said that statements he signed for the ISD
 at that time were written under coercion and intimidation.
 The Government in turn provided affidavits from the accused SD
 officers denying that Cheng had been assaulted or forced to
 sign any statement.
 The allegations are similar to those made in 1988 by nine
 others detained in May 1987 and later released. Eight of the
 nine were redetained in April 1988 after they made a public
 statement alleging that they were mistreated and denying
 allegations of involvement in a Marxist conspiracy. A week
 later the Government released sworn statements made by five of
 those redetained which stated that they had not been
 misteated at any time while in detention. Human rights
 groups contend that these statements were also written under
 duress and coercion.
 The Government continued to assert that torture is not
 practiced in Singapore, but one Cabinet Minister publicly
 acknowledged that "psychological pressure" is used. The
 Government has answered charges of mistreatment by noting that
 persons have the right to bring charges against those in the
 Government who are alleged to have committed such criminal
 acts. Human rights groups note, however, that few persons
 would be willing to accept the possible risks of reprisal
 involved in lodging such complaints. A complaint was filed
 with the police in April 1988 alleging mistreatment of one
 detainee during the 1987 detention. To date there has been no
 public record of any investigation into this complaint.
 The Penal Code mandates caning in addition to imprisonment as
 punishment for certain offenses, including rape, theft,
 robbery, extortion, housebreaking, and vehicle theft. The
 courts routinely order caning for convictions for these
 offenses. As of March, illegal aliens are subject to the same
 punishment (see Section 6.e.).
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Arrest without warrant and detention without trial are legally
 permitted in some instances. Arrest without warrant is
 authorized under section 43 of the Criminal Law (Temporary
 Provisions) Act and sections 8 and 65 of the ISA. Detention
 without trial is authorized under sections 8 and 74 of the
 ISA. The Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act is used
 
 
 971
 ,SINGAPORE
 almost exclusively in cases involving narcotics and secret
 criminal societies. Central Narcotics Bureau (CNB) officers
 and customs officials may arrest without warrant any person
 suspected of manufacturing, importing, exporting, possessing,
 consuming, or trafficking in controlled drugs under the Misuse
 of Drugs Act. The Director of the CNB can commit suspected
 drug users to a 6-month term in a drug rehabilitation center
 in cases of positive urinalysis tests. Suspects have a legal
 right to challenge the finding through the court system.
 There is a functioning system of bail for criminal cases, and
 those charged in both criminal and security cases are entitled
 to legal counsel.
 Section 8 of the ISA permits the Minister of Home Affairs to
 ordet detention if the President determines that the person
 poses a threat to national security. The President may
 authorize detention for up to 2 years. After 2 years, the
 President must redetermine whether the detainee should be
 held, and may so order for up to 2 more years. There is no
 limitation on the number of times a detention order may be
 renewed. A detainee's case is reviewed periodically by an
 advisory board, to which the detainee may make representations.
 The board'can make nonbinding recommendations that a detainee
 be released prior to expiration of the detention order.
 According to the Government, persons are released when the
 Minister for Law and Home Affairs determines they no longer
 pose a threat to national security and are unlikely to resume
 subversive activity. The Minister may also revoke the order
 of release. Under section 74 of the ISA, police may detain a
 person for up to 48 hours; the Minister of Home Affairs can-
 then order the detainee to be held for up to 28 days longer.
 ISA detainees are normally allowed access to lawyers and
 visits by relatives once initial interrogation has been
 completed (after 7 and 10 days respectively in the cases of
 the 1987 and 1988 ISA detainees).
 On January 16 Parliament approved amendments to both the
 Constitution and the ISA which eliminated any judicial review
 of the objective grounds for detentions made under the ISA.
 These amendments came in response to a December 1988 ruling of
 the Appeals Court ordering the release of four ISA detainees,
 in which a judge opined that preventive detention was not a
 subjective matter resting solely upon the judgment of the
 executive and accordingly was open to judicial review.
 The constitutional amendment prevents the courts from
 reviewing the constitutionality of any law passed by
 Parliament to prevent subversion and allows such statutes to
 restrict, or even eliminate, judicial review in cases of
 alleged subversion. This amendment became valid
 retroactively, making it applicable to the detainees who
 benefited from the December 1988 ruling. Using the power
 bestowed by the constitutional amendment, the amendment to the
 ISA stated that "there shall be no judicial review in any
 court of any act done or decision made by the President under
 the proVisions of this act save in regard to any question
 relating to compliance with any procedural requirement of this
 act."
 These amendments subordinate the fundamental liberties
 provided for by the Singapore Constitution to the actions
 taken by the executive in national security cases. Critics
 argue that the amendments are outside the rule of law inherent
 in any constitution based on the Westminster model. A high
 
 
 972
 SINGAPORE
 court judge rejected this latter argument on April 25 in
 ruling on a motion for writ of habeas corpus for Teo Soh Lung.
 Six ISA detainees were released in 1989, leaving only Vincent
 Cheng and Teo Soh Lung in preventive detention. Those
 released have had restrictions placed on their right to
 travel, to make public statements, and to associate with
 former detainees.
 Three of those redetained in April 1988 were released on March
 11, 1989. Eight days earlier they had withdrawn motions for
 writs of habeas corpus, just days before the motions were to
 be heard in the high court. In Parliament, it was suggested
 thit this indicates the Government offered to release them
 sooner if they dropped their legal cases. The Minister for
 Law and Home Affairs responded saying this suggestion was
 totally untrue. Teo Soh Lung, who filed for a writ together
 with the other three and did not withdraw the motion, is still
 being held (the lone police complaint alleging ill-treatment
 was filed in her case). In his September 1989 habeas corpus
 hearing, Vincent Cheng stated in his affidavit that he was
 told in May 1987 he would be held for only a year but "was
 repeatedly threatened with prolonged detention should any
 representations be made or legal proceedings be commenced,"
 and that after he filed to start proceedings in March 1989 an
 ISD officer asked him whether he intended to show by this that
 he was not rehabilitated.
 The Government denies that it pressures detainees by
 threatening to prolong their imprisonment. But when asked in
 court if some detainees have been punished not for what they
 have done, but for what others might do in the future,
 Singapore's Prime Minister said that the way in which the
 Government responds "to pressure either by habeas corpus
 proceedings, or by human rights groups, or by demonstrators,
 or by church agitation decides whether or not others might
 follow in the footsteps of those already detained."
 Chia Thye Poh, a former Member of Parliament (M.P.) who had
 been in preventive detention under the ISA since 1966, was
 conditionally released on May 17. He was sent to a small
 island adjacent to Singapore, from which he cannot leave
 without permission from the ISD. The Government said that the
 Communist Party of Malaya (CPM) organization with which Chia
 was allegedly linked, allegations which the Government never
 attempted to prove in court, "has now been weakened and
 disrupted enough that his release . . . will not be a security
 problem." Chia has consistently denied any ties to the CPM.
 According to the Government, 1,228 persons were in detention
 under the Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act as of August
 15. Sixty percent of these were being held on narcotics-
 related charges; the remaining 40 percent are held on secret
 society and other criminal charges.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Singapore judiciary system is based on the British model.
 There are two levels of courts: the Supreme Court, which
 includes the High Court and the Appellate Courts, and the
 subordinate courts. In normal cases, the Criminal Procedures
 Code provides that a charge against a defendant must be read
 and explained to him as soon as it is framed by the
 
 
 973
 SINGAPORE
 magistrate. The accused has the right to be represented by an
 attorney (advocate). Trial is by judge rather than by jury.
 Persons detained under the ISA and the Criminal Law (Temporary
 Provisions) Act are not entitled to a public trial, which is
 accorded in all other cases. Currently two persons are
 imprisoned under the ISA (see Section l.d.).
 At the discretion of the courts, Commonwealth Queen's Counsels
 (QC) are allowed to argue cases in Singapore. Following a
 habeas corpus hearing in March, however, the Government barred
 the QC who had been iepresenting ISA detainee Zeo Soh Lung
 from further appearances in local courts. The Government
 contended that he'had involved himself in Singapore's domestic
 politics 6I championing his client's cause outside of the
 courtroom. It focused on comments he had made to a closed
 seminar in London. The QC charged that the Government's
 action gave "a clear message to the local legal profession to
 keep off the grass." Commenting on the Government's action,
 the British Government said it would have a negative impact on
 Singapore's reputation for respect of the law.
 In April Pailiament greatly restricted appeals to the judicial
 committee of the Privy Council in London. This made
 Singapore"s appellate courts the final courts of appeal in
 most cases. Critics point out that this reduces the value of
 an appeal, since a group of only nine justices man both the
 High Court and the Appellate Courts. An independent Court of
 Appeals has been proposed, but opponents argue that there is
 insufficient legal talent in Singapore to staff such a court.
 Judges are appointed by the President on the recommendation of
 the Prime Minister in consultation with the Chief Justice.
 Subordinate court judges (magistrates) and public prosecutors
 are civil servants and can be transferred from the judiciary
 to government service. In Parliament the Minister for Law and
 Home Affairs has admitted that an unscrupulous government
 could "pack the courts" to pursue political ends. In arguing
 that judicial review was not an effective way to prevent abuse
 of the Government's discretionary powers, he pointed out that
 "under our system there is no limit to the number of judges
 who can be appointed."
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Government uses its wide discretionary powers when it
 believes that the security of the nation is threatened. In
 most cases, search warrants are required for intrusion into
 the home. Law enforcement officers may, however, search a
 person, home, or property without a warrant if they decide
 there are grounds to do so. In ISA cases, warrantless
 searches are common. Warrantless searches can also be made
 under the Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act, which is
 said mostly to deal with drug- and secret society-related
 offenses'. Judicial review of such searches can be undertaken
 by the courts at the request of the defendant but is not
 automatic. Divisions of the Government's law enforcement
 agencies, including the Internal Security Department and the
 Corrupt Practices Investigation Board (CPIB), have wide
 networks for gathering information. There are credible
 allegations that the authorities monitor telephone and other
 private conversations.
 
 
 974
 SINGAPORE
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution permits official restrictions on the freedom
 of expression. In practice, freedom of speech and press is
 circumscribed, and the Government forbids statements which it
 thinks might arouse tensions among the various races or might
 threaten national security or public order. Inflammatory
 discussion of race, religion, and language is officially
 forbidden.
 Newspapers are published by private firms with close ties to
 the national leadership. While there is no direct censorship
 of the press, editors have acknowledged there are restraints,
 such as the Newspaper and Printing Presses Act. A leading
 Singapore journalist, in a November public statement,
 described the local press as one working in tandem with the
 Government. "Newspapers," he wrote, "pedal along with the
 Government in the direction set by the political leadership."
 The Government brought charges in 1988 against Chiam See Tong,
 an opposition M.P., alleging that his party printed
 unauthorized editions of the party's newspaper. He was
 acquitted but the judge gave the prosecution the option of
 amending the charges. On October 21 the Government relented
 and told the court it would not proceed with the case.
 A wide -range:of international magazines and newspapers can be
 purchased uncensored in Singapore, although newspapers printed
 in Malaysia are not circulated. Under the Newspaper and
 Printing Press Act, the Government may restrict the sales and
 distribution of foreign publications deemed to have "engaged"
 in Singapore's domestic politics. The Government interprets
 the statute as giving it the right to impose such restrictions
 whenever a foreign publication fails to publish in full any
 government reply to the publication's coverage of Singapore.
 The Government has restricted the circulation of the Asian
 Wall Street Journal (AWSJ) and the Far Eastern Economic Review
 (FEER) since 1987. The former did not comply with the
 requirement to publish government letters in full, while the
 Government accused the latter of a negative slant in its
 reporting on Singapore. On November 30, a High Court judge
 held that FEER had libeled the Prime Minister in a December
 1987 article and awarded him $115,000 in damages. In December
 the Government applied for a contempt of court citation
 against the AWSJ because of its report on this verdict. On
 June 1, the Appeals Court dismissed an AWSJ lawsuit against
 the Government which asserted that the circulation restriction
 was illegal. In its decision giving a definition of "engaging
 in domestic politics," the Court said, "it is simply involving
 oneself in some matter, in this case the domestic politics of
 Singapore, where such involvement is neither solicited nor
 welcomed by those who are concerned with or affected by such
 matters." The judges added that domestic politics included
 "the political, social, and economic policies of the
 Government."
 The Government has not allowed the FEER or the AWSJ to post
 correspondents in Singapore since 1987. It refused to grant
 visas to FEER and AWSJ correspondents to come to Singapore to
 cover Vice President Quayle's visit in May and to a FEER
 correspondent coming to cover the libel suit in September. In
 October and November, the Government refused to extend the
 
 
 975
 work permit of the Associated Press/Dow Jones correspondent,
 and refused to issue a visa to a new correspondent. Dow Jones
 is the parent company of FEER and AWSJ.
 The government-owned Singapore Broadcasting Corporation (SBC)
 has a monopoly on domestic radio and television broadcasting
 and follows government guidelines similar to those pertaining
 to local print media. Television broadcasts from Malaysia and
 radio broadcasts from Malaysia and Indonesia can be received-
 uncensdred in Singapore; the British Broadcasting Corporation
 World-Serv-ice also broadcasts locally on the FM band. An
 official board of film censors approves motion pictures; as
 well as.video cassettes, and television programs. Other
 government bodies censor other media; such censorship is aimed
 at mAterial which the overnment believes would undermine
 morals, advocate excessive permissiveness, promote drug abuse,
 or increase social tension. Literature and films featuring
 explicit sexual or drug-related themes are banned.
 The members of the faculties at Singapore institutions of
 higher education are government employees. A number of
 university lecturers are concurrently PAP M.P.'s. Oral and
 written criticism of government policies occasionally occurs
 on campus, but criticism of government leaders and alleged
 authoritarian tendencies is infrequent.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly And Association
 Assemblies-of more than five people in public, including
 political meetings and rallies, must have police permission.
 However, the Government does not stop social gatherings
 regardless of the number present.
 Associations, societies, clubs, churches, and other
 organizations with more than 10 members must be registered
 with the Government under the Societies Act. The Government
 denies registration to societies believed likely to be used
 for unlawful purposes or for purposes prejudicial to public
 peace, welfare, or public order. (See Section 3 regarding
 criticism by opposition groups of the Government's
 discretionary power in this area.)
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is guaranteed by the Constitution and
 usually respected in practice. However, all religious groups
 are subject to government scrutiny and must be legally
 registered. The Government restricts some religious sects by
 application of the Societies Act and has banned others. A
 Presidential Council on Minority Rights exists to ensure that
 legislation does not infringe upon the rights of ethnic or
 religiouso.minorities. There is no state religion. The
 Government has provided financial assistance to build and
 maintain mosques. There is no religious test for employment
 ith the Government or for membership in the PAP. Missionaries
 are permitted to work and to publish religious texts.
 The Government draws a sharp distinction between purely
 religious activities and social activism flowing from
 religious beliefs. Both remaining ISA detainees were arrested
 in part because of alleged political activities while serving
 on Catholic social work committees. The Government announced
 
 
 976
 SINGAPORE
 in October that it will introduce legislation to penalize
 religious groups which engage in political activity.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Significant limitations on freedom of movement within the
 country may be imposed under the ISA. The ISA allows the
 Minister for Law and Home Affairs to suspend or revoke a
 detention order or impose restrictions on activities, place of
 residence, and travel outside of Singapore. All Singapore
 residents over the age of 13 are required to register with the
 Government, receive and carry an identification card, and
 report changes of address within 14 days. A person may be
 denied a passport at the Government's discretion, although in
 practice this applies only to those convicted of a serious
 crime. Males approaching the age of 18 (when national service
 is generally performed) must obtain an exit permit from the
 Ministry of Defense before traveling abroad. Each recipient
 of government-financed higher educational benefits must sign a
 bond obligation to serve the Government for a fixed period and
 may not cease employment or emigrate within the prescribed
 period withcut paying the balance of his or her bond.
 The right of voluntary repatriation is extended to holders of
 Singaporean passports. In 1985 Parliament provided for the
 loss of citizenship by Singaporeans who reside outside
 Singapore for more than 10 years consecutively. Action under
 this law is discretionary and has been taken in at least one
 case involving a well-known government opponent.
 Singapore does not offer first asylum to refugees. Government
 policy permits Vietnamese refugees rescued at sea to disembark
 and remain for up to 90 days only if Singapore is the rescuing
 vessel's next scheduled port of call and if a resettlement
 country provides a resettlement guarantee. The Government has
 agreed, in principle, to permit the United Nations High
 Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to screen such persons in
 accordance with the Comprehensive Plan of Action adopted in
 Geneva at the June 1989 International Conference on
 Indochinese Refugees. However, refugees must still depart
 Singapore within 90 days. To date, no screening has taken
 place because no country has agreed to accept those who would
 be screened out.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Singaporeans have the ability peacefully to change their
 government, but the Government has used its extensive powers
 to place formidable obstacles in the path of would-be
 opponents. Voting is compulsory. Parliamentary elections are
 held at least every 5 years. It is generally accepted that
 the voting and vote-counting system is fair, accurate, and
 free from tampering. While the mechanics of elections have
 been honest and devoid of manipulation, human rights groups
 contend that the overall election process has not been free
 and fair.
 Lee Kuan Yew has served as Prime Minister since 1959. Lee
 heads the PAP, a broadly based institution and the dominant
 political party in Singapore. It includes representatives
 from all racial communities in Singapore and is rooted in
 neighborhood, youth, and labor aasociations. The PAP
 currently holds 80 of the 81 popularly elected seats in
 
 
 977
 SINGAPORE
 Parliament, with the Singapore Democratic Party (SDP)-holding
 the remaining seat. Two Worker's Party (WP) candidates, the
 highest vote-getters among losing opposition candidates in the
 September 1988 elections, accepted "Non-Constituency M.P."
 (NCMP) seats which, allow them to participate in debate but not
 to vote on many issues.
 While opposition parties have contested every election, none
 has been able seriously to challenge the PAP since the late
 1960's. A variety of reasons are given for this. One reason
 is performance. Under the leadership of the PAP, Singapore
 has achieved rapid economic growth, enabling the Government to
 provide a wide array of public services. Political parties,
 while legally free to organize, are subject to strict
 regulations on party constitution, fund raising, and
 accountability. The PAP attributes the lack of effective
 opposition to disorganization, lack of leadership, and lack of
 alternative policy programs. However, critics add that the
 Government's exercise of broad discretionary powers through
 arbitrary detentions and criminal prosecutions, control of the
 media, and restrictions on the right of assembly have vitiated
 opposition efforts by hindering the formation of associations
 or organizations that could provide a basis of support for
 opposition parties.
 Francis Seow, one of the two candidates who accepted an NC4P
 position, -lost his seat before Parliament's first session as a
 result of a December 1988 conviction for tax evasion. At the
 time of his conviction, Seow was in the United States, ,
 undergoing medical treatment. He was not represented in court
 by leg~l counsel when the court convicted him on five of six
 charges. The sixth charge, which involves a possible prison
 sentence, has been adjourned pending his arrest. On February
 15, the prosecution revealed to the court that
 government-hired investigators had followed Seow in the United
 States for more than 7 weeks, and contended that Seow was
 deceiving the court about his medical condition. On May 22, a
 district judge issued an arrest warrant on the grounds that
 Seow had deliberately stayed away from his tax evasion trial.
 Seow-has accepted a fellowship at Yale University and has not
 returned to Singapore.
 Pointing to the extraordinary measures taken by the Government
 to prosdcute Seow, the case against the SDP M.P. (see Section
 2.a.), and the controversial 1986 conviction which cost a
 former Worker's Party M.P. his seat in Parliament--a result
 described as "a grievous injustice" by the Privy Council in
 November 1988--critics charge that the Government uses
 judicial process to harass opposition politicians. The
 Government denies that its criminal investigations are
 politically motivated.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Governmental bodies, such as the presidentially appointed
 Minority Rights Council, monitor alleged violations of
 minority rights, primarily any concerning the Malay minority.
 There are, however, no nongovernmental organizations which
 actively and openly monitor alleged human rights violations, a
 situation that human rights observers attribute to fear of
 government retaliation, a fear fueled by the jailing in 1988
 of those who publicly claimed mistreatment and of lawyers who
 represented them. Amnesty International is not allowed to
 
 
 978
 S! APORE
 operate in Singapore. Observers from foreign human rights
 groups have attended the habeas corpus hearings of ISA
 detainees.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Because of Singapore's history of intercommunal tension, the
 Government takes affirmative measures to ensure racial,
 ethnic, religious, and cultural nondiscrimination. Social,
 economic, and cultural facilities are available to all
 citizens regardless of race, religion, or sex. Minorities are
 constitutionally afforded equal rights and actively
 participate in the political process. The Singapore
 Constitution acknowledges the "special position" of Malays as
 the indigenous people of Singapore, and charges the Government
 to support and promote their "political, educational,
 religious, economic, social, and cultural interests." While
 precise statistics are not readily available, government
 officials acknowledge that Malay Singaporeans are represented
 disproportionately in the bottom quarter of Singapore's
 economy.
 Women have the same rights as men in employment, education,
 childcare and custody, and in the running of a household, but
 do not have equal rights with men in the transmission of
 citizenship to their children or in the right to residence of
 a foreign spouse in Singapore. Muslim women's rights are
 protected by the provisions of the 1957 administration of
 Muslim law, which permits Muslim women to apply for divorce
 and to hold and dispose of property. Women can vote and hold
 any public office.
 There is no evidence of any widespread practice of violence or
 abuse against women. Singapore's laws protect women against
 domestic violence and against sexual or physical harassment.
 Domestic violence can be dealt with under either the penal
 code or the women's charter. Through the latter, a battered
 wife can obtain court orders barring the spouse from the home
 until the court is satisfied that he will stop his aggressive
 behavior. The penal code prescribes mandatory caning and a
 minimum imprisonment of 2 years from conviction on a charge of
 outraging modesty so as to cause the victim fear of death or
 injury. Commenting on these laws, a local women's group has
 stated that this "legislative recognition of the problem of
 domestic violence and the need to protect battered women is
 important in that it reinforces the principle of the
 husband-wife relationship and seeks to restore the respect and
 dignity to the victim of violence in the home."
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Singapore's Constitution gives all citizens the right to form
 associations, including trade unions. Parliament may,
 however, impose restrictions based on security, public order,
 or morality. The right of association is delimited by the
 Societies Act and labor and education laws and regulations.
 In practice, Communist labor unions are not permitted. The
 Trades Union Act authorizes the formation of unions with broad
 rights, albeit with some narrow restrictions--such as
 prohibitions on the unionization of uniformed employees and
 the holding of union office by persons with criminal records.
 
 
 979
 SINGAPORE
 The National Trades Union Congress (NTUC) is a member of the
 International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU); the
 Asian and Pacific Regional Organization (APRO) of the ICFTU
 has its headquarters in Singapore. Singapore is a member of
 the International Labor Organization (ILO) and has ratified
 ILO Convention 98 on the Right to Organize and Bargain
 Collectively but has not ratified Convention 87 on Freedom of
 Association.
 The national work force comprises about 1.2 million workers,
 of whom some 210,000 are organized into 89 trade unions. Some
 70 of these, which represent about 98 percent of the unionized
 workers, are affiliated with the NTUC, an umbrella
 organization, which has a close relationship to the Government.
 Sevetal unions have been founded outside of the NTUC,
 including ones for the catering staff and pilots of Singapore
 Airlines and for Chinese-language teachers.
 The Second Deputy Prime minister, a PAP member, serves as NTUC
 Secretary General, and several PAP M.P.'s are NTUC officials.
 These close ties have led to charges that the NTUC defends the
 interests of the Government and of the PAP just as much as the
 interests of the workers. NTUC policy, for example, prohibits
 unionists who actively support opposition parties from holding
 office in affiliated unions. NTUC officials maintain that the
 two organizations are separate but share the same ideology,
 and that workers benefit from the close ties.
 Workers have the legal right to strike but rarely do so--the
 most recent strike took place in 1986. Reasons given include
 a cultural aversion to confrontation and concern about
 maintaining Singapore's reputation with investors.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Collective bargaining is a normal part of management-labor
 relations particularly in the manufacturing sector. On the
 average, collective bargaining agreements are renewed every 2
 to 3 years.
 A National Wages Council (NWC) brings business, labor, and
 government representatives together to establish guidelines
 for annual wage packages. Those who argue that the NWC fairly
 accommodates the interests of all concerned parties note that
 wage increases in the 1980's have exceeded gross domestic
 product growth. Collective agreements negotiated between
 labor and management generally follow the wage guidelines
 issued annually by the NWC. In 1988, for the first time, the
 NWC issued its guidelines in the form of qualitative
 recommendations rather than the quantitative form used
 before. The NWC found that both employers and workers reacted
 favorably to a more flexible approach which allows management
 to reward workers for performance and sacrifices made during
 bad times, yet allows those in sectors experiencing downturns
 to let wages reflect the circumstances.
 In 1989 the ILO's Committee of Experts (COE) recognized that a
 1988 law removed a previously existing prohibition on the
 negotiation of annual wage supplements but retained this
 restriction under certain circumstances. The COE also noted
 certain issues, such as promotion and transfer, and dismissal
 without notice of employees, are excluded by law from
 ctqllective bargaining, and that the Industrial Arbitration
 Court has the power to-refuse to register the collective
 agreements of newly established enterprises when the
 
 
 980
 SINGAPORE
 conditions of employment they afford are more favorable than
 those set forth by law. The Government countered that the
 Court has never refused to register a collective agreement.
 Section 80 of the Industrial Relations Act makes it an offense
 to discriminate against anyone who "is or proposes" to become
 a member or an officer of a trade union. The offense is
 punishable by a $1,000 fine and/or a 12-month prison sentence.
 Labor laws and regulations are enforced uniformly. There are
 no export processing zones in Singapore.
 c_ Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Singapore law forbids the use of forced or compulsory labor,
 and such labor is not found in Singapore.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The Government enforces the Employment Act which sets the
 minimum age for the employment of children at age 12.
 Children under age 14 are not allowed to work in any
 "industrial undertaking." Industrial employers must notify
 the Ministry of Labor within 30 days of hiring a child between
 the ages of 14 to 16. Ministry of Labor regulations prohibit
 night employment of children and restrict industrial work to
 no more than 7 hours a day. Children cannot work on
 commercial vessels, with any live electrical apparatus lacking
 effective insulation, or in any underground job.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The Singapore labor market offers relatively high wages and
 working conditions consistent with accepted international
 standards. Singapore, however, has no minimum wage or
 unemployment compensation. Because of a continuing labor
 shortage, wages have generally stayed high, and unemployment
 below 3 percent. In 1989 the Government continued
 implementation of a flexible wage program wherein labor and
 management in private firms agree to set bonuses based on a
 company's annual performance. Because of Singapore's booming
 economy in 1989 and the consequent high demand for labor, the
 "flexiwage" system has not resulted in a loss of real income
 for workers. The standard legal workweek under the Employment
 Act (Section 38) is 44 hours.
 The Government enforces comprehensive occupational safety and
 health laws. Enforcement procedures, coupled with the
 promotion of educational and training programs, have reduced
 the frequency of job-related accidents by a third over the
 past decade. The average severity of occupational accidents
 has also been reduced.
 Because of the domestic labor shortage, more than 150,000
 foreign workers are employed legally in Singapore. Most are
 unskilled laborers and household servants. The Government
 controls the numbers of foreign workers directly through
 immigration regulations and indirectly through levies on firms
 hiring foreign workers. Social insurance and safety
 regulations are applied without discrimination against foreign
 workers. Foreign workers face no legal wage discrimination;
 however, they are concentrated in low-wage, low-skill jobs.
 Some foreign workers are members of labor unions, particularly
 NTUC shipbuilding and construction unions.
 
 
 981
 SINGAPORE
 The Government acknowledged the problem of illegal aliens
 working in Singapore by passing a law in March imposing a
 caning penalty on alens who overstay in Singapore by more
 than 90 days. P~rliament has passed a law to impose a caning
 sentence on businessmen who employ more than 5 workers
 illegally. An estimated 12,000 illegal aliens took advantage
 of an amnesty period offered by the Government to leave the
 country before the bill began to be enforced. The Government
 has not yet executed the punishment prescribed under the new
 law.
 
 
 982
