 SINGAPORE
 Singapore is governed under a parliamentary system
 modeled generally along British lines. Political
 and media power is highly concentrated in one rul-
 ing group. Members of Parliament are elected to
 maximum five-year terms on the basis of universal
 adult suffrage. The People's Action Party completely
 dominates the Parliament, having won all seats in the
 past three elections with approximately seventy per-
 cent of the vote. The Government appears to enjoy
 broad popular support. Its civil service is effi-
 cient and honest, and the Government's leadership
 free from corruption. In economic and social matters,
 Singapore's record for raising the standard of living
 and the quality of life of its population is excellent.
 A multiracial society with a dominant majority of
 Chinese but with both Malay and Indian minorities,
 Singapore has experienced communal tensions in the
 past. In addition, Singapore was subject to acts of
 terrorism by elements of the Communist Party of Malaya,
 prior to the mid-1960s. There has been little recent
 evidence of communal tensions, and there have been
 almost no terrorist incidents in recent years. Never-
 theless, the Government of Singapore cites both the
 threat of insurgency and the possibility of renewed
 communal conflict as justification for emergency legis-
 lation which makes legal the arrest and detention
 without trial of persons suspected of activities that
 threaten general civil order.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Torture is prohibited by the Government of Singapore,
 although individual instances of mistreatment by law
 enforcement officers have been alleged. Such behavior
 is illegal and punishable. The Prime Minister pub-
 licly announced in February 1978 that any interrogating
 
 (408)
 
 
 409
 officer who assaulted a detainee would be liable to
 civil and criminal charges. In early 1976, Amnesty
 International cited allegations by unnamed detainees
 that they were subjected to intensive questioning in
 cold air-conditioned cells, forced to do strenuous
 exercises and subjected to prolonged solitary confine-
 ment. Amnesty International repeated these allegations
 in its 1977 annual report, but verification from other
 sources is scarce. Rigorous psychological interroga-
 tion may occur but the Department of State has no evi-
 dence of physical mistreatment. Allegations of torture
 have been categorically denied by the Government of
 Singapore.   .
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 We are unable to verify any instances of such treatment
 or punishment by the Government (unless caning were so
 classified, which was introduced by the British and
 is still employed as a punishment for crimes such as
 narcotics trafficking, rape and rioting).
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 The Government makes use of detention without trial in
 security and some criminal cases, including those invol-
 ving organized secret society crime, under the Internal
 Security Act (ISA) and the Criminal (Detention) Law. It
 also uses the Banishment Act, under which persons de-
 prived of their citizenship may be held awaiting depor-
 tation.
 The Internal Security Act is a preventive detention sta-
 tute inherited from the British colonial administration.
 The Government of Singapore justifies its use as neces-
 sary to counter the Communist Party of Malaya (CPM),
 which is active both in Malaysia and in Singapore. The
 CPM maintains a small network in Singapore with a modest
 capacity to recruit cadre, solicit funds and procure
 supplies for its armed insurgency in Malaysia. It is
 estimated that there is a hardcore communist cadre of
 250-300 either in Singapore or with easy access into
 
 
 Singapore from nearby Johore State in Malaysia, and
 approximately 500-600 communist sympathizers in Singa-
 pore. In the application of the ISA, however, the
 definition of a "security case" on past occasions has
 been extended to include the following categories of
 individuals: those who have had contact with commu-
 nists or some other element of the radical left, but
 who are not necessarily themselves supporters of vio-
 lent revolution; those who portray Singapore as a
 state in which individual liberties are curtailed or
 portray the Government of Singapore as undemocratic,
 totalitarian, autocratic and oppressive; and those
 journalists whose reporting is considered by the
 Government of Singapore to be slanted and therefore
 susceptible to exploitation by communists.
 The Internal Security Act permits the issuance of a
 two-year renewable detention order which is subjec-
 ted to automatic review by an advisory board at
 twelve-month intervals. The number of detainees held
 under the ISA fluctuates as detainees are released
 and others arrested. During t!ie summer and autumn of
 1978, release of detainees seemed to predominate over
 incidents of further arrests. There were approximately
 70-75 detainees at the end of the year. All are said
 by the Singapore Government to have some connection
 with the CPM. Eight of the detainees have been held
 for a long period of time because, according to a
 public statement by Prime Minister Lee, they refuse
 to abjure either forceful overthrow of the Government
 or support of the CPM.
 The Government, however, appears to be changing its
 policy regarding these detainees. Two detainees con-
 ditionally released in November did not abjure the
 forceful overthrow of the Government or support of
 the CPM. In a related action the Government, in early
 1978, suspended the requirement of a "certificate of
 suitability", which had served as a security clearance
 for university students.
 Perhaps 200 persons, approximately seventy of whom
 are believed to be narcotics traffickers, are
 
 
 detained under the Criminal Law (Temporary Provi-
 sions) Act, which is designed for and used mainly
 against members of criminal secret societies and
 narcotics traffickers. A few persons within that
 group may be held for security reasons. A written
 order for temporary detention for one year may be
 issued by the Home Minister. Each order must be re-
 viewed within 25 days by an advisory committee which
 is required to submit a written report to the Presi-
 dent.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Singaporean judicial system operates in accord-
 ance with the basic tenets, practices and precedents
 of British jurisprudence, although the right to a
 trial by jury has been replaced by trial by magistrate
 or judge. The right to a fair, public trial is ob-
 served except for persons detained under the Internal
 Security Act and the Criminal (Detention) Law. Defen-
 dents are permitted to retain counsel.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 The home is free from invasion except for persons ar-
 rested or detained under the ISA and Criminal (Deten-
 tion) Laws. In other cases, the Singapore authorities
 obtain a warrant before entering and searching a dwell-
 ing place.
 2. Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 Singapore's achievements in assuring the well-being of
 its people are internationally recognized. The Govern-
 ment has an image of unbending honesty and is strongly
 identified with the work ethic. Fifty-nine percent of
 the people are housed in well-designed apartments
 which the Government has built largely over the last
 decade. There is virtually no illiteracy, and primary
 
 
 412
 education is provided for the children of all Singa-
 pore citizens. Medical care and education through
 the university level is of high quality and provided
 at modest cost. Singapore has thirteen government
 and eight private hospitals and an extensive system
 of clinics. The infant mortality rate in 1977 was
 among the lowest in the world. Singapore has a strong
 and prosperous free enterprise economy, with an unem-
 ployment rate of slightly less than four percent and
 an inflation rate of three percent in 1977. The stan-
 dard of living is rising steadily and is now the
 second highest in Asia (after Japan) with a per capita
 Gross National Product of $2,900 in 1977.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Includ-
 ing:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion
 and Assembly
 Singapore, although preponderantly Chinese, is a multi-
 racial society. There is complete freedom of religion
 for a wide variety of religious beliefs. However,
 freedom of speech, press and assembly are curtailed in
 several areas. First, the Government forbids activi-
 ties or public statements which might arouse communal
 tensions between the ethnic groups, especially friction
 between the dominant Chinese and the Malay minority.
 In addition, assemblies of more than five persons in a
 public place, including political rallies, must have a
 police permit. while there is no formal censorship
 other than prohibition of discussion of certain ethni-
 cally sensitive topics, the press is circumspect in its
 treatment of the Government and is mindful of the need
 for annual renewal of publishing licenses. During the
 past year, however, the press broadened its reporting
 into criticism of some areas of public policy. In the
 past the Government has invoked the Internal Security
 Act to arrest and detain persons accused of arousing
 communal tensions, but none are currently being held.
 Communist political activities are proscribed. The
 Government promptly detains suspected communist.
 
 
 413
 activists under the Internal Security Act and the
 definition of "security cases" is sufficiently broad
 that it has the effect of tending to stifle dissent.
 Women enjoy the full panoply of legal rights. There
 are no state-imposed restrictions on abortion. Women
 have voting rights and are given equality of economic
 opportunity under the law.
 Singapore has approximately 235,000 workers organized
 into trade unions. Some 220,000 of these belong to
 the National Trade Union Congress (NTUC), which is in-
 formally but closely associated with the ruling
 People's Action Party. Several of the top leaders of
 the NTUC are members of Parliament. The right to
 strike and other forms of job action are limited.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 There are no limitations on freedom of movement within
 the country other than the usual restrictions on enter-
 ing military reservations. The Government does not ob-
 struct nor regulate the travel of its citizens abroad
 except for males liable for national service. The
 latter may be required to post bond before being issued
 a passport to insure their return.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Singapore is a republic with a parliamentary system of
 government organized along British lines. The Govern-
 ment is controlled by the People's Action Party headed
 by Prime Minister Lee Ruan Yew. Membership in the PAP
 is open to non-communist Singaporeans of any race.
 Non-communist, non-racist parties are free to organize,
 but no opposition representatives have been elected to
 the past three Parliaments, in which the PAP won all
 seats with approximately seventy percent of the vote.
 Several opposition parties exist, but their activities
 are closely monitored by the Government and their effec-
 tiveness frequently blunted by various forms of govern-
 ment pressure. The 69-member Parliament is elected to
 
 
 414
 maximum five-year terms on the basis of compulsory
 universal adult suffrage.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 In general, Singapore reacts defensively to foreign
 criticism. For example, Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew
 withdrew the People's Action Party from the Socialist
 International in 1976 when one of the other members
 criticized Singapore's use of the Internal Security
 Act. The Department of State is not aware of any re-
 quests to investigate the overall human rights situa-
 tion in Singapore, although Amnesty International has
 repeatedly called for the release of individuals de-
 tained without trial.
 
 
 