 SINGAPORE
 Singapore, a city-state of about 2.7 million people, has a
 republican form of government based on the Westminster
 parliamentary system. The majority (75 percent) of the
 population is ethnic Chinese, with Malays (15 percent) and
 Indians (7 percent) constituting substantial minorities.
 Politics have been dominated by the People's Action Party
 (PAP), which has held power since Singapore gained autonomy
 from Great Britain in 1959. In November Lee Kuan Yew formally
 stepped down as Prime Minister after 25 years, handing the
 office to his chosen successor, Goh Chok Tong. Lee remains
 active politically, holding the formal title of Senior
 Minister and, more importantly, serving as Secretary General
 of the PAP. Thirty years of social stability and spectacular
 economic success have provided a continuing-basis of political
 support for the PAP. Extensive political control has also
 helped limit the growth of an effective opposition. In the
 September 1988 general election, the PAP received 61.9 percent
 of the ballots cast and won 80 of the 81 parliamentary seats.
 The Government maintains active internal security and military
 forces to counter perceived threats to the nation's security.
 The Government has frequently used security legislation to
 control a broad range of activity. The police force is well
 trained. All young males are subject to national service
 (mostly in the military) and receive nationalistic
 indoctrination similar to the credos held by the PAP. The
 Internal Security Department (ISDY is responsible for
 enforcement of the Internal Security Act (ISAY, including its
 provisions for detention without trial.
 -Singapore's economic system is one of the most open in the
 world. The economy in recent years has made impressive
 .economic gains--gross domestic product grew by 8.3 percent in
 1990. Singaporeans enjoy the third highest per capita income
 in Asia after Japan and Brunei. Individual ownership of
 housing, mostly government built, is enjoyed by over 85
 percent of Singaporean families. Wealth is distributed
 relatively equally in what is essentially a full employment
 economy.
 Major human rights developments in.1990 were the conditional
 release of the'two remaining ISA detainees, the broadening of
 legal controls on the foreign press, the continuation of legal
 actions taken against opposition figures and foreign
 publications, and new restrictive legislation on religious
 activities that, in the Government's discretionary
 determination, disrupt religious harmony or intrude into
 politics. The erosion of judicial review continued, with the
 courts now without authority to review government actions on
 maintaining religious harmony in addition to the prior bar on
 judicial review of government actions taken under the ISA.
 Opposition and potential opposition groups continued to face
 formidable obstacles imposed by the Government in organizing
 themselves. The growth of government discretionary authority
 increased, as reflected in the new legislation on the foreign
 press by which the Government without explanation can deny
 permits for circulation.
 
 
 1020
 SINGAPORE
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no known instances of such killings.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no known instances of politically motivated
 abduction, secret arrests, or clandestine detentions by either
 the Government or the opposition.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Torture is prohibited by law under sections 330 and 331 of the
 Penal Code, and government leaders have stated that they
 oppose its use. Credible reports of recent mistreatment,
 including in 1990, exist.
 A number of persons detained under the ISA in 1987 or
 redetained in 1988 made credible allegations in 1988 of having
 been placed in an extremely cold room, deprived of sleep,
 subjected to prolonged interrogation, and, in one case,
 physically assaulted by an Internal Security Department (ISD)
 officer. Affidavits by some of the detainees also said that
 they were coerced or intimidated into signing admissions of
 involvement in a "Marxist conspiracy." The Government denied
 mistreatment by ISD officers, and, further, redetained five
 persons in 1988 for recanting their previous admissions. The
 Government then released sworn statements, made by the five
 while under indefinite detention, in which they reaffirmed
 their previous recantations.
 In addition, there also were credible reports that in 1990 the
 Government continued to use the indefinite length of
 confinement to pressure detainees to "rehabilitate" themselves
 as well as to make admissions of wrongdoing. The last two ISA
 detainees, released in 1990, were kept in isolation and
 reportedly subjected to government suggestions that they would
 not be released unless they demonstrated a proper degree of
 "rehabilitation" by not legally challenging their detentions
 and by admitting their participation in the "Marxist
 conspiracy." The Government has acknowledged that, in the
 case of detentions without trial under the Criminal Act, the
 indefiniteness of the detentions served to pressure*
 detainees. Although the Government has never said this in the
 case of political detentions, one Cabinet minister publicly
 acknowledged in 1988 that "psychological pressure" was used in
 ISA detention cases.
 Theoretically, persons alleging mistreatment under detention
 may bring criminal charges against those in the Government who
 are alleged to have committed such acts. In practice, the
 Government does not respond to such claims. The fear of
 government retaliation, as in the redetention of ISA detainees
 in 1988 for making charges of mistreatment, also might have
 dissuaded the making of similar allegations.
 The Penal Code mandates caning in addition to imprisonment as
 punishment for certain offenses, including rape, theft,
 robbery, extortion, housebreaking, and vehicle theft. The
 
 
 1021
 
 SINGAPORE
 courts routinely order caning for convictions for these
 offenses. As of 1989,.illegally. working aliens and their
 employers are subject to the same punishment (see Section
 6.e.), although noone has been caned under this provision.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Arrest without warrant is legally permitted under section 43
 of the Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act, the Misuse of
 Drugs Act, and sections 8 and 65 of the ISA. Those arrested
 must be charged before a magistrate within 48 hours. At that
 time, those detained under criminal charges may obtain legal
 counsel. There is a functioning system of bail for those
 charged. No abuses of this system were reported in 1990.
 Detention without trial is authorized under sections 8 and 74
 of the ISA as well as under the Criminal Law (Temporary
 Provisions) Act. This latter act is used almost exclusively
 in cases involving narcotics and secret criminal societies and
 is not used for political purposes. The Director of the
 Central Narcotics Bureau (CNB) can also commit suspected drug
 users to a 6-month term in a drug rehabilitation center in
 cases of positive urinalysis tests. Singapore law does not
 treat involuntary commitment for drug rehabilitation as a
 criminal matter, but suspected drug abusers have a legal right
 to challenge the finding through the court system. Those
 persons detained without trial under the ISA and the Criminal
 Law Act are entitled to counsel but have no legal recourse
 through the courts to challenge the substantive basis for
 their detention.
 Section 8 of the ISA permits the Minister of Home Affairs to
 order detention if the President determines that the person
 poses a threat to national security. The Government has in
 the past interpreted threats to national security to include
 acts of political opposition. The President may authorize
 detention for up to 2 years. After 2 years, the President
 must redetermine whether the detainee should be held .and may
 so order for up to 2 more years. There is no limitation on
 the number of times a detention order may be renewed. A
 detainee's case is reviewed periodically by an advisory board,
 to which the detainee may make representations. The board can
 make nonbinding recommendations that a detainee be released
 prior to expiration of the detention order. Persons are
 released when the Minister for Home Affairs determines they no
 longer pose a threat to national security and are unlikely to
 resume subversive activity. The Minister may also revoke the
 order for release. Under section 74 of the ISA, police may
 detain a person for up to.48 hours; the Minister of Home
 Affairs can then order the detainee to be held for up to 28
 days longer. ISA detainees are normally allowed access to
 lawyers and visits by relatives once initial interrogation has
 been completed (after 7 and l days respectively in the cases-
 of the 1987 and 1988 ISA detainees).
 The two remaining ISA: detainees, Vincent Cheng and Teo Soh
 Lung, were released in June. Cheng was released only after
 admitting to his role in a Marxist conspiracy and promising
 not to engage in subversive acts. As with other former ISA
 detainees, the Government imposed restrictions on their rights
 to travel, to make public statements, and to associate with
 former detainees.
 Chia Thye Poh, a former Member of Parliament (M.P.) released
 in 1989 after 23 years of preventive detention under the ISA,
 
 
 1022
 
 SINGAPORE
 was originally allowed freedom only on a small island adjacent
 to Singapore, from which he could not leave without permission
 from the ISD. In September 1990, the Government relaxed the
 restriction, granting Chia permission to visit Singapore
 proper from 6 a.m. to 9 p.m. daily. Chia can be employed,
 subject to approval by the ISD. According to the Government,
 1,181 persons were in detention under the Criminal Law
 (Temporary Provisions) Act as of December 31, 1990. Sixty
 percent of these were being held on narcotics-related charges;
 the remaining 40 percent are held on secret society and other
 criminal charges.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Singapore judiciary system is based on the British model.
 There are two levels of courts: the Supreme Court, which
 includes the High'Court and the Appellate Courts, and the
 subordinate courts. In normal cases, the Criminal Procedures
 Code provides that a charge against a defendant must be read
 and explained to him as soon as it is framed by the
 magistrate. The accused has the right to be represented by an
 attorney. Trial is by judge rather than by jury.
 Persons detained under the ISA and the Criminal Law (Temporary
 Provisions) Act are not entitled to a public trial, which is
 accorded in all other cases. In 1989 the Government amended
 the Constitution and the ISA to eliminate any judicial review
 of the objective grounds for detentions made under the ISA.
 The constitutional amendment also prevents the courts from
 reviewing the constitutionality of any law passed by
 Parliament to prevent subversion and allows such statutes to
 restrict, or even eliminate, judicial review in cases of
 alleged subversion. This constitutional amendment became
 valid retroactive to 1971. The. ISA amendment placed ISA
 detentions outside of the purview of judicial review, except
 with respect to compliance with procedural requirements of the
 act. These amendments in essence put the executive in charge
 of delimiting, on vaguely defined national security grounds,
 the scope of certain fundamental liberties provided for by the
 Singapore Constitution. In 1989 a Singapore High Court judge
 ruled that no legal challenge to these amendments can be
 sustained.
 The tendency to expand the discretionary powers of the
 Government, with judicial review limited to examination of
 adherence to procedures, continued in 1990. For example, the
 amendments to the Newspaper and Printing Presses Act allow the
 Government to deny permits to circulate periodicals without
 explanation (see Section 2.a. below), and the Religious
 Harmony Act removes judicial review from Government decisions
 on inappropriate religious activity (see Section 2.c. below).
 Judges are appointed by the 'resident on the recommendation of
 the Prime Minister in consultation with the Chief Justice.
 Subordinate court judges (magistrates) and public prosecutors
 are civil servants and may be transferred from the judiciary
 to other government service. Judicial officials, especially
 in the Supreme and Appellate courts, are older and well
 entrenched in the Singapore establishment and have close ties
 to the Government and its leaders. In 1990 Chief Justice Wee
 Chong Jin retired after serving as-the Republic's only Chief
 Justice since independence.
 In 1989 Parliament greatly restricted appeals to the judicial
 committee of the Privy Council in London. This made
 
 
 1023
 
 SINGAPORE
 Singapore's appellate courts the final courts of appeal in
 most cases. 2The legislation *as passed in response to a Privy
 Council decision reinstating prominent oppositionist J.B.
 Jeyaretham t6the Sihgapore'bar and strongly criticizing the
 miscarriage of justice-perpetrated against him. At the
 discretion of the courts, Commonwealth Queen's Counsels (QC)
 are a1owed to argue cases in Singapore. Following habeas
 corpus hearings on an ISA case in 1989, however, the
 Government bhrred the QC representing the petitioner on
 grounds that'he had involved himself in Singapore's domestic
 politics by championing-his client's cause outside of the
 couttroom.
 In September Singapore's lawyers were encouraged by Lee Kuan
 Yew to develop greater business-related expertise and to place
 the interests of society over those of individuals. This was
 taken, by many attorneys as a government suggestion to stay out
 of dissident-pblitics and human rights work, a view supported
 by the Government's record of using ISA detentions and
 politically related court proceedings against such prominent
 oppositi6n lawyers as J.B. Jeyaretnam, Francis Seow, and Teo
 Soh Lung.
 The stripping'away of judicial review in the ISA and religious
 harmony laws further reduced the scope of the judiciary to act
 as a check on the Government. Government leaders continued
 their unbeaten string of libel or slander suits against
 domestic opposition defendants (Lee Kuan Yew v. J.B.
 Jeyaretnam) and foreign publications (see-Section 2.a.
 below). In August Lee Kuan Yew was awarded $260,000 plus
 court costs in his slander suit against opposition leader
 Jeyaretnam. The suit was brought in connection with an 1988
 speech in which Jeyaretnam questioned the lack of an official
 inquiry into the alleged suicide of a government official
 under investigation for corruption. The court refused to
 postpone payment of the award during Jeyaretnam's appeal, and
 in an unusual move added interest payments retroactive to
 September 1, 1988. The Government also confiscated donations
 collected for Jeyaretnam's defense and launched a "commercial
 crimes" investigation.
 Judges are beholden to the Government for their appointments,
 and are easily transferred. Rather.than responding in a
 constructive manner to outside criticism, including the Privy
 Council's criticism of the Singapore judiciary's behavior in
 the Jeyaretnam case and the contempt of court proceedings
 against the Asian Wall Street Journal (AWSJY (see Section
 3.a.), the Government issued sharply critical statements and
 acted to limit the role of the courts still further.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Government frequently uses its wide discretionary powers
 in cases of perceived threat to the security of the nation.
 In most cases, search warrants are required for intrusion into
 the home. Law enforcement officers may, however, search a
 person, home, or property without a warrant, if they decide
 searches are necessary to preserve evidence. Warrantless
 searches can also be conducted under the Criminal Law
 (Temporary Provisions) Act in dealing with drug- and secret
 society-related offenses. Judicial review of such searches
 can be undertaken by the courts at the request of the
 defendant but it is not automatic.
 
 
 1024
 SINGAPORE
 Divisions of the law enforcement agencies, including the
 Internal Security Department and the Corrupt Practices
 Investigation Board (CPIB), have wide networks for gathering o
 information. There are credible allegations that the
 authorities monitor telephone and other private
 conversations. In 1988 and 1989, the Government also hired
 private investigators to monitor the movements of well-known
 opposition figure, Francis Seow, while he was in the United
 States. In 1990 credible reports continued to surface of
 surveillance of opposition or dissident figures as well as
 some religious leaders. In addition, there was substantial
 evidence that the authorities conduct clandestine searches of
 the baggage of opposition figures in the airport baggage
 handling area.
 The Government is actively involved in many aspects of family
 life, including who can buy a house and in what neighborhood,
 who should have children, and who may travel to neighboring
 Malaysia. The Government encouraged university-educated
 families to have as many children as they can afford by
 increasing tax breaks for families with children. At the same
 time, the Government used pamphlets and other materials to
 encourage couples with only primary or secondary educations to
 limit the number of children they have. The Government did
 not use coercive means in pursuing population policies.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution permits official restrictions on the freedom
 of expression, and in practice, freedom of speech and press is
 circumscribed. The law forbids statements which might arouse
 tensions among the various races and religions or which might
 threaten national security or public order. The Government
 has in some cases applied a broad definition of these laws to
 restrict political opposition and criticism of the
 Government. Inflammatory discussion of race, religion, and
 language is illegal. The Government-owned Singapore
 Broadcasting Corporation (SBC) has a monopoly on domestic
 radio and television broadcasting and follows government
 guidelines. Television broadcasts from Malaysia and radio
 broadcasts from Malaysia and Indonesia can be received
 uncensored in Singapore; the British Broadcasting Corporation
 world service also broadcasts locally on the FM band. An
 official board of film censors reviews motion pictures, as
 well as video cassettes and television programs. Such
 censorship is aimed at material which the Government believes
 would undermine morals, advocate excessive permissiveness,
 promote drug abuse, or increase social tension. Literature
 and films featuring explicit sexual or drug-related themes are
 banned. Satellite dishes are not permitted, but in 1990
 members of the ruling PAP began public discussions on whether
 to allow such dishes. The Government has not taken any final
 action.
 Newspapers are published by private firms with close ties to
 the national leadership. Printing of all domestic newspapers
 is monopolized by a government-controlled company. The
 Newspaper and Printing Presses Act creates two classes of
 stock for the newspaper companies--ordinary shares which are
 freely traded, and management shates whqse ownership is
 restricted to those approved by the Government. In essence,
 the controlling interest in management shares of all newspaper
 companies is in the hands of government nominees, who can be
 
 
 1025
 SINGAPORE
 removed at the Government's discretion. Hence, while.
 Singaporean newspapers, especially the English-language
 Straits Times, print a large and diverse selection of articles
 from-a var~ety of foreign sources, their.editorials and
 coverage of domestic events closely parallel government
 policies and opinions of government leaders. In 1990, as in
 the past, the Government used vaguely worded statutes on the
 press and. defamation actions to deter and punish critics.
 Faculty members at Sin9apore public institutions of higher
 education 're government employees. A number of university
 lecturers are concurrently PAP M.P.'s. Academics sometimes
 criticize government policies, but criticism of individual
 government leaders and authoritarianism is infrequent because
 of possible sanctions. Tenure and renewal of appointments can
 be, and have been', refused to academics whose work deviates
 substantially from government views. Published social science
 and think-taik works generally support government policies.
 A wide. range of international magazines and newspapers can be
 purchased uncensored in Singapore, although newspapers printed
 in Malaysia are not circulated. However, Singapore's
 longstanding dispute'with certain foreign publications,
 including Asiaweek, the AWSJ, and the Far Eastern Economic
 Review (FEER) reached a new zenith in 1990 with the passage of
 amendments to the Newspaper and Printing Presses Act that
 further strengthened governmental control mechanisms over the
 foreign press.
 Foreign publications that, by the Government's broad
 determination, interfere in the domestic affairs of Singapore
 may be restricted in circulation. Asiaweek, the FEER, and the
 ASWJ all were, and still are, restricted on this basis. The
 Government prints and distributes in Singapore a limited
 number of unauthorized photocopy editions 9f the FEER without
 advertising, while a prescribed number of copies of Asiaweek
 (10,000) is allowed to be distributed in full. The AWSJ, in
 response to newly acted amendments to the press laws (see
 below) voluntarily ceased publication in Singapore. Neither
 the FEER nor the AWS has been allowed to post a correspondent
 in Singapore since 1987. In addition ta these restrictions,
 Lee Kuan Yew won a $125,000 libel judgment against the FEER in
 November 1989, which led to a December 1989 article in the
 AWSJ suggesting that the Singapore courts had not acted
 impartially. The Government then instituted contempt of court
 proceedings against the AWSJ; these had not been heard by
 year's end.
 Officials of Dow Jones, the U.S. parent of both the FEER and
 the AWSJ, met with then First Deputy Prime Minister.Goh Chok
 Tong in April 1990 and began to correspond with the Government
 in an attempt 'to resolve the dispute, in part so that the FEER
 and the AWSJ could cover the July 1990 Asia-Pacific Economic
 Cooperation (APEC) ministerial meeting held in Singapore.
 Their exchange of letters, subsequently released by the
 Government, revealed that Dow Jones accepted the Government's
 propositions that foreign publications circulate in.Singapore
 as a matter of privilege and not of right and that they should
 not interfere in the domestic affairs of Singapore. In its
 letter, the Government noted that Article 14 of the
 Constitution on freedom of press applies only to Singapore
 citizens. The Government, in breaking off the discussions,
 cited Dow Jones' intentions to appeal The FEER verdict and
 alleged difficulties in serving process in the AWSJ contempt
 of court case as proof that Dow Jones did not in fact accept
 
 
 1026
 
 SINGAPORE
 these propositions. Visa applications of FEER and AWSJ
 journalists to cover the APEC conference were denied.
 Parliament in mid-1990 enacted amendments to the Newspaper and
 Printing Presses Act to strengthen the Government's
 restrictions on the foreign press. The amended Act provides
 that the Government may require permits for the distribution
 of foreign periodicals with a circulation of 300 copies or
 more. The Government may deny or revoke the permits without
 explanation. The Government also determines the number of
 copies that may be circulated and may change that number at
 its discretion, without explanation. The publications must
 appoint an agent in Singapore who is authorized to accept
 service of process, and the publications are required to post
 a bond in an amount determined by the Government to cover
 potential damages in slander, libel, or other legal actions.
 While the legislation was aimed at "old adversaries" such as
 the Dow Jones publications, the clear intent of the Government
 was to warn all foreign periodicals that now circulate in
 Singapore, or will later do so, to be wary of their reporting
 on Singapore lest they cross the vaguely drawn line of
 "interfering" in Singapore's "domestic affairs," thereby
 making themselves subject to the restrictions of the Act. The
 Government required three foreign publications to obtain
 circulation permits and post bonds in excess of $100,000, but
 for the time being exempted 11 others from these requirements.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Assemblies of more than five people in public, including
 political meetings and rallies, must have police permission.
 The Government closely monitors political gatherings
 regardless of the number present.
 Associations, societies, clubs, churches, and other
 organizations with more than 10 members must be registered
 with the Government under the Societies Act. The Government
 denies registration to societies believed likely to be used
 for unlawful purposes or for purposes prejudicial to public
 peace, welfare, or public order. The Government has absolute
 discretion in applying this broad and vague language to
 register or dissolve societies. The Government prohibits
 organized political activities, except by organizations
 registered as political parties. This prohibition extends to
 the opposition, but it is not clear that. it applies to the
 PAP, which enjoys the support of residential committees and
 neighborhood groups ostensibly organized for nonpolitical
 purposes but whose leadership contains many grass-roots PAP
 members (see Section 3 also).
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is guaranteed by the Constitution and
 usually respected in practice. However, all religious groups
 are subject to government scrutiny and must be legally
 registered. The Government restricts some religious sects by
 application of the Societies Act and has banned others. A
 Presidential Council.on Minority Rights exists to ensure that
 legislation does not infringe upon the rights of ethnic or
 religious minorities. There is no state religion. The
 Government has, however, provided financial assistance to
 build and maintain mosques. There is no religious test for
 employment in the Government or for membership in the PAP.
 Missionaries are permitted to work and to publish religious
 texts.
 
 
 1027
 
 SINGAPORE
 The major development in this area was the passage in November
 1990 of the Maintenance of Religious Harmony Act. The Act
 makes it illegal to proselytize in a manner that could inflame
 religFkous enmity- and also proscribes what the Government deems
 to be the-inappropriate involvement of religious groups and
 officers in political- affairs. By the terms of the Act, the
 Minister-of-Home Affairs, After hearing the opinion of the
 Presidential-Council on religious harmony, is authorized to
 warn.and issue a prohibition order against those violating the
 provisions. The Government admitted during hearings on the
 Act that there is no clear line that can be drawn between
 religious an& political acts, but asserted that the
 Government, with the Presidential Council, can make the
 determination. Finally, the Religious Harmony Act explicitly
 denies the judiciary the competence to review possible denial
 of rights-which could arise from the application of the Act,
 and specifically denies judicial review of the enforcement of
 the Act.
 The Government justified the Act by citing two sets of
 problems that allegedly might trigger ethnic or religious
 conflict. The first set dealt with overzealous proselytizing
 by religious groups or persons that would be offensive to-
 members of another religion. The second set dealt with the
 mixing.of political and religious activities, akin to the 1987
 "Marxist conspiracy" wherein "Marxists" allegedly infiltrated
 Catholic -lay organizations in an attempt to politicize them
 against the Government. The Government made it explicit that
 it disapproved of what it perceived as political activity
 disguised as religious activity,, but suggested that the Act
 was a more benign way of handling this problem than use of the.
 ISA. -Singaporean witnesses at hearings on the Act agreed that
 the Government has a role to play in preventing racial and
 religious conflict, but some also criticized the overly vague
 provisions and the lack of safeguards against-governmental
 abuse. Even government officials admitted that most religious
 creeds call for believers to be socially if not sometimes
 politically active. The Government insisted that sufficient
 safeguards exist and that it could determine when political
 activity by rel-igious groups or persons overstepped the line.
 There is substantial evidence that the Government action is
 partially directed against the growth in recent years of
 charismatic Christian organizers which, do not recognize the
 unofficial agreement among establishment religious
 organizations about not proselytizing those of a different
 faith. For example, Reverend Rick Seaward and his church were
 the only Christian organization cited by name, in a government
 white paper on religious harmony, as promoting the concept of
 active Christian proselytizing among the Malay Muslim
 community. Seaward-denied that his church was doing so, but
 Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew then also cited Seaward by name
 and called his activities an example of what the Government
 needed to head off. Seaward and other members of his church
 were indicted for criminal breach of trust (fraud) in a still
 pending case involving the purchase of sound equipment by the
 church from a Los Angeles religious organization wkth which
 Seaward's church is affiliated.. Although the amounts
 involved were not large, the Straits Times gave the
 indictments front-page coverage, highlighting Seaward's
 religious beliefs.
 
 
 1028
 SINGAPORE
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 All Singapore citizens and permanent residents over the age of
 13 are required to register with the Government and carry an
 identification card. The Government may, at its discretion,
 deny a passport and it frequently does so in the case of
 released detainees, one of many devices that seem to inhibit
 such persons from resuming opposition to or criticism of the
 Government.
 The ISA allows the Minister for Law and Home Affairs to
 suspend or revoke a detention order or impose restrictions on
 former detainees' activities, place of residence, and travel
 abroad. Chia Thye Poh is restricted in his movements within
 Singapore, while foreign travel of others formerly detained
 under the ISA is subject to approval by the ISD.
 The right of voluntary repatriation is extended to holders of
 Singaporean passports. In 1985 Parliament provided for the
 loss of citizenship by Singaporeans who reside outside
 Singapore for more than 10 years consecutively. Action under
 this law is discretionary and has been taken in at least one
 case involving a well-known government opponent, Tan Wah
 Piaow. There is considerable evidence that the legislation
 was a bill of attainder, aimed specifically at Tan, but with
 current application to others at the Government's discretion.
 Singapore does not offer first asylum to persons seeking
 refuge there.- Government policy permits Vietnamese asylum
 seekers rescued at sea to disembark and remain for up to 90
 days only if Singapore is the rescuing vessel's next scheduled
 port of call, and if a resettlement country provides a
 resettlement or removal guarantee. The Government has agreed
 to permit the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
 (UNHCR) to screen such -persons for refugee status in
 accordance with the Comprehensive Plan of Action adopted in
 Geneva at the June 1989 International Conference on
 Indochinese Refugees. However, asylum seekers must still
 depart Singapore within 90 days. In practice, Singapore
 halted disembarkation of rescued Vietnamese in July 1990 in
 cases where removal of these persons within 90 days could not
 be guaranteed. As of September 30, there were 143 asylum
 seekers at Singapore's camp (Hawkins Road) which has a
 capacity of approximately 1,000 persons.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Singaporeans have the theoretical right to change their
 government peacefully. The voting and vote-counting system in
 elections is generally fair, accurate, and free from
 tampering. However, the Government has used its extensive
 powers to place formidable obstacles in the path of current
 and would-be opponents. The PAP currently holds 80 of the 81
 popularly elected seats in Parliament, with the Singapore
 Democratic Party (SDP) holding the remaining seat. One
 Workers' Party (WP) representative, among the three highest
 vote-getters among losing opposition candidates in the
 September 1988 elections, is a "Non-Constituency Member of
 Parliament" (NCMP), allowed to participate in debate but not
 to vote on constitutional amendmefits, motions of no-confidence,
 the'budget, and other key issues.
 
 
 1029
 
 SINGAPORE
 While opposition parties have contested every election, none
 has been.Able seriously to challenge the PAP since the late
 1960's. The PAP attributes the lack of effective opposition
 to disorganizati6n, lack of leadership, and lack of
 alterna.ive policy programs. Political parties, while legally
 free to organize, are subject to strict regulations on party
 constitution, fund-raising, and accountability. While the PAP
 has been.able to enjoy the support of 6stensibly nonpolitical
 organizations, the Goveriment has used its broad discretionary
 powers to hinder the creation.of support organizations for the
 opppsibion parties.  Government actions, such as the arrest of
 - the.,"Marxist conspirators" in 1987 and the Maintenance of,
 Religious Harmony Act in 1990, reinforce the Government's
 ability to hinder the effectiveness of opposition parties.
 For three decades, under the authoritarian leadership of Lee
 Kuan Yew, the PAP has dominated politics in Singapore. The
 PAP's grip on power has been enhanced by patronage; political
 control of the.press, courts, and~religion; and strong party
 discipline and performance. Under its leadership, Singapore
 has achieved rapid economic growth, enabling the Government to
 provid.a.wide array of public, services. The PAP's broad base
 includes representatives from all racial communities in
 Singqapore and is rooted in neighborhood,'youth, and labor
 associations.. National servicemen receive indoctrination.
 based on ideas derived from the PAP. The still-forming
 national ideology is.izeplete with PAP themes. National
 holidays are Usually celebrated with PAP members in
 highlighted rbles. PAP members regxilarly preside at'
 dedications and ribbon-cuttings.
 Led Kuan Yew stepped downin November,,after servinqas Prime
 Minister since 1959. His chosen successor, Goh Chok Tong,
 replaced Lee, but the former Prime Minister remains in the
 Cabinet as a senior minister. More importantly, he remains.
 Secretary General of the PAP. The party strategy enunciated
 by Lee Kuan Yew is to occupy as much of the middle ground of
 society as .possible, leaving only the fringes to the  -
 opposition. Each MP, regardless of rank, is expected to be in
 regular touch with his or her constituency in order to be
 entitled to continuing party support. The media are uniformly
 supportive of the PAP. Town councils, ostensibly politically.
 neutral, are filled with PAP activists as an element of
 political patronage, except in the iingle opposition-
 controlled constituency.
 Former President DevOn Nair, an old Lee Kuan Yew ally turned
 critic, departed Singapore after a campaign of personal
 insults and a libel suit. Former Solicitor General Francis
 Seow also departed the country after one period of detention
 under the ISA. He was subjected to sharp attacks on his
 character by the PAP during the 1988 general elections in
 which he stood as a Workers' Party candidate. A score of
 indictments on tax evasion charges were filed against him;
 they involved relatively small amounts of money and were the
 result of a very minute examination of his accounts by the
 Government.
 Ostensibly in response to calls for some alternative voices in
 Parliament to provide debate and checks on government action,
 the Parliament in 1990 enacted legislation providing for a
 system of Nominated Members of Parliament (NMP) who would
 enjoy restricted privileges similar to those of a NCMP. As
 theoretically independent voices, the NMP's would presumably
 channel off some of the popular desire fo; a larger non-PAP
 
 
 1030
 
 SINGAPORE
 presence in the legislature. Not incidentally, this might
 also reduce political support for opposition parties, which
 derive some of their electoral support from voters who are
 anti-PAP but not pro-opposition. Two NMP's were appointed in
 December. Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong publicly proclaimed
 that his administration would not change substantively from
 that of Lee Kuan Yew but that the style of the new government
 would feature greater consultation and openness. Because Goh
 assumed office only in November, there is an insufficient
 record upon which to evaluate his administration; however, he
 and the members of his Cabinet advocated and supported all the
 changes in human rights related law and policy carved out over
 time by Lee Kuan Yew.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human'Rights
 Governmental bodies, such as the presidentially appointed
 Minority Rights Council, monitor alleged violations of
 minority rights, primarily any concerning the Malay minority.
 There are, however, no nongovernmental organizations, with the
 exception of the opposition political parties, which actively
 and openly monitor alleged human rights violations, owing at
 least in part to fear of various forms of governmental
 pressure or reprisal that could be brought to bear. The
 Government rejects the concept that international
 organizations have any competence whatsoever to look into
 human rights matters in Singapore. Visa regulations do not
 recognize monitoring human rights as a "business purpose" in
 visiting Singapore, but neither is such activity regarded as a
 "social visit." Amnesty International is not allowed to
 operate in Singapore, but in 1989 the Government allowed a
 closely scrutinized group of observers from a foreign human
 rights group to attend the habeas corpus hearings of ISA
 detainees.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Because of Singapore's history of intercommunal tension, the
 Government takes affirmative measures to ensure racial,
 ethnic, religious, and cultural nondiscrimination. Social,
 economic, and cultural facilities are available to all
 citizens regardless of race, religion, or sex. Minorities are
 constitutionally afforded equal rights and actively
 participate in the political process.
 The Singapore Constitution acknowledges the "special position"
 of Malays as the indigenous people of Singapore and charges
 the Government to support and promote their "political,
 educational, religious, economic, social, and cultural
 interests." The Government has concentrated on creating
 equality of opportunity, especially in education, and does not
 promote the concept of equality in result, instead leaving it
 up to the ethnic communities, individual initiative, and the
 marketplace to determine economic success.
 While precise statistics are not readily available, government
 officials acknowledge that Malay Singaporeans are represented
 disproportionately in the bottom quarter of Singapore's
 economy. De facto employment discrimination against Malays
 and'Indians exists. Job advertisements often specify the
 ethnicity and sex required of applicants.
 
 
 1031
 SINGAPORE.,
 Equal pay for equal work is practiced. Women have the same
 rights asinen in.employment,_ education, childcare and custody,
 and in the runnihg of a household,. but do not have equal
 rights -with men-ii1 ftfie trfansmission of citizenship to their .
 children ox ii the right to residence of a .f6reign spouse in
 Singapore.- Muslim women's rights are proteited by the
 provisions of the 1957 Administration of Muslim Law Act, which
 permits.Muslim women to apply for divorce and to hold and
 dispose o'propeity. Women can vote and hold any public
 office. Althbugh the political and business elite is still
 overwhelmingly  ale, women are found throughout the rest of
 the jobspectrum, enj6yig equal pay for equal work.
 There is no evidence of any widespread practice of violence or
 abuse against women..,Singapore's laws protect women against
 domestic violence and against sexual or physical harassment.
 Domestic violence can be dealt with under either the penal
 code or-thd'Womei's Charter; The Women's Charter, enacted in
 1961, abolished arranged marriages and gave husband and wife
 equal rights with respect to property ownership and divorce.
 Muslim women are not covered bythe Women's Charter, but enjoy
 the sai- rights and protections under other laws, except that
 Muslim men may divorce unilaterally whereas Muslim women may
 not. the Government enforces the Women's Charter as a
 fundamental aspect of the Republic's family law. Through the
 latter, a battered wife can obtain court orders barring the
 spouse from the home until the court is satisfied that he will
 stop his aggressive beliavior. The penal code prescribes
 mandatory caning and a minimum imprisonment of 2 years for
 conviction on a char4e of outraging modesty so as to cause the
 victim fear of death or injury.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Singapore's Constitution gives all citizens the right to form
 associations, including trade unions. Parliament may,
 however, impose restrictions based on security, public order,
 or morality grounds. The right of Association is delimited by
 the Societies Act and labor and education laws and
 regulations. In practice, Communist labor unions are not
 permitted. The Trades Union Act authorizes the formation of
 unions with-broad rights, albeit with some narrow
 restrictions--such as prohibitions on the unionization of
 uniformed employees and the holding of union office by persons
 with criminal records. The national work force comprises
 about 1.2 million workers, of whom some 210,000 are organized
 into about 90 trade unions. Some 7G of these, which represent
 about 98 percent of the unionized workers, are affiliated with
 the National Trades Union Congress (NTUC), an umbrella
 organization with a close relationship to the Government.
 Several unions have been founded outside of the NTUC,
 including unions for the catering staff and pilots of
 Singapore Airlines and for Chinese-language teachers.
 The NTUC unabashedly acknowledges, that its interests are
 closely linked with those of the ruling PAP. The Second
 Deputy Prime Minister, a PAP member, serves as NTUC Secretary
 General, and several NTUC officials are PAP M.P.'s. NTUC
 policy prohibits unionists who actively support opposition
 parties from holding office in affiliated unions. While the
 NTUC is financially independent of the PAP,.they share the
 same ideology. NTUC officials maintain that their
 organization benefits from its close ties with the PAP.
 
 
 1032
 
 SINGAPORE
 Workers have the legal right to strike but rarely do so--the
 most recent strike took place in 1986. Reasons given include
 a cultural aversion to confrontation, concern about
 maintaining Singapore's attractiveness to investors, a labor
 shortage that has produced higher wages, and economic success
 that has allowed employers to pay more.
 The NTUC is a member of the International Confederation of
 Free Trade Unions (ICFTU); the Asian and Pacific Regional
 Organization (APRO) of the ICFTU has its headquarters in
 Singapore. Singapore is a member of the International Labor
 Organization (ILO). It has not ratified Convention 87 on
 Freedom of Association.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Collective bargaining is a normal part of management-labor
 relations particularly in the manufacturing sector. On the
 average, collective bargaining agreements are renewed every 2
 to 3 years. A National Wages Council (NWC) brings business,
 labor, and government representatives together to establish
 guidelines for annual wage packages. Collective agreements
 negotiated between labor and management generally follow the
 wage guidelines issued annually by the NWC. For the last 2
 years, the NWC issued its guidelines in the form of
 qualitative recommendations rather than the quantitative form
 used before. The NWC continued to recommend iq 1990 that
 employers follow a "flexiwage" system wherein the annual
 increase in the fixed portion of employee income (the wages)
 is kept small with greater emphasis on varying the amount of
 bonuses based on employee performance.
 This system--the NWC fostering cooperation between the NTUC
 and employer organizations--allows manageient to reward
 workers for performance and sacrifices made during bad times,
 yet allows those in sectors experiencing downturns to let
 wages reflect such circumstances. The NWC also recommended
 that the rate of compensation increases be less than the
 increase of the rate of productivity, in order to curb
 inflation and keep salaries in line with productivity.
 Section 80 of the Industrial Relations Act makes it an offense
 to discriminate against anyone who is or proposes to become a
 member or an officer of a trade union. The offense is
 punishable by a fine equivalent to about $1,200 and/or a
 12-month prison sentence. There are no export processing
 zones, nor are special concessions given to firms producing
 for export. -Labor laws and regulations are enforced uniformly.
 -  c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Singapore-law forbids the use of forced or compulsory labor,
 and such labor is not found in Singapore.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The Gov6rnment enforces the Employment Act, which sets the
 minimum age for the employment of children at age 12.
 Children under age 14 are not allowed to work in any
 "industrial undertaking." Industrial employers must notify
 the Ministry of Labor within 30 days of hiring a child between
 the ages of 14 to 16.
 Ministry of Labor regulations prohibit night employment of
 children and restrict industrial work to no more that 7 hours
 
 
 1033
 SINGAPORE
 a day. Children cannot work on commercial vessels, with any
 live electrical apparatus lacking effective insulation, qr in
 any underground job. These laws and regulations are
 effectively enforced bythe Ministry of Education.
 e. Acceptable Conditionsof Work
 The Singapore labor-market offers relatively high wages and
 working conditions consistent with accepted international
 standards. Singapore, however, has no minimum wage or
 unemployment compensation. Because of-a continuing labor
 shortage,.'wages have-generally risen steadily, and.
 unemployment has. stayed below 3 percent. In 1990 the
 Government continued implementation of-a flexible wage program
 wherein labor and management in private firms agree to set
 bonuses based on a company's annual performance. Because of
 Singapore's booming economy In 19.90, and the consequent high
 demand-for labor,-the "flexiwage". system has not resulted in a
 loss of' real income for-workers.--The standard legal workweek
 under the Employment Act (Section' 38) is 44 hours. Laws and
 regulations establishing working conditions are effectively
 enforced by the Ministry of Education.
 The Ministry of Education enforces comprehensive occupational
 safety and health laws. Enforcement procedures, coupled with
 the promotion of educational and training programs, have
 reduced, the frequency of job-related accidents by a third over
 the pas t decade. The. average severity of occupational
 accidents- has also been reduced.                    -
 Because of the domestic labor shortage, more than 250,000
 foreign workers are employed legally in Singapore. Most are
 unskilled laborers and household servants from other Asian
 countries. The Government controls the numbers of foreign
 workers directly through immigration regulations and
 indirectly through levies on firms and individuals hiring
 foreign workers. Social insurance and safety regulations are
 applied without discrimination with respect to foreign
 workers. Foreign workers face no legal wage discrimination;
 however, they are concentrated in low-wage, low-skill jobs.
 Many foreign workers are members of labor unions, particularly
 in electronics and shipbuilding. The large number of foreign
 workers in the construction industry remain unorganized,
 because, the NTUC says, of the nature of the industry with its
 many subcontractors and rapidly changing work venues. Some
 30,000 Filipina maids are employed in Singapore, and there
 have been occasional complaints of abuse or poor working
 conditions. The Government does not bar complainants from
 seeking legal redress-, and there are reports that employers
 who have abused domestic servants have been fined or
 imprisoned.
 The Government acknowledged the problem of illegal aliens
 working in Singapore by passing a law in 1989 imposing a
 caning penalty on aliens who overstay in Singapore by more
 than 90 days. Parliament has passed a law to impose a caning
 sentence and fines on businessmen who employ more than 5
 workers illegally. No one has been caned under either law.
 
 
 1034
