SINGAPORE
The report on Singapore is disappointing. It touches on most major developments in 1987 — such as "the disqualification from Parliament of an outspoken opposition leader, the tightening of controls on the Law Society, curbs on the foreign press, [and] arrests under the [Internal Security Act] of grassroots activists" — but in far too many instances it fails to draw its own conclusions about obvious violations. The effect is to blunt the significance of the violations and the degree to which they reflect efforts by the governii^ Peoples' Action Party (PAP) to maintain its near-complete dominance of the political life of the country.
In discussing the detention without trial of twenty-two opposition figures in May and June 1987 under the Internal Security Act (ISA), the report states that they were detained "for involvement in an alleged Communist conspiracy." However, in light of the implausibility of the accusations, it is remarkable that the report never comments critically on the government's position. Nor does it cite the many criticisms of these charges by informed observers and respected international human rights organizations.
Similarly, the rei>ort states without qualification that the ISA detainees were allowed access to lawyers and visits by relatives. It neglects to mention that lawyers for the detainees arrested in May were denied access to their clients for approximately ten days after the detentions, and that family members of sixteen detainees arrested in May were not permitted to visit their relatives for the first six days of detention. These omissions paper over the fact that the detainees were held incommunicado during the initial stages of detention during which their most severe mistreatment occurred.
The report is similarly slanted in discussing the case of Chia Thye Poh, a former member of Parliament who has been imprisoned without trial since 1966. In 1985, the government claimed that Chia had been a member of the Communist Party of Malaya and had been directed by the party to carry out
129
Critique
"Communist United Front agitation to destabilize the government." Most of the discussion of Chia's case is devoted to an uncritical portrayal of the government's stated conditions for his release:
According to the goveriunent, he wiU be released when he publicly renoimces the use of force to effect political change; government officials have also commented to foreign critics of his detention that he would be allowed to leave the country if arrai^ements are made to resettle him elsewhere.
Nowhere does the report note what appears to be Chia's well-founded concern that to renounce violence as the government demands would be tantamount to conceding that he bad advocated violence in the past and thus would o^er the government a justification for having held him all these years. Nor does the report note Chia's strong denial of the goverrmient's accusations, or the lack of evidence that he has ever advocated or engaged in violence.
Similarly, the section on torture provides only a partial account of the treatment of the May and June detainees. Although it cites reports that detainees were subjected to long periods of interrogation, deprived of sleep, and kept in small cells in which the lights were kept on during limited rest periods, it omits published reports that detainees were also subjected to physical assaults during interrogation. Such reports were published in mid-1987 by an international mission of jurists and by Amnesty International, both of which visited Singapore soon after the detentions.
The section on freedom of association understates the extent of government control. In discussing the Societies Act, a law that requires organizations of more than ten members to be re^stered by the government, the report simply states:
Registration is denied to societies that the Government believes are likely to be used for unlawful purposes or for purposes prejudicial to public peace, welfare, or public order.
The report does not note that the government has displayed an exceptionally broad and arbitrary view of what is prejudicial to the public welfare, and that its interpretation is not subject to independent appeal. Thus, for example, a recent application to form a local section of the British-based
130
Singapore
development organization Oxfam was turned down after a wait of more than two years, with no explanation.
The section on arbitrary interference with privacy is also incomplete. It correctly indicates that the authorities have a wide network for gathering information. But while the report notes that "[tjhe Government uses its wide discretionary powers when it believes that the security of the nation is threatened," it fails to describe the broad and arbitrary manner in which national security is often defined. For example, when a prominent lawyer incurred the ire of the government, the government responded by spelling out the details of his private life in Parliament, and a short while later revoked his girlfriend's permanent residence permit.
The section on the denial of fair public trial is inadequate for its failxu"e to address meaningfully the issue of judicial independence. With a superficial evenhandedness that obscures the troubling underlying issue, the report simply comments:	^
The political opposition has accused the government leadership of interfering in the judicial process in politically related cases. The Government has denied allegations of executive interference in the judiciary.
The report should have stated the substantial basis for concern over a lack of judicial independence in politically related cases, due in large measure to the political dominance of the ruling party, which creates a strong incentive for conformity on the part of those within, and in a position of authority over, the judicial system. We also note that those in Singapore who express such concerns are subject to prosecution for contempt of court.
The section on freedom of movement correctly notes that since 1985 the government has possessed the power arbitrarily to revoke the citizenship of those who remain outside the country for ten years. However, the section obscures the discriminatory application of this provision. It states:
Action under this new law... has been taken...most recently in the case of alleged Mandst ringleader Tan Wah Piow.
Having stated the government's justification for the action against Tan, the
report should have discussed, first, that there is little evidence that Tan is a
131
Critique
"Marxist ringleader," and second, that many believe that the Act was passed for the purpose of keeping Tan and other political opponents out of the country.
Given the relatively rosy picture painted of the conditions of labor, the report should have mentioned the serious problems faced by foreign laborers, especially construction workers and domestic servants, which the legal structure of employment encourages. Domestic servants in particular confront assaults, sexual violations, nonpayment and underpayment, and employers are known to imprison maids in apartments when they go away on leave. The government has expressed concern about these abuses, but has shown little willingness to revise the laws that made them possible. The report also should have mentioned that the activities of some of the May and June detainees included efforts to aid foreign workers who were victims of such abuses.
In the section on the government's attitude toward independent human rights monitoring, the report engages in bland understatement. It simply notes:
There are no organizations in Singapore which actively and openly monitor human rights violations.
Missing from this innocuous account is any inkling that the government has deterred and/or suppressed efforts at domestic human rights monitoring, and that even lawyers involved in political cases have been harassed. As the report should have indicated, it is the climate of fear created by this repression, rather than a lack of mterest, that prevents the establishment of a domestic, nongovernmental human rights monitoring efforts.
Finally, the report presents a similar flat and unenlightening statement in commenting that a Presidential Council for Minorities monitors violations of minority rights. The Council has been severely criticized by independent observers because it has little power and, apparently, less inclination to challenge positions taken by the government. We are unaware of any report it has issued questioning government policy in this area.
132
