 SINGAPORE
 Singapore has a parliamentary system under which the People's
 Action Party (PAP) headed by Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew has
 held power since independence in 1965. The PAP continues to
 hold virtually all seats in Parliament. Public criticism of
 the Government although circumspect, has become noticeably
 more vocal and direct during 1984. Nevertheless, the
 Government enjoys broad public support and received 62.9
 percent of the popular vote in the last general election held
 in December 1984. The civil service is efficient, and
 corruption is officially and actively discouraged.
 Singapore's multiracial society enjoys racial and religious
 harmony and freedom of worship. Singapore was subject to acts
 of terrorism by members of the Communist Party of Malaya (CPM)
 through 1974. While there have been no terrorist incidents in
 recent years, the CPH considers Singapore within its sphere of
 operation. Government military and security agencies work to
 control and, if possible, to eliminate the threat of internal
 disturbances. They act within what most Singaporeans consider
 to be an appropriate legal framework.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no known instances of politically-motivated
 killings in 1984.
 b. Disappearance
 There is no evidence that people were abducted, secretly
 arrested, or held in clandestine detention by official or
 quasi-official security forces, other elements of the
 Government, or opposition forces in 1984.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Torture is prohibited by law under Sections 330 and 331 of the
 Penal Code. Individual instances of mistreatment by law
 enforcement personnel have been alleged by former detainees
 and by Amnesty International. The Government acknowledges
 that its interrogation procedures employ psychological stress,
 as reported by previous detainees, but denies allegations of
 abuse or torture.
 Prison conditions in Singapore are spartan. Singapore's eight
 prisons confine 3,000 prisoners while the eight drug
 rehabilitation centers hold about 4,000 persons. Political
 detainees are separated from other prisoners. Since 1981 the
 Government has stepped up efforts to rehabilitate prisoners
 serving sentences of one year or more. The prison welfare
 services program currently concentrates on young offenders
 between 16 and 21 years old and on adult first-time
 offenders. The Government plans to extend the program to
 include habitual offenders and drug abusers.
 In 1984 the Government amended the Penal Code by mandating
 minimum prison sentences varying from six months to eight
 years and caning from six to twelve strokes for certain crimes
 including outrage of modesty, rape, theft, extortion, robbery,
 
 
 865
 SINGAPORE
 housebreaking and vehicle theft. A small group of attorneys
 in the Law Society of Singapore questioned whether the new
 regulations would be effective in fighting crime, but a
 majority of Singaporeans seems to support the changes. The
 Singapore Government renounced its adherence to International
 Labor Organization (ILO) Convention 105 in 1979 after the ILO
 rejected Singapore's description of work performed by criminal
 offenders as vocational rehabilitation rather than punitive
 labor.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Law enforcement authorities in Singapore follow established
 legal procedures for arrest or detention. Incommunicado
 detention does not occur. Arrest without a warrant and
 detention without charge for periods of one to 30 days are
 authorized under some specific provisions of the law. The
 Ministry of Home Affairs can issue an order under the Internal
 Security Act (ISA), a British measure used by Singapore
 extensively during the 1965-1974 post-independence period when
 Communist-led disturbances and communal violence were
 widespread, or the Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act to
 authorize a longer period of detention of a *suspected
 person". The Director of the Central Narcotics Bureau can
 commit suspected drug users whose urinalysis proves positive
 to a six month term in a drug rehabilitation center. Habeas
 corpus exists in the law, but in ISA cases the Government can
 extend detention indefinitely. In others, such as those
 involving the Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act, which
 is used primarily to detain drug traffickers and members of
 secret societies, the Government can detain people for periods
 of up to one year. In 1984, Parliament amended the Penal Code
 to increase the amount of time police can detain a suspect
 involved in common criminal activity from 24 to 48 hours.
 People who are detained are arrested openly. There is a
 functioning system of bail, and detainees are entitled to
 legal counsel.
 The Misuse of Drugs Act allows Central Narcotics Bureau
 officers and customs officials to arrest without warrant any
 person suspected of manufacturing, importing, exporting,
 possessing, consuming or trafficking in controlled drugs.
 Such persons actually arrested are tried in court. A few
 individuals have maintained that they were not drug users and
 were improperly detained but, thus far, have failed to
 substantiate their allegations in court. The Government has
 maintained that adequate safeguards exist to prevent innocent
 persons being detained.
 The Government stated in 1983 that it released eight ISA
 detainees and still held only one person in detention under
 the act. In September 1984 the Government said it held about
 1,300 persons in indefinite detention under the Criminal Law
 (Temporary Provisions) Act, primarily for membership in
 Chinese triads (mafia-like secret societies) or for drug
 trafficking offenses.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a public trial is observed except for persons
 detained under the provisions of the ISA and the Criminal Law
 (Temporary Provisions) Act. The Government defends its policy
 of detention without trial in these cases on the ground that
 an open trial could result in the intimidation or death of
 witnesses and officials.
 
 
 866
 SINGAPORE
 The Criminal Procedures Code provides that a charge against a
 defendant must be read and explained to him as soon as it is
 framed by the magistrate. The accused has the right to be
 defended by an attorney (advocate). Individuals are tried by
 a magistrate or judge and do not have the right to trial by
 jury. Defendants may appeal their verdicts in most cases to
 higher courts. From there they may appeal to the judicial
 committee of the Privy Council in London, since Singapore is a
 member of the British Commonwealth.
 Judges are appointed by the President on the recommendation of
 the Prime Minister and the Cabinet. Four of the seven High
 Court judges hold what amount to contract appointments, most
 frequently for one year. Subordinate Court judges
 (magistrate) and public prosecutors are civil servants and can
 be transferred by the Ministry of Law.
 Citizens can take government agencies to court over such
 matters as compulsory land acquisitions and compensation. The
 Government has not lost a case involving a challenge to its
 major policies. Members of opposition political parties have
 been taken to court frequently, as have members of the PAP,
 including government ministers.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Government acts arbitrarily through use of its wide
 discretionary powers when it believes that the security of the
 nation is threatened. Search warrants are obtained for
 intrusion into the home in most cases. However, law
 enforcement officers may search a person, home or property
 without a warrant if they have have reasonable grounds to
 believe that it is necessary to do so. In most cases, the law
 does not require later judicial review of such action.
 Divisions of the Government's law enforcement agencies,
 including the Internal Security Division (ISD) and the Corrupt
 Practices Investigation Board (CPIB), have a wide network for
 gathering information. The Government does not prohibit the
 use of indigenous languages, restrict the number of children,
 require membership in a political organization or otherwise
 exceed norms in intruding into citizens' private lives. The
 Government conducts campaigns to increase labor productivity,
 to encourage the speaking of Mandarin Chinese rather than
 local dialects, and to achieve a multitude of other government
 objectives.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and press is circumscribed. The Government
 forbids statements which might arouse communal tensions among
 the various races in Singapore (approximately 77 percent
 Chinese, 15 percent Malay, 6 percent Indian, and 2 percent
 other minorities).
 Newspapers operate as independent companies but under close
 governmental supervision. The Government required the
 reorganization and merger of Chinese language newspapers in
 1983, stating that such mergers were needed for the newspaper
 to remain viable. In 1984 the boards of directors of the
 
 
 867
 SINGAPORE
 companies which publish Singapore's major newspapers announced
 their intention to merge into one holding company. The move,
 which was approved by the Government, could reduce the level
 of press competition. The merger plan was devised ostensibly
 to avoid the expense and waste of an anticipated circulation
 war.
 There is no direct censorship of the press. However, press
 officials understand the restraints and guidelines within
 which they must operate. They did not significantly exceed
 these guidelines in 1984. In the past, editors and reporters
 have been taken to task for articles which criticize the
 Government too strongly. Some press representatives believe
 that they may lose their jobs if they criticize too severely.
 However, the press reports the opposition's view and has
 frequently published statements critical of the government
 proposals and policies.
 The government-owned Singapore Broadcasting Corporation (SBC)
 has a monopoly on domestic radio and television. SBC follows
 government guidelines on its news reporting and obeys
 censorship regulations on the programs which it broadcasts.
 The BBC World Service and Malaysian radio and television can
 be also received in Singapore on local broadcast bands.
 An official Board of Film Censors approves motion pictures,
 television and videotapes. Additional Government bodies
 censor magazines, records, plays, and other media. The
 Government censors these items primarily to prevent the spread
 of materials which they feel will undermine the morals of
 young Singaporeans, advocate excessive permissiveness, or
 promote drug abuse. A wide range of international magazines
 and newspapers can be purchased uncensored in Singapore. The
 country is a regional publishing center for a growing number
 of international magazines and newspapers.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Assemblies of more than five people in a public place,
 including political rallies, are legally allowed only with
 permission from the police. In practice, the Government does
 not stop gatherings of groups of more than five people for
 social purposes.
 In order to operate legally in Singapore, associations,
 societies, clubs, churches and other organizations with more
 than ten members must be registered with the Government.
 Registration is denied to societies with triad rituals, those
 likely to be used for unlawful purposes or for purposes
 prejudicial to public peace, welfare or good order and trust
 whose registration would be contrary to the national
 interest. In the past, arrests have been made at gatherings
 of unregistered organizations, including some splinter
 religious groups which the Government viewed as inimical to
 the public interest.
 Unions are legally allowed in Singapore. However, 1983
 amendments to the Trades Union Act curtailed workers' rights
 to form or continue unions, in some circumstances, or to
 strike. Unions are organized under an Umbrella organization,
 the National Trades Union Congress (NTUC), which has a Cabinet
 Minister as its Secretary General and Members of Parliament on
 the Board of Directors. The NTUC has about 198,000 members in
 a national work force of about 1.2 million. In 1984 the NTUC
 
 
 868
 SINGAPORE
 intensified its campaign to encourage the formation of house
 unions. The campaign encountered some resistance, however,
 from more traditional minded unionists who viewed the effort
 as an attempt by the Government to co-opt the union movement.
 Some of the objecting unionists were removed from their union
 positions, and their protests have not had a significant
 impact on the NTUC's house union drive. Although workers have
 the legal right to strike, there have been no strikes in
 Singapore for over six years.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is enshrined in the Constitution and in
 practice. A Presidential Council on Minority Rights exists to
 insure that legislation does not infringe on the rights of
 ethnic or religious minorities. There is no state religion,
 but the Government has provided financial assistance to some
 religious bodies to allow them to build and maintain places of
 worship. Missionaries are permitted to work and to publish
 religious texts in Singapore.'
 All religious groups are subject to Government scrutiny and
 must be legally registered. The Government restricts
 religious sects with views it considers inimical to the common
 good by application of the Societies Act and has banned some
 splinter groups in the past from practicing their faiths in
 Singapore. No religious bodies were asked to leave the
 country in 1984.
 d. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no limitations on freedom of movement within the
 country other than those under the ISA. The ISA allows the
 Minister for Home Affairs to suspend or revoke a detention
 order or impose restrictions on a person's activities, place
 of residence and travel outside of Singapore. All Singapore
 residents over the age of 13 are required to register with the
 Government, receive and carry an identification card and
 report changes of address within 14 days. An individual may
 be denied a passport at the Government's discretion, although
 in practice this applies only to persons convicted of serious
 crimes. Males approaching the age of 18 (when national
 service is generally performed) must obtain an exit permit
 from the Ministry of Defense. Recipients of
 government-financed educational benefits, who are required to
 sign a bond obligation to serve the Government for a fixed
 period, cannot emigrate without paying the balance of their
 bond.
 The right of voluntary repatriation is extended to holders of
 Singaporean passports. However, several hundred ethnic
 Chinese who left Singapore for China during the politically
 difficult 1950's and 1960's have encountered obstacles to
 tneir return.
 Refugees are granted first asylum for 90 days in Singapore
 only if they have a third country guarantee of resettlement.
 Between 1979 and September 1984 a total of 24,956 Indochinese
 refugees had been brought into Singapore in asylum status.
 
 
 869
 SINGAPORE
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The Government refers to Singapore as a 'socialist democracy,*
 although private enterprise is a major feature of life in the
 Republic. Seventy-seven of 79 members of the unicameral
 Parliament elected December 22 are members of the People's
 Action Party (PAP), headed by Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew.
 The Secretary General of the Worker's Party was the sole
 opposition member of Parliament during 1984. No PAP-sponsored
 bills failed in Parliament during 1984. The opposition member
 did not introduce any bills during the year.
 Non-Communist parties are legally free to organize, and there
 are approximately 20 registered political parties in
 Singapore. These parties are closely monitored by the
 Government, which justifies its actions on the grounds that
 prohibited Communists might participate in elections and
 candidates might make libelous statements. Opposition parties
 attribute their repeated electoral losses to historical and
 institutional factors which inhibit their full participation
 in the political process. The successful prosecution of libel
 and defamation suits against opposition parties and candidates
 by members of the PAP bankrupted three opposition politicians
 from the Barisan Sosialis Party in the mid-1970's.
 Individuals who are undischarged bankrupts or who are
 sentenced to at least one year in jail or fined 2,000
 Singapore dollars or more are legally barred from political
 activities and membership in Parliament. Singapore's lone
 opposition MP and his party chairman were convicted in 1984 of
 campaign fund irregularities, but were acquitted of similar,
 though more serious charges.
 Minorities are constitutionally guaranteed equal rights and
 actively participate in the political process.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There are no organizations in Singapore which actively and
 openly monitor human rights violations. Governmental bodies,
 such as the Minority Rights Council, monitor certain aspects
 of human rights in Singapore for domestic purposes.
 Representatives of Amnesty International and other human
 rights groups are not allowed to visit Singapore in an
 official capacity. Amnesty International in its 1984 Report
 expressed concern about the powers of preventive detention
 exercised by the Government under the ISA. Freedom House
 1983-84 report lists Singapore as 'partly free.'
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Singapore is an urban city-state with a strong and prosperous
 free enterprise economy. Private ownership of property is a
 basic feature of Singapore's economy, although the Government
 has, and exercises, almost unlimited right to acquire land at
 1973 prices for extensive development projects. Singapore's
 population in 1984 stood at 2.53 million, with a growth rate
 of 1.2 percent. The success of the country's population
 control program is based on wide-ranging disincentives to
 having more than two children, including educational, tax and
 medical benefits measures. In 1984, the Government announced
 a number of financial and educational incentives to encourage
 
 
 870
 SINGAPORE
 women with university degrees to have more than two children.
 The Government justified the new incentives by stating that
 educated women are more likely to have intelligent offspring.
 The infant mortality rate was 10.3 per 1,000 live births in
 1984. Life expectancy at birth in 1983 was 69 years for males
 and 74 years for females.
 The standard of living is high and has been rising steadily,
 with a gross domestic product growth rate of 7.9 percent in
 1983. Per capita GNP was approximately $6,526.
 In 1984 about 77 percent of the population was housed in
 well-designed, government-subsidized housing. The entire
 population has access to safe drinking water.
 Education is not compulsory, but free primary education is
 provided for children of all Singapore citizens. Secondary
 and tertiary education is of high quality and provided at
 modest cost. The enrollment ratio for students aged 6-17
 years was 83.9 percent in 1982. The literacy rate rose to 85
 percent in 1983.
 Women generally enjoy equal rights, primarily under the 1969
 Women's Charter and the Constitution. Muslim women's rights
 are protected by the provisions of the 1957 Administration of
 Muslim law, which permits Muslim women to apply for divorce
 and provides for women to hold and dispose of property. Women
 have voting rights and the right of equality of economic
 opportunity under the law.
 There are few women in the top ranks of the civil service or
 business. As a result of the December election, however,
 there are now three PAP female members of Parliament. In
 1983, the median gross monthly income of female workers was 64
 percent of that for male workers. A serious shortage of
 workers has led the Government to encourage women to work.
 Singaporean women do not have equal rights with men in the
 transmission of citizenship to their children. A Singaporean
 woman married to a foreigner will not pass citizenship to
 children born outside the country, although a Singaporean man
 can do so. Additionally, the wife of a Singaporean male can
 receive permanent resident status and citizenship based on the
 marriage while the husband of a Singaporean woman cannot.
 Social, economic and cultural facilities are available to all
 citizens regardless of race, religion or sex. Disparities
 exist among the various races, although not as a result of
 government policies. For example, according to 1980 census
 data, 0.21 percent of Malays had a university education, while
 1.8 percent of the Chinese and 2.44 percent of the Indians
 attained that level of education.
 Singapore had 11 government and 12 private hospitals in 1984.
 The quality of health care is very high in both private and
 government facilities, and the former are subsidized heavily
 by the Government.
 
 
 871
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: SINGAPORE
 1982     1983     1984
 ..........................................................
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............  ....  0.0     0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0       0.0     0.0
 A.AID ....................... 0.0        0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............  ....  0.0     0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............  ....  0.0     0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN $-LOANS               0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR               0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE Il-TOTAL .........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.          0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............  .... 0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS ......         0.0      0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...          0.0      0.1      0.1
 LOANS ..............  ....  0.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS .............         0.0      0.1      0.1
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG ....         0.0      0.1      0.1
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...          0.0      0.1      0.1
 LOANS ................. 0.0          0.0     0.0
 GRANTS .............         0.0      0.1      0.1
 ----------------------------------------------------------
 OTHER US LOANS ..........         0.0    272.9      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......         0.0    272.9      0.0
 ALL OTHER ................. 0.0          0.0      0.0
 ..........................................................
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1982     1983     1984     1946-84
 TOTAL ........      1.3      0.7      0.0    386.5
 IBRD               0.0      0.0       0.0    179.4
 IFC                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 IDA                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDB                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 ADB                0.0       0.0      0.0    181.1
 AFDB               0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNDP                1.3      0.7      0.0     25.4
 OTHER-UN           0.0       0.0      0.0      0.6
 EEC                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 40-387 0 - 85 - 56
 
 
 872
