 SINGAPORE
 Singapore, a city-state of about 2.6 million people, has a
 republican form of government based on the Westminster
 parliamentary system. The majority (75 percent) of the
 population is ethnic Chinese, with Malays (15 percent), and
 Indians (7 percent) constituting substantial minorities. The
 civil service is efficient, and corruption is officially and
 actively discouraged.
 The Government maintains active internal security and military
 forces to counter perceived threats to the nation's security.
 The duties of the Internal Security Department (ISD) include
 enforcement of the ISA, including its provision for detention
 without trial.
 Singapore's free market economic system is one of the most
 open in the world and it is marked by impressive economic
 gains--gross domestic product (GDP) grew by 11.1 percent in
 the first half of 1988. Singaporeans enjoy the third highest
 per capita income in Asia (after Japan and oil-rich Brunei).
 Politics has been dominated by the People's Action Party
 (PAP), headed by Prime Minister Lee Kuar Yew, which has held
 power since Singapore gained autonomy from Great Britain in
 1959. Thirty years of political stability and economic
 success have provided a continuing source of popular political
 support to the PAP.
 In September the eighth general election was fairly conducted
 and contested by the largest number of opposition candidates
 in 20 years. During the campaign, opposition party candidates
 pointed to human rights prcblems, particularly detentions
 without trial under the Internal Security Act (ISA), as
 indications that the PAP was pursuing authoritarian policies.
 Campaign activities by both PAP and opposition party
 candidates were open and were covered extensively, if somewhat
 selectively, by the Singapore media. The PAP received 61.9
 percent of the popular vote and won 80 out of the 81
 parliamentary seats. There were no allegations of malfeasance
 or fraud related to the election.
 By contrast, adverse human rights developments in 1988
 included detentions without trial under the ISA, and tight
 restrictions on freedom of the press (particularly the foreign
 press). The Government detained for a second time eight
 persons and their defense attorney under the ISA in April.
 The eight were detained again for recanting their sworn
 statements in which they denied mistreatment during their
 original detention. In May another former detainee and a
 prominent government opponent were also detained under the
 ISA. Subsequently, the attorney, the prominent government
 opponent, and three of those who had been detained again were
 released. In May the Government expelled a U.S. diplomat,
 alleging he had interfered in Singapore's internal affairs
 based on meetings with government opponents. In December,
 following extraordinary procedures, prosecutors tried on
 criminal tax charges and a court convicted in absentia a
 prominent government opponent, who was abroad purportedly for
 diagnosis and treatment of a cardiovascular condition.
 
 
 917
 SINGAPORE
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section I Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no known instances of politically motivated killing.
 b. Disappearance
 There is no evidence of abduction, secret arrests, or of
 clandestine detentions that were not subsequently acknowledged
 by the Government. Opposition elements did not engage in such
 activities.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 -    Treatment or Punishment
 Torture is prohibited under Sections 330 and 331 of the Penal
 Code. Government leaders, including Prime Minister Lee, have
 stated that they oppose the use of torture.
 During 1988 several foreign human rights organizations
 reported that abuses had occurred in 1987 in connection with
 some of the ISA detentions for alleged Marxist activities
 designed to subvert social order. All but one of the persons
 detained were released later in 1987 after making statutory
 declarations that, inter alia, they were not subjected to
 mistreatment by Singapore authorities. In April 1988,
 however, nine of these detainees publicly recanted their
 declarations and alleged that they had in fact been subjected
 to abuse during their initial detention period in 1987. Eight
 of the nine were then redetained under the ISA (the ninth
 being out of the country). Also detained was an attorney
 advising them; later another ex-detainee who allegedly helped
 draft the denial of the 1987 statutory declarations was
 detained again under the ISA. The Government detained them
 for investigation of the circumstances of their denial of the
 veracity of the 1987 statutory declarations and for a
 determination of whether they constituted a threat to
 Singapore's national security. International human rights
 groups charged that the redetainees had again been subject to
 mistreatment. Credible reports indicate that the detainees
 were subjected to confinement in cold rooms, sleep
 deprivation, dousing with cold water, and prolonged
 interrogation. Subsequent to his release, a former detainee
 issued a press release describing similar treatment during his
 detention. At habeas corpus proceedings brought by some of
 the detainees, the Government reported that the detainees were
 being held in solitary confinement and described the limits on
 visits by legal counsel and families of the detainees. The
 Government has continued to reiterate that torture is not
 practiced in Singapore, but one cabinet minister has publicly
 acknowledged that "psychological pressure" is utilized. The
 Government has answered charges of mistreatment by noting that
 persons have the right to bring charges against those in
 Government alleged to have committed such criminal acts. One
 detainee has filed a police report and has also filed a civil
 suit alleging false imprisonment and assault. The cases are
 pending.
 The Penal Code mandates caning in addition to imprisonment as
 punishment for certain offenses, including rape, theft,
 robbery, extortion, housebreaking, and vehicle theft. In
 
 
 918
 SINGAPORE
 practice, the courts routinely order caning for convictions
 for these offenses. Although a prisoner may be sentenced to
 any number of strokes for multiple offenses, 24 strokes are
 the maximum number which may be administered.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Arrest without warrant and detention without trial are
 permitted in some instances under Singapore law. Arrest
 without warrant is authorized under Section 43 of the Criminal
 Law (Temporary Provisions) Act and Sections 8 and 65 of the
 ISA. Detention without trial is authorized under Section 30
 of the Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act and Sections 8
 and 74 of the ISA. The Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions)
 Act is used almost exclusively in secret criminal society and
 drug cases. The Misuse of Drugs Act allows Central Narcotics
 Bureau (CNB) officers and customs officials to arrest without
 warrant any person suspected of manufacturing, importing,
 exporting, possessing, consuming, or trafficking in controlled
 drugs. The Director of the CNB can commit suspected drug
 users to a 6-month term in a drug rehabilitation center in
 cases of positive urinalysis tests. Suspects have a legal
 right to challenge the finding and can appeal through the
 court system. There is a functioning system of bail, and
 those charged in both criminal and security cases are entitled
 to legal counsel.
 Section 8 of the ISA permits the Minister of Home Affairs to
 order the detention of persons if the President determines
 that those persons pose a threat to national security. The
 President may authorize detention for up to 2 years. After 2
 years, the President must again determine whether the detainee
 should be kteld longer, and may so order, again for up to 2
 years. There is no limitation on the number of times a
 detention order may be renewed. A detainee's case is reviewed
 periodically by an advisory board, to which the detainee may
 make representations. The board can recommend that a detainee
 be released prior to expiration of the detention order. The
 board's recommendations are not binding.  According to the
 Government, persons are released when the Minister of Home
 Affairs determines that they no longer pose a threat to
 national security and that they are unlikely to resume
 subversive activity. The Minister may also revoke the order
 of release. Under Section 74 of the ISA, police authorities
 may detain a person for up to 48 hours; the Minister of Home
 Affairs can then order the detainee to be held for up to 28
 days longer. Although, ISA detainees are normally allowed
 access to lawyers and visits by relatives, those detainees
 arrested in April were held incommunicado for 10 days.
 In defending the ISA, the authorities maintain that the
 Communist Party of Malaya (CPM) has not abandoned its intent
 to overthrow the Government by force and that the need for
 continuing social harmony requires special measures.
 Government leaders have also claimed that the ISA is necessary
 to detain Singaporeans who might become "beholden" to foreign
 powers, citing past cases where Singaporeans were found to
 have been agents of neighboring governments, and more recent
 allegations that some in opposition to the Government received
 foreign backing.
 On three occasions in 1988, the Government used its powers
 under the ISA. In April nine people were detained without
 trial under the ISA. In May the Government detained a
 businessman who allegedly assisted in drafting the repudiation
 
 
 919
 SINGAPORE
 of the Statutory Declarations. In May the Government arrested
 Francis Seow, a former Solicitor General, who had indicated
 support for the nine detainees. The Government charged that
 Seow had been "cultivated" by U.S. diplomats for a plan to
 organize an opposition candidate slate to run in the
 anticipated general elections. Citing statements made by Seow
 during detention, the Government unexpectedly requested the
 immediate withdrawal of a foreign service officer assigned to
 the American Embassy in Singapore. The U.S. Government
 complied with the request under protest and subsequently
 expelled a political officer assigned to the Singapore Embassy
 in Washington. By July Seow and 4 of the 10 people detained
 in April and May had been released.
 Chia Thye Poh, a former Member of Parliament, also remains in
 detention under the ISA for alleged membership in the CPM. He
 has been held without trial since 1966. According to the
 Government, Chia will be released when he publicly renounces
 the use of force to effect political change; he has refused to
 do so, denying that he advocates violence. Government
 officials have also announced publicly that Chia will be
 released if he agrees to leave the country. Canada offered to
 grant Chia asylum in 1987, but Chia reportedly refused and
 insisted on receiving an open trial on the charges against him.
 No formal charges have been brought against any of the
 detainees held under the ISA, and no trials have taken place.
 The Government has said publicly that in security cases
 traditional evidentiary and due process standards do not
 apply. During the summer of 1988, a series of habeas corpus
 proceedings were brought by some of the April detainees to
 challenge the legality of their detention, but the trial court
 ruled that executive decisions regarding detentions under the
 ISA are not reviewable by the judiciary. Attorneys for the
 detainees appealed the trial court decision to the Court of
 Appeals. In December that court, ruling that the detention
 orders were technically defective, granted the writ of habeas
 corpus and ordered the release of four of the ISA detainees.
 However, the four were immediately served with new detention
 orders, with the technical defect corrected, and redetained.
 The four have filed new habeas corpus petitions challenging
 the new detention orders. The court has granted leave for the
 petitions to be filed, but will not hear arguments on the new
 petitions until early 1989. On December 19, the Government
 announced that the Appeals Court had asserted an overly broad
 right of judicial review of ISA detentions and that the
 Government will seek amendment of the ISA to narrow the scope
 of judicial review.
 According to the Government, four Malaysians detained in 1987
 for allegedly inciting ethnic tensions have been released.
 Eight people remained under detention under the ISA as of
 November 30. According to the Government, some 1,250 people
 are held in indefinite detention under the Criminal Law
 (Temporary Provisions) Act, with the large majority being held
 on narcotics-related charges.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Persons detained under the provisions of the ISA and the
 Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act do not enjoy the right
 to a public trial, which is accorded in all other cases. In
 normal cases the Criminal Procedures Code provides that a
 
 
 920
 SINGAPORE
 charge against a defendant must be read and explained to him
 as soon as it is framed by the magistrate. The accused has
 the right to be represented by an attorney (advocate). Trial
 is by a magistrate or judge rather than by jury. In most
 cases, defendants may appeal their verdicts to higher courts.
 Singapore is a member of the British Commonwealth, and
 Singapore law provides for appeal to the Judicial Committee of
 the Privy Council in London in certain cases, for example,
 where legal questions are reserved or where the cases are of
 "public interest."
 Judges are appointed by the President on the recommendation of
 the Prime Minister in consultation with the Chief Justice.
 Subordinate court judges (magistrates) and public prosecutors
 are civil-servants and can be transferred by the Legal Service
 Commission.
 The political opposition has accused the government leadership
 of interfering in the judicial process; the Government has
 denied these allegations. In July an opposition politician
 was convicted of contempt of court for implying that the
 courts were not independent in politically sensitive cases.
 In a November decision overturning the disbarment of a former
 opposition Member of Parliament, the Privy Council criticized
 the High Court's role in convicting the defendant for a crime
 which led to his disbarment. The Privy Council noted the
 "grievous injustice" of the oppositionist's expulsion from
 Parliament as a result of the conviction.
 Some critics contend that the Government is using a criminal
 tax proceeding to exclude prominent oppositionist Francis Seow
 from Parliament. In August a magistrate reversed a previous
 procedural ruling in favor of Seow, and Seow had to enter a
 plea. However, the magistrate scheduled the trial for
 November, thereby permitting Seow to run for Parliament in the
 September elections. After granting several postponements
 while Seow underwent medical treatment in the United States,
 the court ordered the trial to proceed on December 15 without
 Seow's presence. Subsequently the court convicted Seow on
 five of six tax evasion charges. The trial on the sixth
 charge was rescheduled for January 3, 1989.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Government uses its wide discretionary powers when it
 believes that the security of the nation is threatened. In
 most cases, search warrants are required for intrusion into
 the home. Law enforcement officers may, however, search a
 person, home, or property without a warrant if they decide
 there are grounds to do so. In ISA cases, warrantless
 searches are common. Judicial review of such searches can be
 undertaken by the courts at the request of the defendant but
 it is not automatic. Divisions of the Government's law
 enforcement agencies, including the Internal Security
 Department and the Corrupt Practices Investigation Board
 (CPIB), have a wide network for gathering information.
 Government opponents have alleged that the authorities monitor
 telephone and other private conversations.
 During the September 1988 elections, both PAP and opposition
 candidates published statements accusing opponents of alleged
 personal, moral, and legal misconduct. Some ruling party
 criticisms may have been based on documents compiled by
 
 
 921
 SINGAPORE
 government investigative authorities, including confidential
 tax information.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution permits official restrictions on the freedom
 of expression. During an official visit to the United States
 in April, Lee Kuan Yew stated that the Singapore Government
 sets its own standards and has no obligation to uphold a free
 and unrestricted press. In practice, freedom of speech and
 press is circumscribed, and the Government forbids statements
 which it thinks might arouse tensions among the various races
 or which threaten national security or public order.
 Inflammatory discussion of race, religion, and language is
 officially forbidden.
 Newspapers are published by private firms with close ties to
 the national leadership. While there is no direct censorship
 of the press, editors have acknowledged there are restraints,
 and journalists understand the guidelines within which they
 must operate. The local media did not exceed the press
 guidelines in 1988. During the general election campaign, the
 media devoted greater coverage to PAP positions, candidates,
 and campaign events than to those of the opposition, although
 the opposition was covered extensively. The media has
 similarly reported, accurately but selectively, domestic and
 foreign charges of human rights abuses.
 The Government brought charges against an opposition Member of
 Parliament, alleging that his party printed unauthorized
 editions of the party's newspaper.
 A wide range of international magazines and newspapers can be
 purchased uncensored in Singapore, although newspapers printed
 in Malaysia are not circulated. The country is a regional
 publishing center for a number of international magazines and
 newspapers. Under the Newspaper and Printing Press Act, the
 Government may restrict the sales and distribution of foreign
 publications deemed to have "engaged" in Singapore's domestic
 politics. The Government interprets the statute as giving it
 an unrestricted right of reply to foreign media coverage of
 Singapore and obliging foreign publications to publish such
 replies in full. Because of noncompliance with this
 obligation, the Government restricted distribution of three
 foreign publications in 1987, and in 1988 continued to enforce
 restrictions placed on Asiaweek, the Far Eastern Economic
 Review (FEER), and the Asian Wall Street Journal (AWSJ).
 Restrictions on the circulation of Asiaweek have, been changed
 from 500 to 5,000 copies per issue after Asiaweek agreed that
 it would not "engage' in the "domestic politics of
 Singapore." The AWSJ challenged the Government's action in
 Singapore courts, arguing that the-order restricting its
 circulation should be invalidated because the refusal to
 publish a letter from the Government did not amount to
 "engaging in domestic politics." A Singapore trial court
 found in favor of the Government in May, but the AWSJ is
 appealing the judgment. The FEER is also involved in legal
 proceedings. The Government has accused the FEER of printing
 "malicious criticism" and "damaging statements" against the
 Prime Minister, even though the magazine consistently accorded
 the Government the right of reply. Prime Minister Lee's
 
 
 922
 SINGAPORE
 lawyers are also suing for damages. The FEER case was still
 in evidentiary stages at year's end.
 With respect to nonprint media, the government-owned Singapore
 Broadcasting Corporation (SBC) has a monopoly on domestic
 radio and television broadcasting, and follows government
 guidelines similar to those pertaining to local print media.
 Malaysian radio and television can be received uncensored in
 Singapore; the British Broadcasting Corporation world service
 also broadcasts locally on the FM band. An official board of
 film censors approves motion pictures, as well as video
 cassettes, and television programs. Other government bodies
 censor other media; such censorship is aimed at material which
 the Government believes would undermine morals, advocate
 excessive permissiveness, promote drug abuse, or increase
 social tension. Literature and films featuring explicit
 sexual or drug-related themes are therefore banned. In May
 the SBC restricted the broadcast of seven songs, enunciating a
 policy that "songs which are political, religious, contain
 undesirable influences, or do not conform with national
 objectives will be restricted in broadcast."
 In separate actions, the Government refused the application of
 the resident AWSJ journalist to extend his annual work permit
 and refused to authorize a replacement for him. During the
 campaign period preceding the September 3 parliamentary
 election, reporters for the FEER and the AWSJ were asked to
 leave or denied entry under Singapore visa and immigration
 regulations.
 Some opponents, as well as government supporters, have
 contended that the PAP has used civil proceedings to limit
 freedom of expression. In 1988 Prime Minister Lee either won
 or favorably settled several civil suits which he brought,
 alleging that government opponents slandered or defamed him.
 The Prime Minister had instituted such suits before and has
 never lost a case. Defendants have had to pay hefty civil
 damages and court costs. One award to Lee amounted to about
 $250,000, reportedly the largest civil award for libel and
 slander in Singapore's legal history. Lee has consistently
 donated all awards to charity. Recently, government critic
 Francis Seow filed a defamation suit against Minister of Trade
 and Industry Lee Hsien Loong.
 The National University of Singapore (NUS) is the leading
 academic institution, with the National Polytechnic Institute
 and Nanyang Technological Institute following next in terms of
 prestige. The members of the faculties at these institutions
 are Government employees. A number of NUS lecturers are
 concurrently PAP Members of Parliament. The opposition
 fielded no candidates from academia during the general
 elections. Oral and written criticism of government policies
 occasionally occurs on campus. For example, at the request of
 the Government, the NUS Sociology Department conducted and
 published a study of young people's dissatisfaction with
 government policies. Their criticisms were subsequently
 reported in the print media. Criticism of government leaders
 and alleged authoritarian tendencies is infrequent.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Assemblies of more than five people in public, including
 political rallies, are authorized only with permission from
 the police. In practice, the Government does not stop social
 gatherings regardless of the number present. Several
 
 
 923
 SINGAPORE
 thousands of Singaporeans attended ruling and opposition
 political party rallies at authorized sites during the general
 election campaign in August and September with no interference
 from law enforcement agencies.
 Associations, societies, clubs, churches, and other
 organizations with more than 10 members must be registered
 with the Government under the Societies Act. Registration is
 denied to societies that the Government believes are likely to
 be used for unlawful purposes or for purposes prejudicial to
 public peace, welfare, or public order. During the election
 campaign, several opposition candidates alleged that the
 Government has exercised its broad discretion systematically
 to prevent the formation of any association or organization
 that could provide a basis of support for opposition parties
 or movements. These opposition candidates pointed out that,
 in contrast, various approved social, youth, and labor
 organizations were supporting the PAP. The opposition
 allegations principally were that government actions, such as
 the detention and redetention of young social activists in
 1987 and 1988 had a chilling effect on the formation of
 organizations with opposition orientations. In response, the
 PAP attributed the lack of opposition to opposition
 disorganization, lack of leadership, and lack of alternative
 policy programs.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is affirmed by the Constitution and
 usually respected in practice. However, all religious groups
 are subject to government scrutiny and must be legally
 registered. The Government restricts religious sects with
 views it considers inimical to the common good by application
 of the Societies Act, and it has banned some groups under this
 rationale. A Presidential Council on Minority Rights exists
 to ensure that legislation does not infringe upon the rights
 of ethnic or religious minorities. There is no state
 religion. The Government has provided financial assistance to
 build and maintain mosques. There is no religious test for
 employment with the Government or for membership in the PAP.
 Missionaries are permitted to work and to publish religious
 texts.
 The Government draws a sharp distinction between purely
 religious activities and social activism flowing from
 religious beliefs. It expelled officials of the Christian
 Conference of Asia in December 1987 for alleged involvement in
 wpolitical activities." Most of the ISA redetainees are Roman
 Catholic, but the Government contends that their arrests were
 not because of their religion but due to their allegedly
 illegal political activities.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no limitations on freedom of movement within the
 country other than those under the ISA. The ISA allows the
 Minister for Home Affairs to suspend or revoke a detention
 order or impose restrictions on an affected person's
 activities, place of residence, and travel outside of
 Singapore. All Singaporean residents over the age of 13 are
 required to register with the Government, receive and carry an
 
 
 924
 SINGAPORE
 identification card, and report changes of address within 14
 days. A person may be denied a passport at the Government's
 discretion, although in practice this applies only to those
 convicted of a serious crime. Males approaching the age of 18
 (when national service is generally performed) must obtain an
 exit permit from the Ministry of Defense. Recipients of
 government-financed higher educational benefits are required
 to sign a bond obligation to serve the Government for a fixed
 period and may not cease employment or emigrate within the
 prescribed period without paying the balance of their bond.
 The right of voluntary repatriation is extended to holders of
 Singaporean passports. However, several hundred ethnic Chinese
 who left Singapore for China during the politically difficult
 1940's and 1950's have encountered obstacles to their return.
 In 1985 Parliament provided for the loss of citizenship by
 Singaporeans who reside outside Singapore for more than 10
 years consecutively. Action under this law is discretionary
 and has been taken in at least one case.
 Refugees rescued at sea are granted first asylum for up to 90
 days in Singapore if the rescuing vessel's next scheduled port
 of call is Singapore and if a resettlement country provides a
 guarantee of removal within 90 days. Singapore does not
 accept refugees arriving in small boats but will assist in
 reprovisioning and repairs of refugee vessels before pointing
 them towards first asylum countries. Government officials
 have stated that Singapore will admit ship stowaways only when
 a resettlement guarantee exists and when the ship in question
 is Vietnamese and returning directly to Vietnam. In September
 Singapore made an exception to this policy by allowing 13
 Vietnamese stowaways to transit through Singapore en route to
 a regional refugee processing center.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Lee Kuan Yew has served as Prime Minister since independence.
 Lee heads the PAP, a broadly based institution and the
 dominant political party in Singapore. It includes
 representatives from all racial communities in Singapore and
 is rooted in neighborhood, youth, and labor associations.
 Non-Communist parties are legally free to organize, subject to
 strict regulations on party constitution, fundraising, and
 accountability. Opposition parties are monitored closely by
 the Government, which justifies its action on the grounds of
 possible Communist infiltration and enforcement of libel laws
 in connection with election campaigning. Seven opposition
 parties ran candidates in the September general elections, and
 several other parties are legally registered but have been
 dormant. Voting is compulsory; those failing to vote are
 subsequently removed from the rolls but can be reinstated upon
 paying a fee of about $2.50. The traditional voting rate is
 over 90 percent, a rate reaffirmed in the September 3
 elections.
 When the September elections for Singapore's 81-seat
 Parliament were called, opposition parties complained that the
 event was a "snap" election with insufficient notice (16 days)
 for them to prepare. The 16-day notice was, however, in
 accord with minimum requirements under the law. Opposition
 parties also criticized the domestic media for bias in favor
 of the PAP and accused the PAP of pursuing authoritarian
 measures designed to stifle viewpoints differing from those of
 the PAP. The opposition parties alleged furthermore that the
 
 
 SINGAPORE
 "Group Representation Constituency" (GRC) system (3-man teams
 representing large districts) instituted by the PAP-controlled
 Parliament effectively immunized the PAP from serious
 electoral challenge in the GRC districts. The PAP contended
 that the GRC system is designed to promote the rights of
 minorities by ensuring ethnic minority representation in
 Parliament. Opposition party slates contested 10 of the 13
 GRC's at stake in the September elections and came close to
 winning 3.
 The PAP ran on its record of economic and political
 achievements while the opposition parties ran on a theme of
 preventing "authoritarianism" under*PAP rule. Eleven seats
 were uncontested "walkovers," which PAP candidates won by
 default. The remaining 70 seats were contested by a total of
 75 opposition candidates. Thousands attended both ruling and
 opposition party rallies. Three televised, equal-time debates
 drew a large audience of viewers.
 The PAP won 80 of the 81 seats, with only the opposition
 Singapore Democratic Party (SDP) winning a single seat. The
 PAP won 61.9 percent of the popular vote in the 70 contested
 races. Two candidates from the opposition Workers, Party--one
 of whom was Francis Seow--accepted seats under a provision of
 the Parliamentary Elections Act that gives losing opposition
 candidates who gained the highest percentage of the popular
 vote a maximum of three "nonconstituency member of parliament"
 seats with limited, nonvoting privileges. As a result of the
 1988 election, there are now four female members of
 Parliament, an increase of one over the number of women in the
 previous Parliament.
 Opposition parties did not allege any misfeasance during
 election day, and it is generally accepted that the voting and
 vote-counting system were fair, accurate, and free from
 tampering.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental'Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Governmental bodies, such as the presidentially appointed
 Minority Rights Council, monitor alleged violations of
 minority rights, primarily any concerning the Malay minority.
 There are, however, no nongovernmental organizations which
 actively and openly monitor alleged general human rights
 violations. Amnesty International is not allowed to operate
 in Singapore. Representatives of the U.S.-based Asia Watch
 visited Singapore twice in 1988. One met with Prime Minister
 Lee in May, and another visited the country in August.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Because of Singapore's history of intercommunal tension, the
 Government takes affirmative measures to ensure racial,
 ethnic, religious, and cultural nondiscrimination. Social,
 economic, and cultural facilities are available to all
 citizens regardless of race, religion, or sex. Minorities are
 constitutionally afforded equal rights and actively
 participate in the political process. Disparities exist among
 the various races, although not as a result of government
 policies. Government officials have acknowledged that Malay
 Singaporeans are represented disproportionately in the bottom
 
 
 926
 SINGAPORE
 quarter of Singapore society, based on income, although
 precise statistics are not readily available.
 Women generally enjoy equal rights, primarily under the 1969
 Women's Charter and the Constitution, but they do not have
 equal rights with men in the transmission of citizenship to
 their children or in the right to residence of a foreign
 spouse in Singapore. Muslim women's rights are protected by
 the provisions of the 1957 administration of Muslim law, which
 permits Muslim women to apply for divorce and permits them to
 hold and dispose of property. Women's voting rights are
 protected under the law.
 Although women appear well represented in the middle ranks,
 there are few women in the top ranks of the civil service or
 business. In 1986 the median gross monthly income of female
 workers was 76 percent of that for male workers. As a result
 of a chronic labor shortage, more women are entering the work
 force, and unions have begun attempting to organize them.
 The Government has encouraged the development of Confucian
 Ethics ("Conthics") as a moral guide and as part of the
 elective curriculum, especially for Singaporeans of Chinese
 extraction. However, Singaporeans of any ethnicity and
 religion can freely choose to adopt or ignore "Conthics."
 Malay is the national language of Singapore, but English,
 Tamil, and Mandarin are also official languages. English is
 the language of administration. Schooling can be had in any
 of these languages, and there is official encouragement of
 multilingualism. Some critics allege that an ongoing "Speak
 Mandarin" campaign is a government-sponsored attempt to
 entrench ethnic Chinese as the dominant group, but the
 Government has claimed that the "Speak Mandarin" program is
 aimed at encouraging understanding among Singaporean Chinese
 who are separated linguistically by the different regional
 dialects they speak.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Singapore's Constitution gives all citizens the right to form
 associations (Article 14), including trade unions. Parliament
 may, however, impose "such restrictions as it considers
 necessary or expedient in the interest of the security of
 Singapore or any part thereof, public order or morality." The
 right of association is delimited by the Societies Act and
 labor and education laws and regulations. Labor unions can be
 formed so long as they are not detrimental to the national
 security, public order, or morality. In practice, Communist
 labor unions are not permitted.
 The National Trades Union Congress (NTUC) is a member of the
 International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU); the
 Asian and Pacific Regional Organization (APRO) of the ICFTU
 has its headquarters in Singapore. Singapore is a member of
 the International Labor Organization (ILO) and has ratified
 ILO Convention No. 98 on the Right to Organize and Collective
 Bargaining but has not ratified Convention No. 87 on Freedom
 of Association and Protection of the Right to Orqanize.
 The national work force is comprised of about 1.2 million
 workers, of which some 210,000 are organized into over 80
 trade unions. Some 70 of these, including about 90 percent of
 
 
 927
 SINGAPORE
 the unionized workers, are affiliated with an umbrella
 organization, NTUC, which has a close relationship with the
 Government. Though there is no formal link between the PAP
 and the NTUC, the second Deputy Prime Minister serves as its
 Secretary General, and about a dozen NTUC officials were
 elected to Parliament as PAP candidates in the September
 elections.
 Some government critics characterize the close association
 between the PAP, the NTUC, and the Government as being
 designed to further the Government's political and
 developmental goals rather than strictly to promote workers'
 interests. For example, the NTUC enunciated a new policy in
 October that the unionists who actively support opposition
 parties should not remain officials of the NTUC because the
 NTUC and the PAP share the same ideology. In the
 implementation of the policy, officials of NTUC-affiliated
 unions who had run as opposition parliamentary candidates were
 removed from their union positions. Two members of a NTUC
 taxi cooperative who ran on the opposition ticket were forced
 to leave the cooperative. An NTUC employee who ran as an
 oppositionist was fired. The NTUC actions were limited to
 those who were opposition candidates and has not extended to
 those who merely supported the opposition.
 Many observers in Singapore note that the PAP, the Government,
 and the NTUC have a symbiotic relationship, especially because
 Singapore is in effect a one-party state. Workers have the
 legal right to strike, but strikes are rare. In the only
 recent strike (in 1986), NTUC officials, including PAP members
 of Parliament, joined the picket line. Reasons given for the
 paucity of strikes include a cultural aversion to confrontation
 on the part of the workers, the fact that there is a functional
 institutional framework for resolving industrial disputes, and
 a widespread belief that the Government would intervene in
 activities which would reflect badly on Singapore's
 attractiveness as an investment center. Another probable
 factor is the fact that from 1980 to 1988 wage increases
 averaged approximately 7 percent while the GDP grew at an
 average annual rate of over 6 percent, thus boosting real
 average incomes. The NTUC, the Government, and business
 leaders point to this record as evidence that the National
 Wage Council structure fairly accommodates the interests of
 all concerned parties.
 Several unions have been founded outside of the NTUC.
 Catering staff and pilots for Singapore Airlines and Chinese
 language teachers, for instance, have formed unions outside of
 the NTUC framework. They function freely and have a
 reputation for aggressively representing members' interests.
 As the economy shifts away from manufacturing--where
 unionization has traditionally been common--towards the
 service sector, the NTUC has launched a campaign to increase
 union membership in the services sector, among female
 employees, and among part-time employees.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The Trades Union Act authorizes the formation of unions with
 broad rights, albeit with some narrow restrictions--such as
 prohibitions on the unionization of uniformed employees and
 the holding of union office by persons with criminal records.
 Collective bargaining is a normal part of management-labor
 relations in Singapore, particularly in the manufacturing
 sector. On the average, collective bargaining agreements are
 
 
 928
 SINGAPORE
 renewed every 2 to 3 years. As the wage increase figures
 cited above indicate, labor has fared relatively well at the
 bargaining table. This result may be attributable in part to
 Singapore's small population and resultant tight labor
 supply. Workers with higher skill levels that are in
 relatively short supply have a record of job-hopping if they
 are dissatisfied with their workplaces. The Government
 attempted to deter job-hopping in 1988 by proposing a tracking
 plan, whose services would be made available for a fee to
 potential employers, but the proposal met with little interest
 from the private sector. The Government seeks to make
 Singapore highly competitive in international trade and, as
 part of that effort, strives continuously to upgrade the
 skills of workers.
 The ILO's Committee of Experts on the Application of
 Conventions and Regulations, at its 1988 session, discussed
 the Singapore Government's reluctance to introduce amendments
 to bring its legislation excluding certain conditions of
 employment from collective bargaining into conformity with the
 provisions of Convention 98 because "such action might
 endanger the balance and harmony that reign in industrial
 relations that have long been based on harmony and mutual
 trust." The Government also pointed out that it is current
 practice to consult workers on these aspects of conditions of
 employment when necessary. While taking note of these views,
 the Committee urged the Government to ensure that the
 legislation be amended so as to give workers the possibility
 of negotiating on a voluntary basis all the aspects of their
 conditions of employment. The Committee also requested the
 Government to indicate the measures it envisages taking to
 encourage and promote the development and utilization of
 collective bargaining with a view to regulating the terms and
 conditions of employment of workers in enterprises where there
 are as yet no unions.
 Labor laws and regulations are enforced uniformly throughout
 Singapore.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Singapore law forbids the use of forced or compulsory labor,
 and such labor is not found in Singapore.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The Government enforces the employment act which sets the
 minimum age for the employment of children at 12 years of age.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The Singapore labor market offers relatively high wage rates
 and working conditions consistent with accepted international
 standards. Singapore, however, has no minimum wage or
 unemployment compensation. Because of a continuing labor
 shortage, wages have generally stayed high, and the
 unemployment rate at about 3 percent. In 1988 the Government
 continued implementation of a flexible wage program wherein
 labor and management in private companies agree to set bonuses
 based on the annual profitability of the companies as well as
 on the companies' international competitiveness. Because of
 Singapore's booming economy in 1988 and the consequent high
 demand for labor, the "flexiwage" system has not resulted in a
 loss of real income for workers.
 
 
 929
 SINGAPORE
 The Government enforces comprehensive occupational safety and
 health laws. Enforcement procedures, coupled with the
 promotion of educational and training programs, have reduced
 the frequency of job-related accidents by a third from the
 early 1970's to the early 1980's. The average severity of
 occupational accidents has also been reduced.
 Because of the domestic labor shortage, over 100,000 foreign
 workers were employed in Singapore as of September 30. Most
 are unskilled labor and household servants. The Government
 controls the numbers of foreign workers directly through
 immigration regulations and indirectly through levies on firms
 hiring foreign workers. The Government officially encourages
 the employment of Singaporeans over foreign workers and exacts
 a levy on persons and firms hiring foreign workers. Other
 employment, social insurance, and safety regulations are
 applied without discrimination against foreign workers.
 Foreign workers face no legal wage discrimination, but the
 concentration of foreign workers in low-skilled jobs and the
 extra cost for employers in the form of levies for hiring
 foreign workers suggest that they are in general paid less
 than Singaporeans. There are no labor unions composed of
 foreign workers, and Singaporean labor unions do not recruit
 foreign workers as members. Some human rights groups have
 charged that household servants, especially Filipino maids',
 are subject to illegally long work hours as well as occasional
 mistreatment and confinement in the households where they are
 employed. In March the Philippines imposed a ban on household
 servants working abroad in an effort to secure better working
 conditions for them. However, the Government of the
 Philippines has included Singapore among a number of countries
 to which Filipino household servants are permitted to go to
 work.
 
 
 930
