SINGAPORE
This year's report on Singapore, like last year's, presents a good factual account of human rights issues in the country. Buried in the 1991 report is the important assertion that "the PAP's [People's Action Party] domination of politics in Singapore continues, as it has for three decades under the authoritarian leadership of Lee-Kuan Yew." This sentence goes far in explaining the nature of human rights violations in Singapore. Unfortunately, omissions of key human rights issues and events in the report ultimately weaken the State Department's analysis. The State Department also too often attributes allegations of human rights violations to "government critics" or unidentified observers, instead of reaching its own conclusions. And while the report notes the potential harmful impact of Singapore's many restrictive laws, it should make clear that the mere threat of their implementation has a considerable chilling effect on all opposition political activity.
This year's report corrects the 1990 report's gross omission of any discussion of Singapore's longest-held political prisoner, Chia Thye Poh, but important elements of Chia's detention go unmentioned. During his 23 years of detention under Singapore's Internal Security Act (ISA), Chia was never tried or formally charged with a crime. He also was subjected to severe psychological pressure in an attempt to brainwash him, punishment for refusing to do forced labor, and incarceration in a stifling, dimly lit cell that created serious health problems. Although he is now allowed to visit Singapore proper from 6 a.m. to 9 p.m. daily, as the report notes, he is subject to close government surveillance, and government restrictions make employers very reluctant to hire him.
The section on arbitrary arrest acknowledges only that some former ISA detainees are still subject to government-imposed restrictions on the right to travel, make public statements and associate freely. In fact, all eight of the ISA detainees who were re-arrested in 1988 are subject to restrictions, which make it difficult for them to find jobs and engage in any community activities. For example, a vaguely worded clause in Vincent Cheng's release agreement requires him to get
313
Singapore
permission from the Internal Security Department (ISD) before granting an interview. However, the ISD could determine that the mere act of seeking permission is "evidence" that Cheng has not been sufficiently "rehabilitated" ~ that is, he wants to talk about the past ~ and thereby provides grounds for his being detained again.
The report fails to note that the government has conditioned the right of former leftwing politicians banished during the 1950-60s to visit or return to Singapore on their relinquishment of all political activity and, in some instances, a guarantee that they reside with their children. Exiled political activists from the 1970-80s, although not technically forbidden from entering Singapore, still have arrest warrants pending against them.
The section on torture implies that the only torture imposed on past detainees was the threat of indefinite confinement. As already noted with respect to Chia Thye Poh, other methods have been used, including physical blows, blindfolding, stripping and sleep deprivation.
The section on denial of fair public trials corrects the omissions of last year's report, such as the government's use of untenured "judicial commissioners." But the section should have noted that the provisional appointment of judges who have passed the mandatory retirement age also contributes to the judiciary's lack of independence. The section also omits key facts about the harassment of long-time opposition leader J.B. Jeyaretnam. Lee Kuan Yew's slander action against Jeyaretnam, one of 13 such suits he has commenced and won over the past 30 years, was premised upon Jeyaretnam's request for a government inquiry into the suicide of former minister of national development Teh Cheang Wan. Jeyaretnam called for an inquiry because Teh had died from an overdose of a prescription drug and had written a letter to Lee the day before his death stating that he "would accept any decision which [Lee] may want to make."
The PAP's attacks on members of Singapore's legal profession receive more coverage this year than in the past, but important facts are again omitted. The 1989 amendments to the Legal Professions Act
314
Singapore
prohibit appeals of disbarments to the Privy Council in London and created the government-controlled Academy of Law, a mandatory bar society.
With respect to freedom of speech and press, the report again does not note that the requirement that foreign publications obtain ministerial licenses (renewable annually) is specifically aimed at publications that cover politics and current events in Southeast Asia. It also again fails to acknowledge that the government's printing and distribution of unauthorized photocopy editions of the Far Eastern Economic Review constitutes serious copyright violations.
The report accurately states that Cable News Network (CNN) broadcasts were aired during the Persian Gulf War, but fails to specify that such broadcasts were restricted to banks and financial institutions that had been granted month-long licenses to operate receive-only satellite dishes. The general public had no access to the CNN broadcasts. Even the authority recently granted to permanently install satellite dishes is limited to institutions whose applications are supported by die Monetary Authority of Singapore or the Economic Development Board. The U.S. embassy's own application to install a satellite dish was granted two years after application in the mid-1980s, on the condition that no Singaporeans, not even embassy employees, be allowed to view the programs.
The report paints a picture of expanding television access in Singapore, yet fails to note that the scheduled screening of a documentary on Singapore coproduced by the United States, Australia and Japan was canceled last summer. The government claimed that the program was inaccurate and insensitive and was part of a series on Asian countries described as "skewed towards social discontent and societal upheaval." The government took particular, offense to the program's description of the country's public housing as "high-rise slums."
Government censorship of film, which had been relaxed after the Gulf War, was subsequently reinforced following a dramatic increase in movie attendance. The age of admission for restricted films was raised
315
Singapore
from 18 to 21 years and films with erotic, violent or exploitative themes, as determined by the government, will be banned.
Other restrictions on the freedom of speech are omitted. All books must be submitted to a censor. Since this review procedure can take many months, booksellers self-censor their selections, choosing only reading material they know will be safe. A similar self-censorship keeps the domestic press in line even without the trappings of government control. Journalists will refrain from asking questions at press conferences to avoid drawing unwanted attention that might contribute to losing their jobs.
The report's discussion of the Maintenance of Religious Harmony Act passed by Parliament in 1990 does not adequately convey the severity of the law. Under the Act, the Minister of Home Affairs, on the advice of the executive-appointed Presidential Council on Religious Harmony, may issue prohibition orders enjoining specified activity against alleged violators of the Act. Violations of a such an order can result in up to two years in jail or a S$10,000 fine without trial. A second offense can carry up to three years' imprisonment, a S$20,000 fine or both, again without trial.
The report does not mention the adoption of a government white paper on "shared values" drafted by Lee Kuan Yew's son, Deputy Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong. The five values articulated in the document -- nation before community and society above self; the family as the basic unit of society; respect and community support for the individual; consensus instead of conflict; and racial and religious harmony ~ are aimed expressly at preventing Singapore's Chinese population from becoming "too Westernized." Singapore's minority Malay population as well as opposition and nonconstituency Members of Parliament strongly opposed the document as a transparent attempt to silence dissenting voices, impose "thought control" and politically embrace Confucian philosophy. Although the government claims that no measures will be taken to legally enforce adherence to the values, the document could have a significant impact on the country's political and social life.
316
Singapore
Singapore's latest "Speak Mandarin" campaign employed the highly controversial slogan "If you are Chinese, make a statement ~ in Mandarin." For the first time, the official drive to speak Mandarin seemed aimed at inhibiting the use of English and the resulting exposure to Western influences rather than discouraging Chinese dialects.
The section on respect for political rights, while noting that opposition candidates received 39% of the popular vote yet only four seats in Parliament, should have discussed district gerrymandering by the ruling PAP. In accordance with the terms of the Presidential Elections Bill passed by Parliament in July 1991, polling day must be announced between nine days and eight weeks in advance. Opposition leaders claim that the minimum period is too short and thereby disadvantageous to the opposition.
The report provides a detailed, but largely uncritical, discussion of the newly established elected presidency. It does not mention that there is no judicial review of a determination by the Presidential Elections Committee disqualifying a candidate or that certain individuals, such as former ministers, are exempt from the Committee's review.
The report continues to ignore Singapore's Destitute Persons Act (1989), under which any destitute person may be required, subject to penal sanctions, to reside in a welfare home and to engage in any suitable work. Since 1970, the Committee of Experts on the Application of Conventions and Recommendations of the International Labor Organization has criticized this Act and has urged the government to amend the law to reflect Convention standards. The government has ignored these recommendations.
By again claiming that reports by foreign workers of abuse or poor working conditions are only "occasional," the report glosses over the difficulty foreign workers have in protecting their interests. In the aftermath of the 1987 ISA detentions, the government shut down the Geylang Catholic Centre for Foreign Workers, which provided counseling, legal aid and information to foreign workers, especially Filipina maids. The Centre was seen as a potential source of conflict
317
Singapore
with the government and some of its staff members were among those arrested under the ISA.
The report corrects an omission in last year's report concerning legislation enacted in 1985 that allows loss of Singaporean citizenship for persons who reside outside of Singapore for more than 10 years consecutively.
318
