 SINGAPORE
 Singapore, a city-state of 3 milionpeople, has a republican form of government
 based on the parliamentary system. The majority of the population is ethnic Chi-
 nese (78 percent), with Malaya (14 percent) and Indians (7 perent) constituting sub-
 stantial minorities. Poitics are dominated by the People's Aion Party (PAP), which
 has held power since Singapore gained autonomy from Great Britain in 1959. Goh
 Chok Tong completed his seond year as Prime Minister in November. Lee Kuan
 Yew, who served as Prime Minister from independence in 1965 until 1990, remains
 active poitically, holding the title of Senior inister. The current Parliament was
 elected in August 1991. The PAP holds 77 of the 81 parliamentary seats.
 The Government maintains active internal security and military forces to counter
 perceived threats to the nation's security. It has frequently used security legislation
 to control a broad range of activity. The Internal Security Department (ISD) is re-
 sponsible for enforcement of the Internal Security Act (ISA), including its provisions
 for detention without trial. All younrgmales are subject to national service (mostly
 in the military) and receive nationalistic indoctrination conforming to the credos
 held by the PAP. Total military expenditures for 1989, the last year for which the
 U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency conducted a detailed analysis, were
 $1.47 billion. Government policy is to maintain defense spending at 6 percent of the
 gross domestic product (GDP).
 Singapore's economic system is one of the most open in the world. The economy
 in recent years has made impressive gains--GDP grew by 5.6 percent in 1992--ena-
 bling Singaporeans to enjoy a relatively high per capita income. Individual owner-
 ship of housing, mostly government-built, is enjoyed by 90 percent of Singaporean
 families. Wealth is distributed relatively equally in what is essentially a full-em-
 ployment economy.
 In 1992 the Government continued to use its power to handicap Singapore's two
 main opposition parties, both by implementing policies in ways which favored dis-
 tricts supporting the PAP and by obstructing the opposition's efforts to publicize its
 viewpoints and serve its constituents. Prime Minister Goh also showed less commit-
 ment to the "open, consultative" style of government which he had emphasized upon
 assuming office in 1990. However, additional progress was made in resolving the
 Government's longstanding disagreement with Dow Jones, publisher of the Asian
 Wall Street Journal and the Far Eastern Economic Review, and Singaporeans' ac-
 cess to additional sources of information increased with the introduction of 24-hour
 Cable News Network broadcasts. At the same time, an ISD raid on a local paper
 in August renewed doubts of the Government's tolerance of domestic criticism. For
 the second straight year, the Government held no ISA detainees.
 Despite marginal improvement in some areas of human rights, the Government
 retained wide powers to detain people and subsequently restrict their travel, free-
 dom of speech, and right to associate freely, and to unfairly handicap political oppo-
 sition. There was no evidence of a change in the Government's basic willingness to
 restrict human rights when it deemed that necessary in the pursuit of its policy
 goals.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no known instances of
 such killing.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no known instances of politically motivated abduc-
 tion, secret arrests, or clandestine detentions by either the Government or the oppo-
 sition.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Torture is prohibited by law, and government leaders have stated that they oppose
 its use. There were no reports of mistreatment in 1992.
 Similarly, there were no reports in 1992 of government use of the indefinite
 length of confinement to pressure detainees to "rehabilitate" themselves as well as
 to make admissions of wrongdoing. The Government has acknowledged that in the
 
 
 648
 case of detentions without trial under the Criminal Act, the indefmiteness of the
 detentions served to pressure detainees. Persons alleging mistreatment under deten-
 tion may bring criminal charges against those in the Government who are alleged
 to have committed such acts, but few choose to do so. According to the Government,
 there were 3 suits against police officers in 1992 from people who alleged assaults
 while under police detention. These cases are still pending before the court. Fear
 of government retaliation e.g., redetention under the ISA, discourages the making
 of such allegations, and has an overall chilling effect on those who might oppose
 government policies.
 The Penal Code mandates caning in addition to imprisonment as punishment for
 certain offenses, including rage, theft, robbery, extortion, housebreaking, and vehicle
 theft. The courts routinely order caning for convictions for these offenses.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Arrest without warrant is legally per-
 mitted under the ISA the Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act, the Misuse of
 Drugs Act, and the Undesirable Publications Act. Those arrested must be charged
 before a magistrate within 48 hours. At that time, those detained under criminal
 charges may obtain legal counsel. There is a functioning system of ball for those
 charged. There were no reported abuses of the bail system in 1992.
 The ISA and the Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act authorize detention
 without trial. The latter act is used almost exclusively in cases involving narcotics
 and secret criminal societies and is not used for political purposes. According to the
 Government, 916 persons were in detention under the Criminal Law (Temporary
 Provisions) Act as of October 31, of which 342 were for secret society activities and
 574 for drug trafficking. The Director of the Central Narcotics Bureau (CNB) can
 also commit suspected drug users for up to 6 months, with subsequent extensions,
 in a drug rehabilitation center in cases of positive urinalysis tests.
 Singapore law does not treat involuntary commitment for drug rehabilitation as
 a criminal matter, but suspected drug abusers have a legal right to challenge such
 findings through the court system. Those persons detained without trial under the
 ISA and the Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act are entitled to counsel but
 have no legal recourse through the courts to challenge the substantive basis for
 their detention. The ISA also permits the Minister of Home Affairs to order deten-
 tion without charges if the President determines that a person poses a threat to na-
 tional security. The Government has broad discretion to determine what constitutes
 such a threat. The President may authorize detention for up to 2 years; thereafter,
 he must redetermine whether the detainee should continue to be held, and may so
 order for up to 2 more years. There is no limitation on the number of times a deten-
 tion order may be renewed. A detainee's case is reviewed periodically by an advisory
 board, to which the detainee may make representations.
 The board can make nonbinding recommendations that a detainee be released
 prior to expiration of the detention order. If the Minister wishes to act contrary to
 a recommendation for release by the board, he must seek the agreement of the
 President. Persons are released when the Minister for Home Affairs determines they
 no longer pose a threat to national security and are unlikely to resume subversive
 activity. The ISA empowers the police to detain a person for up to 48 hours; any
 police officer at or above the rank of superintendent may authorize that the detainee
 e held for up to 28 days longer. ISA detainees normally have been allowed access
 to lawyers and visits by relatives once initial interrogation has been completed.
 No one was detained under the ISA in 1992. The last two remaining ISA detain-
 ees were released in 1990. Certain government-imposed restrictions, such as on the
 right to travel, make public statements, and associate freely, remain in effect
 against three former ISA detainees, although these were eased in 1992. Chia Thye
 Poh, a former Member of Parliament (M.P.) released in 1989 after 23 years of pre-
 ventive detention under the ISA, had been restricted to a small island adjacent to
 Singapore, from which he could visit Singapore proper from 6 a.m. to 9 p.m. daily.
 He was allowed to move to Singapore proper in November, but his activities are still
 restricted. Chia can be employed, subject to the ISD's approval. Vincent Cheng, a
 detainee released in 1990, cannot issue public statements or publish without the
 ISD's prior consent and cannot travel outside of Singapore without the ISD's prior
 written approval. However, he no longer needs to appear at the ISD each month.
 Teo Soh Lung, the other ISA detainee released in 1990, cannot issue public state-
 ments or be involved in any organization without prior ISD approval, but is now
 free to travel abroad.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Singapore judiciary system is based on the
 British model, but there are significant differences (see below). There are two levels
 of courts-the Supreme Court, which includes the high court and the appellate
 courts, and the subordinate courts. In normal cases the Criminal Procedures Code
 nrovides that a charge against a defendant must be read and explained to him as
 
 
 649
 
 soon as it is framed by the magistrate. The accused has the right to be represented
 by an attorney. Trial is by judge rather than by  iry. Persons detained under the
 IA and the Criminal Law (Temporary Prvisions) Act are not entitled to a public
 trial, which is accorded in all other cases.
 In 1989 the Government amended the Constitution and the ISA to eliminate any
 judicial review of the objective grounds for detentions made under the ISA. The con-
 stitutional amendment also prevents the courts from reviewing the constitutionality
 of any law passed by Parliament to prevent subversion and allows such statutes to
 restrict, or even eliminate, judicial review in cases of alleged subversion. This con-
 stitutional amendment was made valid retroactive to 1971. The ISA amendment
 placed ISA detentions outside the purview of judicial review, except with respect to
 compliance with procedural requirements of the act. These amenents in essence
 put the executive branch in charge of delimiting, on vaguely defined national secu-
 rity grounds, the scope of certain ?undamental liberties provided for by the Constitu-
 tion. In 1989 a high court judge ruled that no legal challenge to these amendments
 can be sustained. The ISA ameidment was one of several legislative actions in 1989
 and 1990 which expanded the discretionary power of the Government and limited
 judicial review to the examination of adherence to procedures. The result of these
 measures has been to reduce the authority of the judiciary to act as a check on the
 Government.
 In 1989 Parliament greatly restricted appeals to the judicial committee of the
 Privy Council in London, making Singapore's appellate courts the final courts of ap-
 peal in most cases. The Government explained that different circumstances in
 Singapore and the United Kingdom meant that Singapore's laws were best inter-
 preted by its own judges. However, the legislation also seemed to be in response to
 a Privy Council decision reinstating prominent opposition politician J.B. Jeyaretnam
 to the Singpre bar and strongly criticizing what it termed the miscarriage of jus-
 tice perpetrated against him.
 Judges of the Supreme Court are appointed by the President on the recommenda-
 tion of the Prime Minister in consultation with the Chief Justice. A Supreme Court
 justice may remain in office until the mandatory retirement age of 65, after which
 he may continue to serve at the Government's discretion for brief, renewable terms
 at full salary.
 Subordinate-court judges are appointed by the President on the recommendation
 of the Chief Justice. These appointments are for fixed periods and may be revoked.
 In 1992 the Supreme Court was comprised of a Chief Justice 11 judges, and 8 'udi-
 cial commissioners" (including the first woman appointed). The Constitution allows
 for the appointment of judicial commissioners to the Supreme Court as a stopgap
 measure to clear up case backlogs. They have the same powers and perform the
 same functions as a Supreme Court judge, and in most cases subsequently receive
 permanent appointments to the bench. Subordinate-court judges and magistrates, as
 well as public prosecutors, are civil servants whose specific assignments are deter-
 mined by the egal Service Commission which can decide on job transfers to any
 of several legal service departments. Judicial officials, especially in the high and ap-
 pellate courts, are well entrenched in the Singapore establishment and have close
 ties to the Government and its leaders.
 The Supreme Court Chief Justice initiated a program of reforms in 1992 aimed
 at eliminating a backlog of cases in the courts. The program included an increase
 in the number and jurisdiction of subordinate courts. In March Parliament approved
 a bill to allow one judge instead of two to preside over capital offense cases. Appeala
 are still heard by the three-judge appellate court. The Government proposed this
 change to eliminate a large backlog of capital cases and to ensure speedy consider-
 ation of new cases. Opponents of the bill, while acknowledging the need to avoid
 trial delays, argued that the presence of two judges provided an additional guaran-
 tee of a fair trial, of special importance in capital offenses. In response to criticisms
 of the bill, the Government agreed to provide two defense counsels for those accused
 of capital offenses who do not directly hire their own counsel.
 In October the Supreme Court ruled that a suspect or accused person does not
 have a constitutional right to remain silent when questioned by the police. The
 Court said it would give the reasons for its ruling at a later date. The Court consid-
 ered this issue in response to a July request from the Attorney General. His request
 resulted after two high court judges ruled in a murder trial that the police must
 expressly inform the accused of his or her right to remain silent. The Attorney Gen.
 eral contended that the law requiring a warning of the right to remain silent was
 repealed in 1976 and that, under current law, voluntary statements were admissible
 as evidence in court even if the person was not informed of the right to remain si-
 lent. The Attorney General noted that courts have the discretion to scrutinize
 uncautioned statements carefully before accepting them as valid evidence.
 
 
 650
 Government leaders continued their successful libel or slander suits against do-
 mestic opposition defendants. In Apr opposition politician J.B. Jeyaretnam lost his
 appeal ofa slander suit riled by Lee Kuan Yew in 1988 for remarks made by
 Jeyaretnam at a political rally in August 1988. Jeyaretnam was found guilty of def-
 amation in a 1990 trial and the court awarded Lee damages and costa equivalent
 to $392,000. Jeysretnam challenged the court assessment for legal costs, and in n
 November decision, the court of appeals reduced that charge by the equivalent of
 $42,000 and awarded Jeyaretnam costs equivalent to $7,200.
 In June Workers' Party politician Weehan Kim sgreed to an out-of-court settle-
 ment with Lee Kuan Yew and his son, Deputy Prime Minister Lee ilsien Long,
 for "defamatory allegations" made during a May political rally. In his rally speech,
 Wee suggested that Lee Hsien Loong's career had-benefited from his family connec-
 tions. Rather than face a slander suit, Wee agreed to pay the equivalent of $120,000
 to a PAP community fund designated by the Lees and to issue a public apology.
 In September Gopalan Nair, a lawyer and former Workers' Party candidate or
 Parliament, was suspended from practice for 2 years and ordered to pay court costs
 after being found guilty of violating the Legal Pofession A  for " sly improper
 onduct" by "threateninga the Attorney General. Nair faces possible disbarment or
 censure, ahe charges resulted from a series of letters Nabr wrote the Attorney Gen-
 eral in 1989 seeking information regarding legal proceedings then underway against
 J.B. Jeyartnam. In his letters, Nair said that he would make public his correspond-
 ence with the Attorney General if there was no response. The Government pro-
 ceeded with this case even though Nair had emigrated from Singapore prior to a
 June court hearing on the charge.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Government uses its wide discretionary powers when it determines that national se-
 curity is threatened. In most cases, search warrants are required for intrusion into
 the home. Law enforcement officers may, however, search a person, home, or p~rp-
 erty without a warrant if they decide searches are necesany to preserve evidence.
 Warrantles searches can also be conducted under the Misuse of Drugs Act and
 the Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act in dealing with  r gand secret soci-
 ety-related offenses. Judicial review of such searches can be under taen by the
 courts ather th   e   he defendant but it is not automatic. Divisions of the Gov-
 ernment's law enforcement agencies, including the ISD and the Corrupt Practices
 Investigation Board (CPIB), have wide networks for gathering information. The au-
 thorities have the capability to monitor telephone and other private conversations
 and conduct surveillance, but there were no credible allegations that they did so in
 1992.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom c Speech and Press.-The Constitution permits official restrictions on
 the freedom of expression, and in practice freedoms of speech and press are cir-
 cumacribed..The law forbids statements that might arouse tensions among the var-
 ious races and religions or might threaten national security or public order. The
 Government has in some cases applied a broad definition of these laws to restrict
 political opposition and criticism. In December the Government refused a permit for
 speeches at the opposition Workers' Party annual Democracy Day Dinner. Permits
 had been granted in past years. "Inflammatory" discussion of race, religion, or lan-
 gu age is illegal.
 The government-owned Singapore Broadcasting Corporation (SBC) follows govern-
 ment gidelines and has a near monopoly on broadcasting, operating all 3 free tele-
 vision channels, all 3 pay channels, and 9 of 12 radio stati~ons. However, the Govern-
 ment is gradually deregulating and liberalizing the flow of information into Singa-
 pore. The British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) broadcasts its world service lo-
 cally on the FM band. Television broadcasts from Mala uia and radio broadcasts
 from Malaysia and Indonesia can be received uncensoreitin Sin apore. Home Box
 Office and Chinese movies are available on pay television. CNN broadcasts, first
 carried locally during the 1991 Gulf War, are now available 24 hours daily to sub-
 scribers of a new S(C pay television news channel. Although CNN is carried live,
 the Government reviews other cable programs and censors undesirable programs.
 In 1991 the Government ended a prohibition on installation of satellite dishes, and
 allowed businesses and financial institutions-but not hotels and households-to
 apply for licenses. Fewer than 20 institutions, mainly banks, have permits to oper-
 ate satellite dishes.
 All newspapers, except for a small-circulation Tamil-language daily, are published
 by Singapore  Press Hordin  (SPH), which has close ties to the national leadership.
 Holders of management shares" control all SPH personnel decisions. The Govern-
 ment mustanes, a pand can remove, holders of management shares. Hence, while
 
 
 651
 Singaprean newspapers, especially the English-languag Straits Times, print a
 large and diverse selection of articles from a variety of foreign sources, their edi-
 torials and coverage of domestic events closely parallel government policies and the
 opinions of government leaders. Government leadrs have criticized the "Western
 model" of the media which have an unrestricted responsibility to report the news
 as they see it. They argue that the role of the media is to support the goals of the
 elected leadrship and not to advance their own political agenda.
 In August agents of the ISD raided the newsrom of Sigapore's leading business
 daily, Business Times, to investigate a possible violation of the Official Secrets Act
 involving the leak of economic statistics from the Ministry of Trade and Industry.
 The investigation also extended to two foreign securities firms. Four people-a gov-
 ernment official, a journalist, and two employees at a foreign securities house--were
 charged in December with violations of the Official Secrets Act. The ISD raid fol-
 lowed a series of articles in the Business Times reporting remarks of local and for-
 eign economists critical of the. Government's economic policies. In a speech shortly
 after the raid, Senior Minister Lee Kuan Yew said that pressure groups such as
 journalists and economists were testing the limits of Prime Minister Goh and his
 Cabinet. Despite later government disclaers of any connection between the two
 issues, Lee's remarks left the impression that one purpose of the raid was to dis-
 courage critical commentary by the press.
 A wide range of international magazines and newspapers can be purchased un-
 censored in Singapore, although newspapers printed in Malaysia are not circulated.
 A 1990 law required offshore newspapers to post a bond of $118,000, strengthening
 the Government's control over the foreign press. This legislation was specifically
 aimed at publications covering politics and current events in southeast Asia.
 The Government can also limit the circulation of foreign publications that, by the
 Government's broad determination, interfere in Singapore s domestic affairs. The
 Asian Wall Street Journal (AWSJ), Asiaweek, and the Far Eastern Economic Re-
 view (FEER) are still restricted on this basis. Only a prescribed number of copies
 Rer issue of FEER (270), AWSJ (3,500), and Asiaweek (12 000) can be distributed.
 The Government has allowed neither the FEER nor the AWSJ to post a correspond-
 ent in Singapore since 1987 and 1988 respectively. In June the Government agreed
 to allow an AWSJ correspondent to spend 14 workdays each month in Singapore,
 an increase from the 7 days allowed since November 1991.
 In July the Government raised the circulation limit on the AWSJ by 1,000 to
 3,500 copies per issue. Although Dow Jones, publisher of bth the AWSJ and the
 FEER would have preferred that market demand determine the AWSJ 'a circula-
 tion, tle action represented an additional step in the incremental improvement in
 relations between the Government and Dow Jones.
 Singapore censors movies, video materials, some publications, and music. Foreign
 books must be submitted to a censor. Censorship may be applied to materials "con-
 trary to the public interest" including publications that undermine the stability of
 the state, contravene moral norms, glamorize or promote drug use, or incite racial,
 religious, or language animosities. In October the censorship review committee, a
 panel established by the Government in November 1991, concluded its reevaluation
 of existing censorship guidelines on films, music, publications, videos, and live per-
 formances. The committee recommended tightened controls on high impact media
 forms, such as television and film, but some easing of restrictions on drama and cer-
 tain types of publications. The Government accepted the committee's recommenda-
 tions and sadit would implement them in stages. Public surveys indicate that there
 is strong public support for continued censorship of sex and violence in films.
 Faculty members at Singapore public institutions of higher education are govern-
 ment employees. A number of university lecturers are concurrently PAP M.P.'s. Aca-
 demics sometimes criticize government policies, but criticism of individual govern-
 ment leaders and government authoritarianism is infrequent because of possible
 sanctions. Tenure and renewal of appointments can be, and have been, refused to
 academics whose work deviates substantially from government views. Published so-
 cial science and think tank papers generally support government policies.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Assemblies of more than five
 persons in public, including political meetings and rallies, must have police permis-
 sion. Those who wish to speak at a public function must obtain permission from the
 public entertainment licensing unit, a division of the police criminal investigation
 department. Opposition politicians have experienced long delays, and occasional re-
 jection, in receiving police approval. According to government statistics, 4 out of a
 total of 280 applications were rejected in 1992 as of December 10.
 The Government closely monitors political gatherings regardless of the number
 present. Associations, societies, clubs, churches, and other organizations with more
 than 10 members must be registered with the Government under the Societies Act.
 
 
 652
 The Government denies registration to societies it believes likely to be used for un-
 lawful purposes or for purposes prejudicial to public peace, welfare, or public order.
 The Government has absolute discretion in applying this broad and vague language
 to register or dissolve societies. It prohibits organized political activities, except by
 organizations registered as political parties. This prohibition extends to the opposi-
 tion, but it is not clear that it applies to the PAP, which enjoys the support of resi-
 dential committees and neighborhood groups ostensibly organized for nonpolitical
 purposes but whose leadership contains many grassroots PAP members (see also
 Section 3.).
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Freedom of religion is provided for in the Constitution
 and usually respected in practice. Missionaries are permitted to work and to publish
 religious texts. However, all religious groups are subject to government scrutiny and
 must be legally registered. The Government restricts some religious sects by appli-
 cation of the Societies Act and has banned others, such as the Jehovah's Witnesses
 and the Unification Church. A presidential council on minority rights exists to en-
 sure that legislation does not infringe upon the rights of religious or ethnic minori-
 ties. There is no state religion, although there are periodic campaigns to make Con-
 fucian ethics the "national ideology" of Singapore. The Government has provided fi-
 nancial assistance to build and maintain mosques. There is no religious test for em-
 ployment in the Government or for membership in the PAP.
 The 1990 "Maintenance of Religious Harmony Act" made it illegal to proselytize
 in a manner that could inflame religious enmity and proscribed what the Govern-
 ment deemed to be the inappropriate involvement of religious groups and officials
 in political affairs. The act explicitly denies the judiciary the competence to review
 possible denial of rights which could arise from the application of the act, and spe-
 cifically denies judicial review of its enforcement. One reason given by the Govern-
 ment to justify adoption of the Religious Harmony Act was concern over the growth
 of charismatic Christian groups which do not recognize the unofficial agreement
 among establishment religious organizations not to proselytize among those of other
 faiths. The act has had the effect of causing some religious groups to exercise more
 self-restraint. A 1990 government White Paper on religious harmony cited the Rev-
 erend Rick Seaward and his church as an example of such groups. Seaward was
 charged in 1990 with criminal breach of trust (fraud) in a case involving the lease-
 purchase of sound equipment by his church from a firm affiliated with him. After
 a well-publicized trial, he was convicted in June and sentenced to one day in jail
 and fined the equivalent of $6,000. In December, the courts ordered Seaward to pay
 the equivalent of $47,400 for prosecution costs. Seaward is appealing his conviction.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-All Singapore citizens and permanent residents over the age of 13 are
 required to register with the Government and to carry identification cards. After the
 completion of national service, enlisted men remain liable for reserve training until
 the age of 40, and officers to age 50. During this period people must obtain exit per-
 mits before traveling outside Singapore. The Government may deny a passport, and
 it has done so in the case of released detainees.
 The ISA allows the Minister for Law and Home Affairs to suspend or revoke a
 detention order or to impose restrictions on former detainees' activities, places of
 residence, and travel abroad. The right of voluntary repatriation is extended to hold-
 ers of Singaporean passports. In 1985 Parliament provided for the loss of citizenship
 by Singaporeans who reside outside Singapore for more than 10 years consecutively.
 Action under this law is discretionary and has been taken in at least one case in-
 volving a well-known government opponent, Tan Wah Piaow.
 Singapore does not offer first asylum to refugees. Government policy permits Viet-
 namese asylum seekers rescued at sea to disembark and remain for up to 90 days
 only if Singapore was the rescuing vessel's next scheduled port of call and if a reset-
 tlement country provides a removal guarantee. Singapore has not accepted the Com-
 prehensive Plan of Action, and continues to insist that its policy requires Vietnam-
 ese asylum seekers to depart within 90 days. In practice, Singapore limited the dis-
 embarkation of rescued Vietnamese in July 1990 and halted it completely in June
 1991 because removal within 90 days could not be guaranteed. As of October 1,
 1992, there were 86 asylum seekers at the Hawkins Road camp which has a stated
 capacity of approximately 1,000 persons. Persons of other nationalities who enter
 Singapore and who come to the attention of the U.N. High Commissioner for Refu-
 gees (UNHCR) are permitted to have their status determined for possible resettle-
 ment elsewhere. There is no systematic procedure for ensuring that asylum seekers
 are referred to the UNHCR.
 
 
 653
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights- The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Constitutionally, Singaporeans have the right to change their government peace-
 fully through democratic means and, in fact, the voting and vote-counting systems
 in elections are fair, accurate, and free from tamperin#. This was the case in a De-
 cember by-election called by the Prime Minister in his own district, in which the
 four PAP candidates defeated three opposition parties and were elected with 73 per-
 cent of the vote. However, the Government has extensive powers which it uses to
 place formidable obstacles in the path of current and would-be opponents. The PAP
 has an overwhelming majority in the current Parliament, elected in August 1991,
 controlling 77 out of8i seats. In September Parliament accepted the appointment
 of six "Nominated Members of Parliament" (N.M.P.'s). These appointments, allowed
 by legislation enacted in 1990, permits the selection of up to six N.M.P.'s, usually
 neutral and talented people not interested in running for office, who can raise the
 level of debate and decisionmaking in Parliament. The actual implementation of this
 bill is determined by each new Parliament, which decides how many N.M.P.'s, if
 any, it wishes to appoint. NMP's eny restricted voting privileges.
 Oppsition parties have been unable seriously to challene the PAP since the late
 1960'a. Consequently, the PAPs domination of politics in Singapore continues as it
 has for three decades under the authoritarian leadership ofLee Kuan Yew. The
 PAPs political success in large part results from government policies which helped
 Singapore achieve rapid economic growth, thereby enabling the Government to pro-
 vide a wide array of public services. The PAP enjoys a broad base of popular sup-
 port, sustained in part through neighborhood, youth, and labor associations.
 Political parties, while legally free to organize, are subject to strict regulations on
 party constitutions, fandralsing, and accountability. While the PAP has been able
 to enjoy the support of ostensibly nonpolitical organizations, the Government has
 used its broad discretionary powers to under the creation of support organizations
 for the opposition parties. The PA~s grip on power has also been enhanced by pa-
 tronage, such as the network of town councils; political control of the press, courts,
 and religion; strong party discipline and performance; and its access to the instru-
 ments of power. For example, government programs announced in 1992 to refurbish
 public housing and sell government-owned shop space give priority to PAP constitu-
 encies.
 Efforts by opposition parties to rent office spae in government-housing estates
 and to establish community foundations which run private kindergartens have been
 hampered by changes in regulations enacted after the August 1991 elections. The
 PAP attributes the lack of an effective opposition to disorganization, lack of leader-
 ship, and lack of alternative policy progama.
 In January 1991, Parliament passeda constitutional amendment changing Singa-
 pore's ceremonial presidency into one with veto powers over government budgets
 and key public appointments. The amendment went into effect in November 1991.
 There is no mechanism for overriding presidential vetoes, except in the case of "sup-
 ply bills," legislation that authorizes government expenditures. The vote for Singa-
 pore's frst popularly elected President, who will serve a 6-year term, must take
 place before the term of Singapore s incumbent President expires in September
 1993.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no nongovernmental organizations, with the exception of the opposition
 plitical parties, that actively and openly monitor alleged human rights violations.
 pforts by any independent organization to investi ate and publicly criticize govern-
 ment human rights policies would face the same obstacles as those faced _by the po-
 litical parties. Governmental bodies, such as the presidentially appointed mnnority
 rights council, review legislation to ensure that it is not disadvantageous to a par-
 ticulai ethnic group. They also report to the overnment on matters affecting an
 racial or religious community and investig ate complaints presented to the councl
 bhfoY s  vernment denies that international organizations have any competence
 whatsoever to look into human rights matters in Singapore. Visa regulations do not
 recognize monitoring human rights as a "business purpose for vistying Singapore-
 but neither is such activity regarded s a "social visit.d mnesty Intedatonni is not
 allowed to operate in Singapore. The Government did .not receive any reuest in
 1992 from human rights organizations asking to examin e human rights situa-
 tion in Singapore.
 
 
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Language, or Social Status
 Because of Singapore's history of intercommunal tension, the Government takes
 affirmative measures to ensure racial, ethnic, religious, and cultural nondiscrimina-
 tion. Social, economic, and cultural facilities are available to all citizens regardless
 of race, religion, or sex. Minorities are constitutionally afforded equal rights and ac-
 tively participate in the political process.
 The Constitution acknowledges the "special position" of Malays as the indigenous
 eople of Singapore, and charges the Government to support and promote their 'po-
 litical, educational, religious, economic, social, and cultural interests." The Govern-
 ment has concentrated on creating equality of opportunity, especially in education,
 and does not promote the concept of equality in result, instead leaving it up to the
 ethnic communities, individual initiative, and the marketplace to determine eco-
 nomic success.
 While precise statistics are not readily available, government officials acknowl-
 edge that Malay Singaporeans are represented disproportionately in the bottom
 quarter of Singapore's economy. De facto employment discrimination against Malays
 and Indians exists. Job advertisements often specify the ethnicity and gender re-
 quired of applicants.
 Women nave the same legal rights as men in employment, education, child care
 and custody, and in the running of a household, but do not have equal rights with
 men in the transmission of citizenship to their children or in the conferral of the
 right to residence of a foreign spouse in Singapore. Women can vote and hold any
 public office. Although the political and business elite is still overwhelmingly male,
 women are found throughout the rest of the job spectrum, enjoying equal pay for
 equal work.
 There is no evidence of any widespread practice of violence or abuse against
 women. Singapore's laws protect women against domestic violence and against sex-
 ual or phyical harassment. Domestic violence can be dealt with under either the
 Penal Code or the Women's Charter. The Women's Charter, enacted in 1961, abol-
 ished arranged marriages and gave husband and wife equal rights with respect to
 roperty ownership and divorce. Muslim women are not covered by the Women's
 lharter, but enjoy the same rights and protections under other laws, except that
 Muslim men may divorce unilaterally whereas Muslim women may not. The Gov-
 ernment enforces the Women's Charter as a fundamental aspect of the republic's
 family law. Through the latter, a battered wife can obtain court orders barring the
 spouse from the home until the court is satisfied that he will stop his aggressive
 behavior. The Penal Code prescribes mandatory caning and a minimum imprison-
 ment of 2 years for conviction on a charge of outraging modesty so as to cause the
 victim fear of death or injury.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution gives all citizens the right to form
 associations, including trade unions. Parliament may, however, impose restrictions
 based on security, public order, or morality grounds. The right of association is de-
 limited by the Societies Act and by labor and education laws and regulations. In
 practice, Communist labor unions are not permitted. The Trades Union Act author-
 izes the formation of unions with broad rights, albeit with some narrow restrictions,
 such as prohibitions on the unionization of uniformed employees and of the holding
 of union office by persons with criminal records. The national work force comprises
 about 1.6 million workers, of whom some 225,000 are organized into 83 trade
 unions. Some 74 of these unions, which represent about 98 percent of the unionized
 workers, are affiliated with the National Trades Union Congress (NTUC), an um-
 brella organization which has a loose relationship to the Government.
 The NTUC unabashedly acknowledges that its interests are closely linked with
 those of the ruling PAP. The second deputy Prime Minister, Ong Teng Cheong,
 serves as NTUC Secretary General. Several NTUC officials are PAP M.P.'s. NTUC
 policy prohibits unionists who actively support opposition parties from holding office
 in affiliated unions. While the NTUC is financially independent of the PAP, with
 income generated by NTUC-owned businesses, the NTUC and PAP share the same
 ideology.
 Workers have the legal right to strike but rarely do so; the most recent strike took
 place in 1986. The Government claims this is so due to, inter alia, cultural aversion
 to confrontation, concern about maintaining Singapore's attractiveness to investors
 a labor shortage that has increased wages, and economic success that has allowed
 employers to pay higher wages. Critics note that the PAP/NTUC nexus is also a sig-
 nificant factor.
 The NTUC is free to associate regionallv and internationallv.
 
 
 655
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Collective bargaining is a nor-
 mal part of management-labor relations, particularly in the manufacturing sector.
 However, the International Labor Organization (ILO) noted in 1992 that certain is-
 sues are excluded by law from collective bargaining and that the industrial arbitra-
 tion court has the power to refuse to register the collective bargaining agreement
 of newly established enterprises in certain instances. On average, collective bargain-
 ing agreements are renewed every 2 to 3 years. A National Wages Council (NWC)
 brings business, labor, and government representatives together to establish guide-
 lines for annual wage packages. Collective agreements negotiated between labor and
 management generally follow the wage guidelines issued annually by the NWC. The
 Industrial Relations Act makes it an offense to discriminate against anyone who is
 or proposes to become a member or an officer of a trade union. The offense is pun-
 ishable by a line equivalent to $600 and/or a 12-month prison sentence. Labor laws
 and regulations are enforced uniformly. There are no export-processing zones, nor
 are special concessions given to. firms producing for export.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Under sections of Singapore's Des-
 titute Persons Act, any indigent person may be required, subject to penal sanctions,
 to reside in a welfare home and engage in suitable work. The ILO has criticized the
 coercive terms of this act, which are not in compliance with the ILO Convention on
 Forced Labor, ratified by Singapore in 1965. The Government maintains that work
 is not mandatory for residents in welfare homes, but is intended to prepare people
 for employment. In 1992 there were 1,360 residents in government-run welfare
 homes 609 of whom were engaged in work.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Government enforces the Em-
 ployment Act, which sets the minimum age for the employment of children at age
 2. Children under age 14 must receive written permission from the Commissioner
 for Labor if they wish to work in an "industrial undertaking." The number of such
 applications was 11 in 1991 and 1 as of June 1992. The Commissioner for Labor
 has never a proved such applications, but the Government has chosen not to har-
 monize its legislation with the requirements of the Convention on Minimum Age
 (Industry), as recommended by the ILO. Industrial employers must notify the Min-
 istry of Labor within 30 days of hiring a child between the ages of 14 and 16. The
 incidence of children taking up permanent employment is very low and abuses are
 almost nonexistent.
 Ministry of Labor regulations prohibit night employment of children and restrict
 industrial work to no more than 7 hours a day. Children cannot work on commercial
 vessels, with any live electrical apparatus lacking effective insulation, or in any un-
 derground job. These laws and regulations are effectively enforced by the Ministry
 of Labor.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Singapore has no minimum wage or unemploy-
 ment compensation, but the labor market offers relatively high wages and good
 working conditions. The Employment Act sets the standard legal workweek at 44
 hours, and provides for 1 rest day each week. Laws and regulations establishing
 working conditions are effectively enforced by the Ministry of Labor, as are com-
 prehensive occupational safety and health laws. Enforcement procedures, coupled
 with the promotion of educational and training programs, have reduced the fre-
 quency of job-related accidents by a third over the past decade. The average severity
 of ocupational accidents has also been reduced.
 Because of the domestic labor shortage, more than 250,000 foreign workers are
 employed legally in Singapore, 16 prcent of the total work force. Most are unskilled
 laborers and household servants mm other Asian countries. Foreign workers face
 no legal wage discrimination; however, they are concentrated in low-wage, low-skill
 jobs. Some 50,000 foreign maids, mainly from the Philippines, Indonesia, and Sri
 Lanka, are employed in Singapore, and there have been complaints of abuse or poor
 working conditions. The Government does not bar complainants from seeking legal
 redress. Employers who have abused domestic servants have been fined or impris-
 oned, often with great publicity. The Government acknowledged the problem of ille-
 gal aliens working in Singare by passing a law in 1989 imposing a caning penalty
 on aliens who overstay in ingapore by more than 90 days. Parliament has passed
 a law to impose a caning sentence and fines on businessmen who employ more than
 five workers illegally. No one has been caned under either law.
