 SINGAPORE
 Singapore has a parliamentary system under which the People's
 Action Party (PAP), headed by Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew, has
 held power since independence in 1965. The PAP continues to
 dominate Parliament, holding 76 of the 77 occupied seats. Two
 seats are currently vacant. The Government enjoys broad
 public support, as indicated by the 62.9 percent share of the
 popular vote it received in the last general election,
 December 1984. The Civil Service is efficient, and corruption
 is officially and actively discouraged.
 Singapore was subject to acts of terrorism by members of the
 Communist Party of Malaya (CPM) through 1974. While there
 have been no terrorist incidents in recent years, the CPM
 considers Singapore within its sphere of operation.
 Government military and security agencies work to control and,
 if possible, to eliminate the threat of internal disturbances.
 They act within what most Singaporeans consider to be the
 bounds of acceptable legal conduct.
 Singapore's strategic location and industrious population give
 it economic importance in Southeast Asia disproportionate to
 its small size. Following independence, the economy expanded
 rapidly, with foreign trade and shipping reaching record
 levels. In recent years industrialization also has been
 rapid. In 1985-86, however, the economy cooled markedly, and
 Singapore is only beginning to shake off the effects of
 economic recession.
 One significant human rights development in 1986 was the
 enactment of legislation empowering authorities to restrict
 sales and distribution of foreign publications judged by the
 Minister of Communications and Information to have "engaged"
 in Singapore's domestic politics. The Government made first
 use of this legislation in October when it announced
 circulation restrictions on Time Magazine. A second
 development was an appeals court ruling against prominent
 opposition figure Joshua Benjamin Jeyaretnam which cost him
 his seat in Parliament.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no known instances of politically motivated killing.
 b. Disappearance
 There was no evidence that people were abducted, secretly
 arrested, or held in clandestine detention by official or
 quasi-official security forces, other elements of the
 Government, or opposition forces.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Torture is prohibited by law under sections 330 and 331 of the
 Penal Code, and there is no credible evidence to suggest
 involvement by authorities in torture or abuse. Prison
 conditions in Singapore are spartan. Singapore's 7 penal
 institutions confine about 5,300 prisoners. Some 4,000 others
 
 
 808
 SINGAPORE
 are held in drug rehabilitation centers. Since 1981 the
 Government has stepped up efforts to rehabilitate prisoners
 serving sentences of 1 year or more. The prison welfare
 services program has continued to concentrate on adult
 first-time offenders, juvenile delinquents, and drug abusers.
 Singapore's penal code mandates caning in addition to
 imprisonment as punishment for certain crimes including rape,
 theft, robbery, extortion, housebreaking, and vehicle theft.
 The maximum allowable number of strokes is 24.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Law enforcement authorities follow established legal
 procedures for arrest or detention. Incommunicado detention
 does not occur. Arrest without a warrant is permitted under
 Section 31 of the Criminal Procedure Code, Section 43 of the
 Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act, and Sections 8 and 65
 of the Internal Security Act (ISA). Detention without charge
 is authorized under Section 30 of the Criminal Law (Temporary
 Provisions) Act and Section 8 of the ISA. The ISA applies in
 security cases, while the Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions)
 Act applies in criminal cases and is used almost exclusively
 against Chinese triads (mafia-like secret societies) or in
 drug cases. Detention without charge is authorized for
 periods of 1 to 30 days. The Ministry of Home Affairs can
 issue an order under the ISA, a British measure used by
 Singapore extensively during the 1965-74 post-independence
 period when Communist-led disturbances and communal violence
 were widespread, or the Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions)
 Act to authorize a longer period of detention of a "suspected
 person."' Habeas corpus exists in the law, but the Government
 can extend detention indefinitely in ISA cases. In some other
 cases, provisions of the Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions)
 Act can be invoked to detain suspects for periods of up to 1
 year. These provisions are invoked mainly in criminal matters
 involving secret societies, where intimidation and retaliation
 against witnesses appearing in open court would make
 prosecution difficult or impossible. Detentions of people
 under the Act are conducted openly. There are no secret
 detentions. There is a functioning system of bail, and those
 charged in both criminal and civil cases are entitled to legal
 counsel.
 The Misuse of Drugs Act allows Central Narcotics Bureau
 officers and customs officials to arrest without warrant any
 person suspected of manufacturing, importing, exporting,
 possessing, consuming, or trafficking in controlled drugs.
 The director of the Central Narcotics Bureau in cases of a
 positive urinalysis can commit suspected drug users to a
 6-month term in a drug rehabilitation center. Suspects have a
 legal right to challenge the finding and can appeal through
 the court system.
 Such persons actually arrested are tried in court. A few
 persons have maintained that they were not drug users and were
 improperly detained but, thus far, have failed to substantiate
 their allegations in court. The Government has maintained
 that adequate safeguards exist to prevent innocent persons
 being detained.
 A former member of Parliament, who has been linked to the
 Communist movement and who has refused to renounce the use of
 force to challenge the Government, has been in detention under
 terms of the ISA since 1966. More than 1,000 persons are held
 
 
 809
 SINGAPORE
 in indefinite detention under the Criminal Law (Temporary
 Provisions) Act, primarily for membership in Chinese triads or
 for drug-trafficking offenses.
 Singapore law prohibits the use of forced or compulsory labor.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a public trial is observed except for persons
 detained under the provisions of the ISA and the Criminal Law
 (Temporary Provisions) Act. The Government defends its policy
 of detention without trial in these cases on the ground that
 an open trial could result in the intimidation of witnesses
 and officials.
 The Criminal Procedures Code provides that a charge against a
 defendant must be read and explained to him as soon as it is
 framed by the magistrate. The accused has the right to be
 defended by an attorney (advocate). Trial is by a magistrate
 or judge rather than by jury. Defendants may appeal their
 verdicts in most cases to higher courts. Singapore is a
 member of the British Commonwealth and allows for further
 appeal to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in
 London.
 Judges are appointed by the President on the recommendation of
 the Prime Minister in consultation with the Chief Justice.
 Subordinate court judges (magistrates) and public prosecutors
 are civil servants and can be transferred by the Public
 Service Commission.
 The Government publicly reaffirmed its commitment to an
 independent court system and denied allegations of executive
 interference in the judiciary raised by a prominent opposition
 Member of Parliament (MP) during parliamentary debate in early
 1986. In June a commission of inquiry headed by a Supreme
 Court Justice found no evidence to support charges of
 executive interference.
 Citizens can take government agencies to court over such
 matters as compulsory land acquisitions and compensation. The
 Government has not lost a case involving a challenge to its
 major policies. Members of both the ruling and opposition
 political parties have been taken to court in recent years on
 nonpolitical charges.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Government does not hesitate to use its wide discretionary
 powers when it believes that the security of the nation is
 threatened. Search warrants are required for intrusion into
 the home in most cases. Law enforcement officers may,
 however, search a person, home, or property without a warrant
 if they have reasonable grounds to believe that it is
 necessary to do so. Judicial review of such searches can be
 undertaken by the courts at the request of the defendant, but
 is not automatic. Divisions of the Government's law
 enforcement agencies, including the Internal Security Division
 (ISD) and the Corrupt Practices Investigation Board (CPIB),
 have a wide network for gathering information.
 
 
 810
 SINGAPORE
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and press are circumscribed. The Government
 forbids statements which might arouse communal tensions among
 the various races (roughly 77 percent Chinese, 15 percent
 Malay, 6 percent Indian, and 2 percent other minorities).
 Newspapers are published by private firms with close ties to
 the national leadership. While there is no direct censorship
 of the press, members of the press understand the restraints
 and guidelines within which they must operate. They did not
 significantly exceed these guidelines in 1986. Some press
 representatives believe that they may lose their jobs if they
 criticize the Government too severely. The press reports the
 opposition's views, however, and has published statements
 critical of the Government's proposals and policies.
 The most significant development relating to the press in 1986
 was the enactment of legislation empowering authorities to
 restrict sales and distribution of foreign publications judged
 by the Minister of Communications and Information to have
 "engaged" in Singapore's domestic politics. The Government
 made the first use of its newly increased power over the
 foreign press in October when it announced circulation
 restrictions on Time Magazine. Time's circulation in
 Singapore was cut from 18,000 to 9,000 on October 20, 1986 and
 was further reduced to 2,000 on January 1, 1987. The
 Government justified its action by claiming that Time was
 unwilling to publish a Government letter to the editor
 responding to alleged errors in a September Time story about
 the local political scene. Time subsequently published the
 letter, but the circulation restrictions remain in force.
 The government-owned Singapore Broadcasting Corporation (SBC)
 has a monopoly on domestic radio and television. SBC follows
 government guidelines on its news reporting and obeys
 censorship regulations on the programs which it broadcasts.
 The BBC World Service and Malaysian radio and television can
 be received uncensored in Singapore on local broadcast bands.
 An official board of film censors approves motion pictures,
 television programs, and videotapes. Additional government
 bodies censor magazines, records, plays, and other media. The
 Government censors these items primarily to prevent the spread
 of material which it feels would undermine the morals of young
 Singaporeans, advocate excessive permissiveness, or promote
 drug abuse.
 A wide range of international magazines and newspapers can be
 purchased uncensored in Singapore. The country is a regional
 publishing center for a growing number of international
 magazines and newspapers.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Assemblies of more than five people in public, including
 political rallies, are authorized only with permission from
 the police. In practice, the Government does not stop
 gatherings of groups of more than 5 people for social purposes.
 In order to operate legally in Singapore, associations,
 societies, clubs, churches, and other organizations with more
 than 10 members must be registered with the Government under
 the Societies Act. Registration is denied to societies that
 
 
 811
 SINGAPORE
 the Government believes are likely to be used for unlawful
 purposes or for purposes prejudicial to public peace, welfare,
 or good order. In the past, arrests have been made at
 gatherings of unregistered organizations, including some
 splinter religious groups, which the Government viewed as
 inimical to the public interest.
 Unions play an important role in labor's relations with both
 management and government in Singapore. The Trades Union Act,
 however, places restrictions on workers' rights, including a
 prohibition against unionization of uniformed employees and
 restrictions preventing persons with criminal records from
 holding union office. Unions are organized under an umbrella
 organization, the National Trades Union Congress (NTUC), which
 has a Deputy Prime Minister as its Secretary General and MPs
 on its Board of Directors.
 The NTUC has about 200,000 members in a national work force of
 approximately 1.2 million. Workers have the legal right to
 strike, and in January Singapore's first strike in 8 years
 occurred at a manufacturing firm (and was quickly settled).
 The country has retained a positive record of industrial peace
 despite rising job losses, official calls for wage restraint,
 and other pressures stemming from the recession. The NTUC
 remains a member of the International Confederation of Free
 Trade Unions (ICFTU), and Singapore continues its membership
 in the International Labor Organization (ILO).
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is enshrined in the Constitution and fully
 respected in practice. A Presidential Council on Minority
 Rights exists to insure that legislation does not infringe
 upon the rights of ethnic or religious minorities. There is
 no state religion, but the Government has provided financial
 assistance to some religious bodies to allow them to build and
 maintain places of worship. Missionaries are permitted to
 work and to publish religious texts.
 All religious groups are subject to government scrutiny and
 must be legally registered. The Government restricts
 religious sects holding views it considers inimical to the
 common good by application of the Societies Act and has banned
 some splinter groups from practicing their faiths in
 Singapore. There are no restrictions based on religious
 affiliation to membership in the PAP.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no limitations on freedom of movement within the
 country other than those under the ISA. The ISA allows the
 Minister for Home Affairs to suspend or revoke a detention
 order or impose restrictions on a person's activities, place
 of residence, and travel outside of Singapore, but it has been
 rarely used for this purpose. All Singapore residents over
 the age of 13 are required to register with the Government,
 receive and carry an identification card, and report changes
 of address within 14 days. A person may be denied a passport
 at the Government's discretion, although in practice this
 applies only to those convicted of serious crimes. Males
 approaching the age of 18 (when National Service is generally
 performed) and wishing to travel abroad must obtain an exit
 permit from the Ministry of Defense. Recipients of government-
 financed educational benefits are required to sign a bond
 
 
 812
 SINGAPORE
 obligation to serve the Government for a fixed period and may
 not emigrate without paying the balance of their bond.
 The right of voluntary repatriation is extended to holders of
 Singaporean passports. However, several hundred ethnic
 Chinese who left Singapore for China during the politically
 difficult 1940's and 1950's have encountered obstacles to
 their return.
 Refugees are granted first asylum for 90 days in Singapore if
 they have a third-country guarantee of resettlement. As of
 October 1986, more than 26,000 Indochinese refugees had been
 brought into Singapore in asylum status.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The dominant political party in Singapore, the People's Action
 Party (PAP), is a broadly based institution, with roots in
 neighborhood organizations. It includes representatives from
 all racial communities in Singapore. Non-Communist parties
 are legally free to organize, in accordance with strict
 regulations on party constitution, fund raising, and
 accountability. There are some 19 registered political
 parties in Singapore in addition to the PAP. These parties
 are closely monitored by the Government, which justifies its
 action on the grounds of possible Communist infiltration and
 enforcement of libel laws in connection with election
 campaigning. The successful prosecution of libel and
 defamation suits against opposition parties and candidates by
 members of the PAP bankrupted three opposition politicians
 from the Barisan Socialist party in the mid-1970's.
 In November, Singapore's High Court of Appeals sustained
 parliamentary opposition leader Joshua Benjamin Jeyaretnam's
 1985 District Court conviction on fraud charges and "varied"
 the original 3-month prison sentence to I month in jail plus a
 fine of 5,000 Singapore dollars (US$2,282). Addition of the
 fine resulted in Jeyaretnam being stripped of his seat in
 Parliament (under Singapore's Constitution an MP found guilty
 of a crime for which he has been fined 2,000 or more Singapore
 dollars is disqualified from holding office for a period of 5
 years). Jeyaretnam is appealing his sentence (but not the
 verdict); his final recourse would be an appeal to Singapore
 President wee for a pardon. Jeyaretnam maintains that the
 charges against him were politically motivated.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There are no organizations in Singapore which actively and
 openly monitor human rights violations. Governmental bodies,
 such as the Minority Rights Council, monitor certain aspects
 of human rights in Singapore for domestic purposes.
 Representatives of Amnesty International and other human
 rights groups are not allowed to visit Singapore in an
 official capacity.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Social, economic, and cultural facilities are available to all
 citizens regardless of race, religion, or sex. Minorities are
 constitutionally guaranteed equal rights and actively
 
 
 813
 SINGAPORE
 participate in the political process. Disparities exist among
 the various races, although not as a result of government
 policies.' For example, according to 1980 census data, 0.21
 percent of Malays had a university education, while 1.8
 percent of the Chinese and 2.44 percent of the Indians
 attained that level of education.
 Women generally enjoy equal rights, primarily under the 1969
 Women's Charter and the Constitution. Muslim women's rights
 are protected by the provisions of the 1957 Administration of
 Muslim Law, which permits Muslim women to apply for divorce
 and provides for women to hold and dispose of property. Women
 have voting rights and the right of equality of economic
 opportunity under the law.
 There are few women in the top ranks of the civil service or
 business. As a result of the 1984 election, however, there
 are now three female MP's. In 1986 the median gross monthly
 income of female workers was 76 percent of that for male
 workers. A shortage of workers has led the Government to
 encourage women to work. Singaporean women do not have equal
 rights with men in the transmission of citizenship to their
 children. A Singaporean woman married to a foreigner can not
 pass citizenship to children born outside the country,
 although a Singaporean man can do so. Additionally, the wife
 of a Singaporean male can receive permanent resident status
 and citizenship based on the marriage while the husband of a
 Singaporean woman can not.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 Relatively high wage rates and working conditions consistent
 with accepted international standards are features of the
 Singapore labor market which, despite the economic downturn,
 still provides jobs for some 50,000 foreign workers. The
 unemployment rate in mid-1986 was 6.5 percent. Singapore has
 no minimum wage legislation or unemployment compensation.
 Singapore enforces comprehensive occupational safety and
 health laws. Enforcement procedures, coupled with the
 promotion of educational and training programs, have reduced
 the frequency of job-related accidents from 7.0 accidents per
 million man hours worked in the early 1970's to 4.7 during a
 comparable 3-year period in the 1980's. The average severity
 of occupational accidents has also been reduced.
 Child labor laws which protect young people from exploitation
 and hazardous working conditions are enforced. Employment of
 children below the age of 12 is prohibited, as is nighttime
 work by young people below the age of 16.
 
 
 814
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.PISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: SINGAPORE
 1934     1985     1986
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .............. 0.              0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................      0.0      0.0      0.0
 A. AID ....................      0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .......               0.0      0.0      0.0
 (SEC.SU'P.ASSIST),,         0.0       0.0      0.0
 J.FOOO FOR PEAC                  0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS  .............       0.3       0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-T3TAL.                   0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. I4 S-LOANS.              0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY.  IN  FOR.  CURR .....      0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE II-TOTAL.                  0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.2C.3EV S WFP,          0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER  ECON.  ASSIST..,       0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        .00       0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS .             0.0      0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ..............     O.        0.0      0.0
 II.MIL.  ASSIST.-TOTAL,.,         0.1      0.1      0.0
 LOANS ..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .......... ....       0.1      0.1      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS.                  0.0       0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING.           0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL  MIL.ED.TRNG ....       0.1       0.1      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0       0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER  GRANTS ........       0.0       0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. 0 MIL,..          0.1      0.1      0.0
 LOANS ..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.1       0.1      0.0
 OT4ER  US  LOANS ..........       0.0     15.8      0.0
 EX-:I  BANK  LOANS .......       0.0     15.3      0.0
 ALL OTHER .................      0.0      0.0      0.0
 .........................................................
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1984     1935     1936     1946-86
 TOTAL .......... 0.0        0.7      D.0    387.3
 IBRD               ).0       0.0      0."    17.4
 IFC                 0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IO A.0                      0.0      0.0      D.0
 I03                 0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADB                3.0       0.3      0.0    181.1
 AF09. D0                     0.      ,0      0.0
 UN3.P              J.1      0.7      C.2     26.2
 OTIER-UN           2.        0J0      0.0      0.6
 EiC                 .1      0.0       0.0      0.O
 
 
 815
