	SERBIA
The Serbian government of Slobodan Milosevic has encouraged, directed and carried out a deliberate and calculated campaign of terror against its own population. The apparent objective of these gross violations of human rights is the "eÂnic cleansing" of non-ethnic "Serbs" from Serbia and the political intimidation and silencing of any Serbs who object.
The 1993 State Department report criticizes the Serbian goverrmient for its military, economic and political support of "massive human ri^ts abuses and acts of genocide" in Bosnia. But despite this apparently harsh summary language, the report subsequently evades any full discussion of the Milosevic goverrmient's responsibility for events in Bosnia. Given what is known about the origins of the war in that country, the report is flatly misleading in its later reference to "sporadic outbursts of violence [which] . . . escalated into full-scale war." In a recently published book, Yugoslav Chief of Staff General Kadijevic openly admits to a conspiracy with Serbian leaders to start a war as soon as "the other side" provided an appropriate "provocation." Serbian police armed Croatian and Bosnian Serb paramilitaries long before any violence erupted in Croatia and Bosnia, and these troops were placed undei" the command of the Yugoslav Army; regular Yugoslav Army troops were routinely sent to fight in both Croatia and Bosnia against their will, and in changed uniforms; and an important contingent of Serbian forces fighting around Gorazde came from Serbia proper. Facts such as these run counter to the State Department's portrayal of the conflict as a "civil war."
The record of abuses in Serbia indicates that, with the exception of the ^stemic practice of mass rape, the same human rights abuses being carried out with the support of the Serbian regime in Bosnia, are also being carried out in Serbia proper, albeit on a smaller scale and with less open official sanction. In many cases the same paramilitary forces that have carried out gross abuses in Bosnia have been unleashed within Serbia to terrorize ethnic minorities there.
Taken together, the individual sections of the 1993 report provide an accurate portrayal of human rights abuses in Serbia/Montenegro. The report is to be commended for noting that human rights abuses in Serbia are "extensive, brutal and systemic." It presents an accurate description of the type and general extent of abuses committed by the police force and paramilitary forces, including widespread extrajudicial killings, "disappearances," torture and beatings. Similarly, the report is correct in its general description of civil liberties violations perpetrated by Serbian authorities, supported by accurate descriptions of individual incidents of intellectual, cultural and political repression. It is dso accurate in noting that ethnic minorities in Serbia/Montenegro are most often the victims of these abuses.
The report falls short, however, in providing an "overview of the various abuses that fully captures the extent to which these reflect the government's policy
311
CRITIQUE 1993
of "ethnie cleansing." Within Serbia, this follows as the logical extension of the Serbian policy toward Bosnia and the establishment of ethnic enclaves throughout the former Yugoslavia. The ethnic conflict in Serbia is not merely the fimction of random acts of spontaneous violence (although these no doubt occur), but rather a process of human rights abuses that begins and ends with a government committed to a program of Serbian nationalism intolerant of the presence within Serbia of non-"Serbs." At best, the report suffers from an excessively diplomatic tone; at worst, it simply fails to recognize the nature of the Serbian government and its role in originating and perpetuating human rights abuses within Serbia. To state that the Serbian government ideologically demands "ethnic cleansing" may be an overstatement, but that it materially supports and encourages this pattern of abuses, and possesses the ability to stop it, is undeniable.
The United Nations and widely respected NGOs are unanimous in their concern that the situations in Kosovo, Sandzak and Vojvodina are potentially explosive. Kosovo in particular is seen as quite capable of developing into a situation on a par with that in Bosnia. The regime's ejqiulsion of CSCE human rights observers and its targeting of those who had cooperated with them is a particularly ominous sign.
Human rights violations in Kosovo, while accurately reported, are scattered throughout the report under various headings. This format diminishes the significance of the events in Kosovo within a larger political framework, particularly the extent to which they are part of a larger program of "Serbianization." This is exemplified by the systematic harassment of the local political leadership, repression of Albanian culture and religion, and attempts by the Serbs to eliminate an independent school system.
The report, and in particular its introduction, while accurate, uses language which is ambiguous in its discussion of Milosevic's power and the nature of his govenmient. For example, the report correctly notes that Milosevic "dominates the political scene" and "wields absolute control over the Serbian police." But it fails to discuss claims that the police force has been deliberately strengthened as Milosevic's "personal army," and that elements of the police force have been recruited from criminal elements of Serbian society. The introduction describes the actions of the paramilitary forces as "tolerated" by the Belgrade authorities. Given that Vojislav Seselj, a primary leader of the paramilitary forces, admits to being armed by the Belgrade government and that forces are controlled by officers with direct ties to the government, "toleration" is too weak a term.
Nowhere in the introduction, and only once in the entire report, is the term "ethnic cleansing" used. The report speaks of the "systemic repression of ethnic Albanians in the Kosovo region," but without explaining that such oppression has resulted in the flight of thousands and is widely viewed as a deliberate attempt to establish a Serbian majority within Kosovo. The "selective intimidation" of Croats
312
_SERBIA
and Hungarians in the Vojvodina region is described, somewhat diplomatically, as having "spurred" the emigration of non-Serbs, while the paramilitary attacks and "murders" in the Sandzak region are described as having led to the "dislocation" of Muslims. While the intent and details of these actions and the government's role in them are ftilly noted in the body of the report, the tone of the overview may give the reader a misleading impression of the nature of violations in Serbia.
The introduction also avoids using the term "torture." Non-governmental human rights groups have amassed ample evidence to show that torture is systemic, especially in Sandzak and Kosovo. The most common method is the sustained beating of detainees. Other methods include beatings of the genitalia and soles of the feet. The one incident described in detail in the report is also the only incident leading to legal punishment of the perpetrator, leaving the reader with the inaccurate impression that such abuses are generally punished.
The report also fails to mention the effect of violence against women. While the body of the report is generally accurate in its description of types and forms of abuses, rape seems to be the one area which the report fails to mention entirely. Although, as noted above, rape in Serbia cannot be said to occur on the same large scale in Bosnia-Herzegovina, there have been cases of rape and of increased violence against women in Serbia, and these warrant discussion. The report also fails to make the logical link between the rapes committed by Serbian paramilitary forces outside of Serbia, and the fact that fear of rape by these same forces must necessarily exist among non-Serbian women within Serbia itself
While the report accurately chronicles specific examples of the Serbian government's repression of the press and free speech, it does not make clear how integral control of the media has been in bringing Milosevic to power and allowing him to stay there. The report describes the most egregious abuses of press freedom, but does not always succeed in setting them in the proper context. It presents the Serbian government's confrols and abuses as violations of its own laws protecting freedom of speech, and thus aberrations, rather than as part of a systematic effort to maintain control through what amounts, especially in Kosovo, to a police state dependent on a well-orchestrated system of official propaganda. For example, the report understates the intolerance faced by those who publish material critical of the regime. It indicates that while the media is tightly controlled, material which criticizes the government is generally tolerated, "with a few notable exceptions." This wording is highly disputable, as may be attested to particularly by the frequency of harassment faced by those deemed responsible for such writings.
The report does detail several incidents of harassment. Other examples include the arrest of Rrok Berisha, a TV Pristina journalist who was accused of organizing protests, informing the CSCE about human rights abuses and misleading the general public about Serbian authorities. Before being-released, he was warned not to write about the police or the Serbian authorities. Similarly, journalist Cerkin
313
CRITIQUE 1993
Ibishi was arrested and asked who was financing him and who had ordered him to criticize the government. Before his release, he was warned to cease writing.
The report mentions that Serbian Radio and Television (RTS) placed some 1,500 employees on involuntary leave in early 1993, and that the majority had publicly condemned RTS's encouragement of nationalistic and religious intolerance. What the report does not indicate, however, is that new staff were later hired, despite the fact that economic pressures had been given as the reason for the "layoffs." Additionally, Human Ri^ts Watch/Helsinki notes that "the journalists who were dismissed either were non-Serbs, open political opponents of the ruling Socialist Party of Serbia (SPS) or members of the independent journalists' union."
In general, the Serbian government often maintains de facto control over the media even without official ownership of each publication or station. Although Politika, for example, is not officially owned by the government, there have been recent attempts both to nationalize and to privatize it, leaving its current official status unclear. In fact, the government appears to continue to control the paper's editorial policy, if not its daily operations. Similarly unclear is the status of Borba, currently the most independent daily newspaper in Serbia/Montenegro. Once the main Communist newspaper, it later become a more liberal, reformist voice. However, as the composition of its shareholders changed, it has moved closer to the government's position. Limited though its independence from the government is, Borba has, like others, suffered from the government's ability to manipulate its financial situation. By freezing the price of daily newspapers, the government has drastically reduced the press's ability to pay its costs, to the point where its very survival is in question. Similarly, although the report states that the goveniment has restricted foreign investment in Serbian media, it does not explain that the few remaining independent press outlets in Serbia depend heavily on financing from abroad. This is the case, for example, with the weekly Vreme.
The report misleadingly states that "freedom of peaceful assembly and association is legally provided for," although "severely restricted." All the examples it gives of such restrictions involve acts of police brutality, such as breaking up demonstrations and arbitrarily detaining and assaulting participants. But this is only part of the picture. It would be more accurate to say that freedom of assembly and association are guaranteed under certain articles of the constitutions of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and its member republics, Serbia and Montenegro. However, these guarantees are effectively contradicted by other constitutional articles, as well as by legislation such as the Serbian Law on Associations and the Serbian Law on Public Gatherings. These laws, in turn, are applied in a capricious and restrictive fashion.
The report places little emphasis on the intense harassment of participants in the "parallel" program of Albanian underground private schools in Kosovo. On June 21, a campaign against the schools was reported by the CSCE team in Pec.
314
_SERBIA
Eight schools were searched for graduation certificates issued in the name of the Kosovo Republic. In Klina, the police searched a school and then went to the local Democratic League of Kosovo (LKD), arresting the 12 people present, and beating several. The opening of the following school year on September 1 was marked by similar events, with armed Serbian police preventing Albanian pupils from entering their schools. Additionally, it was reported from Albania on September 18 that Belgrade authorities had ordered the closing of the 58 secondary schools and 21 of the 350 elementary schools in the Albanian language. As in 1992, Albanian teachers were arrested prior to the start of the new academic year. In one instance, it was reported that police entered an Albanian primary school and brutally beat the school guard without cause.
The report does a good job of conveying the overall climate of repression faced by ethnic Albanians, particularly those who are involved with political groups. It should be noted that the arbitrary arrest and detention of Albanians is usually carried out under the pretext of combating "Albanian separatism, secessionism and terrorism." The Albanian Council for the Defense of Human Rights reports that during August and September 1993,67 Albanians were arrested on trumped-up criminal charges.
Similarly, court proceedings in Kosovo, which formerly were conducted in the language of the defendant, are now conducted exclusively in Serbian. Complaints written in Albanian have been rejected by the courts. Official identification papers, which used to appear in both languages, are now written only in Serbian.
Similar treatment is faced by non-Serbs in other regions of Serbia. In the Sandzak region, police conduct raids regularly on Muslim flats and houses. Near the end of 1993, 25 members of the Party of Democratic Action, which has substantial support from the Sandzak population, were charged with preparing for "armed rebellion." The charge appears to have arisen from a memorandum drafted by the Muslim National Council, proposing special status for five municipalities in Montenegro and six in Serbia with Muslim majority populations.
Finally, while the report mentions the expulsion of the CSCE from the provinces of Kosovo, Sandzak and Vojvodina, it does not mention the harassment suffered by those who had had contact with the organization. According to the CSCE, local secretaries, translators and other administrative staff have had their homes searched and passports seized. In Prizren, a town near the Albanian border, about 100 intellectuals, politicians and human rights workers who had contact with the CSCE had been arrested as of early September.
The report does not discuss the significant pressure being applied by Serbian authorities in reaction to the proclamation of Montenegrin Bishop Antonije Abramovic on October 31, reestablishing the Montenegrin Church as an independent entity. This proclamation prompted an immediate and harsh reaction
315
CRITIQUE 1993
from Serbian officials and the Serbian Orthodox Church, who fear that the reestablishment of the church would endanger Serbian nationalism. Pressure from the Belgrade authorities includes the imposition of an informal economic and trade blockade against Montenegro.
The report's discussion of the situation of refiigees in Serbia could also have been strengthened. In particular, the comment Üiat Serbia "tightened its refugee requirements" on May 1 demands ñirther explanation. Serbia faces a dilemma in seeking both to discourage some reftigees, due largely to economic conditions, while at the same time seeking to encourage some Serbs to move into "ethnically cleansed" areas of Serbia formerly occupied by Muslims. The Serbian Commissioner for Reftigees has therefore promulgated a new "interpretation" of regulations denying reftigee status to many fleeing from Serb-held regions of Bosnia and Croatia, while allowing it to others. One of the new "instructions," specifying to whom exceptions for entry may or may not be granted, bars anyone who fled from the war area to Montenegro from becoming a reftigee in Serbia. The practical effect of this rule is to bar Muslims from achieving reftigee status.
The new instructions also state that applicants from designated "safe havens" are normally to be refused reftigee status. This regulation is designed to discourage the departure of Serbs from these areas, particularly those of military age. Since these "safe havens" are Serb-controlled, the question arises of what would happen to a member of a different ethnic group in such a region. The potential difficulties facing non-Serb seeking reftigee status from a Serb-held "safe haven" should have been discussed in the report.
Human rights NGOs, including the Lawyers Committee, have consistently objected to the Serbian government's policy of denying reftigee status not only to those who come from allegedly "safe municipalities" in Bosnia-Herzegovina or Croatia, but to all able-bodied males between 18 and 60 years old. The issue of men fleeing military service in the Bosnian Serb army is not sufficiently addressed in the report, and their forcible return to the place of their persecution, in violation of international law, is not addressed at all.
Additionally, the CSCE received reports in February of the unlawftil recruiting of Serb reftigees by "armed gangs" who sent loaded trucks of these refugees, or "volunteers," directly to the front. The UN Special Rapporteur's staff was informed that after such a group arrived at a reftigee center in Sremaka Mitrovica in March, they were sent directly to the front with the ftill knowledge of camp authorities.
316
