 SOLOMON ISLANDS
 Solomon Islands is one of the larger mini-states in the
 South Pacific with a homogeneous population of 225,000. It
 is a parliamentary democracy. The capital, Honiara, is the
 only urban area. Over 90 percent of the population live
 in rural villages. Most Solomon Islanders still are deeply
 associated with traditional Melanesian social mores and
 maintain strong roots in village life. Solomon Islands
 achieved independence on July 7, 1978. Since then,
 democratic institutions established during the colonial
 period are being integrated with custom and traditional
 practices; substantial government powers are being devolved
 to the provincial and local levels.
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a.   Torture
 Torture is prohibited by law and custom in Solomon Islands.
 No reports of torture have been received in 1981.
 b.   Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 Cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment is illegal
 and not practiced or condoned. Capital punishment was abolished
 in 1966. Criminal law is embodied in a penal code. Treatment
 of prisoners is fair and humane. There have been no charges
 of mistreatment.
 c.   Disappearances
 This is nonexistent in Solomon Islands.
 d.   Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment.
 There are no political prisoners in Solomon Islands. Habeas
 corpus exists and is honored in practice. Preventive
 detention does not exist.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 A right to a fair public trial is guaranteed by law, and is
 honored in practice. Defendants are entitled to counsel
 and may consult with counsel freely and in private. The
 constitution provides for a public solicitor whose function
 is to provide legal aid, advice and help to the public,
 especially to those charged with criminal offenses. Defendants
 are made fully aware of the charges against them, and their
 lawyers can inform themselves of the evidence on which
 charges are based. The Solomon Islands court system is
 independent of executive or military control. There are
 no special courts to deal with security or political offenses.
 The high court has a wide review authority over the lower
 courts. An ombudsman investigates complaints against the
 government.
 f.   Invasion of the Home
 There is respect for the sanctity of the home and search
 warrants are required as a matter of law. Illegal entries
 of the home are not condoned.
 
 (0)
 
 
 687
 2.   Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a.   Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 Free speech and free press are guaranteed and observed in
 practice. There are both government and privately published
 newspapers and a government radio station. Religions are
 freely practiced. There are no impedivents to assembly or
 to freedom of association. Private newspapers operate
 freely. There is no censorship of the press. There have
 been no violations of freedom of the press reported this
 year.
 b.   Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 Solomon Islanders are free to travel within the country
 and abroad. Passport fees are not excessive.
 c.   Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 There is universal adult suffrage for citizens 18 and older.
 An electoral commission oversees registration and ensures
 fair elections. In September, Solomon Islands witnessed
 the first change of government since independence. The
 transition was smooth and peaceful. The unicameral
 parliament of 38 members meets regularly. Women have equal
 standing and play a significant role in all arenas. Under
 law there is no discrimination by sex. There is an active
 trade union movement to organize, bargain and strike.
 3.   Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged
 Violations of Human Rights
 No such allegations against the Solomon Islands Government
 or any requests for investigations have been received.
 4. Economic and Social Circumstances
 The British colonial administration did little to prepare
 Solomon Islands for independence in 1978. Solomon Islands
 receives considerable foreign aid which supports much of the
 government's development programs. However, Solomon Islands'
 economy is dependent on commodities, especially copra, that
 are currently experiencing exceptionally low world prices.
 This has meant a significant reduction in the resources
 available to the government. The new prime minister has
 announced plans to restructure his government in order to
 improve delivery of government services to the people. Health,
 education and other social programs are available on a non-
 discriminatory basis. GNP per capita has risen from $150 in
 1960 to $470 in 1979, despite an increase in the population's
 growth rate from 1.7 in 1960 to 3.4 percent in 1979. Many
 comparative health statistics are not available, but the
 percentage of calorie supply available for consumption relative
 to nutritional requirements is 81 and shows no change from
 1960 to 1979. The infant mortality rate in 1979 was 52.4
 per thousand live births. In 1979, a reported 95 percent of
 the urban population had access to safe water, while only 24
 percent of the rural population did. The adult literacy rate
 in 1980 was estimated at 60 percent; the percentage of primary
 school-age children enrolled in school rose from 61 in 1960
 to 72.8 in 1970.
 
 
