 SOLOMON ISLANDS
 Solomon Islands, with its population of over 340,000 people, is an archipelago
 stretching over 840 miles in the South Pacific and the second largest (after Papua
 New Guinea) of the Melanesian countries. Its government is based on a modified
 parliamentary system consisting of a single-chamber legislative assembly of 47
 members. Executive authority lies with the Prime Minister and his Cabinet. The
 Prime Minister elected by a majority vote of Parliament, selects his own Cabinet.
 This system, adopted on independence in 1978, accords with both Solomon Islands'
 experience and the Melanesian tradition of leadership based upon individual
 achievement and political consensus. Political legitimacy rests on direct election by
 secret ballot. There have been four general elections since independence, the most
 recent in June. The courts are independent and vigorously protect individual rights.
 A police force of about 500 men is under civilian control. There are no armed
 forces.
 Agriculture is the mainstay of the village economy. About 85 percent of the popu-
 lation engages to some extent in subsistence farming, obtaining food by gardemng
 and fishing, and has little involvement in the cash economy. Improved Solomon Is-
 lands export performance, particularly in the forestry sector, continued in 1993.
 However, the resulting improvements in Solomon Islands' fiscal and balance of pay-
 ments positions are likely to be temporary.
 Most basic individual rights are provided for in the Constitution, respected by the
 authorities, and defendedby the courts, but discrimination and violence against
 women and restrictions on the press remain serious problems. There is a constitu-
 tionally provided Ombudsman to look into and provide protection against improper
 or unlawful administrative treatment.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killings.-Political and other extrajudicial
 killing did not occur.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of political disappearance.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Torture is prohibited by law and not practiced.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-There was no evidence of politically moti-
 vated arrests, Exile is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judicial system is a blend of British and tradi-
 tional systems. There is a high court, plus magistrates' courts. Accused persons are
 entitled to counsel. Provision is made for writs of habeas corpus under the law. It
 is illegal to coerce statements. Violations of civil liberties are punishable by fines
 and jail sentences.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-In addi-
 tion to legal provisions, the traditional culture provides strong protection against
 these types of abuses.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Although freedom of the press is provided for
 in the Constitution, the Government placed severe restrictions on the media's news
 coverage on several occasions in 1993. The former government banned all coverage
 by local media of the border tensions between Solomon Islands and Papua New
 Guinea from May, when clashes were first reported, until the election of the new
 Government in June. The Solomon Islands Broadcasting Corporation (SIBC) ini-
 tially defied this ban by relying on outside coverage provided by the Australian
 Broadcasting Corporation and other sources, but this was later sto ped by the Gov-
 ernment. The new Government, elected in June, haspledged to aolish the media
 restrictions imposed by the previous government and has hired as press spokes-
 person a journalist who was fired from the SIBC for defying a censorship order of
 the former Prime Minister.
 Freedom of speech and academic expression is recognized in the Constitution, sup-
 ported by the courts, and honored by the Government.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The right of association is pro-
 vided for in the Constitution and freely exercised. Demonstrators must obtain a per-
 mit, but permits have never been denied on political grounds.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Freedom of religion is guaranteed by law. Organized reli-
 gions as well as indigenous beliefs are freely practiced.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation. -There are no legal or administrative restrictions on movement of Solo-
 
 
 mon Islands' citizens within or out of the country. Native-born citizens may not be
 deprived of citizenship on any grounds. Although they have not been formally grant-
 ed asylum a limited number of displaced persons from Papua New Guinea's North
 Solomons Province, the site of conflict on Bougainville Island, are allowed to remain
 in the country indefinitely.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have the right to change their government through periodic free elec-
 tions. Since independence, Solomon Islands has had four parliamentary elections
 (the most recent in June 1993) and several elections for provincial and local coun-
 cils. The Governor General declared Francis Billy Hilly Prime Minister following his
 election by one vote in Parliament in June. The result was contested by former
 Prime Minister Solomon Mamaloni, but the courts confirmed Hilly's election.
 Besides the general elections, three additional changes of government occurred be-
 cause of votes of no confidence in Parliament. Suffrage is universal over the age of
 18.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 While there are no restrictions on the formation of local organizations to monitor
 and report on human rights, none has been established to date. There were no
 known requests for investigation by outside human rights organizations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Women.-Solomon Islands law accords women equal legal rights, however, in most
 traditional Solomon Islands societies males are dominant, and women are limited
 to customary family roles. This has hampered women from taking more active roles
 in economic and political life. Only 1 of the 47 members of Parliament is female,
 and none of the 15 government ministers is female. A shortage of employment o
 portunities throughout the country has inhibited the entry of women into the work
 force.
 While actual statistical data are scarce, incidents of wife beating and abuse ap-
 pear to be common. In the rare cases that are reported charges are often dropped
 by the women before the court appearance or are settled out of court. Police are re-
 luctant to interfere in what they perceive as domestic disputes. In addition, many
 of the laws benefiting women are from the British tradition and are viewed by many
 Solomon Islanders as "foreign laws" not reflective of their own customs and tradi-
 tions. The magistrate courts deal with physical abuse of women, on the basis of in-
 herent common law powers, as they would any other assault, although prosecutions
 are rare.
 There is no national policy on women. The government-supported National Coun-
 cil of Women is the principal women's organization involved in t ing to improve
 the status of women in society. While the Council continues to hold workshops and
 to conduct programs to train women in skills needed to enhance their self-con-
 fidence, andto strengthen their participation in the political and economic life of
 Solomon Islands, its efforts on the legislative front seemed to have slackened. The
 Government provides support for these efforts through the Women's and Develop-
 ment Division of the Ministry of Health. Various nongovernmental organizations
 and church groups also actively train women and support their empowerment.
 Children.-Children are respected and protected within the traditional extended
 family system, in accordance with the family's financial resources and access to
 services. As a result virtually no children are homeless or abandoned. Although
 some cases of child abuse are reported there is no pattern of societal abuse. Never-
 theless, due to limited access to health care, infant mortality rates for children
 under 5 years of age were estimated to be 42.9 per 1,000 live births in 1989, the
 latest year for which statistics are available. An estimated 25 percent of children
 under 5 are malnourished. Although education is a government priority, access is
 limited and school attendance is not compulsory. An estimated 25 percent of school-
 age children never begin primary studies. Total enrollment for primary-school-aged
 children was estimated to be 66 percent in 1990. The Constitution grants children
 the same general rights and protection as adults. Existing laws are designed to pro-
 tect children from sexual abuse, child labor, and neglect. Within the limits of its re-
 sources, the Government is committed to the welfare and protection of the rights
 of children.
 People with Disabilities.-There is no law or any national policy on the disabled,
 and no legislation mandates access for the disabled. Protection and care of the dis-
 abled is left to the traditional extended family and nongovernmental organizations.
 
 
 Informally, the disabled in urban areas frequently find work through the public
 service sector. However, with high unemployment countrywide and few jobs avail-
 able in the formal sector, most disabled persons, particularly those in rural areas,
 do not find work outside the family structure.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Solomon Islands' Constitution implicitly recog-
 nizes the right of workers in the public and private sectors to form or join unions
 to choose their own representatives, to determine and pursue their own views and
 policies, and to engage in political activities. The courts have confirmed these rights.
 Approximately 20-25 percent of the total population participates in the formal sec-
 tor of the economy. Of that, approximately 60-70 percent are organized: 90 percent
 of the public sector and approximately 50 percent of the private sector. There are
 two major private sector unions: the Solomon Islands National Union of Workers
 and the National Bank Officers Association. The major unions in the public sector
 are: the Public Employees Union, National Teachers Association, Nurses Associa-
 tion, Medical Association, and two unions at the College of Higher Education (one
 each for lecturers and nonacademic stafi). Labor seldom resorts to strikes and pre-
 fers to negotiate. Disputes are usually quickly referred to the Trade Disputes Panel
 for arbitration either before or during a strike. Employees are protected from arbi-
 trary dismissal while the Panel is deliberating. In practice, the small percentage of
 workers actually involved in the wage economy means that employers have an
 ample supply of replacement workers if disputes are not resolved quickly. There is
 some legal protection for workers against employer retaliatory actions. Once a case
 has been referred to the Trade Disputes Panel, the employer cannot undertake a
 lockout or summarily dismiss employees. The definition of "summarily dismiss" has
 yet to be resolved, however. In 1993 the only strikes of note were a successful work
 stoppage at an oil palm plantation in support of a pay raise and a contentious
 strike, followed by a lockout, at the National Provident Fund. The latter may pro-
 vide the courts an opprtunity to define further the rights of those dismissed during
 a strike. Unions are free to affiliate internationally, and the largest trade union, the
 Solomon Islands' Union of Workers, is affiliated with the formerly Soviet-controlled
 World Federation of Trade Unions (WFTU). The Union of Workers remains loosely
 affiliated with the WFTU. It is also affiliated with the South Pacific Organization
 Congress of Trade Unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The right to organize and
 bargain collectively is provided for by the Trade Disputes Act of 1981, and unions
 engage in it frequently.
 Wages and conditions of employment are determined by collective bargaining. If
 disputes between labor and management cannot be settled between the two sides,
 the disputes are referred to the Trade Disputes Panel (TDP) for arbitration. The
 three-member TDP is made up of a chairman appointed by the judiciary, a labor
 representative, and a business representative. The panel is independent and neu-
 tral.
 In a labor-management dispute, either party may refer the dispute to the panel
 for arbitration. While a dispute is before the panel for arbitration, labor is prohib-
 ited from striking, and management is prohibited from dismissing workers who are
 party to the dispute. During arbitration both public and private sector workers may
 be legally required to return to work. A decision by the TDP is legalll binding but
 may be adjusted by the Government "in the interest of the economy, according to
 Section 8 of the Trade Disputes Act of 1981. The Government has never taken such
 action.
 Workers are protected by law against antiunion activity, and there are no areas
 where union activity is officially discouraged. Charges of antiunion activity would
 be referred either to the High Court or to the TDP for resolution. There are no ex-
 port processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced labor is prohibited by the
 Constitution, except as part of a court sentence or order, and this prohibition is ob-
 served.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of children.--Child labor is forbidden for chil-
 dren under the age of 12 except when performed in the company of parents in light
 agriculture or domestic work. Children under 15 are barred from work in industry
 or on ships; those under age 18 cannot work underground or in mines. The labor
 division of the Ministry of Commerce, Trade, and Industry is charged with enforcing
 child labor laws. Given low wages and high unemployment, there is little incentive
 to employ child labor.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Although the minimum wage is supposed to
 be adjusted annually to reflect changes in the retail price index, the present rate
 
 
 737
 of 23 cents per hour has been in place since 1988. The legal minimum wage is not
 adequate to sustain a family of four in the capital of Honiara. Because most of the
 population is dependent to some extent on the subsistence economy, and as there
 is high unemployment and underemployment, workers are available at the current
 wage.
 The Labor Act of 1969, as amended, and the Employment Act of 1981, as well
 as other laws, regulate premium pay sick leave, the right to paid vacations, and
 other conditions of service. The standard workweek is 45 hours and is limited to
 6 days weekly. There are provisions for premium pay for overtime and holiday work
 as well as provisions for maternity leave. Both an active labor movement and an
 independent judiciary ensure widespread enforcement of labor laws in major state
 and private enterprises. The Commissioner of Labor the public prosecutor, and the
 police are responsible for enforcing labor laws. However, they usually react to
 charges of labor law violation rather than take the initiative in monitoring adher-
 ence to these laws. The extent to which the law is enforced in smaller establish-
 ments and in the subsistence sector is unclear. There appear to be no legal safety
 and health standards. Workers at construction sites are not required to wear protec-
 tive clothing or helmets. Malaria is endemic in the Solomon Islands and affects the
 health of many employees. Agricultural workers have a high risk of contracting ma-
 laria but are not provided with malaria suppressants.
