 SOLOMON ISLANDS
 Solomon Islands, with its approximately 395,000 people, is an archipelago stretch-
 ing over 840 miles in the South Pacific. Its government is a modified parliamentary
 system consisting of a single-chamber legislative assembly of 47 members. Executive
 authority lies with the Prime Minister and his Cabinet. The Prime Minister, elected
 by a majority vote of Parliament, selects his own Cabinet. Political legitimacy rests
 on direct election by secret ballot. There have been four general elections since inde-
 pendence in 1978, most recently in June 1993.
 A police force of about 500 men under civilian control is responsible for law en-
 forcement. There were no reports of police abuse of human rights.
 About 85 percent of the population engages to some extent in subsistence farming,
 obtaining food by gardening and fishing, and has little involvement in the cash econ-
 omy. Approximately 10 to 15 percent of the working population (15 years and older)
 are engaged in nonsubsistence production. Although exports, particularly of unproc-
 essed logs, have boomed, the number of wage earners has remained unchanged for
 the past several years, despite high population growth.
 Most basic individual rights are provided for in the Constitution, respected by au-
 thorities, and defended by an independent judiciary. Discrimination and violence
 against women remain serious problems, and the Government on occasion has im-
 posed restrictions on the media. There is a constitutionally provided Ombudsman
 to look into and provide protection against improper or unlawful administrative
 treatment.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 These practices are prohibited by law and not known to occur.
 Prison conditions meet minimum international standards. As there are no human
 rights organizations in Solomon Islands, the question of whether the Government
 would permit visits by human rights monitors has never arisen.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-There was no evidene of politically moti-
 vatd arrests or detentions. Exile is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public TriaL-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary and it is independent in practice.
 The judicial syrstem onsists of a High Court and magitrates' ourts. Accused per-
 sons are entitled to counsel. The law provides for a judicial determination of the le-
 gality of arrests. Violations of civil liberties are punishable by fines and jail sen-
 tences.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-In addi-
 tion to leg alprevisions, the traditional culture provides strong protection against
 these types of abuses. A constitutionally provided Ombudsman, with the power of
 subpoena, can investigate complaints of official abuse, mistreatment, or unfair treat-
 ment. While the office has potentially far-rang powers, it focuses mainly on inter-
 vening on behalf of individuals when officia admnistrative errors are brought to
 the offie's attention.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Government generally respects the con-
 stitutional provisions for freedom of speech and of the press. The media comprise
 the Solomon Islands Broadcasting Corporation (SIBC), a statutory body which
 comes directly under the Prime Minister's office and whose radio broadcasts are
 heard throughout the country, and privately owned newspapers based in the capital,
 Honiara. Given the high rate of illiteracy, the SIBC is more influential than the
 newspapers, the most popular of which is published semiweekly. The Department
 of Information in the Prime Minister's office publishes a monthly newspaper which
 
 
 719
 is strongly progovernment. At least one nongovernmental organization (NGO) pub-
 lishes a monthly magazine which frequently deals with environmental issues and
 is highly critical of the Government's logging policy.
 The state-owned SIBC is relatively bias free. On one occasion, however, the Gov-
 ernment forbade provincial authorities to air their concerns about a policy of the
 central Government that directly affected them.
 While freedom of speech is generally respected, the Prime Minister in May
 warned NGOs critical of his government's logging policy on a small island in the
 Russell Islands group that henceforth their activities would be closely monitored, es-
 pecially those involving foreigners. He accused the NGO's of politicizing the issue
 and stated that some of their personnel wanted to destabilize the country. He said
 that foreigners as well as naturalized citizens had been identified and were being
 advised not to interfere in internal government matters.
 b. Freeedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 the right of association, and this right is freely exercised. Demonstrators must ob-
 tain permits, but permits are not known to have been denied on political grounds.
 c. Freedom of Region.-The law provides for freedom of religion, and the Govern-
 ment respects this provision in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Government places neither legal nor administrative restrictions on
 the movement of citizens within or out of the country. Native-born citizens may not
 be deprived of citizenship on any grounds.
 Although they have not been formally granted asylum, a limited number of dis-
 placed persons from Papua New Guinea's Bougainville Island, who fled the conflict
 there several years before, have been allowed to remain in the country indefinitely.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment.
 Citizens have the right to change their government through periodic free elec-
 tions. Since independence in 1978, Solomon Islands has had four parliamentary
 elections, most recently in June 1993, and several elections for provincial and local
 councils. On four occasions, changes of government resulted from either parliamen-
 tary votes of no confidence or the resignation of the Prime Minister. Suffrage is uni-
 versal over the age of 18.
 Traditional male dominance has limited the role of women in government. Only
 one of the 47 members of Parliament is a woman.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 While there are no restrictions on the formation of local organizations to monitor
 and report on human rights, none has been established to date. There were no
 known requests for investigation by outside human rights organizations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides that no person-regardless of race, place of origin, po-
 litical opinions, color, creed, or subject to disabiities--shall be treated in a discrimi-
 natory manner in respect of access to shops, hotels, public restaurants, places of en-
 tertainment, or to public places. The Constitution further prohibits any laws which
 would have discriminatory effects, and provides that no person should be treated in
 a discriminatory manner by anyone acting in an official capacity. Despite constitu-
 tional and legal protections, women remain the victims of discrimination in this tra-
 dition-based society. Due to high rates of unemployment, there are a limited number
 of j'o available to the disabled.
 Women.-While actual statistical data are scarce, incidents of wife beating and
 wife abuse appear to be common. In the rare cases that are reported, charges are
 often droppedby the women before the court appearance or are settled out of court.
 Police are reluctant to interfere in what they perceive as domestic disputes. In addi-
 tion, many of the laws benefiting women derive from the British tradition and are
 viewed by many Solomon Islanders as "foreign laws" not reflective of their own cus-
 toms andtraditions. The magistrates' courts deal with physical abuse of women as
 they would any other assault, although prosecutions are rare.
 The law accords women equal legal rights. However, in this traditional society
 men are dominant, and women are limited to customary family roles. This situation
 has prevented women from taking more active roles in economic and political life.
 A shortage of employment opportunities throughout the country has inhibited the
 entry of women into the work force.
 Children.-Within the limits of its resources, the Government is committed to the
 welfare and protection of the rights of children. Children are respected and pro-
 
 
 720
 tected within the traditional extended-family system, in accordance with the fami-
 ly's financial resources and access to services. As a result, virtually no children are
 homeless or abandoned. Although some cases of child abuse are reported, there is
 no pattern of societal abuse. The Constitution grants children the same general
 rights and protection as adults. Existing laws are designed to protect children from
 sexual abuse, child labor, and neglect.
 People With Disabilities.-There is no law or national policy on the disabled, and
 no legislation mandates access for the disabled. Their protection and care are left
 to the traditional extended family and nongovernmental organizations. With high
 unemployment countide and few jobs available in the formal sector, most dis-
 abled persons, particularly those in rural areas, d not find work outside the family
 structure. A group representing the disabled, the Crippled Society of Solomon Is-
 lands, recently revived after years of inactivity, and held a fund-raising drive with
 the goal of setting up a home for the disabled in the capital, Honiara.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution implicitly recognizes the right of
 workers in the public and private sectors to form or join unions, to choose their own
 representatives, to determine and pursue their own views and policies, and to en-
 gage in political activities. The courts have confirmed these rights. Only about 10
 to 15 percent of the population participate in the formal sector of the economy. Ap-
 proximately 60 to 70 percent of wage earners are organized (90 percent of employees
 in the public sector employees ancI about 50 percent of those in the private sector).
 The law allows strikes, but there were none of note in 1995. The unions seldom
 resort to strikes, preferring instead to negotiate. Disputes are usually referred
 quickly to the Trade Disputes Panel (TDP) or arbitration, either before or during
 a strike. Employees are protected from arbitrary dismissal while the TDP is delib-
 erating. In practice, the small percentage of the work force in formal employment
 means that employers have ample replacement workers if disputes are not resolved
 quickly. There is some legal protection for workers against retaliatory actions by
 employers. Once a case has been referred to the TDP, the employer cannot under-
 take a lockout or summarily dismiss employees.
 Unions are free to affiliate internationally, and the largest trade union the Solo-
 mon Islands' National Union of Workers, is affiliated with the World Federation of
 Trade Unions, the South Pacific Oceanic Council of Trade Unions, and the Common-
 wealth Trade Union Congress.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Trade Disputes Act of
 1981 provides for the rights to organize and to bargain collectively and unions exer-
 cise these rights frequently.
 Wages and conditions of employment are determined by collective bargaining. If
 a dispute between labor and management cannot be settled between the two sides,
 it is referred to the TDP for arbitration. The three-member TDP, comprising a chair-
 man appointed by the j*udiciary, a labor representative, and a business representa-
 tive, is independent and neutral.
 The law protects workers against antiunion activity, and there are no areas where
 union activity is officially discouraged.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 labor, except as part of a court sentence or order, and this prohibition is observed.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The law forbids child labor by
 children under the age of 12, except li ht agriculture or domestic work performed
 in the company of parents. Children under age 15 are barred from work in industry
 or on ships; those under age 18 may not work underground or in mines. The Labor
 Division of the Ministry of Commerce, Trade, and Industry is responsible for enforc-
 ing child labor laws. Given low wages and high unemployment, there is little incen-
 tive to employ child labor.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The present minimum hourly wage rate of
 about $0.22 (0.74 Solomon Islands dollars) has been in place since 1988. The legal
 minimum wage would not support an urban family living entirely on the cash econ-
 omy. Most families are not dependent solely on wages for their livelihoods.
 The Labor Act of 1969, as amended, and the Employment Act of 1981, as well
 as other laws, regulate premium pay, sick leave, the right to paid vacations, and
 other conditions of service. The standard workweek is 45 hours and is limited to
 6 days per week. There are provisions for premium pay for overtime and holiday
 work and for maternity leave.
 Both an active labor movement and an independent judiciary ensure widespread
 enforcement of labor laws in major state and private enterprises. The Commissioner
 of Labor, the Public Prosecutor, and the police are responsible for enforcing labor
 
 
 721
 laws. However, they usually react to complaints rather than routinely monitor ad-
 herence to the law. The extent to which the law is enforced in smaller establish-
 ments and in the subsistence sector is unclear. Safety and health laws appear to
 be adequate. Malaria is endemic in Solomon Islands and affects the health of many
 employees. Agricultural workers have a high risk of contracting malaria.
