 SOLOMON ISLANDS
 Over 340,000 people occupy Solomon Islands, an archipelago stretching over 840
 miles in the South Pacific and the second largest (after Papua New Guinea) of the
 
 
 Melanesian countries. Its government is based on a modified parliamentary system
 consisting of a single-chamber legislative assembly of 38 members. Executive au-
 thority lies with the Prime Minister and his Cabinet. The Prime Minister, elected
 by a majority vote of Parliament, selects his own Cabinet. This system, adopted on
 independence in 1978, accords with both Solomon Islands' experience and the Mela-
 nesian tradition of leadership based upon individual achievement and political con-
 sensus. Political legitimacy rests on direct election by secret ballot.
 There have been three general elections since independence; the most recent, in
 February 1989, resulted in the first government led by a single party since inde-
 pendence. Following his resignation from the majority Peoples Alliance Party (PAP)
 in October 1990 when it appeared he would be replaced as party head, Prime Min-
 ister Solomon Mamaloni dismissed 6 of his 14 PAP Ministers and formed a coalition
 government which has remained firmly in power since that time. New general elec-
 tions are scheduled for June 1993. The courts are independent and vigorously pro-
 tect individual rights.
 A police force of about 500 men is under civilian control. There are no other
 armed forces.
 Agriculture is the mainstay of the economy. About 85 percent of the population
 engages to some extent in subsistence farming, obtaining food by root-gardening and
 fishing, and has little involvement in the cash economy. Improved prices for Solo-
 mon Islands export commodities, combined with higher export volume and reduced
 imports, resulted in a lower trade deficit and a modest balance of payments surplus
 for 1992. However, fiscal and current account deficits persisted and the country's
 weak economy, exacerbated by a population growth rate of 3.5 percent per year, en-
 sured continued pressure on public and private resources.
 Most basic individual rights are provided for in the Constitution, respected by the
 authorities, and defended by the courts, but discrimination and violence against
 women remain serious problems. There is a constitutionally provided Ombudsman
 to look into and provide protection against improper or unlawful administrative
 treatment.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Political and other extrajudicial kill-
 ing did not occur.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of political disappearance.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Torture is prohibited by law and not practiced.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-There was no evidence of politically moti-
 vated arrests. Exile is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judicial system is a blend of British and tradi-
 tional systems. There is a high court plus magistrates' courts. Accused persons are
 entitled to counsel. Provision is made for writs of habeas corpus under the law. It
 is illegal to coerce statements. Violations of civil liberties are punishable by fines
 and jail sentences.
 f. Arbitray Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-In addi-
 tion to legal provisions, the traditional culture provides strong protection against
 these types of abuses.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Constitutional provisions, an independent press,
 and a functioning democratic political system combine to ensure that freedom of
 speech and press are generally respected. There are two private weekly newspapers,
 weekly and monthly national government newsletters, and one provincial govern-
 ment weekly. The Solomon Islands Broadcasting Corporation (SIBC), an independ-
 ent statutory agency, gives significant coverage to statements of opposition politi-
 cians. There is no television, and the importation of satellite dishes is strictly con-
 trolled. The Government and established churches are reluctant to permit the intro-
 duction of television since they are concerned that foreign images of violence, sex,
 and materialism could have a negative influence on the public.
 In March SIBC's general manager began to screen reports on the Bougainville se-
 cessionist movement prior to broadcast. The current affairs editor refused to submit
 a report for advance approval and was therefore fired. The general manager ceased
 reviewing reports on Bougainville shortly after the departure of the current affairs
 editor.
 
 
 657
 b. F!reedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The right of association is pro.
 vided for in the Constitution and freely exercised. Demonstrators must obtain a per.
 mit, but permits have never been denied on political grounds.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Freedom of religion is guaranteed by law. There are no
 controls on the practice of religion, and there is no religious discrimination. Al-
 though Christianity is the predominant religion and a wide variety of Christian de-
 nominations are represented, indigenous beliefs also continue to be practiced with-
 out restriction. Missionaries work without restrictions, but in March the Solomon
 Islands Christian Association called on the Government to amend constitutional
 guarantees to religious freedom to limit what it referred to as new church groups
 and cults. To date, no action has been taken by the Government or Members of Par-
 liament on this request.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-There are no legal or administrative restrictions on freedom of move-
 ment of Solomon Islands' citizens within or out of the country. Native-born citizens
 may not be deprived of citizenship on any grounds.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have the right to change their government through periodic free elec-
 tions. Since independence, Solomon Islands has had three parliamentary elections
 (the most recent in early 1989) and several elections for provincial and local coun-
 cils. Besides the general elections, three additional changes of government were ac-
 complished by votes of Parliament. Suffrage is universal over the age of 18.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 While there are no restrictions on formation of local organizations to monitor and
 report on human rights, none has been established to date.
 There was one ilegation by an outside human rights organization of human
 rights violations in Solomon Islands. The Pacific Islands News Association and the
 New York-based Committee to Protect Journalists protested alleged censorBhip of
 radio news reporting on the Bougainville secessionist movement and the dismissal
 of a radio editor for refusing to submit to management censorship (see Section 2.a.).
 The Office of the Prime Minister denied the allegation of censorship and refused to
 ask SIBC to reinstate the editor.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Language, or Social Status
 Solomon Islands' society displays a hig degree of tolerance. However, while the
 law accords women equal legal rights, the traditional society, in which males are
 dominant and women are seen in customary family roles, has ampered women
 from taking more active roles in economic and political life. Only one of the 38 Mem-
 bers of Pailiament is female. None of the 15 overnment ministers is female, and
 only one of the 15 permanent secretary positions immediately below the rank of
 minister in the government hierarchy is held by a woman. A shortage of employ-
 ment opportunities throughout the country has inhibited the entry of women into
 the work force.
 While actual statistical data are scarce, incidents of wife beating and abuse ap-
 pear to be common. In the rare cases that are reported, charges are often dropped
 by the women before their court appearance or are settled out of court. Police are
 reluctant to interfere in what they perceive as domestic disputes. In addition, many
 of the laws benefiting women are in the British tradition and are viewed by many
 Solomon Islanders as "foreign laws," not reflective of the customs and traditions of
 Solomon Islands. The magistrate courts deal with physical abuse of women on the
 basis of inherent common law powers and deal with it as they would any other as-
 sault, although prosecutions are rare.
 A nations policy on women is currently being drafted by the Solomon Islands
 Government. The unit responsible for drafting the policy statement was composed
 of four female public servants and completed its work late in the year. Based on
 this statement, Parliament passed the Amendment to the Affiliation, Maintenance,
 and Separation Act on December 15, but details of the Amendment were not avail-
 able at year's end.
 The government-supported National Council of Women is the principal women's
 organization involved in trying to improve the status of women in society. Following
 the resignation of its president upon her election as Solomon Islands' first female
 Member of Parliament, the Council was without a president and suffered a leader-
 ship vacuum for much of 1991 and 1992. While the Council Continues to hold work-
 shops and to conduct programs to train women in various skills to enhance their
 self-onfidence and to strengthen their participation in the political and economic
 
 
 life of Solomon Islands, its efforts on the legislative front seemed to have slackened.
 The process of legal and administrative review of the Council's proposed amendment
 to the Affiliation, Maintenance, and Separation Law, pending since 1989, has yet
 to be completed. The amendment would ensure that women who bring cases to court
 are protected against harassment from husbands or members of husbands' families
 at home and in places of employment, and would ensure women's rights to child
 support and compensation. The completion of this process is required before the
 amendment can be submitted to Parliament for consideration.
 Indigenous Solomon Islanders are favored over naturalized citizens in the matter
 of land ownership. Following his election in 1989, the new Prime Minister an-
 nounced a policy restricting t  employment of expatriate Freemasons in the civil
 service, based on objections to what he perceived as Masonic ritualistic secrecy.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Solomon Islands' law recognizes the right of workers
 to organize, to choose their own representatives, to determine and pursue their own
 views and policies,and to engage in political activities. Both public and private sec-
 tor unions have the right to strike-a right they have often exercised. Both civil
 servants and public school teachers successfully struck for wage increases in 1991.
 In 1992 Public Health Service medical doctors were unsuccessful in gaining ap-
 proval of their demands for improved benefits and working conditions. Following
 protracted negotiations in which the Government refused to meet these demands,
 the doctors resigned en masse. While some doctors returned to work with the Public
 Health Service, the majority established themselves in private practice. The small
 percentage of workers actually involved in the wage economy means that employers
 have an ample supply of replacement workers if disputes are not resolved quickly.
 Solomon Islands unions are free to affiliate internationally and the largest trade
 union, the Solomon Islands' National Union of Workers, is affiliated with the Com-
 munist-dominated World Federation of Trade Unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectivdy.-The right to collective bar-
 gaining is provided for by the Trade Disputes Act of 1981, and unions engage in
 it frequently. Wages and conditions of employment are determined by collective bar-
 gaining. If disputes between labor and management cannot be settled between the
 two sides, the disputes are referred to the Trade Disputes Panel (TDP) for arbitra-
 tion. The three-member TDP is made up of a chairman appointed by the judiciary,
 a labor representative, and a business representative. The panel is independent and
 neutral. In a labor-management dispute, either party may refer the dispute to the
 panel for arbitration. While a dispute is before the panel for arbitration, labor is
 prohibited from striking and management is prohibited from dismissing workers
 who are party to the sputa. During arbitration, both public and private sector
 workers may be legally required to return to work. A decision by the TDP is legally
 binding but may be adjusted by the Government "in the interest of the economn
 according to Section 8 of the Trade Disputes Act of 1981. Workers are protected by
 law against antiunion activity, and there are no areas where union activity is offi-
 cially discouraged. Charges of antiunion activity would be referred either to the
 High Court or to the TD  for resolution. There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced labor is prohibited by law,
 except as part of a court sentence or order, and this prohibition is observed.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Cild labor is forbidden for chil-
 dren under the age of 12 except in the company of parents in light agricultural or
 domestic work. Childrea under 15 are barred from work in industry or on ships;
 those under age 18 cannot work underground or in mines. The Labor Division of
 the Ministry of Commerce, Trade, and Industry is charged with enforcing child labor
 laws.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Provincial governments have the power to set
 minimum wages. Although the minimum wage is supposed to be adjusted annually
 to reflect changes in the retail price index, the present rate has been in place since
 1988 based on the recommendation of the Minimum Wage Advisory Board and fol-
 lowing approval by the Minister of Labor. While the minimum wage is small, it pro-
 vides an adequate standard of living in areas outside the capital when supple-
 mented by the subsistence farming and fishing practiced by most families. The cur-
 rent legal minimum wage is not adequate to sustain a family of four in the capital
 of Honiara. Since most of the population is dependent to some extent on the subsist-
 ence economy, and as there is high unemployment and underemployment, workers
 are readily available at this wage.
 Labor laws regulate premium pay, sick leave, the right to paid vacations, and
 other conditions of service. The standard workweek is 45 hours and limited to 6
 days weekly. There are orovisions for oremium nav for overtime and holiday work
 
 
 659
 as well as provisions for maternity leave. Both an active labor movement and an
 independent judiciary ensure widespread enforcement of labor laws in major state
 and private enterprises. The Commissioner of Labor, the Public Prosecutor, and the
 police are responsible for enforcement of labor law. However, they usually react to
 charges of labor law violation rather than taking the initiative in monitoring adher-
 ence to these laws. The extent to which the law is enforced in smaller establish-
 ments and in the subsistence sector is unclear. There appear to be no safety and
 health standards. Workers at construction sites are not required to wear protective
 clothing or helmets. Malaria is endemic in the Solomon Islands and affects the
 health of many employees. Agricultural workers with a high risk of contracting ma-
 laria are not provi ed with malaria suppressants.
