 SOLOMONS
 Over 300,000 people occupy Solomon Islands, an archipelago
 stretching over 840 miles in the South Pacific and the second
 largest (after Papua New Guinea) of the Melanesian countries.
 Its Government is based on a modified parliamentary system
 consisting of a single-chamber legislative assembly of 38
 members. Executive authority lies with the Prime Minister and
 his Cabinet. The Prime Minister, elected by a majority vote of
 Parliament, selects his own Cabinet. This system, adopted when
 the country became independent in 1978, accords with both
 Solomon Islands' experience and the Melanesian tradition of
 leadership based upon individual achievement and political
 consensus. Political legitimacy rests on direct election by
 secret ballot.
 A police force of around 500 men is under civilian control.
 There are no other armed forces. The courts are independent
 and vigorously protect individual rights. There have been
 three general elections since independence; the most recent, in
 February 1989, resulted in the first government led by a single
 party since independence. Following his resignation from the
 majority Peoples Alliance Party (PAP) in October 1990 when it
 appeared he would be replaced as party head, Prime Minister
 Solomon Mamaloni dismissed 5 of his 14 PAP Ministers and formed
 a coalition Government which remained in power throughout 1991.
 Agriculture is the mainstay of the economy. About 85 percent
 of the population engages to some extent in subsistence
 production, obtaining food by root-gardening and fishing, and
 has little involvement in the cash economy. With increasing
 prices for most its export commodities, the Solomon Islands
 economy experienced a modest improvement in its trade balance
 and its terms of trade in 1991. However, the country's fiscal
 and current accounts deficits.continued a long-term decline.
 Poor economic performance was exacerbated by a population
 growth rate of about 3.5 percent, which ensured continued
 pressures on public and private resources.
 Most basic individual rights are provided for in the
 Constitution, respected by the authorities, and defended by the
 courts, but discrimination and violence against women are
 serious problems. There is a constitutionally provided
 Ombudsman to look into and provide protection against improper
 *or unlawful administrative treatment.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 Political and other extrajudicial killing did not 6ccur.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of political disappearance.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Torture is prohibited by law and not practiced.
 
 
 992
 SOLOMONS
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 There is no evidence of politically motivated arrests.
 Exile is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The judicial system is a blend of British and traditional
 systems. There is a high court plus magistrates' courts.
 Accused persons are entitled to counsel. Provision is made for
 writs of habeas corpus under the law. It is illegal to coerce
 statements. Violations of civil liberties are punishable by
 fines and jail sentences.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 In addition to legal provisions, the traditional culture
 provides strong protection against these types of abuses.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Constitutional provisions, an independent press, and a
 functioning democratic political system combine to ensure
 freedom of speech and press. There are two private weekly
 newspapers, weekly and monthly national government news-
 letters, and one provincial government weekly. The state-owned
 radio gives significant coverage to statements of opposition
 politicians. There is no television, and the importation of
 satellite dishes is strictly controlled. The Government and
 established churches are reluctant to permit the introduction
 of television since they are concerned that outside images of
 violence, sex, and materialism could have a negative influence
 on the public.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The right of association is provided for in the Constitution
 and freely exercised. Demonstrators must obtain a permit, but
 permits have never been denied on political grounds.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is guaranteed by law, there are no controls
 on the practice of religion, and there is no religious
 discrimination. Although Christianity is the predominant
 religion and a wide variety of Christian denominations are
 represented, indigenous beliefs also continue to be practiced
 without restriction. Missionaries work without restrictions,
 but the Government and established church leaders have voiced
 concern about what they view as the socially disruptive effect
 of new charismatic evangelical movements entering the country
 from overseas.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no legal or administrative restrictions on freedom of
 movement of Solomon Islands' citizens within or out of the
 country. Native-born citizens may not be deprived of
 citizenship on any grounds.
 
 
 993
 SOLOMONS
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Citizens have the right to change their government through
 periodic free elections. Since independence, Solomon Islands
 has had three parliamentary elections (the most recent in early
 1989) and several elections for provincial and local councils.
 Besides the general elections, three additional changes of
 government were accomplished by votes of Parliament. Suffrage
 is universal over the age of 18.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There were no allegations by outside organizations of human
 rights violations in Solomon Islands or any request for
 investigations. While there are no restrictions on formation
 of local organizations to monitor and report on human rights,
 none have been established to date.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 There is a high degree of tolerance in Solomon Islands'
 society. However, while the law accords women equal legal
 rights, the traditional society, where males are dominant and
 women are seen in customary family roles, has hampered them
 from taking more active roles in economic and political life,
 and indigenous Solomon Islanders are favored over naturalized
 citizens in the matter of land ownership. Only one of the 36
 Members of Parliament is female. None of the 15 Government
 ministers is female and only one of the 15 permanent secretary
 positions immediately below minister in the government
 hierarchy is held by a female. A shortage of employment
 opportunities throughout the country has inhibited the entry of
 women into the work force. Following his election in 1989, the
 new Prime Minister announced a policy restricting the
 employment of expatriate Freemasons in the Civil Service, based
 on objections to what he perceived as Masonic ritualistic
 secrecy.
 While actual statistical data are scarce, incidents of wife
 beating and abuse appear to be common. In the rare cases that
 are reported, charges are often dropped by the women before
 their court appearance or are settled out of court. Police are
 reluctant to interfere in what they perceive as domestic
 disputes. In addition, many of the laws benefiting women are
 in the British tradition and are viewed by many Solomon
 Islanders as "foreign laws" not reflective of the customs and
 traditions of Solomon Islands. The magistrate courts deal with
 physical abuse of women on the basis of inherent common law
 powers and deal with it as they would any other assault,
 although prosecutions are rare.
 The government-supported National Council of Women is actively
 involved in trying to improve the position of women in
 society. Though progress is slow, the Council continues to
 work to familiarize women with a proposed amendment to the
 Affiliation, Maintenance, and Separation Law pending since 1989
 which would ensure that women who bring cases to court are
 protected against harassment from husbands or members of
 husbands' families, at home and in places of employment, and
 would ensure womens's rights to child support and
 compensation. The Council continues to hold workshops and to
 
 
 994
 SOLOMONS
 conduct programs to train women in various skills, to enhance
 their self-confidence, and to strengthen their participation in
 the political and economic life of Solomon Islands.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Solomon Islands' law recognizes the right of workers to
 organize, to choose their own representatives, to determine and
 pursue their own views and policies, and to engage in political
 activities. Both public and private sector unions have the
 right to strike--a right they have often exercised. Both civil
 servants and public school teachers struck in 1991 for wage
 concessions and in protest over the removal by the Government
 of career civil service permanent secretaries and their
 replacement by highly paid political appointees. The small
 percentage of workers actually involved in the wage economy
 means that employers have an ample supply of replacement
 workers if disputes are not resolved quickly.
 Solomon Islands' unions are free to affiliate internationally,
 and the largest trade union, the Solomon Islands' National
 Union of Workers, is affiliated with the World Federation of
 Trade Unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The right to collective bargaining is provided for by the Trade
 Disputes Act of 1981 and unions engage in it frequently. Wages
 and conditions of employment are determined by collective
 bargaining. If disputes between labor and management cannot be
 settled between the two sides, the disputes are referred to the
 Trade Disputes Panel for arbitration. During arbitration, both
 public and private sector workers may be legally required to
 return to work. A decision by the Trade Disputes Panel is
 legally binding, but may be varied by the Government "in the
 interest of the economy," according to section 8 of the Trade
 Disputes Act of 1981. Workers are protected by law against
 antiunion activity, and there are no areas where union activity
 is officially discouraged. There are no export processing
 zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced labor is prohibited by law, except as part of a court
 sentence or order, and this prohibition is observed.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Solomon Islands has comprehensive laws on worker rights, but
 there is no enforcement mechanism. Child labor is forbidden
 for children under the age of12 except in the company of
 parents in light agricultural or domestic work. Children under
 15 are barred from work in industry or on ships; those under 18
 cannot work underground or in mines.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Provincial governments have the power to set minimum wages.
 Although the minimum wage is supposed to be adjusted annually
 to reflect changes in the retail price index, the present rate
 was established in 1988 on the recommendation of the Minimum
 Wage Advisory Board and following approval by the Minister of
 Labor. While the minimum wage is small, it provides an
 
 
 995
 SOLOMONS
 adequate standard of living in areas outside the capital when
 supplemented by the subsistence farming and fishing practiced
 by most families. Since most of the population is dependent to
 some extent on the subsistence economy, and as there is high
 unemployment and underemployment, workers are readily available
 at this wage.
 Labor laws regulate premium pay, sick leave, the right to paid
 vacations, and other conditions of service. The standard
 workweek is 45 hours and is limited to 6 days weekly. There
 are provisions for premium pay for overtime and holiday work as
 well as provisions for maternity leave. Both an active labor
 movement and an independent judiciary ensure widespread
 enforcement of labor laws in major state and private
 enterpiises. The Commissioner of Labor, the Public Prosecutor,
 and the police are responsible for enforcement of labor law.
 However, they are reactive to charges of labor law violation
 rather than than taking the initiative in monitoring adherence
 to these laws.   The extent to which the law is enforced in
 smaller establishments and in the subsistence sector is
 unclear. There appear to be no safety and health standards.
 Workers at construction sites are not required to wear
 protective clothing or helmets. Malaria is endemic in the
 Solomon Islands, including Honiara, and affects the health of
 many employees. Agricultural workers with a high risk of
 contracting malaria are not provided with malaria
 suppressants.
 
 
 996
