 SOLOMON ISLANDS
 Solomon Islands, populated by approximately 386,000 people, is an archipelago
 stretching over 840 miles in the South Pacific. Its government is a modified par-
 liamentary system consisting of a single-chamber legislative assembly of 47 mem-
 bers. Executive authority lies with the Prime Minister and his Cabinet. The Prime
 Minister, elected by a majority vote of Parliament, selects his own Cabinet. Political
 legitimacy rests on direct election by secret ballot. There have been four general
 elections since independence, most recently in June 1993.
 A police force of about 500 men under civilian control is responsible for law en-
 forcement. There were no reports of police abuse of human rights.
 About 85 percent of the population engages to some extent in subsistence farming,
 obtaining food by gardening and fishing, and has little involvement in the cash econ-
 omy. Improved export performance, particularly in the forestry sector, continued in
 1994.
 Most basic individual rights are provided for in the Constitution, respected by the
 authorities, and defended by an independent judiciary. Discrimination and violence
 against women remain serious problems, and the Government on occasion has im-
 posed restrictions on the press. There is a constitutionally provided Ombudsman to
 look into and provide protection against improper or unlawful administrative treat-
 ment.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of political disappearance.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 These practices are prohibited by law and not known to occur.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-There was no evidence of politically moti-
 vated arrests or detentions. Exile is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judicial system consists of a high court and
 magistrates' courts. Accused persons are entitled to counsel. The law provides for
 a judicial determination of thie legality of arrests. Violations of civil liberties are
 punishable by fines and jail sentences.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-In addi-
 tion to legal prvisions, the traditional culture provides strong protection against
 these types of abuses.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The constitutional provisions for freedom of
 speech and of the press are generally respected. The Government in the past had
 attempted to censor the news or ban broadcasts because of political sensitivities. In
 March the Government lifted a ban imposed by the Hilly government on trans-
 mission by the government-financed Solomon Islands Broadcasting Corporation
 (SIBC) of any news about the insurrection in nearby Bougainville (Papua New Guin-
 ea), and on April 25 the Prime Minister announced that all restrictions on broad-
 casting about the Bougainville crisis had been removed.
 The press was instrumental in exposing a scandal that led to the resignation of
 the nation's Finance Minister in 1994.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 the right of association, and this right is freely exercised. Demonstrators must ob-
 tain a permit, but permits have never been denied on political grounds.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The law provides for freedom of religion. Organized reli-
 gions as well as indigenous beliefs are freely practiced.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Government places neither legal nor administrative restrictions on
 the movement of citizens within or out of the country. Native-born citizens may not
 be deprived of citizenship on any grounds. Although they have not been formally
 granted asylum, a limited number of displaced persons from Papua New Guineas
 North Solomons province, the site of conflict on Bougainville, have been allowed to
 remain in the country indefinitely.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have the right to change their government through periodic free elec-
 tions. Since independence, Solomon Islands has had four parliamentary elections,
 
 
 most recently in June 1993, and several elections for provincial and local councils.
 On four other occasions, changes of government resulted from either parliamentary
 votes of no confidence or the resignation of the Prime Minister. Prime Minister
 Francis Hilly Billy, facing a certain vote of no confidence resigned in November.
 Former Prime Minister Solomon Mamaloni was then electea as Prime Minister. The
 Parliament convened twice in 1994, first in January, to complete the work of the
 November 1993 budget session, and in November. Suffrage is universal over the age
 of 18.
 Traditional male dominance has limited the role of women in government. Only
 1 of 47 Members of Parliament is a woman. She also served as 1 of 18 ministers
 in the Hilly Government.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 While there are no restrictions on the formation of local organizations to monitor
 and report on human rights, none has been established to date. There were no
 known requests for investigation by outside human rights organizations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Women.-The law accords women equal legal rights. However, in this traditional
 society males are dominant, and women are limited to customary family roles. This
 situation has prevented women from taking more active roles in economic and politi-
 cal life. A shortage of employment opportunities throughout the country has inhib-
 ited the entry of women into the work force.
 While actual statistical data are scarce, incidents of wife beating and wife abuse
 appear to be common. In the rare cases that are reported, charges are often dropped
 by the women before the court appearance or are settled out of court. Police are re-
 luctant to interfere in what they perceive as domestic disputes. In addition, many
 of the laws benefiting women derive from the British tradition and are viewed by
 many Solomon Islanders as "foreign laws" not reflective of their own customs and
 traditions. The magistrates courts deal with physical abuse of women as they would
 any other assault, although prosecutions are rare. However, in March a Malaita
 man was sentenced to 10 years in prison for killing his wife.
 Children.-Within the limits of its resources, the Government is committed to the
 welfare and protection of the rights of children. Children are respected and pro-
 tected within the traditional extended-family system, in accordance with the fami-
 ly's financial resources and access to services. As a result, virtually no children are
 homeless or abandoned. Although some cases of child abuse are reported, there is
 no pattern of societal abuse. The Constitution grants children the same general
 rights and protection as adults. Existing laws are designed to protect children from
 sexual abuse, child labor, and neglect.
 People With Disabiities.-There is no law or national poicy on the disabled, and
 no legislation mandates access for the disabled. Protection and care of the disabled
 are lef to the traditional extended family and nongoverMmental organizations. In-
 formally, the disabled in urban areas frequently find work in the public service sec-
 tor. However, with high unemployment countrywide and few jobs available in the
 formal sector, most disabled persons, particularly those in rural areas, do not find
 work outside the family structure.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution implicitly recognizes the right of
 workers in the public and private sectors to form or join unions to choose their own
 representatives, to determine and pursue their own views and policies, and to en-
 gage in political activities. The courts have confirmed these rights. From 20 to 25
 percent of the total population participate in the formal sector of the economy. Of
 that, approximately 60 to 70 percent are organized: 90 percent of the public sector
 and about 50 percent of the private sector.
 The law allows strikes, but there were none of note in 1994. The unions seldom
 resort to strikes, preferring instead to negotiate. Disputes are usually referred
 quickly to the Trade Disputes Panel (TDP) for arbitration, either before or during
 a strike. Employees are protected from arbitrary dismissal while the TDP is delib-
 erating. In practice, the small percentage of workers actually involved in the wage
 economy means that employers have an ample supply of replacement workers if dis-
 putes are not resolved quickly. There is some legal protection for workers against
 retaliatory actions by employers. Once a case has been referred to the TDP, the em-
 player cannot undertake a lockout or summarily dismiss employees.
 Unions are free to affiliate internationally, and the largest trade union, the Solo-
 mon Islands' Union of Workers, is affiliated with the formerly Soviet-controlled
 
 
 691
 World Federation of Trade Unions (WFTU). The Union of Workers remains loosely
 affiliated with the WFTU.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectivey.-The Trade Disputes Act of
 1981 provides for the right to organize and bargain collectively, and unions engage
 in it frequently.
 Wages and conditions of employment are determined by collective bargaining. If
 disputes between labor and management cannot be settled between the two sides,
 the disputes are referred to the TDP for arbitration. The three-member TDP, corn.
 prising a chairman appointed by the judiciary, a labor representative, and a busi-
 ness representative, is independent and neutral.
 The law protects workers against antiunion activity, and there are no areas where
 union activity is officially discouraged. There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 labor, except as part of a court sentence or order, and this prohibition is observed.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The law forbids child labor for
 children under the age of 12, except when performed in the company of parents in
 light agriculture or domestic work. Children under 15 are barred from work in in-
 dustry or on ships; those under age 18 may not work underground or in mines. The
 Labor Division of the Ministry of Commerce, Trade, and Industry is responsible for
 enforcing child labor laws. Given low wages and high unemployment, there is little
 incentive to employ child labor.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The present minimum hourly wage rate of ap-
 proximately $0.23 has been in place since 1988. All independently negotiated wages
 are above this figure. The legal minimum wage is not adequate to sustain a family
 of four in the capital of Honiara. Because most of the population is dependent to
 some extent on the subsistence economy, and as there is high unemployment and
 underemployment, workers are available at current wage rates.
 The Labor Act of 1969, as amended, and the Employment Act of 1981, as well
 as other laws, regulate premium pay, sick leave, the right to paid vacations, and
 other conditions of service. The standard workweek is 45 hours and limited to 6
 days weekly. There are provisions for premium pay for overtime and holiday, work
 as well as provisions for maternity leave.
 Both an active labor movement and an independent judiciary ensure widespread
 enforcement of labor laws in major state and private enterprises. The Commissioner
 of Labor, the Public Prosecutor, and the police are responsible for enforcing labor
 laws. However, they usually react to charges of labor law violation rather than take
 the initiative in monitoring adherence to these laws. The extent to which the law
 is enforced in smaller establishments and in the subsistence sector is unclear. Safe-
 ty and health standards appear to be adequate. Malaria is endemic in the Solomon
 Islands and affects the health of many employees. Agricultural workers have a high
 risk of contracting malaria but are not provided with malaria suppressants.
