 SOLOMON ISLANDS
 Solomon Islands is an archipelago comprising 6 large islands
 and many smaller ones stretching over 840 miles in the South
 Pacific. Its population of about 300,000 makes it the second
 largest (after Papua New Guinea) of the Melanesian countries.
 Its government is based on a modified Westminster parliamentary
 system consisting of a single-chamber legislative assembly of
 38 members. This system, adopted when the country became
 independent in 1978, accords with both Solomon Islands'
 experience and the Melanesian tradition of leadership based
 upon individual achievement and political consensus. Political
 legitimacy thus rests on direct election by secret ballot.
 The police are under civilian control: there are no other
 armed forces. The courts are independent and vigorously
 protect individual rights. Since independence, two
 parliamentary elections have been held, and two additional
 changes of government were accomplished by vote of Parliament.
 Another general election is scheduled for early 1989.
 The gross domestic product fell steadily from 1984 to 1986,
 but increased somewhat in 1987 and continued to rise
 throughout 1988. Solomon Islands still faces a long-term
 decline in the terms of trade of commodity exports versus
 manufactured imports, growing national budget deficits,
 increasing foreign trade imbalance, and higher debt service
 costs. Poor economic performance has been exacerbated by
 population growth of about 3.5 percent annually. Government
 leaders have recently begun public education campaigns
 extolling the benefits of limiting or spacing children.
 No human rights abuses were reported in 1988.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Political killing has not occurred in Solomon Islands.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of political disappearance.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Torture is neither practiced nor condoned. All basic
 individual rights are provided for in the Constitution,
 implemented by the authorities, and defended by the courts.
 In addition, there is a constitutionally provided office of
 Ombudsman to look into and provide protection against
 administratively caused improper or unlawful treatment.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 There is no evidence of politically motivated arrests. Exile
 is not practiced.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 
 
 931
 SOLOMON ISLANDS
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Accused persons are entitled to counsel. Provision is made
 for writs of habeas corpus under the law. Coerced statements
 are illegal. Violations of civil liberties are punishable by
 fines and jail sentences. Slow police investigations and
 delays in bringing charges had been a problem in past years.
 In 1988 the judiciary began attacking the denial of speedy
 trials by dismissing prosecutions commenced long after the
 alleged act and by investigating and criticizing cases of
 unacceptable delay by police or prosecutors.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 In addition to legal provisions, the traditional culture
 governing the daily lives of most Solomon Islanders provides
 strong protection against these types of abuses.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Constitutional provisions, an independent press, and a
 functioning democratic political system combine to ensure
 freedom of speech and press. There are two private weekly
 newspapers, weekly and monthly national government
 newsletters, and one provincial government weekly. The
 state-owned radio gives significant coverage to statements of
 opposition politicians. After an Australian Broadcasting
 Corporation (ABC) report deemed unflattering and offensive by
 the Prime Minister, ABC journalists were denied entry into
 Solomon Islands for several months in 1988, but the ban was
 eventually lifted. There are no other instances of
 restrictions ever having been placed on journalists.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The right of association is provided for in the Constitution
 and freely exercised. Demonstrators, however, must obtain a
 permit. There are no instances of a permit having been denied
 on political grounds.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is guaranteed by law, there are no
 controls on the practice of religion, and there is no
 religious discrimination. Although Christianity is the
 predominant religion, and a wide variety of Christian
 denominations are represented, indigenous beliefs also
 continue to be practiced. Missionaries work without
 restrictions.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no legal or administrative restrictions on the
 freedom of movement of Solomon Islands' citizens within or out
 of the country. Natural-born citizens may not be deprived of
 citizenship on any grounds.
 
 
 932
 SOLOMON ISLANDS
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Since independence, Solomon Islands has had two parliamentary
 elections and several elections for provincial and local
 councils. The next election is scheduled for February 1989.
 Election results were contested in some constituencies, and
 court decisions resulted in new polls in a few instances.
 Citizens over the age of 18 enjoy universal suffrage. There
 are no women in senior government positions or in Parliament,
 although women are involved in politics and have run for
 national office.
 Section 4' Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There were no allegations by outside organizations of human
 rights violations in Solomon Islands nor any request for
 investigations.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 There is no discrimination on the basis of race, religion,
 language, or social status. Indigenous Solomon islanders are
 favored over naturalized citizens in the matter of land
 ownership. The law accords women equal legal rights, but the
 traditional society, where males are dominant and women are
 seen in traditional family roles, has hampered them from
 taking more active roles in the economic and political life of
 the country. Where women do have jobs, they are usually in
 secretarial or clerical jobs on the lower end of the pay
 scale. Few businesses are owned by Melanesian women. A
 shortage of employment opportunities throughout the country
 and a predominantly young population with many more job
 seekers than jobs available have also inhibited the entry of
 women into the work force. The National Council of Women is
 actively involved in trying to improve the position of women
 in society. Only about 25 percent of the population aged 15
 through 24 work for wages. Another 70 percent are
 self-employed, mainly as copra farmers or market gardeners,
 whose wives and family members are usually unpaid helpers.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Solomon Islands law recognizes the right of workers to
 organize, to choose their own representatives, to determine
 and pursue their own views and policies, and to engage in
 political activities. Unions exist and are active in both the
 public and private sector, but only private sector unions have
 the right to strike--a right which has often been exercised.
 The small percentage of workers actually involved in the wage
 economy, however, means that there is an ample supply of
 replacement workers for employers to draw on if disputes are
 not resolved quickly. Solomon Islands joined the
 International Labor Organization (ILO) in 1984, but has not
 yet ratified ILO Convention No. 87, on Freedom of Association
 and Protection of the Right to Organize, or Convention No. 98,
 on the Right to Organize and Collective Bargaining. Solomon
 Islands unions are free to affiliate internationally and the
 
 
 933
 SOLOMON ISLANDS
 largest trade union, the Solomon Islands National Union of
 Workers, is affiliated with the Soviet-controlled World
 Federation of Trade Unions.
 b.   The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The Solomon Islands National Union of Workers, and other
 smaller unions freely organize workers. The Trade Disputes
 Council exists to arbitrate between unions and employers.
 Workers are protected against antiunion activity, and there
 are no areas where union activity is officially discouraged.
 Labor laws and regulations are applicable uniformly throughout
 the country and there are no economic incentive zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced labor is prohibited, except as part of a court sentence
 or order.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.
 Solomon Islands has comprehensive laws on worker rights.
 Child labor is forbidden for children under the age of 12
 except in the company of parents in light agricultural or
 domestic work. Children under 15 are barred from work in
 industry or on ships; those under 18 cannot work underground
 or in mines.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Power to set minimum wages lies with the provincial
 governments. At the present time, in Honiara and provincial
 government stations, it is about 30 cents per hour. While
 small, this provides an adequate standard of living within the
 local context when supplemented by the subsistence farming and
 fishing practiced by most families. As most of the population
 is engaged in subsistence labor, and there is high
 unemployment and underemployment, workers are readily
 available at this wage. Labor laws regulate premium pay, sick
 leave, the right to paid vacations, and other conditions of
 service. The standard workweek is 45 hours and limited to 6
 days per week. There are provisions for premium pay for
 overtime and holiday work. Both an active labor movement and
 an independent judiciary ensure widespread enforcement of
 labor laws in major state and private enterprises. The extent
 to which the law is enforced in smaller establishments and in
 the subsistence sector is unclear. Information on
 occupational safety and health legislation is not available.
 
 
 934
