 SOLOMON ISLANDS
 Solomon Islands, with its approximately 400,000 people, is an archipelago stretch-
 ing over 840 miles in the South Pacific. Its government is a modified parliamentary
 system consisting of a single-chamber legislative assembly of 47 members. Executive
 authority lies with the Prime Minister and his Cabinet. The Prime Minister, elected
 by a majority vote of Parliament, selects his own Cabinet. Political legitimacy rests
 on direct election by secret ballot. There have been four general elections since inde-
 pendence in 1978, most recently in June 1993.
 A police force of about 500 men under civilian control is responsible for law en-
 forcement. There were occasional reports of police abuse of human rights.
 About 85 percent of the population engages to some extent in subsistence farming,
 obtaining food by gardening and fishing, and has little involvement in the cash econ-
 omy. Approximately 10 to 5 percent of the working population (15 years and older)
 are engaged in nonsubsistence production. Although exports, particularly of unproc-
 essed logs, have boomed, the number of wage earners has remained unchanged for
 the past several years, despite high population growth.
 Most basic individual rights are provided for in the Constitution, respected by au-
 thorities, and defended by an independent judiciary. Discrimination and violence
 against women remain problems, and the Government on occasion has imposed re-
 strictions on the media. There is a constitutionally provided ombudsman to look into
 and provide protection against improper or unlawful administrative treatment.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearanc.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 These practices are prohibited by law. There were a few complaints of excessive use
 of force by police in making arrests. These are handled either by the police's inter-
 nal investigations office orby the courts. In one instance, the Honiara magistrate's
 court in August fined a police constable for striking a drunk with his baton when
 arresting him.
 Prison conditions meet minimum international standards. Prisons are over-
 crowded, and new facilities are under construction at the central prison in Rove.
 The new prison complex, due to open in 1997, is designed to provide separate facili-
 ties for short-, medium-, and long-teri prisoners, as well as for juvenile offenders.
 Since there are no human rights organizations in Solomon Islands, the question of
 whether the Government would permit visits by human rights monitors has never
 arisen. A government-appointed Committee of Mercy, comprised of church and social
 leaders, recommends pardons for rehabilitated prisoners.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-There was no evidence of politically moti-
 vated arrests or detentions. Exile is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary and it is independent in practice.
 The judicial system consists of a High Court and magistrates' courts. Accused per-
 sons are entitled to counsel. The law provides for a judicial determination of the le-
 
 
 gality of arrests. Officials found to have violated civil liberties are subject to fines
 and jail sentences.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-In addi-
 tion to legal provisions, the traditional culture provides strong protection against
 these types of abuses. A constitutionally provided ombudsman, with the power of
 subpoena, can investigate complaints of official abuse, mistreatment, or unfair treat-
 ment. While the Ombudsman's office has potentially far-ranging powers, it is limited
 by a shortage of investigators and other resources.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Government generally respects the con-
 stitutional provisions for freedom of speech and of the press. The media comprise
 the Solomon Islands Broadcasting Corporation (SIBC), a statutory body that comes
 directly under the Prime Minister's office and whose radio broadcasts are heard
 ghout the ountry; a privately owned FM radio station; and three privately
 owned~ weekly or semiweekly newspapers. Given the high rate of illiteracy, the SIBO
 is more influential than the print media. The Department of Information in the
 Prime Minister's office  publishes a monthly    newspaper which   is strongly
 progovernment. At least two nongovernmental organizations (NGO's) publish peri-
 odic news journals; their environmental reporting frequently is criticalof the Gov-
 ernment's logging policy and foreig logging companies'practices. In addition to the
 three established newspapers, a newspaper in Solomon Islands Pidgin, the language
 understood by most of the population, began semiweekly publication in late 1996.
 A private company has been given a license to begin limited television operations
 in 1997.
 The state-owned SB is relatively bias free. In April the Prime Minister banned
 SIBC from broadcasting any statements by the Honiara-based spokesman of the
 Papua New Guinea secessionist movement, the Bougainville Revolutionary Army
 (BRA). This action followed demands from the Papua n ew Guinea Government that
 the Solomon Islands not allow BRA rebels to operate in its territory. In May, follow-
 ing a news report that the Government believed unfounded and prejudicial to the
 national security, the SIBC governing bard directed that all news and current af-
 fairs programs have executive management clearance before being broadcast. Sev-
 eral SIB C newswriters and producers subsequently staged a short sit-in in protest
 against management statements that adversely reflected on their professionalism.
 The Solomon Islands Media Association also reacted strongly, saying that the
 prescreening of news broadcasts necessary.
 The Government is acutely sensitive to international media coverage of the politi-
 cally sensitive logging issue. Although journalists do not require visas, the Govern-
 ment must clear any filming, and Australian broadcast media representatives were
 initially deniedpermission to enter the country on the grounds that the logging sub-
 ject already had been thoroughly covered. Two journalists later entered as tourists
 and used small video cameras. Their report, which was broadcast in Australia in
 August, highlited an apparent conflict of interest in that the Prime Minister's log-
 ging company h ad received 100 percent tax exemptions on its exports. The Govern-
 ment reacted angrily to the apparent violation of immigration law.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 the right of association, and this right is freely exercised. Demonstrators must ob-
 tain permits, but permits are not known to have been denied on political grounds.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The law provides for freedom of religion, and the Govern-
 ment respects this provision in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Government places neither legal nor administrative restrictions on
 the movement of citizens within or out of the country. Native-brn citizens may not
 ederived of citizenship on any grounds. Following several instances of attempted
 illegal' immigration, the Government banned individuals from all Caribbean and Al-
 rican countries, and from the Pacific Island nations of Kiribati and Nauru, from vis-
 iting without prior approval of the Director of Immigration.
 The Government provides first asylum to approximately 1,000 to 2,000 people
 from Papua New Guinea's Bougainville Island, who fled the confict there several
 years earlier. Although they have not been granted formal refugee status, they have
 een alowed to remain. Most reside in Honiara with friends, while several hundred
 live in Red Cross-administered care centers elsewhere. The Government cooperated
 with the United Nations High Commissioner for refugees in locating asylum in the
 Netherlands for the Honiara-resident spokesman for the Bougainville rebels in May
 when his safety could no longer be assured.
 
 
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment.
 Citizens have the right to change their government through periodic free elec-
 tions. Since independence in 1978, there have been four parliamentary elections,
 most recently in June 1993, and several elections for provincial and local councils.
 On four occasions changes of government resulted from either parliamentary votes
 of no confidence or the resignation of the Prime Minister. Suffrage is universal over
 18_year of age.
 e the country's democratic commitment appears to remain strong, it was
 brought into question when the Deputy Prime Minister publicly stated in July that
 party politics destabilizes the country and causes disunity among the people. He fa-
 vored instead a one-party system that would rule the country "intelligently."
 Traditional male dominance has limited the role of women in government. Only
 1 of the 47 members of Parliament is a woman.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 While there are no restrictions on the formation of local organizations to monitor
 and report on human rights, none has been established to date. There were no
 known requests for investigation by outside human rights organizations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides that no person-regardless of race, place of origin, po-
 litical opinions, color, creed, or disabilities--shall be treated in a discriminatory
 manner in respect of access to public places. The Constitution further prohibits any
 laws which would have discriminatory effects, and provides that no person should
 be treated in a discriminatory manner by anyone acting in an official capacity. De-
 spite constitutional and legal protections, women remain the victims of discrimina-
 tion in this tradition-based society. Due to high rates of unemployment, there are
 a limited number of jobs available to the disabled.
 Women.-While actual statistical data are scarce, incidents of wife beating and
 wife abuse apear to be common. In the rare cases that are reported, charges are
 often droppediy the women before the court appearance or are settled out of court.
 Police are reluctant to interfere in what they perceive as domestic disputes. In addi-
 tion, many of the laws benefiting women derive from the British tradition and are
 viewed by many Solomon Islanders as "foreign laws" not reflective of their own cus-
 toms andtraditions. The magistrates' courts deal with physical abuse of women as
 with any other assault, although prosecutions are rare.
 The law accords women equal leral rights. However, in this traditional society
 men are dominant, and women are limited to customary family roles. This situation
 has prevented women from taking more active roles in economic and political life.
 A shortage of employment opportunities throughout the country has inhibited the
 entry of women into the work force. The majority of women are illiterate; this is
 attributed in large part to cultural barriers. According to a 1995 United Nations De-
 velopment Program (UNDP) report on human development, Solomon Islands renked
 very low on the gender empowerment measure that examines women's ability to
 participate in economic and political life. The National Council of Women and other
 GO's attempt to make women more aware of their legal rights through seminars,
 workshops and other activities. The government's Women Development Division
 also addresses women's issues.
 Children.-Within the limits of its resources, the Government is committed to the
 welfare and protection of the rights of children. There is no compulsory education,
 and, according to some estimates, only 60 percent of school age children have access
 to primary education; the percentages of those attending secondary and tertiary in-
 stitutions are much smaller. Children are respected and protected within the tradi-
 tional extended-family system, in accordance with a family's financial resources and
 access to services. As a result, virtually no children are homeless or abandoned. Al-
 though some cases of child abuse are reported, there is no societal pattern of abuse.
 The Constitution grants children the same general rights and protection as adults.
 Existing laws are designed to protect children from sexual abuse, child labor, and
 neglect.
 People With Disabiities.-There is no law or national policy on the disabled, and
 no legislation mandates access for the disabled. Their protection and care are left
 to the traditional extended family and nongovernmental organizations. With high
 unemployment countride and few jobs available in the formal sector, most dis-
 abled persons, particularly those in rural areas, do not ind work outside the family
 structure. The Solomon Islands Red Cross society led private fund-raising efforts to
 
 
 777
 build a new national center for disabled children, completing the first phase in this
 campaign by year's end.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution implicitly recognizes the right of
 workers to form or join unions, to choose their own representatives, to determine
 and pursue their own views and policies, and to engage in political activities. The
 courts have confirmed these rights. Only about 10 to 15 percent of the population
 participate in the formal sector of the economy. Approximately 60 to 70 percent of
 wage earners are organized (90 percent of employees in the public sector and about
 50 percent of those in the private sector).
 The law allows strikes, but there were none of note in 1996. The unions seldom
 resort to strikes, preferring instead to negotiate. Disputes are usually referred
 quickly to the Trade Disputes Panel (TDP) for arbitration, either before or during
 a strike. In practice, the small percentage of the work force in formal employment
 means that employers have ample replacement workers if disputes are not resolved
 quickly. Employees, however, are protected from arbitrary dismissal or lockout
 while the TDP is deliberating.
 Unions are free to affiliate internationally, and the largest trade union, the Solo-
 mon Islands' National Union of Workers, is affiliated with the World Federation of
 Trade Unions, the South Pacific Oceanic Council of Trade Unions, and the Common-
 wealth Trade Union Congress.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Trade Disputes Act of
 1981 provides for the rights to organize and to bargain collectively and unions exer-
 cise these rights frequently.
 Wages and conditions of employment are determined by collective bargaining. If
 a dispute between labor and management cannot be settled between the two sides,
 it is referred to the TDP for arbitration. The three-member TDP, comprising a chair-
 man appointed by the judiciary, a labor representative, and a business representa-
 tive, is independent and neutral.
 The law protects workers against antiunion activity, and there are no areas where
 union activity is officially discouraged.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 labor, except as part of a court sentence or order, and this prohibition is observed.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The law forbids child labor by
 children under the age of 12, except light agriculture or domestic work performed
 in the company of parents. Children under age 15 are barred from work in industry
 or on ships; those under age 18 may not work underground or in mines. The Labor
 Division of the Ministry of Commerce, Trade, and Industry is responsible for enforc-
 ing child labor laws. Given low wages and high unemployment, there is little incen-
 tive to employ child labor.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The minimum hourly wage rate was raised in
 1996 from its 1988 rate of $0.22 (0.74 Solomon Islands dollars) to $0.42 (1.50 Solo-
 mon Islands dollars) for all workers except those in the fishing and agricultural sec-
 tors, who now receive $0.34 (1.20 Solomon Islands dollars). Even at the new rate,
 the legal minimum wage is not sufficient to support an urban family living entirely
 on the cash economy. However, most families are not dependent solely on wages for
 their livelihoods.
 The Labor Act of 1969, as amended, and the Employment Act of 1981, as well
 as other laws, regulate premium pay, sick leave, the right to paid vacations, and
 other conditions of service. The standard workweek is 45 hours and is limited to
 6 days per week. There are provisions for premium pay for overtime and holiday
 work and for maternity leave.
 Both an active labor movement and an independent judiciary ensure widespread
 enforcement of labor laws in major state and private enterprises. The Commissioner
 of Labor, the Public Prosecutor, and the police are responsible for enforcing labor
 laws. However, they usually react to complaints rather than routinely monitoring
 adherence to the law. The extent to which the law is enforced in smaller establish-
 ments and in the subsistence sector is unclear. Safety and health laws appear to
 be adequate. Malaria is endemic in Solomon Islands and affects the health of many
 employees. Agricultural workers have a high risk of contracting malaria.
 
 
 778
