 SOLOMON ISLANDS
 Solomon Islands is a developing country composed of 6 large
 islands and numerous small ones stretching over 840 miles in
 the southern Pacific Ocean. It has a parliamentary system
 consisting of a single-chamber legislative assembly of 38
 members. This system, adopted when the country became
 independent in 1978, accords well both with Solomon Islands'
 experience and with the Melanesian tradition of leadership
 based upon individual achievement and political consensus.
 Political legitimacy thus rests on free popular voting. The
 police are under civilian control; there are no other armed
 forces. The courts are independent and vigorously protect
 individual rights. Since independence, two parliamentary
 elections have been held and one additional change of
 government was accomplished by vote of Parliament.
 Agricultural exports and external aid are the country's
 primary sources of foreign exchange. The Government
 recognizes the need for private enterprise for economic
 development. Its conservative fiscal and monetary policies
 support a healthy business climate. The country's main
 exports are timber, fish, copra, and palm oil.
 Human rights in Solomon Islands are rigorously protected. No
 abuses were reported in 1985. Despite some traditional
 inertia, women's rights are improving.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section I Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Political killing does not occur in Solomon Islands.
 b. Disappearance
 There are no reports of political disappearance in Solomon
 Islands.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Torture .is neither practiced nor condoned. All the basic
 protections of the integrity of the individual are guaranteed
 by the Constitution, implemented by the authorities, and
 defended by the courts and the Ombudsman for protection
 against possible excessive or unlawful treatment.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 There is no evidence of politically motivated arrests.  Exile
 is not practiced. Forced labor is forbidden, except as part
 of a sentence or court order.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Accused persons are entitled to counsel. Provision is made
 for writs of habeas corpus under the law and coerced
 statements are illegal. Civil rights violations are
 punishable by fines and jail sentences.
 
 
 875
 SOLOMON ISLANDS
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The traditional culture which governs the daily lives of most
 Solomon Islanders provides strong protection against these
 types of abuses.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Constitutional guarantees, an independent press, and a
 functioning democratic political system combine to insure
 freedom of speech and press. There are two private weekly
 newspapers, weekly and monthly national government
 newsletters, and one provincial government weekly. The
 state-owned radio gives significant coverage to statements of
 opposition politicians. In 1984, there had been several
 instances when foreign reporters were denied accreditation,
 most notably on the occasion of the Pope's visit. However,
 since the Government of Sir Peter Kenilorea came to power in
 late 1984, there have been no restrictions on foreign press
 activity.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The right of association is constitutionally guaranteed and
 freely exercised. Demonstrators, however, must obtain a
 permit, which is usually granted. A recent exception was
 denial of a permit to demonstrate before the Pope during his
 visit in May 1984.
 Unions have the right to engage in collective bargaining and
 in the private sector they have the right to strike. While
 civil servants are not supposed to strike, in September 1985
 civil servants did so, effectively closing the ports and
 airport to protest alleged corruption in the Government
 Housing Committee. The strike ended when the Government
 dissolved the Committee.
 The largest trade union, the Solomon Islands National Union of
 Workers, and other smaller unions freely organize workers.
 The plantation sector, however, is not widely unionized.
 Solomon Islands' unions have international ties with several
 organizations.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is guaranteed by law; there are no
 controls on the practice of religion and no religious
 discrimination. Although Christianity is the dominant
 religion and has a wide variety of denominations, indigenous
 beliefs also flourish. Missionaries work without
 restrictions.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no legal or administrative restrictions on the
 freedom of movement of Solomon Islands' citizens within or out
 of the country. Natural-born citizens may not be deprived of
 citizenship on any grounds.
 
 
 876
 SOLOMON ISLANDS
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Since independence, Solomon Islands has had two parliamentary
 elections and several elections for provincial and local
 councils. The second of the two parliamentary elections, held
 in November 1984, resulted in the orderly replacement of
 former Prime Minister Mamaloni by Sir Peter Kenilorea, who, in
 secret balloting by the Parliament, received 21 out of a
 possible 33 votes. Election results were contested in some
 constituencies and court decisions resulted in new polls in a
 few instances. The overall results have been widely accepted
 as fair. Citizens over 18 enjoy universal suffrage.
 Parliament has the power to form governments.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There have been no allegations by outside organizations of
 human rights violations in Solomon Islands nor any request for
 investigations. The Amnesty International 1985 Report does
 not contain an entry for Solomon Islands. Freedom House rates
 it as "free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 The population of Solomon Islands in 1985 was 273,000 and
 growing at 3.5 percent per year. Both subsistence and market
 economies exist, with 9 out of 10 households being engaged to
 some extent in subsistence production, which accounts for 40
 percent of gross domestic production. The economy depends
 heavily for its prosperity on international trade, exporting
 agricultural products while importing manufactured goods.
 Major fluctuations in world market prices can have a sharp
 impact on the economy. World prices for Solomon Islands
 exports rose precipitately in 1983-84 but subsided to lower
 levels in 1984-85. Per capita gross national product was
 US$657 in 1982.
 The infant mortality rate has declined to 38.8 per 1,000 live
 births; life expectancy at birth is 58 years (World Bank).
 According to 1980-1982 World Bank estimates, 27 percent of the
 rural population had safe water. (Government statistics
 published in 1984 indicate that 38 percent of the rural
 population and nearly all urban dwellers, or 58 percent of the
 entire population, now have access to safe water). For the
 same period World Bank estimates give the per capita supply of
 calories as 79 percent of requirements. There appears to be
 an adequate supply of food. Health, education, and other
 social services are rudimentary but available on a
 nondiscriminatory basis. According to government statistics,
 the adult literacy rate in 1980 was 60 percent.
 Solomon Islands has comprehensive laws on workers' rights.
 Child labor is forbidden for children under the age of 12
 except in the company of parents in light agricultural or
 domestic work. Children under 15 are barred from work in
 industry or on ships; those under 18 cannot work underground
 or in mines. The standard workweek is 45 hours and is limited
 to 6 days. Power to set minimum wages has been devolved to
 the provincial governments. In Honiara, the capital, the
 minimum wage is about 30 cents per hour. There are provisions
 for premium pay for overtime and holiday work. Both a strong
 
 
 877
 SOLOMON ISLANDS
 labor movement and an independent judiciary ensure widespread
 enforcement of labor laws in major state and private
 enterprises. The extent to which the law is enforced in
 smaller establishments and in the subsistence sector is
 problematic. No information is available on occupational
 safety and health legislation.
 Women have equal legal rights, but traditional culture has
 hampered their moving into leadership roles. There are no
 women in senior governmental positions or in Parliament but
 women are involved in politics and have run for national
 office. According to 1981 World Bank statistics, 61.5 percent
 of girls are enrolled in primary schools and 79.4 percent of
 boys (for an average of 71 percent).
 
 
 878
