 SOLOMON ISLANDS
 Solomon Islands is the third largest Pacific island state after
 Papua New Guinea and Fiji. The parliamentary government which it
 adopted upon receiving independence from Great Britain in 1978
 accords both with the country's colonial experience and with the
 Melanesian tradition of leadership based upon individual prestige
 and the ability to form a consensus. Political legitimacy, thus,
 rests on free popular voting. The police and small armed forces
 are under civilian control; the courts are independent and
 vigorously protect individual rights. There has been one change
 of government since independence, accomplished peacefully by vote
 of Parliament.
 Solomon Islands is a developing country which depends primarily
 on agricultural exports and external aid for its income. The
 Government recognizes the need for private enterprise in economic
 development; fiscal and monetary policies support a healthy
 business climate. Exports in 1982 nearly equaled imports,
 despite the depressed prices of Solomon Islands' main exports:
 timber, fish, copra, and palm oil.
 Human rights in Solomon Islands are effectively protected.
 During 1983 the courts' willingness to enforce constitutional
 rights was demonstrated when the High Court, acting under a
 constitutional provision allowing any citizen to bring suit for
 relief if his interests were affected by an unconstitutional act,
 ruled that the Committee on the Prerogative of Mercy which had
 pardoned a Cabinet minister convicted of assault was improperly
 constituted. The minister lost his portfolio and was returned to
 jail. Protection against police coercion was strengthened in an
 out-of-court settlement by which the police publicly admitted
 wrongly apprehending and detaining a theft suspect without a
 warrant.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Unlawful or Arbitrary Deprivation of Life
 There have been no reports of such occurrences.
 b. Disappearance
 There are no reports of politically motivated disappearance in
 Solomon Islands.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 There is no torture in Solomon Islands. All the basic
 protections of the integrity of the individual are guaranteed by
 the Constitution of Solomon Islands, implemented by the
 authorities, and defended by the courts and public opinion.
 Prisoners have recourse to the courts and the Ombudsman for
 protection against possible excessive or unlawful treatment.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 There aTe no politically motivated arrests or exiles in Solomon
 i - idS.
 
 (880)
 
 
 881
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Accused persons are entitled to counsel. Provision is made for
 writs of habeas corpus under the law and coerced statements are
 not admissible in the courts. Civil rights violations are
 punishable by fines and jail sentences.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The traditional culture which governs the daily lives of most
 Solomon Islanders provides strong protection against these types
 of abuses.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Constitutional guarantees, an independent press, and a
 functioning democratic political system combine to insure
 freedoms of speech and press. There are three private weekly
 newspapers and a monthly government newsletter. State-owned
 radio gives significant coverage to statements of opposition
 politicians.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The right of association is constitutionally guaranteed and
 freely exercised. Unions in the private sector have the right to
 strike; the plantation sector is not widely unionized. The
 country's largest trade union is the Solomon Islands National
 Union of Workers; it and other smaller unions freely organize
 workers.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is guaranteed by law; there are no controls
 on the practice of religion and no religious discrimination.
 Christianity is the dominant religion with a wide variety of
 denominations, and indigenous beliefs also flourish.
 Missionaries work without restrictions.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel,
 Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no legal or administrative restrictions on freedom of
 movement of Solomon Islands citizens within or in and out of the
 country. Natural-born citizens may not be deprived of
 citizenship on any grounds.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to
 Change Their Government
 Since independence, Solomon Islands has had one parliamentary
 election and several elections for provincial and local
 councils. Elections are well contested and are managed by an
 elections commission; the independent courts and press assure
 that they are fair. There is universal suffrage for citizens
 over 18. Parliament has the power to form governments; it voted
 a change in 1981. Parliamentary elections are due no later than
 1985.
 
 
 882
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There have been no allegations by outside organizations of human
 rights violations in the Solomon Islands nor any request for
 investigations. Amnesty International did not comment on the
 country in its 1983 report. Freedom House described Solomon
 Islands as "free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 The Solomon Islands' economy depends heavily for its prosperity
 on international prices of its manufactured imports and its
 agricultural exports. Depressed commodity prices in 1980-82
 brought growth to a standstill, in contrast to an average eight
 percent annual growth rate in the 1970's, but recovery of copra
 and palm oil prices benefited the economy in 1983. The latest
 World Bank figures show per capita Gross National Product at $619
 in 1981.
 The population of Solomon Islands in 1983 was 254,000 and was
 growing at 3.7 percent per year. The infant mortality rate has
 declined to 43.7 per 1,000 live births. There is an adequate
 supply of food. Health, education, and other social services are
 rudimentary but available on a nondiscriminatory basis. The
 adult literacy rate in 1980 was estimated at 60 percent; the
 enrollment rate of primary school-age children in 1980 was 75
 percent.
 Women have equal legal rights, but traditional culture has
 discouraged their moving into leadership roles. There are no
 women in senior governmental positions or in Parliament. Girls
 constitute 42 percent of primary school enrollment and 30 percent
 in secondary schools.
 
 
