 SOLOMON ISLANDS
 Over 300,000-people occupy Solomon Islands, an archipelago
 stretching over 840 miles in the South Pacific and the second
 largest (after Papua New Guinea) of the Melanesian countries.
 Its government is based on a modified Westminster parliamentary
 system consisting of a single-chamber legislative assembly of
 38 members. This system, adopted when the country became
 independent in 1978, accords with both Solomon Islands,
 experience and the Melanesian tradition of leadership based
 upon individual achievement and political consensus.
 Political legitimacy rests on direct election by secret ballot.
 A police force o4 around 500 men is under civilian control.
 There are no other armed forces. The courts are independent
 and vigorously protect individual rights. There have been
 three general elections since independence; the most recent
 one in February 1989 resulted in the first one-party
 government since independence.
 Agriculture is the mainstay of the economy. About 85 percent
 of the population engages to some extent in subsistence
 production, obtaining food by root-gardening and fishing, and
 has little involvement in the cash economy. In 1989 Solomon
 Islands still faced a long-term decline in the terms of trade,
 substantial domestic and external deficits, an increasing
 foreign trade imbalance, and higher debt service costs. Poor
 economic performance was exacerbated by a population growth
 rate of about 3.5 percent, which ensured continued pressures
 on public and private resources.
 All basic individual rights are provided for in the
 Constitution, implemented by the authorities, and defended by
 the courts. There is a constitutionally provided Ombudsman to
 look into and provide protection against improper or unlawful
 administrative treatment. No human rights abuses were
 reported in 1989.
 RESPECT FOR HUI-AN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 Political and other extrajudicial killing has not occurred.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of political disappearance.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Torture is prohibited by law and not practiced.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 There is no evidence of politically motivated arrests.
 Exile is not practiced.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 
 
 983
 SOLOMON ISLANDS
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The judicial system is a blend of British and traditional
 systems. There is a high court plus magistrates' courts.
 Accused persons are entitled to counsel. Provision is made
 for writs of habeas corpus under the law. Coerced statements
 tre illegal. Violations of civil liberties are punishable
 by fines and jail sentences.
 f. Arbitrary'tnterference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 In addition'to legal provisions, the traditional culture
 provides strong protection against these types of abuses.
 Sdction 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Constitutional provisions, an independent press, and a
 functionin4g.democratic political system combine to ensure
 freedom-oft speech and press. There are two private weekly
 --newspapers, weekly and monthly-national government news-
 letters,-and one provincial government weekly. The
 state-owned radio gives significant'cdverage to statements of
 opposition politicians. The new Prime Minister conducted
 press conferences with-local journalists on a weekly basis.
 b   Freedom-of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The-right-of association is provided for in the Constitution
 ahd freely 'exercised. Demonstrators must obtain a permit, but
 permits have never been denied on'political grounds.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion-is guaranteed by law, there are no
 controls on the practice of religion, and there is no
 religious discrimination. AlthoughChristianity is the
 predominant religion and a wide variety of Christian
 denominations are represented, indigenous beliefs also
 continue to be practiced without restriction. Missionaries
 .work without restrictions.
 d,--Freedom of Movement Within'the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There-are no legal or administrative retrictions on freedom of
 movement of Solomon Islands, citizens within or out of the
 country. Natural-born citizens may not be deprived of
 citizenship on any grounds.
 Sectio 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Since independence, Solomon Islands'has had three
 parliamentary elections (the most recent in early 1989), and
 several elections for provincial and local councils. Besides
 the general elections, three additional changes of government
 were accomplished by votes of Parliament. Suffrage is
 universal over the age of 18.
 
 
 984
 SOLOMON ISLANDS
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigations of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There were no allegations by outside organizations of human
 rights violations in Solomon Islands nor any request for
 investigations. There are no local organizations that monitor
 and report on human rights.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, lex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 There is no discrimination on the basis of race, religion,
 language, or social status. Following his election in 1989,
 the new Prime Minister announced a policy prohibiting the
 employment of Freemasons in the Civil Service. Indigenous
 Solomon Islanders are favored over naturalized citizens in the
 matter of land ownership.
 The law accords women equal legal rights, but the traditional
 society, where males are dominant and women are seen in
 customary family roles, has hampered them from taking more
 active roles in economic and political life. A shortage of
 employment opportunities throughout the country has inhibited
 the entry of women into the work force.
 While actual statistical data are scarce, incidents of wife
 beating and abuse appear to be common. In the rare cases that
 are reported, charges are often dropped by the women before
 their court appearance. Police are reluctant to interfere in
 what they perceive as domestic disputes. In addition, many of
 the laws benefiting women are in the British tradition and are
 viewed by many Solomon Islanders as "foreign laws" not
 reflective of the customs and traditions of Solomon Islands.
 The magistrate courts deal with physical abuse of women on the
 basis of inherent common law powers and deal with it as they
 would any other assault.
 The government-supported National Council of Women is actively
 involved in trying to improve the position of women in
 society. Among other things, the Council is working to
 familiarize women with a proposed amendment to the
 Affiliation, Maintenance, and Separation Law which would
 guarantee that women who bring cases to court be protected
 against harassment from husbands or members of their husbands'
 families, both at home and in places of employment, and would
 guarantee women's right to child support and compensation. In
 1989 the Council also undertook workshops and programs to
 train women in various skills, to enhance their
 self-confidence, and to strengthen their participation in the
 political and economic life of Solomon Islands.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Solomon Islands' law recognizes the right of workers to
 organize, to choose their own representatives, to determine
 and pursue their own views and policies, and to engage in
 political activities. Only private sector unions have the
 right to strike--a right which has often been exercised.
 However, a 4-month strike by publicly paid teachers was
 successful in gaining wage concessions. The small percentage
 of workers actually involved in.the wage economy means that
 
 
 985
 SOLOMON ISLANDS
 there is an ample supply of replacement workers for employers
 to. draw on if disputes are not resolved quickly.
 Solomon Islands joined the International Labor Organization
 (ItO) in 1984, but has not yet ratified ILO Convention 87 on
 Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to Organize
 or Convention 98 on the Right to Organize and Collective
 Bargaining. Solomon Islands' unions are free to affiliate
 internationally and the largest trade union, the Solomon
 Islands National Union of Workers, is affiliated with the
 Communist-controlled World Federation of Trade Unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The.,Solomon Islands' National Union of Workers and other
 smaller unions freely organize workers. Unions exist and are
 active in both the public and private sector. The Trade
 Disputes Council exists to arbitrate between unions and
 employers. Workers are protected against antiunion activity,
 and there are no areas where union activity is officially
 discouraged. There are no economic incentive zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced labor is prohibited by law, except as part of a court
 sentence or order, and this prohibition is observed.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Solomon Islands has comprehensive laws on worker rights.
 Child labor is forbidden for children under the age of 12
 except in the company of parents in light agricultural or
 domestic work. Children under 15 are barred from work in
 industry or on ships; those under 18 cannot work underground
 or -in mines..
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Power to set minimum wages lies with the provincial
 governments..- At the present time, in Honiara and provincial
 government stations, it is about 32 cents per'hour. While
 small, this provides an adequate standard of living within the
 local context when supplemented by the subsistence farming and
 fishing practiced by most-families. As noted above, most of
 the population is engaged in subsistence labor, and as there
 is high unemployment and underemployment, workers are readily
 available at this wage.        ,
 Labor laws regulate premium pay, sick leave, the right to paid
 vacations., and other conditions of service. The standard
 workweek is 45 hours and limited to 6 days weekly. There are
 provisions for premium pay for overtime and holiday work as
 well as provisions for maternity leaves. Both an active labor
 movement and an independent judiciary ensure widespread
 enforcement of labor laws in major state and private
 enterprises. The extent to which the law is enforced in
 smaller establishments and in the subsistence sector is
 unclear. The Workmen's Compensation Act and subsidiary
 legislation make provisions for compensation to workmen
 injured at work. No data are available about health and
 safety standards.
 
 
 986
