 SOLOMON ISLANDS
 Over 300,000 people occupy Solomon Islands, an archipelago
 stretching over 840 miles in the South Pacific and the second
 largest (after Paptia New Guinea) of the Melanesian countries.
 Its government is based on a modified Westminster
 parliamentary system consisting of a single-chamber
 legislative assembly of 38 members. Executive authority lies
 with the Prime Minister and his Cabinet. The Prime Minister,
 elected by a majority vote of Parliament, selects his own
 Cabinet. This system, adopted when the country became
 independent in 1978, accords with both Solomon Islands'
 experience and the Melanesian tradition of leadership based
 upon individual achievement and political consensus.
 Political legitimacy rests on direct election by secret ballot.
 A police force of around 500 men is under civilian control.
 There are no other armed forces. *The courts are independent
 and vigorously protect individual rights. There have been
 three general elections since independence; the most recent
 one in February 1989 resulted in the first one-party
 government since independence.
 Agriculture is the mainstay of the economy. About 85 percent
 of the population engages to some extent in subsistence
 production, obtaining food by root-gardening and fishing, and
 has little involvement in the cash economy. In 1990 Solomon
 Islands still faced a long-term decline in the terms of trade,
 substantial domestic and external deficits, an increasing
 foreign trade imbalance, and higher debt service costs. Poor
 economic performance was exacerbated by a population growth
 rate of about 3.5 percent, which ensured continued pressures
 on public and private resources.
 Most basic individual rights are provided for in the
 Constitution, respected by the authorities,, and defended by
 the courts, but discrimination and violence against women are
 serious problems. There is a constitutionally provided
 Ombudsman to look into and provide protection against improper
 or'unlawful administrative treatment.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 Political and other extrajudicial killing did not occur.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of political disappearance.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Torture is prohibited by law and not practiced.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 There is no evidence of politically motivated arrests.
 Exile is not practiced.
 
 
 1035
 
 SOLOMON ISLANDS
 e.- Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The judicial system is a blend of British and traditional
 systems. There is a high court'plus magistrates' courts.
 Accused persons are entitled to counsel. Provision is made
 for writs of habeas corpus under-the law. Coerced statements
 are:illegal. Violations.of civil liberties are punishable
 by fines and jail sentences.
 f. .Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 In addition to legal provisions, the traditional culture
 provides strong protection against these types of abuses.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Constitutional provisions, an independent press','and a
 functioning democratic political system combine to ensure
 freedom of speech and press. There are two private weekly
 newspapers, weekly and monthly national government news-
 letters, and one provincial government weekly. The
 state-owned radio gives significant coverage to statements of
 opposition politicians. There is no television and the
 importation of satellite dishes is strictly controlled. The
 Government and established churches are -reluctant to permit
 the introduction of television since they are concerned that
 outside images of violence, sex and materialism could have a
 negative influence the public.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The right'of association is provided for in the Constitution
 and freely exercised. Demonstrators must obtain a permit, but
 permits have never been denied on political grounds.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is guaranteed by law, there are no
 controls on the practice of religion, and there is no
 religious discrimination. Although Christianity is the
 predominant religion and a wide variety of Christian
 denominations are represented, indigenous beliefs also
 continue to be- practiced without restriction. Missionaries
 work without restrictions, but the Government and established
 church leaders have voiced concern about what they view as the
 socially disruptive effect of new charismatic evangelical
 movements entering the country from overseas.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no legal or administrative restrictions on freedom
 of movement of Solomon Islands' citizens within or out of the
 country. * Natural-born citizens may not be deprived of
 citizenship on any grounds.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Citizens have the right to change their government through
 periodic free elections. Since independence, Solomon Islands
 has had.three parliamentary elections (the most recent in
 
 
 1036
 SOLOMON ISLANDS
 early 1989) and several elections for provincial and local
 councils. Besides the general elections, three additional
 changes of government were accomplished by votes of
 Parliament. Suffrage is universal over the age of 18.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There were no allegations by outside organizations of human
 rights violations in Solomon Islands or any request for
 investigations. There are no local organizations that monitor
 and report on human rights.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 There is a high degree of tolerance in Solomon Islands'
 society. However, while the law accords women equal legal
 rights, the traditional society, where males are dominant and
 women are seen in customary family roles, has hampered them
 from taking more active roles in economic and political life,
 and indigenous Solomon Islanders are favored over naturalized
 citizens in the matter of land ownership. A shortage of
 employment opportunities throughout the country has inhibited
 the entry of women into the work force. Following his
 election in 1989, the new Prime Minister announced a policy
 restricting the employment of expatriate Freemasons in the
 Civil Service, based on objections to what he perceived as
 Masonic ritualistic secrecy.
 While actual statistical data are scarce, incidents of wife
 beating and abuse appear to be common. In the rare cases that
 are reported, charges are often dropped by the women before
 their court appearance. Police are reluctant to interfere in
 what they perceive as domestic disputes. In addition, many of
 the laws benefiting women are in the British tradition and are
 viewed by many Solomon Islanders as "foreign laws" not
 reflective of the customs and traditions of Solomon Islands.
 The magistrate courts deal with physical abuse of women on the
 basis of inherent common law powers and deal with it as they
 would any other assault.
 The -government-supported National Council of Women is actively
 involved in trying to improve the position of women in
 society. Among other things, the Council is working to
 familiarize women with a proposed amendment to the
 Affiliation, Maintenance, and Separation Law which would
 ensure that women who bring cases to court be protected
 against harassment from husbands or members of their husbands'
 families, at home and in places of employment, and would
 ensure women's right to child support and compensation. In
 1990 the Council also undertook workshops and programs to
 train women in various skills, to enhance their
 self-confidence, and to strengthen their participation in the
 political and economic life of Solomon Islands.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Solomon Islands' law recognizes the right of workers to
 organize, to choose their own representatives, to determine
 and pursue their own views and policies, and to engage in
 political activities. Only private sector unions have the
 
 
 1037
 
 SOLOMON ISLANDS
 right to strike-a right which has oftenbeen exercised.
 However, a 4-month strike in 1989 by publicly.paid teachers
 was successful in gaining wage concessions. The small
 percentage.of workers actually involved in the wage economy
 means that there is an ample supply of replacement workers for
 employers to. raw on if disputes are not resolved quickly.
 Solomon Islands joined the International Labor Organization
 (ILO) in 1984, but has not yet ratified ILO Convention 87 on
 freedom of association or. Convention 98 on Collective -
 Bargaining. Solomon Islands' unions are free to affiliate
 internationally and the largest trade union, the Solomon
 Islands' National Union of Workers, is affiliated with the
 Communist-controlled World Federation of Trade Unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The Trade Disputes Act of 1981 provides for collective
 bargaining and is respected in practice. The Solomon Islands'
 National Union of Workers and other smaller unions freely
 organize workers in both the public and private sector. Total
 union membership is between 17,000 and 20,000. Wages and
 conditions of employment for unionized workers are determined
 through collective bargaining. Workers are protected against
 antlunion activity, and there are no areas where union
 activity is officially discouraged. There are no economic
 incentive zones.
 c: Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced labor is prohibited by law, except as part of a court
 sentence or order, and this prohibition is observed.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Salomon Islands has comprehensive laws on worker rights, but
 there is no enforcement mechanism. Child labor is forbidden
 for children under the age of 12 except in the company of
 parents in light agricultural or domestic work. Children
 under 15 are barred from work in industry or on ships; those
 under 1 cannot work underground or in mines. There is no
 agency formally responsible for enforcing these laws.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Power to set minimum wages lies with the provincial
 governments. At the present time, in Honiara and provincial
 government stations, it is about 32 cents per hour. While
 small, this provides an adequate standard of living in areas
 outside the capital when supplemented by the subsistence
 farming and fishing practiced by most families. Since most of
 the population is dependent to some extent on the subsistence
 economy, and as there is high unemployment and underemployment,
 workers are readily available at this wage.
 Labor laws regulate premium pay, sick leave, the right to paid
 vacations, and other conditions of service. The standard
 workweek is 45 hours and is- limited to 6 days weekly. There
 are provisions for premium pay for overtime and holiday work
 as well as provisions for maternity leave. Both an active
 labor movement and an independent judiciary enture widespread
 enforcement of labor laws in major state and private
 enterprises. The Commissioner of Labor, thb Public
 Prosecutor, and the police are responsible for enforcement of
 labor law. However, they are reactive to charges of labor law
 
 
 1038
 SOLOMON ISLANDS
 violation rather than than taking the initiative in monitoring
 adherence to these laws.  The extent to which the law is
 enforced in smaller establishments and in the subsistence
 sector is unclear. The Workmen's Compensation Act and
 subsidiary legislation make provisions for compensation to
 workmen injured at work. There appear to be no apparent
 safety and health standards. Workers at construction sites
 are not required to wear protective clothing or helmets.
 Agricultural workers with a high risk of contracting malaria
 are not provided with malaria suppressants.
 
 
 1039
