 SOLOMON ISLANDS
 Solomon Islands is an archipelagic country comprising 6 large
 islands and many smaller ones stretching over 840 miles in the
 South Pacific. Its total population of about 285,000 makes it
 the second largest (after Papua New Guinea) of the Melanesian
 countries. The Government is based on a modified Westminster
 parliamentary system consisting of a single-chamber legislative
 assembly of 38 members. This system, adopted when the country
 became independent in 1978, accords well with both Solomon
 Islands' experience and the Melanesian tradition of leadership
 based upon individual achievement and political consensus.
 Political legitimacy thus rests on free popular voting. The
 police are under civilian control; there are no other armed
 forces. The courts are independent and vigorously protect
 individual rights. Since independence, two parliamentary
 elections have been held and'two additional changes of
 government were accomplished by vote of Parliament.
 The gross domestic product (GDP) has been dropping since 1984
 and although the rate of decrease has slowed in recent months
 it is still down about 16 percent. This is attributed
 primarily to population growth of around 3.5 percent yearly
 and a stagnant economy. Depressed world prices for copra and
 the aftermath of a cyclone in 1986 continue to retard economic
 growth.
 Human rights in Solomon Islands are protected rigorously. No
 abuses were reported in 1987.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity .of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Political killing has not occurred in Solomon Islands.
 b. Disappearance
 There are no reports of political disappearance.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Torture is neither practiced nor condoned. All basic
 individual rights are provided for in the Constitution,
 implemented by the authorities, and defended by the courts.
 In addition, there is a constitutionally provided office of
 Ombudsman to look into and provide protection against
 administratively caused excessive or unlawful treatment.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, Exile, or Forced Labor
 There is no evidence of politically motivated arrests. Exile
 is not practiced. Forced labor is forbidden, except as part
 of a sentence or court order.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Accused persons are entitled to counsel. Provision is made
 for writs of habeas corpus under the law. Coerced statements
 are illegal. Violations of civil liberties are punishable by
 fines and jail sentences.
 
 
 808
 SOLOMON ISLANDS
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 In addition to legal provisions, the traditional culture
 governing the daily lives of most Solomon Islanders provides
 strong protection against these types of abuses.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Constitutional provisions, an independent press, and a
 functioning democratic political system combine to insure
 freedom of speech axid press. There are two private weekly
 newspapers, weekly and monthly national government
 newsletters, and one provincial government weekly. The
 state-owned radio gives significant coverage to statements of
 opposition politicians. There have been no restrictions on
 foreign press activity since 1984.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The right of association is constitutionally guaranteed and
 freely exercised. Demonstrators, however, must obtain a
 permit, which is usually granted.
 Unions have the right to engage in collective bargaining and
 in the private sector they have the righE to strike, a right
 which has been exercised often.
 The largest trade union, the Solomon Islands National Union of
 Workers, and other smaller unions freely organize workers.
 The plantation sector, however, is not widely unionized.
 Solomon Islands' unions are associated with several
 international organizations, including the International Labor
 Organization and the International Confederation of Free Trade
 Unions.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is guaranteed by law; there are no
 controls on the practice of religion and no religious
 discrimination. Although Christianity is the dominant
 religion and a wide variety of Christian denominations are
 represented in the islands, indigenous beliefs also flourish.
 Missionaries work without restrictions.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no legal or administrative restrictions on the
 freedom of movement of Solomon Islands' citizens within or out
 of the country. Natural-born citizens may not be deprived of
 citizenship on any grounds.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Since independence, Solomon Islands has had two parliamentary
 elections and several elections for provincial and local
 councils. Parliamentary elections were most recently held in
 November 1984. Election results were contested in some
 constituencies, and court decisions resulted in new polls in a
 few instances. Prime Minister Ezekial Alebua has led the
 
 
 809
 SOLOMON ISLANDS
 Government since a coalition realignment in November 1986.
 Citizens over the age of 18 enjoy universal suffrage.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There were no allegations by outside organizations of human
 rights violations in Solomon Islands nor any request for
 investigations.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Discrimination based on regional or ethnic considerations is
 not practiced. The law accords women equal legal rights, but
 the culture, in which males are dominant and women seen in
 their traditional family roles, has hampered them from taking
 more active roles in the economic and political life of the
 country. There are no women in senior governmental positions
 or in Parliament, although women are involved in politics and
 have run for national office. A shortage of employment
 opportunities and a predominantly young population with many
 job seekers have also inhibited women from entering the work
 force. About 25 percent of the population aged 15-54 works
 for wages. Another 70 percent are self-employed, mainly as
 copra farmers or market gardeners, whose wives and family
 members are usually unpaid helpers.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 Solomon Islands has comprehensive laws on workers' rights.
 Child labor is forbidden for children under the age of 12
 except in the company of parents in light agricultural or
 domestic work. Children under 15 are barred from work in
 industry or on ships; those under 18 cannot work underground
 or in mines. The standard workweek is 45 hours and limited to
 6 days. Power to set minimum wages lies with provincial
 governments. In Honiara, the capital, the minimum wage is
 about 30 cents per hour. There are provisions for premium pay
 for overtime and holiday work. Both a-strong labor movement
 and an independent judiciary ensure widespread enforcement of
 labor laws in major state and private enterprises. The extent
 to which the law is enforced in smaller establishments and in
 the subsistence sector is unclear. Information on occupational
 safety and health legislation is not available.
 
 
 810
