 SOLOMON ISLANDS
 Solomon Islands, with its approximately 400,000 people, is an archipelago stretch-
 ing over 840 miles in the South Pacific. Its government is a modified parliamentary
 system consisting of a single-chamber legislative assembly of 50 members. Executive
 authority lies with the Prime Minister and his Cabinet. The Prime Minister, elected
 by a majority vote of Parliament, selects his own Cabinet. Political legitimacy rests
 on direct election by secret ballot. There have been five general elections since inde-
 pendence in 1978, most recently in August. The judiciary is independent.
 A police force of about 500 men under civilian control is responsible for law en-
 forcement. There were occasional reports of police abuse of human rights.
 About 85 percent of the population engages to some extent in subsistence farming,
 obtaining food by gardening and fishing, and has little involvement in the cash econ-
 omy. Approximately 10 to 15 percent of the working population (15 years and older)
 are engaged in nonsubsistence production. Although exports, particularly of unproc-
 essed logs, have boomed, the number of wage earners has remained unchanged for
 the pst several years, despite high population growth.
 Most basic individual rights are provided for in the Constitution, respected by au-
 thorities, and defended by an independent judiciary. Discrimination and violence
 against women remain problems, and the Government on occasion has imposed re-
 strictions on the media. There is a constitutionally provided ombudsman to look into
 and provide protection against improper or unlawful administrative treatment.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 These practices are prohibited by law. Complaints of excessive use of force by police
 when making arrests, as well as other complaints about police behavior, are handied
 by the polic s internal investigations office or by the courts. There were no known
 complaints of excessive use of force by the police in 1997.
 
 
 Prison conditions meet minimum international standards. A new prison complex,
 slated for completion in 1997, was to have provided separate facilities for short-, me-
 dium-, and long-term prisoners as well as for juvenile offenders. It has not yet been
 completed. Since there are no human rights organizations in Solomon Islands, the
 question of whether the Government would permit visits by human rights monitors
 has never arisen. A government-appointed Committee of Mercy, comprised of church
 and social leaders, recommends pardons for rehabilitated prisoners.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-There was no evidence of politically moti-
 vated arrests or detentions. Exile is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public TriaL-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary and it is independent in practice.
 The judicial system consists of a High Court and magistrates' courts. Accused per-
 sons are entitled to counsel. The law provides for a judicial determination of the le-
 gality of arrests. Officials found to have violated civil liberties are subject to fines
 and jail sentences.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitray Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-In addi-
 tion to legaprvisions, the traditional culture provides strong protection against
 these types of abuses. A constitutionally provided ombudsman, with the power of
 subpoena, can investigate complaints of official abuse, mistreatment, or unfair treat-
 ment. The Ombudsman's Office did not report any incidents involving interference
 with these rights. While the Ombudsman's office has potentially far-ranging powers,
 it is limited by a shortage of investigators and other resources.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Government generally respects the con-
 stitutional prvisions for freedom of speech and of the press. The media comprise
 the Solomon Islands Broadcasting Corporation (SIBC), a statutory body that comes
 directly under the Prime Minister's office and whose radio broadcasts are heard
 throughout the country; a privately owned FM radio station; and three privately
 owned weekly or semiweekly newspapers. Given the high rate of illiteracy, the SIBC
 is more influential than the print media. The Department of Information in the
 Prime Minister's office publishes a monthly     newspaper which   is strongly
 progovernment. At least two nongovernmental organizations (NGO's) publish pri-
 odic news journals; their environmental reporting frequently is critical of the ov-
 emnent's logging policy and foreign logging companies' pradtices. In addition to the
 three established newspapers, a newspaper in Solomon rslands Pidin, the language
 understood by most of the population, began semiweekly publication in late 1996.
 A private company has been given a license to begin limited television operations
 in 1997.
 The state-owned SIBC is relatively bias free. A radio call-in show on SIBC critical
 of the performance of the Government in power prior to the August elections was
 reportedly forced to terminate its broadcast part way through the program. In 1996
 the Prime Minister banned SIBC from broadcasting any statements by the Honiara-
 based spokesman of the Papua New Guinea secessionist movement, the Bougainvie
 Revolutionary Army (BRA). This action followed demands from the Papua New
 Guinea Government that the Solomon Islands not allow BRA rebels to operate in
 its territory. It is not clear whether this ban is still in effect or has been quietly
 lifted. Also in 1996. following a news report that the Government believed un-
 founded and prejudicial to the national security, the SIBC governing board directed
 that all news and current affairs programs have executive management clearance
 before being broadcast. Several SIBC newswriters and producers subsequently
 staged a short sit-in to protest against management statements that adversely re-
 flected on their professionalism. The Solomon Islands Media Association also re-
 acted strongly, saying that the prescreeningof news broadcasts was unnecessary.
 The requirement or executive clearance has een lifted.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 the right of association, and this right is freely exercised. Demonstrators must ob-
 taine rmits, but permits are not known to have been denied on political grounds.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The law provides for freedom of religion, and the Govern-
 ment respects this provision in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Government places neither legal nor administrative restrictions on
 the movement of citizens within or out of the country. Native-born citizens may not
 be deprived of citizenship on any grounds.
 The Government provides first asylum to approximately 1,000 to 2,000 people
 from Papua New Guinea's Bougainville Island, who fled the conflict there several
 years earlier. Although they have not been granted formal refugee status, they have
 
 
 907
 been allowed to remain. Most reside in Honiara with friends, while several hundred
 live in Red Cross-administered care centers elsewhere.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have the right to change their government through periodic free elec-
 tions. Since independence in 1978, there have been five parliamentary elections,
 most recently in August, and several elections for provincial and local councils. On
 four occasions changes of government resulted from either parliamentary votes of
 no confidence or the resignation of the Prime Minister. Suffrage is universal over
 18 years of age.
 Traditional male dominance has limited the role of women in government. Al-
 though 14 women ran for Parliament in the August elections, only 1, the previous
 incumbent and sole woman in Parliament, was elected.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 While there are no restrictions on the formation of local organizations to monitor
 and report on human rights, none has been established to date. There were no
 known requests for investigation by outside human rights organizations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides that no person-regardless of race, place of origin, po-
 litical opinions, color, creed or disabilities-shall be treated in a discriminatory man-
 ner in respect of access to public places. The Constitution further prohibits any laws
 which would have discriminatory effects, and provides that no person should be
 treated in a discriminatory manner by anyone acting in an official capacity. Despite
 constitutional and legal protections, women remain the victims of discrimination in
 this tradition-based society. Due to high rates of unemployment, there are a limited
 number of jobs available to the disabled.
 Women.-While actual statistical data are scarce, incidents of wife beating and
 wife abuse appear to be common. In the rare cases that are reported, charges are
 often dropped by the women before the court appearance or are settled out of court.
 Police are reluctant to interfere in what they perceive as domestic disputes. In addi-
 tion, many of the laws benefiting women derive from the British tradition and are
 viewed by many Solomon Islanders as "foreign laws" not reflective of their own cus-
 toms and traditions. The magistrates' courts deal with physical abuse of women as
 with any other assault, although prosecutions are rare.
 The law accords women equal legal rights. However, in this traditional society
 men are dominant, and women are limited to customary family roles. This situation
 has prevented women from taking more active roles in economic and political life.
 A shortage of employment opportunities throughout the country has inhibited the
 entry of women into the work force. The majority of women are illiterate; this is
 attributed in large part to cultural barriers. According to a 1995 United Nations De-
 velopment Program (UNDP) report on human development, Solomon Islands ranked
 very low on the gender empowerment measure that examines women's ability to
 participate in economic and political life. The National Council of Women and other
 NGO's attempt to make women more aware of their legal rights through seminars,
 workshops and other activities. The government's Women Development Division
 also addresses women's issues.
 Children.-Within the limits of its resources, the Government is committed to the
 welfare and protection of the rights of children. There is no compulsory education,
 and, according to some estimates, only 60 percent of school age children have access
 to primary education; the percentages of those attending secondary and tertiary in-
 stitutions are much smaller. Children are respected and protected within the tradi-
 tional extended-family system, in accordance with a family's financial resources and
 access to services. As a result, virtually no children are homeless or abandoned. Al-
 though some cases of child abuse are reported, there is no societal pattern of abuse.
 The Constitution grants children the same general rights and protection as adults.
 Existing laws are designed to protect children from sexual abuse, child labor, and
 neglect.
 People With Disabilities.-There is no law or national policy on the disabled, and
 no legislation mandates access for the disabled. Their protection and care are left
 to the traditional extended family and nongovernmental organizations. With high
 unemployment countrywide and few jobs available in the formal sector, most dis-
 abled persons, particularly those in rural areas, do not find work outside the family
 structure. The Solomon Islands Red Cross continued to conduct private fund-raising
 efforts to build a new national center for disabled children.
 
 
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution implicitly recognizes the right of
 workers to form or join unions, to choose their own representatives, to determine
 and pursue their own views and policies, and to engage in political activities. The
 courts have confirmed these rights. Only about 10 to 15 percent of the population
 participate in the formal sector of the economy. Approximately 60 to 70 percent of
 wage earners are organized (90 percent of employees in the public sector and about
 50 percent of those in the private sector).
 Although the law permits strikes unions seldom resort to them, preferring to ne-
 gotiate. Disputes are usually referred quickly to the Trade Disputes Panel (TDP) for
 arbitration, either before or during a strike. In practice, the small percentage of the
 work force in formal employment means that employers have ample replacement
 workers if disputes are not resolved quickly. Employees, however, are protected
 from arbitrary dismissal or lockout while the TDP is deliberating.
 Unions are free to affiliate internationally, and the largest trade union the Solo-
 mon Islands' National Union of Workers, is affiliated with the World Federation of
 Trade Unions, the South Pacific Oceanic Council of Trade Unions, and the Common-
 wealth Trade Union Congress.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Trade Disputes Act of
 1981provides for the rights to organize and to bargain collectively and unions exer-
 cise these rights frequently.
 Wages and conditions of employment are determined by collective bargaining. If
 a dispute between labor and management cannot be settled between the two sides,
 it is referred to the TDP for arbitration. The three-member TDP, comprising a chair-
 man appointed by the   diciary, a labor representative, and a business representa-
 tive, is independent and neutral.
 The law protects workers against antiunion activity, and there are no areas where
 union activity is officially discouraged.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 labor, including forced and bonded labor by children, and, except as part of a court
 sentence or order, this prohibition is observed.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The law
 forbids child labor by children under the age of 12, except light agriculture or do-
 mestic work performed in the company of parents. Children under age 15 are barred
 from work in industry or on ships; those under age 18 may not work underground
 or in mines. The Labor Division of the Ministry of Commerce, Trade, and Industry
 is responsible for enforcing child labor laws. Given low wages and high unemploy-
 ment, there is little incentive to employ child labor.
 Forced and bonded labor by children is constitutionally prohibited and is not
 known to occur (see Section 6.c.).
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The minimum hourly wage rate was raised in
 1996 from its 1988 rate of $0.22 (0.74 Solomon Islands dollars) to $0.42 (1.50 Solo-
 mon Islands dollars) for all workers except those in the fishing and agricultural sec-
 tors, who now receive $0.34 (1.20 Solomon Islands dollars). Even at the new rate,
 the legal minimum wage is not sufficient to support an urban family living entirely
 on the cash economy. However, most families are not dependent solely on wages for
 their livelihoods.
 The Labor Act of 1969, as amended, and the Employment Act of 1981, as well
 as other laws, regulate premium pay, sick leave, the right to paid vacations, and
 other conditions of service. The standard workweek is 45 hours and is limited to
 6 days per week. There are provisions for premium pay for overtime and holiday
 work and for maternity leave.
 Both an active labor movement and an independent judiciary ensure widespread
 enforcement of labor laws in major state and private enterprises. The Commissioner
 of Labor, the Public Prosecutor, and the police are responsible for enforcing labor
 laws. However, they usually react to complaints rather than routinely monitoring
 adherence to the law. The extent to which the law is enforced in smaller establish-
 ments and in the subsistence sector is unclear. Safety and health laws appear to
 be adequate. Malaria is endemic in Solomon Islands and affects the health of many
 employees. Agricultural workers have a high risk of contracting malaria.
