 SOLOMON ISLANDS
 The Solomon Islands is a newly independent Pacific
 island state (July, 7, 1978) with a relatively homogeneous
 population of 218,000. It is a parliamentary democracy
 and a member of the British Commonwealth. The capital,
 Honiara, is the only urban area and over 90 percent of
 the population lives in rural villages. Most Solomon
 Islanders still are deeply associated with traditional
 Melanesian social mores and maintain strong roots in
 village life. Democratic institutions established during
 the colonial period are being integrated with custom
 and traditional practices; substantial government pow-
 ers are being devolved to the provincial and local levels.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Torture is prohibited by law and custom in the Solomon
 Islands.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punish-
 ment
 Cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment
 is illegal and not practiced or condoned. Capital punish-
 ment was abolished in 1966. Criminal law is embodied
 in a penal code. Treatment of prisoners is fair and
 humane.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 There are no political prisoners in the Solomons.
 Habeas Corpus exists and is honored in practice.
 Preventive detention does not exist. Persons are not
 held clandestinely and do not "disappear."
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 A right to a fair public trial is guaranteed by
 law, and is honored in practice. Defendants are entitled
 to counsel and may consult with counsel freely and in
 private. The constitution provides for a public
 solicitor whose function is to provide legal aid, advice
 and help to the public, especially those charged with
 criminal offences.
 Defendants are made fully aware of the charges
 against them, and their lawyers can inform themselves
 of the evidence on which charges are based.
 The Solomons court system is independent of execu-
 tive or military control. There are no special courts
 to deal with security or political offenses. The High
 Court has a wide review authority over the lower courts.
 An Ombudsman investigates complaints against the govern-
 ment.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 
 (524)
 
 
 525
 There is respect for the sanctity of the home and
 search warrants are required as a matter of law. Illegal
 entries of the home are not condoned.
 2. Government Policies Relating to the Fulfillment of
 Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care and
 Education
 The Solomons Government has emphasized development
 of rural areas and decentralization of government func-
 tions. Adequate food, shelter, health care and education
 are all objectives of the national development plan, and
 modest progress is being made in carrying out these
 objectives within the constraints of the budget. There
 is a strong commitment to capitalist enterprise, and the
 government actively encourages foreign investment.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 These rights are guaranteed and observed in practice,
 there are both government and privately published news-
 papers; radio Is controlled by the government. Religions
 are freely practiced. There are no impediments to assembly
 or to freedom of association.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 Solomon Islanders are free to travel within the
 country and abroad. Passport fees are not excessive.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 There is universal adult suffrage for citizens 18
 and older. An electoral commission oversees the
 registration and ensures fair elections. The unicameral
 parliament meets regularly.
 Women have equal standing and play a significant
 role in all arenas. There is no discrimination by sex.
 There is an active trade union movement with rights
 to organize, bargain and strike.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-Governmental Investigation of Alleged Viola-
 tions of Human Rights
 We are unaware of any such allegations against the
 Solomon Islands Government or of any requests for in-
 vestigations.
 
 
