 SOLOMON ISLANDS
 One of three neighboring small Pacific island states, Solomon
 Islands ranks third in size after Papua New Guinea and Fiji.
 The parliamentary government which was adopted upon receiving
 independence from Great Britain in 1978, consists of a single-
 chamber legislative assembly of 38 members. The Government
 accords both with the country's colonial experience and with
 the Melanesian tradition of leadership based upon individual
 prestige and the ability to form a consensus. Political
 legitimacy, thus, rests on free popular voting. The police
 and armed forces are under civilian control; the courts are
 independent and vigorously protect individual rights. Since
 independence, two parliamentary elections have been held and
 one additional change of government was accomplished by vote
 of Parliament.
 Solomon Islands is a developing country composed of six large
 islands and numerous small ones stretching over 840 miles in
 the southern Pacific Ocean. Agricultural exports and external
 aid are its primary sources of income. The Government
 recognizes the need for private enterprise for economic
 development. Its conservative fiscal and monetary policies
 support a healthy business climate. Exports in the first half
 of 1984 exceeded imports by about $9 million, reflecting an
 improvement in prices for the country's main exports of
 timber, fish, copra, and palm oil.
 Human rights in Solomon Islands are rigorously protected. No
 abuses were reported in 1984. Despite some traditional
 inertia, women's rights are improving and, although no woman
 has yet been elected to a national seat, women are involved in
 politics and have run for national office.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Political killing does not occur.
 b. Disappearance
 There are no reports of political disappearance.
 c.  Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Torture is neither practiced nor condoned. All the basic
 protections of the integrity of the individual are guaranteed
 by the Constitution of Solomon Islands, implemented by the
 authorities, and defended by the courts and public opinion.
 Prisoners have recourse to the courts and the Ombudsman for
 protection against possible excessive or unlawful treatment.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 There are no politically motivated arrests. Exile is not
 practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Accused persons are entitled to counsel. Provision is made
 for writs of habeas corpus under the law and coerced
 
 
 873
 SOLOMON ISLANDS
 statements are illegal. Civil rights violations are
 punishable by fines and jail sentences.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The traditional culture which governs the daily Xives of most
 Solomon Islanders provides strong protection against these
 types of abuses.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Constitutional guarantees, an independent press, and a
 functioning democratic political system combine to insure
 domestic freedoms of speech and press. There are two private
 weekly newspapers, a monthly national government newsletter,
 and one provincial government weekly. State-owned radio gives
 significant coverage to statements of opposition politicians.
 The foreign press has not fared as well. In May 1984, some
 foreign reporters who had obtained the required clearances
 weeks in advance were denied permission to cover the Pope's
 visit. Only the press traveling with the official entourage
 was allowed into Solomon Islands. In October, two Australian
 journalists, visiting the capital to cover elections, were
 denied accreditation, but eventually allowed to remain.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The right of association is constitutionally guaranteed and
 freely exercised. Demonstrators, however, must obtain a
 permit which is usually granted. A recent exception was
 denial of a permit to demonstrate before the Pope during his
 visit in May 1984. Unions in the private sector have the
 right to strike. The largest trade union, the Solomon Islands
 National Union of Workers, and other smaller unions freely
 organize workers. The plantation sector is not widely
 unionized. Solomon Islands' unions have international ties
 with several organizations.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is guaranteed by law; there are no
 controls on the practice of religion and no religious
 discrimination. Christianity is the dominant religion with a
 wide variety of denominations, and indigenous beliefs also
 flourish. Missionaries work without restrictions.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no legal or administrative restrictions on freedom
 of movement of Solomon Islands citizens within or in and out
 of the country. Natural-born citizens may not be deprived of
 citizenship on any grounds.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Since independence, Solomon Islands has had two parliamentary
 elections and several elections for provincial and local
 councils. The second of the two parliamentary elections, held
 in November 1984, resulted in the orderly replacement of
 former Prime Minister Mamaloni by Sir Peter Kenilorea, who, in
 
 
 874
 SOLOMON ISLANDS
 secret balloting by the Parliament, received 21 out of a
 possible 37 votes. Elections were well contested and were
 managed by an elections commission; the independent courts and
 press assured that they were fair. Citizens over 18 enjoy
 universal suffrage. Parliament has the power to form
 governments.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged
 Violations of Human Rights
 There have been no allegations by outside organizations of
 human rights violations in the Solomon Islands nor any request
 for investigations. The 1984 Amnesty International Report has
 no entry for Solomon Islands. Preedom House's 1984-85 report
 lists it as 'free.'
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 The Solomon Islands' economy depends heavily for its
 prosperity on international prices of its manufactured imports
 and its agricultural exports. Although depressed commodity
 prices brought economic growth to a standstill in 1980-82,
 high world prices for Solomon Islands' exports in 1984
 precipitated a strong recovery that pushed per capita gross
 national product up 5.8 percent to $657 in 1982, according to
 World Bank statistics.
 The population of Solomon Islands in 1984 was 263,000 and was
 growing at 3.7 percent per year. The infant mortality rate
 has declined to 40.5 per 1,000 live births (World Bank).
 There is an adequate supply of food. World Bank statistics
 published in 1984 indicate that 38 percent of the rural
 population and nearly all urban dwellers, or 58 percent of the
 entire population, has access to safe water. Health,
 education, and other social services are rudimentary but
 available on a nondiscriminatory basis. According to
 government statistics, the adult literacy rate in 1984 was
 estimated at 60 percent; the enrollment rate of primary
 school-age children was 75 percent.
 Women have equal legal rights, but traditional culture has
 hampered their moving into leadership roles. There are no
 women in senior governmental positions or in Parliament.
 Girls constitute 42 percent of primary school enrollment and
 30 percent of secondary school enrollment.
 
 
 875
