 SOLOMON ISLANDS
 Solomon Islands, with its approximately 400,000 people, is an archipelago stretch-
 ing over 840 miles in the South Pacific. Its government is a modified parliamentary
 system consisting of a single-chamber legislative assembly of 50 members. Executive
 authority lies with the Prime Minister and his Cabinet. The Prime Minister, elected
 by a majority vote of Parliament, selects his own Cabinet. Political legitimacy rests
 on direct election by secret ballot. There have been five general elections since inde-
 pendence in 1978, most recently in August. The judiciary is independent.
 A police force of about 500 men under civilian control is responsible for law en-
 forcement.
 About 85 percent of the population engage to some extent in subsistence farming,
 obtaining food by gardening and fishing, and have little involvement in the cash
 economy. Approximately 10 to 15 percent of the working population (15 years and
 older) are engaged in nonsubsistence production. Due to a sharp drop in demand
 for tropical timber, 50 percent of jobs in that major export industry were lost in
 1998. The civil service, which employs about 37.5 percent of those in formal employ-
 ment, is being reduced by about 5 percent as part of a government-restructuring
 program.
 Most basic individual rights are provided for in the Constitution, respected by au-
 thorities, and defended by an independent judiciary. Discrimination and violence
 against women remain problems. There is a constitutionally provided ombudsman
 to look into and provide protection against improper or unlawful administrative
 treatment.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 These practices are prohibited by law. Complaints of excessive use of force by police
 when making arrests, as well as other complaints about police behavior, are handled
 by the police's internal investigations office or by the courts. In January the police
 opened a public complaints office in the capital. There were no reports of excessive
 use of force by the police during the year.
 Prison conditions meet minimum international standards. A new prison complex,
 slated for completion in 1997, was to have provided separate facilities for short-, me-
 dium-, and long-term prisoners, as well as for juvenile offenders. It remains
 uncompleted due to lack of funds. A government-appointed Committee of Mercy,
 comprised of church and social leaders, recommends pardons for rehabilitated pris-
 oners.
 There are no human rights organizations in the country, and the question of
 whether the Government would permit visits by human rights monitors has never
 arisen.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-There was no evidence of politically moti-
 vated arrests or detentions. Exile is not practiced.
 
 
 1066
 
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary and it is independent in practice.
 The judicial system consists of a High Court and magistrates' courts. Accused per-
 sons are entitled to counsel. The law provides for a judicial determination of the le-
 gality of arrests. Officials found to have violated civil liberties are subject to fines
 and jail sentences.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-In addi-
 tion to legal provisions, the traditional culture provides strong protection against
 these types of abuses. A constitutionally provided ombudsman, with the power of
 subpoena, can investigate complaints of official abuse, mistreatment, or unfair treat-
 ment. The Ombudsman's Office did not report any incidents involving interference
 with these rights. While the Ombudsman's office has potentially far-ranging powers,
 it is limited by a shortage of investigators and other resources.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Government generally respects the con-
 stitutional provisions for freedom of speech and of the press.
 The media comprise the Solomon Islands Broadcasting Corporation (SIBC), a stat-
 utory body that comes directly under the Prime Minister's office and whose radio
 broadcasts are heard throughout the country; a privately owned FM radio station;
 and three privately owned weekly or semiweekly newspapers. Given the high rate
 of illiteracy, the SIBC is more influential than the print media. The Department of
 Information in the Prime Minister's office publishes a monthly newspaper, which is
 strongly progovernment. At least two nongovernmental organizations (NGO's) pub-
 lish periodic news journals; their environmental reporting frequently is critical of
 the Government's logging policy and foreign logging companies' practices. A private
 company began transmitting one Australian television channel to the country in
 mid-year. There is no locally produced television.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 the right of association, and this right is freely exercised. Demonstrators must ob-
 tain permits, but permits are not known to have been denied on political grounds.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The law provides for freedom of religion, and the Govern-
 ment respects this provision in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Government places neither legal nor administrative restrictions on
 the movement of citizens within or out of the country. Native-born citizens may not
 be deprived of citizenship on any grounds.
 The Government has provided first asylum to persons from Papua New Guinea's
 Bougainville Island, who fled the conflict that started there in 1989. Following the
 1998 peace settlement, 'many have returned home. According the United Nations
 High Commissioner for Refugees, there are less than 50 documented Bougainville
 refugees  remaining. It   is  estimated  that  approximately  500  additional
 Bougainvillians are temporarily sheltering in the country, of whom about 250 reside
 in Red Cross-administered care centers.
 The Government negotiated agreements with the Government of Papua New
 Guinea to establish means for traditional border crossers in southern Bougainville
 and the northern Solomon Islands to pass easily between the two countries.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have the right to change their government through periodic free elec-
 tions. Since independence in 1978, there have been five parliamentary elections,
 most recently in August 1997, and several elections for provincial and local councils.
 On four occasions, changes of government resulted from either parliamentary votes
 of no confidence or the resignation of the Prime Minister. Suffrage is universal over
 18 years of age.
 Traditional male dominance has limited the role of women in government. Al-
 though 14 women ran for Parliament in the 1997 elections, only 1, the previous in-
 cumbent and sole woman in Parliament, was elected.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 While there are no restrictions on the formation of local organizations to monitor
 and report on human rights, none has been established to date. There were no
 known requests for investigation by outside human rights organizations.
 
 
 1067
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides that no person-regardless of race, place of origin, po-
 litical opinion, color, creed or disability-shall be treated in a discriminatory manner
 in respect of access to public places. The Constitution further prohibits any laws
 that would have discriminatory effects and provides that no person should be treat-
 ed in a discriminatory manner by anyone acting in an official capacity. Despite con-
 stitutional and legal protections, women remain the victims of discrimination in this
 tradition-based society. Unemployment is high, and there are limited job opportuni-
 ties for the disabled.
 Women.-While actual statistical data are scarce, incidents of wife beating and
 wife abuse appear to be common. In the rare cases that are reported, charges often
 are dropped by the women before the court appearance or are settled out of court.
 The magistrates' courts deal with physical abuse of women as with any other as-
 sault, although prosecutions are rare. During the year, the Police Department began
 a series of lectures on domestic violence and child abuse for police officers and for
 the community. Police officers are now ordered to treat all such incidents like any
 other criminal offense. Regional police commanders are continuing the lecture series
 in their areas.
 The law accords women equal legal rights. However, in this traditional society
 men are dominant, and women are limited to customary family roles. This situation
 has prevented women from taking more active roles in economic and political life.
 A shortage of employment opportunities throughout the country has inhibited the
 entry of women into the work force. The majority of women are illiterate; this is
 attributed in large part to cultural barriers. The National Council of Women and
 other NGO's have attempted to make women more aware of their legal rights
 through seminars, workshops and other activities. The Governmenes Women Devel-
 opment Division also addresses women's issues.
 Children.-Within the limits of its resources, the Government is committed to the
 welfare and protection of the rights of children. There is no compulsory education,
 and, according to some estimates, only 60 percent of school-age children have access
 to primary education; the percentages of those attending secondary and tertiary in-
 stitutions are much smaller. Children are respected and protected within the tradi-
 tional extended-family system, in accordance with a family's financial resources and
 access to services. As a result, virtually no children are homeless or abandoned. Al-
 though some cases of child abuse are reported, there is no societal pattern of abuse.
 The Constitution grants children the same general rights and protection as adults.
 Existing laws are designed to protect children from sexual abuse, child labor, and
 neglect.
 People With Disabilities.-There is no law or national policy on the disabled, and
 no legislation mandates access for the disabled. Their protection and care are left
 to the traditional extended family and nongovernmental organizations. With high
 unemployment countrywide and few jobs available in the formal sector, most dis-
 abled persons, particularly those in rural areas, do not find work outside the family
 structure. The Solomon Islands Red Cross continued to conduct private fund-raising
 efforts to build a new national center for disabled children.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution implicitly recognizes the right of
 workers to form or join unions, to choose their own representatives, to determine
 and pursue their own views and policies, and to engage in political activities. The
 courts have confirmed these rights. Only about 10 to 15 percent of the population
 participates in the formal sector of the economy. Approximately 60 to 70 percent of
 wage earners are organized (90 percent of employees in the public sector and about
 50 percent of those in the private sector).
 The law permits strikes. Disputes are usually referred quickly to the Trade Dis-
 putes Panel (TDP) for arbitration, either before or during a strike. In practice, the
 small percentage of the work force in formal employment means that employers
 have ample replacement workers if disputes are not resolved quickly. However, em-
 ployees are protected from arbitrary dismissal or lockout while the TDP is deliberat-
 ing. In July the High Court dismissed the Government's request for an injunction
 against a public service strike that was called over the Government's refusal to n-
 gotiate a government-wide downsizing of the public service.
 Unions are free to affiliate internationally, and the largest trade union, the Solo-
 mon Islands' National Union of Workers, is affiliated with the World Federation of
 Trade Unions, the South Pacific Oceanic Council of Trade Unions, and the Common-
 wealth Trade Union Congress.
 
 
 1068
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Trade Disputes Act of
 1981 provides for the rights to organize and to bargain collectively and unions exer-
 cise these rights frequently.
 Wages and conditions of employment are determined by collective bargaining. If
 a dispute between labor and management cannot be settled between the two sides,
 it is referred to the TDP for arbitration. The three-member TDP, comprising a chair-
 man appointed by the judiciary, a labor representative, and a business representa-
 tive, is independent and neutral.
 The law protects workers against antiunion activity, and there are no areas where
 union activity is officially discouraged. There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 labor, including forced and bonded labor by children, and, except as part of a court
 sentence or order, this prohibition is observed.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The law
 forbids child labor by children under the age of 12, except light agriculture or do-
 mestic work performed in the company of parents. Children under age 15 are barred
 from work in industry or on ships; those under age 18 may not work underground
 or in mines. The Labor Division of the Ministry of Commerce, Trade, and Industry
 is responsible for enforcing child labor laws. Given low wages and high unemploy-
 ment, there is little incentive to employ child labor.
 Forced and bonded labor by children is constitutionally prohibited and is not
 known to occur (see Section 6.c.).
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The minimum wage rate is $0.31 per hour
 (1.50 Solomon Islands dollars) for all workers except those in the fishing and agri-
 cultural sectors, who receive $0.25 (1.25 Solomon Islands dollars). The legal mini-
 mum wage is not sufficient to support an urban family living entirely on the cash
 economy. However, most families are not dependent solely on wages for their liveli-
 hoods.
 The Labor Act of 1969, as amended, and the Employment Act of 1981, as well
 as other laws, regulate premium pay, sick leave, the right to paid vacations, and
 other conditions of service. The standard workweek is 45 hours and is limited to
 6 days per week. There are provisions for premium pay for overtime and holiday
 work and for maternity leave.
 Both an active labor movement and an independent judiciary ensure widespread
 enforcement of labor laws in major state and private enterprises. The Commissioner
 of Labor, the Public Prosecutor, and the police are responsible for enforcing labor
 laws. However,, they usually react to complaints rather than routinely monitoring
 adherence to the law. The extent to which the law is enforced in smaller establish-
 ments and in the subsistence sector is unclear. Safety and health laws appear to
 be adequate. Malaria is endemic in the country and affects the health of many em-
 ployees. Agricultural workers have a high risk of contracting malaria.
