 SOLOMON ISLANDS
 Solomon Islands is one of the largest of the Pacific Island
 states. Its 234,000 people have been governed, since the
 country attained independence from Great Britain in 1978, by a
 Westminster-style democracy. There are two major political
 parties and a large independent group in the parliament;
 deputies are free to criticize government actions and
 intitatives, and do so. Since 1978 Solomon Islands has had two
 governments; the first fell on a parliamentary vote of no
 confidence, the second is still in power. The change was
 accomplished calmly and in conformity with the Constitution.
 Solomon Islands is a developing country which depends primarily
 on agricultural exports and external aid for its income. The
 country's mineral resources have not been adequately surveyed,
 although bauxite deposits have been identified, and small gold
 deposits are worked. Fishing is a rich resource, one the
 Solomons Government plans to develop as soon as it can.
 The Solomons Government has endeavored to develop the nation's
 economy; its efforts have been stymied, to some extent, by the
 world economic crisis -- in particular the low price of copra
 and the high cost of imported petroleum. The economy is one of
 free enterprise, and foreign investment is welcomed.
 Solomon Islands is a conservative, overwhelmingly rural,
 traditional Melanesian society. The family is the principal
 social unit, and its hold over members remains strong.
 Christianity, the religion of nearly all Solomon Islanders,
 also exerts great influence on the society. These factors,
 added to a colonial legal legacy of respect for individual
 rights, contribute to the excellent record Solomon Islands has
 established in its respect for human rights. There have been
 no significant human rights violations in the country since
 independence, nor have there been any changes in Solomons'
 observance of human rights over the past year.
 1. Respect for the integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a.   Killing
 Politically-motivated murder is unknown in the Solomon Islands.
 b.   Disappearance
 Forced disappearance of persons does not occur in the Solomons.
 c.   Torture
 Torture is forbidden by the Constitution and is not practiced.
 d.   Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 Inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment is illegal and is
 not practiced. Treatment of prisoners is fair and humane and
 conditions of imprisonment are satisfactory to Solomon Islands
 citizens.
 e.   Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Arrests are made in accordance with the Constitution and the
 law, and police must advise any person detained of the reasons
 for his arrest. There are no political prisoners in the
 
 15-480 0 - 83 - 52
 
 
 808
 Solomon Islands. Habeas corpus is a principle of law; coerced
 statements are not admissible in the courts, and civil rights
 violations are punishable by fines or by jail sentences.
 f.   Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a fair hearing and trial is guaranteed by law and
 is honored in practice. Defendants are entitled to counsel and
 may consult with counsel freely and in private. The
 Constitution provides for a public solicitor whose function is
 to provide legal aid, advice, and help to the public.
 Defendants are advised of the charges against them, and their
 lawyers can inform themselves of the evidence on which charges
 are based. The Solomon Islands court system is independent of
 executive and military control. There are no special courts to
 deal with security or political defenses. The high court has a
 wide review authority over the lower courts. An ombudsman
 investigates complaints against the Government.
 g.   Invasion of the Home
 Rights of privacy and property are guaranteed in the
 Constitution, and are respected in practice. A warrant signed
 by a magistrate is required to search private premises.
 2. Respect for Civil and Political Rights, Including:
 a.   Freedom of Speech and Press
 Free speech is guaranteed by the Constitution and observed in
 practice. A free press exists, with both privately-owned and
 government newspapers; there is no censorship. Only one radio
 station is in operation, which is government-owned, but radio
 broadcasts from New Guinea can be heard in the northern islands
 and shortwave radios are common, at least in the urban areas.
 b.   Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of association and assembly are guaranteed by the
 Constitution, and the right to form trade unions and political
 parties is protected by law. Unions in the private sector have
 the right to strike; the civil service is unionized but may not
 strike. Union members do not, as is the case with most
 predominantly agricultural societies, make up a large portion
 of the labor force. The country's largest trade union is the
 Solomon Islands National Union of Workers; it and other smaller
 unions may, and do, freely organize workers.
 c.   Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is guaranteed by the Constitution and
 observed in practice.
 d.   Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no restrictions on freedom of movement within, into,
 or out of the Solomon Islands. Any citizen may obtain a
 passport for a reasonable fee.
 e.   Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 There is universal adult suffrage for citizens 18 and older.
 Any citizen 21 and above may run for a variety of elective
 offices. The Electoral Commission oversees registration and
 ensures fair elections. The European and Chinese minority
 populations are not discriminated against. Women have equal
 
 
 809
 legal rights, but for traditional, cultural reasons rarely run
 for office.
 3. Government Attitude Regarding International and Non-
 governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations of
 Human Rights
 There have been no allegations related to human rights against
 the Solomon Islands Government or any requests for
 investigations by outside organizations. Freedom House in 1982
 called the Solomon Islands 'Free.'
 4. Economc, Social, and Cultural Situation
 The Solomon Islands economy grew at an average of eight percent
 per annum in the 1970's; it suffered a sharp turndown in 1.980
 and has not yet recovered its former buoyancy. The country's
 economy is heavily dependent on commodities, especially copra,
 which currently command exceptionally low prices. This
 situation has caused the Government to tighten its budget and
 has reduced the monies available for economic and social
 infrastructure. Foreign economic assistance continue, to
 support much of the Government's development programs.
 Health, education, and other social services are available on a
 non-discriminatory basis. Although Solomon Islands is one of
 the poorest of South Pacific states, with a per capita income
 of $470 a year in 1980, the GNP per capita has tripled since
 1960 and has done so despite a population growth rate of 3.4
 percent per year (1970-79). There is an adequate supply of
 food. The infant mortality rate is 52.4 per 1,000 live births,
 but has fallen over the last decade. In 1970, 95 percent of
 the urban population and 24 percent of the rural population had
 access to safe water. The adult literacy rate in 1980 was
 estimated at 60 percent; the percentage of primary school-age
 children enrolled rose from 61 in 1960 to 73 in 1970.
 
 
 810
