Sierra Leone
The human rights situation has vastly improved since Sierra Leone’s
devastating civil war was officially declared over in January 2002.
However, implementation of the rule of law remains weak and questions
remain about the government’s willingness to guarantee economic,
social, and cultural rights. The mismanagement and corruption of public
funds, coupled with high unemployment among young adults, a
drastic increase in basic commodity prices, and continued insecurity
within the sub-region, render Sierra Leone vulnerable to future instability.
Sierra Leone’s civil war was characterized by egregious human rights
abuses on all sides but especially by rebel forces. A confluence of factors
helped end the war, including the deployment of a 17,000-member
United Nations peacekeeping force known as UNAMSIL, a U.N. arms
embargo against neighboring Liberia, and the commitment of British
troops to stop a rebel advance against the capital, Freetown, in 2000.
Despite the disarmament of some 47,000 combatants, and the successful
completion of presidential and parliamentary elections in 2002 and local
elections in 2004, the deep rooted issues that gave rise to the conflict—
endemic corruption, weak rule of law, crushing poverty, and the
inequitable distribution of the country’s vast natural resources—remain
largely unaddressed by the government.
Significant progress has been made, however, in achieving accountability
for war crimes committed during the decade-long war and some
hopeful developments that may build respect for human rights. During
2004 the Special Court for Sierra Leone commenced its first trials, the
Truth and Reconciliation Commission submitted its report to the
government, and the Parliament passed an act establishing the National
Human Rights Commission of Sierra Leone. Nevertheless, the draw-down and eventual complete withdrawal of
UNAMSIL peacekeepers set for June 2005 and continuing insecurity in
neighboring Liberia, Guinea, and Cote d’Ivoire give cause for concern.
During 2004, the military strength of UNAMSIL was reduced from
11,500 to fewer than 5,000 troops. Given continuing concerns about
the extent to which the Sierra Leone police and army can ensure the
security of the country and will uphold the rule of law, a residual force
of some 3,250 UNAMSIL military personnel will remain in Sierra
Leone until at least June 2005.
Accountability for Past Abuses
The U.N.-mandated Special Court for Sierra Leone (SCSL), established
to bring to justice persons “who bear the greatest responsibility”
for atrocities during the war, has so far indicted thirteen individuals,
including former Liberian president Charles Taylor and former Sierra
Leone government minister Hinga Norman. The first trials commenced
in June 2004. The first of two chambers is currently holding
two trials – of the Civil Defense Forces (CDF) and Revolutionary
United Front (RUF) – on a rotating basis. A delay in the establishment
of the planned second trial chamber threatens to seriously undermine
the court’s capacity to complete operations efficiently.
Since starting operations in 2002, the SCSL has made significant
progress, including indicting suspects from all warring factions; charging
all indictees with child soldier recruitment and most indictees with
gender based crimes; establishing a defense unit to ensure protection of
the rights of the accused; issuing precedent-setting decisions on international
jurisprudence; conducting outreach to the local population; and
employing Sierra Leoneans to work in every organ of the Special Court.
However, several concerns remain about the SCSL operations. These
include insufficient resources for the witness protection unit, outreach
section, chambers and defense office; that the existing indictments reflect an inappropriately narrow interpretation of the court’s mandate,
such that several particularly brutal regional or mid-level commanders
have not been indicted; and that Nigeria has so far failed to surrender
Charles Taylor to the SCSL. Taylor, indicted by the SCSL on seventeen
counts of crimes against humanity and other serious violations of international
humanitarian law, was in August 2004 offered a safe haven by
the Nigerian government when rebels threatened to take the Liberian
capital Monrovia. The international community, most notably the
United Nations Security Council, has failed to exert sufficient pressure
to ensure that Taylor is surrendered to the court.
In October 2004, the Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC),
created in 2002 in accordance with the terms of the 1999 Lomé peace
accord, released its final report. The TRC was tasked with establishing
an impartial historical record of the conflict, promoting reconciliation,
and making recommendations to prevent a repetition of the violence.
The operation of the TRC was plagued with management and funding
problems, however, the public hearings were well attended and the final
report contains some significant findings and recommendations. The
TRC faulted years of bad governance, endemic corruption, and the
denial of basic human rights as having created the conditions that made
conflict inevitable, and noted that many of the causes of conflict have
yet to be adequately addressed. The recommendations were aimed at
promoting good governance and providing for the wars’ most vulnerable
victims. They included the strengthening of the judiciary, abolition
of the death penalty, that senior public officials disclose their financial
interests, and that special funds be set up to care for children, amputees,
and women victims. The TRC also called on Liberia and Libya, which
supported the RUF and AFRC, to make symbolic and financial contributions
to a war victims’ fund. 
Corruption
Corruption and mismanagement within both the public and private sectors
in Sierra Leone remain endemic. The government Anti-Corruption
Commission (ACC), created in 2000 largely due to pressure from international
donors, has been subject to political interference, with few convictions
for corruption-related offenses. The ACC has the power to
investigate allegations of corruption within the public and private sectors.
Once investigations are complete, the Attorney General, who has,
in the past, been subject to political pressure, determines whether there
are grounds for prosecution. Since October 2003, three judges from
Commonwealth countries have been attached to the Sierra Leone High
court to hear cases referred by the ACC. However, the planned
appointment of a Commonwealth-provided prosecutor has yet to materialize
and is undermining the independence and success of the ACC.
Dysfunctional Judicial System
Efforts to refurbish numerous court buildings destroyed during the war
have helped improve court infrastructure, and by the end of 2004 magistrates’
courts were functioning in all of Sierra Leone’s fourteen
provinces. However, insufficient numbers of judges, magistrates, public
defenders, and prosecutors continue to result in huge back-logs, and
those charged with criminal offenses spend months and in some cases
years in pretrial detention. Low salaries paid to magistrates and judges
make them susceptible to corruption. At years end, there were over 80
former rebel combatants held since their arrest in 2000 under a nowrepealed
Emergency Powers Act, without regard for due process rights.
At least 15 individuals, including two women, were on death row following
convictions for felonies, however, no executions were carried
out.
The system of local courts presided over by traditional leaders or their
officials and applying customary law is the only form of legal system accessible to an estimated 70 percent of the population. Customary law
applied by the local courts is often discriminatory, particularly against
women, and the local courts frequently abuse their powers by illegally
detaining persons and charging excessively high fines for minor
offences, as well as adjudicating criminal cases which should by law be
tried in the higher courts.
Sierra Leone Army and Police
The Sierra Leone Army and Sierra Leone Police have over the years
been the source of considerable instability, corruption, and human
rights violations and have enjoyed near-complete immunity from prosecution.
Efforts by the British-led International Military Advisory and
Training Team (IMATT), which since 1999 has endeavored to reform,
restructure, and rehabilitate the army, have led to considerable improvement
in the professionalism of the force. However, shortages in equipment,
vehicles, and communications equipment undermine their operations,
particularly along the volatile and isolated borders with Liberia
and Guinea. In 2004, few reports were made of abuses, extortion, or
indiscipline by the army.
While there have been improvements in the conduct of the police, and
at year’s end the government had successfully re-established a police
presence in all provincial and major towns in Sierra Leone, reports of
extortion, bribe-taking, and unprofessional conduct remain common.
The Commonwealth Police Development Task Force (CPDTF) has
since 1998 been responsible for restructuring and retraining the police.
Low salaries, lack of training capacity, and inadequate resources remain
key challenges.
Key International Actors
The international and donor community has since 1999 spent billions
of dollars to bring about peace and stability in and facilitate the postwar reconstruction of Sierra Leone. Although this level of commitment
is welcome, it has not always been accompanied by willingness to use
the leverage such a high dependency on aid gives to put pressure on the
Sierra Leone government to address the conditions giving rise to continued
human rights abuses.
The United Kingdom and United States have taken the lead in rebuilding
Sierra Leone’s infrastructure and institutions. The U.K. has for the
last several years spent some U.S.$60 million per year on rebuilding and
restructuring the army, police and judiciary. The U.S. spent some U.S.
$45 million on reconstruction, the reintegration of former combatants,
and improving the control and management of the diamond sector.