 SIERRA LEONE
 Under its 1978 constitution, Sierra Leone was a one-party state
 with a dominant President and a unicameral Parliament which in
 practice was largely advisory. President (General) Joseph
 Momoh and the All People's Congress Party (APC) continued in
 power in 1991. However, responding to growing public pressures
 for political reform, including within the APC, the President
 signed into law on September 24 a new Constitution which calls
 for multiple parties and strengthened legislative and judicial
 branches of government. Adoption of the new Constitution had
 been preceded by lengthy deliberations of the National
 Constitutional Review Commission, a constitutional referendum
 in August, and the formation on September 23 of an interim
 Government under the President until the modalities for-
 eventual free elections could be negotiated. The new
 Constitution provided for the legalization of other political
 parties, effective October 1. By the end of the year, seven
 political parties had been formed.
 The security structure includes the Republic of Sierra Leone
 Military Forces (RSLMF), which during 1991 doubled in size to
 approximately 7,000 men. It is responsible for dealing with
 external threats and civil disturbances in the country. The
 RSLMF was preoccupied with countering the occupation of
 portions of Sierra Leone territory by Charles Taylor and his
 National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL). While official
 information was sparse, unconfirmed reports indicated there
 were a number of armed actions in 1991 in which both sides
 committed human rights abuses, including summary executions.
 Over 70 percent of the 3.9. million population is involved in
 some aspect of agriculture, mainly subsistence farming. Sierra
 Leone is rich in minerals, including titanium-bearing rutile,
 gold, and diamonds, the export of which generates most of the
 -country's foreign exchange. The economic reform program, with
 its imposed austerity, continued to generate public criticism.
 At over 10G percent per year, Sierra Leone's inflation rate is
 a very serious problem which the Government has had only
 limited success in controlling.
 The human rights situation improved in 1991 with the adoption
 of a new Constitution providing for a number of basic rights
 and the promise of a democratic political system, including a
 strengthened Parliament and more independent judicial system.
 There were increases in freedoms of speech and press and,
 potentially, for assembly and association as political parties
 began to form in late 1991. However, at the end of the year
 there had been little real change in the government/one-party
 dominance, and the extent of abuses arising out of the military
 actions in the southeast could not be determined. Major human
 rights abuses included extrajudicial killings, torture.
 mistreatment of criminal detainees, life-threatening prison
 conditions, lack of fair trials, and de facto discrimination
 against women. The NPFL incursion into Sierra Leone has
 seriously disrupted Sierra Leonean society and may have an
 adverse impact on democratization. Military attitudes toward
 the political reform movement remained unknown at the end of
 1991.
 
 
 337
 SIERRA LEONE
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no known cases of political killing. (See Section
 l.g. for reports of civilians summarily killed by the RSLMF and
 the NPFL, a dissident Liberian occupation force.)
 b. Disappearance
 There were unconfirmed reports of the disappearances of
 captured suspected NPFL rebels from Sierra Leone prisons.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Tnhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Although the Constitution prohibits torture, reports continued
 of police mistreatment of suspects during arrest and
 interrogation. There were no known cases of responsible
 officials being punished by the Government. (See Section 1.g.
 for reports of mistreatment of civilians by the RSLMF and the
 NPFL.)
 Prison conditions did not improve in 1991. Pademba Road Prison
 in Freetown, which was built to accommodate several hundred
 prisoners, now has an inmate population of over 1,000. Much of
 this increase was a result of the invasion by the NPFL and the
 continued war in the eastern border region. Deaths in prison
 are common due to malnutrition and inadequate medical
 supplies. -The Government recognized the need for prison reform
 and in August replaced its Director of Prisons, but it remained
 unclear.at year's end what reforms, if any, would be put in
 place by the new interim Government. The 1989 report of a
 presidential commission to investigate prison conditions has
 never been made public.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The 1991 Constitution reduced the period of permissible
 detention without charge to allow investigation of criminal
 complaints from'28 days to a maximum of 10 days for cases of
 capital offenses, offenses carrying life imprisonment, or
 economic or environmental offenses. Other offenses carry a
 maximum detention period of 72 hours. The new Constitution has
 not been in effect long enough to determine whether past police
 practices will be significantly altered. Detainees are
 guaranteed access to legal counsel, families, and medical care,
 but authorities do not always respect these guarantees unless
 detainees demand compliance and have the means to afford
 counsel.
 The Government provides legal representation for the indigent
 only in the case of capital offenses. Lack of counsel in other
 cases frequently leads to abuse. Many indigent detainees are
 ignorant of their rights and assume, sometimes correctly, that
 law enforcement or judicial authorities will be paid to rule
 against them by the accuser. The Society for the Protection of
 Human Rights provides pro bono legal counsel to some indigent
 detainees; in at least six cases, attorneys were able to secure
 the release of detainees on grounds of false imprisonment
 stemming from lack of initial legal representation.
 
 
 338
 SIERRA LEONE
 Police and security agencies may recommend to the President
 that a person be detained indefinitely on suspicion of
 threatening the national security. During a state of
 emergency, the President may also invoke the Public Emergency
 Act, which permits indefinite detention and suspends the right
 to a hearing unless the detainee is charged with a capital
 offense. This Act has never been invoked.
 There are reports that the Government holds up to 150 security
 detainees. These include both Sierra Leoneans and Liberians
 suspected of supporting the NPFL/rebel invasion of Sierra
 Leone. In May 1991, the ICRC visited 113 persons detained in
 connection with the NPFL/rebel invasion of Sierra Leone. The
 ICRC requested permission for followup visits but has not yet
 received it.
 Former Liberian Senator Kerkura Kpoto was held for 7 months on
 charges of involvement in the incursion and released on October
 30, 1991. When he was released, Senator Kpoto said that he had
 not been mistreated.
 There were reports of foreign nationals being held and
 mistreated by security forces which suspected them of being
 foreign mercenaries.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 While the Constitution provides for fair and public trial,
 there are often long delays in bringing cases to trial, and the
 judiciary is subject to political influence and manipulation.
 Sierra Leone has two judicial systems: the regular court
 system and the local or traditional court system. The regular
 court system consists of the Supreme Court, an intermediate
 Court of Appeals, a High Court of Magistrates, and magistrates'
 courts. Defendants are allowed counsel of their choice, but
 many persons cannot afford legal representation. Decisions by
 lower courts may be appealed. Indigenous ethnic leaders
 preside over the local courts and administer tribal law, e.g.,
 in many family matters. The local courts are often the only
 legal institution in rural areas.
 The 1991 Constitution includes provisions designed to
 strengthen the judiciary's independence, such as the removal of
 judges only through impeachment, including a two-thirds vote of
 Parliament, and mandatory retirement at age 65. Long delays of
 up to 2 years in bringing cases to trial and lack of trained
 personnel serve to circumscribe judicial independence. Judges
 still take handwritten notes on court proceedings, which in
 itself can lead to inaccuracies in records and further delays
 in legal action.
 There were no known political prisoners being held at the end
 of 1991.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Constitution prohibits arbitrary invasion of the home, and
 the Government does not generally interfere with the rights of
 privacy and family. In security cases, however, authorities
 have the power to enter homes without a search warrant.
 
 
 339
 SIERRA LEONE
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian
 Law in Internal Conflicts
 On March 23, troops of the Natioial Patriotic Front of Liberia
 (NPFL) attacked two border posts in Sierra Leone, killing 14
 people. This was'just the first in a series of cross-border
 incursions by the NPFL. The ensuing conflict led to human
 rights abuses by both sides in the conflict.
 NPFL troops were responsible for the deaths of many civilians;
 however, the number of deaths cannot be reasonably estimated.
 There are numerous credible reports of atrocities committed by
 NPFL troops. In Pendembu, for instance, there were reports
 that civilians were burned alive or killed for failing to
 answer questions correctly. In one case, a Catholic
 parishioner was killed for ringing the church bell.
 In reprisal, government troops took action against the
 intruders and those suspected of aiding them. Following the
 NPFL seizure of Pendembu, RSLMF troops arrested an unknown
 number of alleged NPFL supporters. Credible eyewitnesses
 reported that some of those being held were then executed.
 Newspaper reports indicated-that rebel captives were being
 mistreated and showed pictures of them being paraded naked.
 Outside observers also expressed concern for the civilian
 population in the war zone, especially after the Sierra Leone
 Government declared that anyone remaining in cleared rebel
 areas along the border would be considered a rebel.
 Section 2 Respect foi Civil Liberties, Including:
 a.- Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech is legally guaranteed, but the Government may
 abridge freedom'bf expression under the Constitution if it
 deems national security to be endangered. 'In practice, the
 Government generally tolerates public criticism by citizens and
 academics. In various 1991 forums, there was discussion of the
 need for multiparty democracy'and the'Government's record on
 human rights. In particular, there was much discussion of new
 political parties, and future party-leaders began
 organizational steps even before parties were legalized on
 October 1.  .
 There are at least 12-active newspapers, of which only 2 are
 considered to be government controlled. Most journalists
 practice self-censorship; in particular, they avoid criticizing
 the President himself but do criticize some of his policies.
 Journalist Franklin Bunting Davis was sued for libel and
 arrested. *He was released upon posting bond, and the case
 continues in the courts.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The new Constitution provides for freedom of assembly and
 guarantees the right to form'economic, social, and professional
 organizations. Until the hew Constitution took effect on
 October 1, these rights were limited in practice to APC
 organizations. By the end of 1991, seven political parties had
 been formed. Demonstrations are generally not permitted but,
 in the case of unauthorized demonstrations, police normally do
 not intervene unless violence occurs.
 
 
 340
 SIERRA LEONE
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is guaranteed by the Constitution, and
 religious tolerance is practiced in Sierra Leone. Muslims, the
 largest religious group, Christians, animists, and adherents of
 other faiths practice their beliefs freely, and they can
 publish and distribute religious materials without government
 interference. A wide cross-section of Sierra Leoneans
 participated in the annual hajj (Muslim pilgrimage to Mecca).
 The Government partially subsidizes participation in the hajj.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no restrictions on freedom of movement within the
 country, foreign travel, or emigration and repatriation.
 Repatriates are not discriminated against by the Government.
 Sierra Leone, a party to the U.N. Convention and Protocol
 Relating to the Status of Refugees, hosts approximately 10,000
 Liberian refugees. Sierra Leoneans displaced by the NPFL rebel
 incursion totaled 236,000 at the end of the year. These large
 numbers of refugees and displaced persons have placed a serious
 strain on the national economy. The Government is assisted by
 the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in providing
 relief aid to 7,250 refugees in one large camp near Freetown.
 Refugees are not forced by the Government to return to
 countries in which they have a fear of persecution.
 Nevertheless, many persons have fled the country due either to
 fighting along the Sierra Leone-Liberia border or out of fear
 of being considered by the Government or civilians as NPFL
 sympathizers. Of the estimated 125,000 Liberians who had found
 refuge in Sierra Leone in early 1991, all but 10,000 have fled
 to Guinea or returned to Liberia.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights* The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Under the new Constitution, citizens are promised the right to
 change their government through direct elections of the
 President and Members of Parliament by secret ballot. This
 right had not been tested in 1991, and President Momoh and the
 APC were still firmly in charge. The Government committed
 itself to early free elections which foreign observers may be
 invited to monitor, but no dates had been set by the end of the
 year. Continued fighting against the NPFL incursion could also
 jeopardize the timing of these elections.
 In theory, the unicameral House of Representatives, now
 controlled by the APC, will have increased powers vis-a-vis the
 executive, e.g., approval of certain appointed officials and a
 limited veto power. The President will be limited to only two
 terms of office.
 A traditional system of local government operates in the
 provinces. Paramount Chiefs are elected for life by the
 members of the local chiefdom councils. Several women have
 been elected Paramount Chief. They wield considerable
 authority in local issues. There are no special conditions or
 restrictions that significantly limit any elements of the
 population from playing a fair role in the system. The
 President has announced his suppqrt for election of town and
 city councils to replace appointed-councils.
 
 
 341,
 SIERRA LEONE.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation-of Alleged Violations
 --of Human Rights
 The Sierra Leone Bar Association's Society for-the Preservation
 of Human Rights (ASPHR) monitors human rights developments.
 The Government allows visits by-international human rights.,
 organizations, including-the International Committee of the Red
 Cross (see Section.l.d.).
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or-Social Status
 There  s no officially sanctioned discrimination on the basis
 of sex, religion, language, or.social status. There continue
 to be complaints of favoritism in political appointments and in
 military commissions and promotions, particularly members of
 President Momoh's:Limba ethnic group, who.hold many significant
 positions in the Government. Citizens.of non-African descent
 face political restrictions, e.g., citizens of Lebanese.origin-
 may hold Sierra Leonean passports but may not run for
 Parliament.                     .
 Women in'Sierra Leone are guaranteed-equal-rights by the-
 Constitution, and-women are represented in many occupations.
 However,.the-status-of women varies-widely in different parts
 of the country and depends heavily on the traditions of their
 ethnic group. These values affect the amount of-education
 women received. Women appear to have equal access-to
 education, but in fact, according to a recent -U.N. study.,
 females only receiveabout one-fourth as much schooling as
 males. Women in rural areas, in particular, are rarely
 encouraged to attend school. At the university level, men
 predominate.-
 Violence against iomen, especially wife beating,. is most common
 among the-more traditional elements of society. The police are
 unlikely to-intervene in domestic disputes exceptin cases of
 severe injury or death. Few cases of violence against women
 come to court. Neither the Government'nor the APC women's
 group has specifically addressed this issue. Female
 circumcision is legal and widely practiced, especially in
 traditional tribal groups. As the education of women
 increases, many families are not allowing their daughters to'
 undergo this operation which is tied to the women's secret
 society initiation rites. Shrouded in secrecy, these societies
 are a strong force in-women's lives. Tradition guards these
 rites and works against change.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a.. The Right of Association
 The right of association is provided for in the Constitution.
 Workers, including civil servants,- have the right to join trade
 unions of their choice. Unions are independent of the ruling
 All People's Congress. Individual labor unions have by custom
 joined the Sierra Leone Labor Congress (SLLC), and all unions
 are members of the SLLC. Membership is, however, voluntary.
 There is no legal prohibition against the SLLC leadership
 holding political office, and its president holds appointive
 office in Parliament. Under the Trade Union Act, any five
 persons-may form a trade-union by applying to the Registrar of
 Trade Unions, who has statutory powers under the Act to approve
 the creation of trade unions. Applications for approval by the
 
 
 342
 SIERRA LEONE
 Registrar may be rejected for several reasons including
 insufficient numbers of members, proposed representation in an
 industry already served by an existing union, or incomplete
 documentation. If the Registrar rejects an application, his
 decision may be appealed in the ordinary courts.
 Approximately 60 percent of the working population in urban
 areas, including government employees is unionized, but unions
 have been less successful in organizing workers in the
 agricultural and mining sector.
 Unions have the right to strike without exception. During
 1991, teachers, health care workers, and other civil servants
 staged strikes demanding immediate payment of salary arrears.
 In several instances the Government eventually paid overdue
 salaries.
 Unions are free to form federations and confederations and
 affiliate internationally, and there are no restrictions on
 international travel and contacts.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The legal framework for collective bargaining is the Regulation
 of Wages and Industrial Relations Act. Collective bargaining
 must take place in trade group negotiating councils. each of
 which is comprised of an equal number of employer and worker
 representatives. Most enterprises are covered by collective
 bargaining agreements on wages and working conditions. The
 SLLC provides assistance to unions in preparing for
 negotiations in which the Governmenp can intervene in case of a
 deadlock.
 The law prohibits any discrimination against union members.
 Complaints of discrimination against unions are made- to the
 Industrial Court for Arbitration. Individual trade unions
 investigate alleged violations of work conditions and ensure
 that employers take the necessary steps to correct abuses.
 There are no export processing zones in Sierra Leone-.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Under the Chiefdom's Council Act, compulsory labor may be
 imposed by individual chiefs requiring members of their
 villages to contribute to the improvement of common areas.
 There is no penalty for noncompliance. This practice,
 customary in Sierra Leone, exists only in the rural areas.
 The International Labor Organization's (ILO) Committee of
 Experts reiterated in 1991 its previous request to the
 Government to repeal or amend this provision of the Act, which
 contravenes ILO Convention 29 on Forced Labor. The Government
 did not take such action in 1991.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The minimum age for employment of children is officially 18
 years, but in practice there is no enforcement of this minimum
 age. There is no government entity specially charged with
 enforcement of existing minimum age standards. In rural areas,
 children at early ages work seasonally on subsistence family
 farms. Because the adult unemployment rate is as high as 60
 percent, there are few children involved in the industrial
 sector. Children often engage in street trading. Young Sierra
 
 
 343
 SIERRA LEONE
 Leonean children are reportedly hired by foreign employers to
 work overseas, primarily as domestics, in appalling conditions
 for extremely low wages. There has been no systematic
 collection of information to document the extent of the
 problem. The-Government, however, has ordered the compilation
 of a list of-all children employed by Lebanese nationals,
 believed-to be the primary recruiters of the children, and is
 reportedly considering raising the minimum employment age to 21.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 There is.no legislated minimum wage. Workers' purchasing power
 has declined dramatically-in recent months,-and most workers
 have tQ pool-incomes with their-extended families and engage in
 subsistence food production in order to maintain a minimum
 standard of living.
 The standard legal workweek is 38 hours (8 hours on Monday
 through Thursday and 6 hours on Friday).
 Within the Ministry of Labor, there is an inactive Health and
 Safety Division. Health'and safety regulations are included in
 collective-bargaining agreements negotiated by the trade
 unions, but there is no evidence of systematic enforcement of
 these safety standards. Trade unions provide the only
 protection for workers who file'complaints about working
 conditions. Initially,-the unions make a formal complaint
 about a-hazardous work- condition.  If this is rejected, the
 unions can issue a 21-day strike notice.
 
 
 44
