 SIERRA LEONE
 After gaining independence from Britain in 1961, Sierra Leone
 was a multi-party parliamentary democracy with an independent
 judiciary. In June 1978, a new constitution was approved by
 national referendum which established a one-party government
 under the All Peoples' Congress. Other parties challenged
 the legitimacy of the referendum but eventually acquiesced and
 joined the Congress. The Constitution also extended the term of
 President Siaka Probyn Stevens for an additional seven years.
 President Stevens first assumed executive power in 1968. A year
 earlier, after his party had apparently won a narrow victory in
 multi-party elections, a military coup prevented Dr. Stevens
 from forming a government. A subsequent coup the next year
 restored civilian rule and brought Stevens to power. In 1978,
 the Constitution was changed to provide for strong single-party
 leadership of the Government.
 The President is the predominant executive authority in the
 country. A Cabinet, selected by the President from elected
 members of Parliament, meets with the President regularly and
 has substantial influence on decisionmaking. A unicameral
 parliament takes its direction from the executive. The first
 elections for the one-party Parliament were held in 1982. There
 were contested elections in about two-thirds of the constituen-.
 cies. Electoral results were challenged by losers in about 21
 contests. In the first 12 cases decided, the courts overturned
 eight results, including the victory of one cabinet minister.
 The other cases are still pending.
 The judiciary generally maintains its independence from the
 executive and has been reasonably effective in protecting basic
 legal rights. However, there are allegations that some court
 officials are increasingly subject to political manipulation
 and influence by bribes.
 The year 1983 was marked by a diminution of press freedom.
 The Government in July finally implemented the Newspaper Act
 of 1980. The Act requires that newspapers apply to the
 Minister of Information and Broadcasting for a certificate
 of registration that must be renewed annually. A newspaper
 advisory committee appointed by the Government reviewed
 the professional and educational qualifications and practical
 experience of the editors of applying newspapers. Seven
 newspapers were approved by the committee. Six small
 independent newspapers which appear with varying degrees ot
 regularity were thereby effectively proscribed.
 The Constitution recognizes the right of private property
 for Sierra Leone citizens, and most of the modern sector of
 the economy is in private hands. There is also government
 ownership, or partial ownership, in parts of certain key
 sectors, particularly mining and transportation. In addition,
 the Government attempts to control wholesale and retail
 prices, allocate foreign exchange, and set agricultural
 producer prices.
 Sierra Leone is considered by the United Nations to be among
 the world's least developed countries and its economy has
 been declining for the past decade.
 
 (308)
 
 
 309
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS:
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Unlawful or Arbitrary Deprivation of Life
 There were a few killings during the 1982 parliamentary elec-
 tions and some violence in limited areas continued into 1983.
 It is not possible to determine how many killings occurred and
 which were criminally rather than politically motivated, but
 one Cabinet minister was publicly criticized as responsible
 for post election violence.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of abduction of individuals by the
 Government or hostage taking by non-governmental groups.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 There have been no reports of torture or of cruel, inhuman,
 or degrading treatment or punishment.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Habeas corpus is part of Sierra Leone common law and is
 observed in practice. Under the Constitution of 1978, the
 President may take measures to detain any person who is, or
 is reasonably suspected to be, "dangerous to the well-being
 of the Republic." Writs of habeas corpus granted by the court
 during such an emergency would not extend to applicants
 detained pursuant to an order under the Public Emergency
 Act. A state of emergency must come into force within 28
 days after the detention, or a detainee not charged with an
 oftense must be released. There is no one currently being
 detained under public emergency regulations. A state of
 emergency last existed in Sierra Leone from September 1981
 to early 1982. It was declared in response to a national
 strike called by the Sierra Leone Labour Congress. Approxi-
 mately 180 persons, including trade union leaders and
 journalists, were detained for up to one month. In 1983, on
 three occasions journalists were detained for a few days.
 The editor of the newspaper Progress was detained for printing
 a story which libeled the Liberian Head of State. The brief
 jailing of the offending journalist was seen as a way of
 expressing regret to the Liberians and defusing tensions.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The judiciary has maintained its independence from the
 Government, although some critics charge that the legal
 system is increasingly subject to political manipulation,
 often before cases reach the courts. The Constitution
 gives tne President power to remove judges after age 55--
 a provision which has not to date been invoked. All persons
 charged with a criminal offense are entitled to an arraignment
 within 48 hours, but the period is often longer. The time
 from arraignment to trial often ranges from 6 to 12 months
 due to overcrowded dockets and understaffing.
 
 
 310
 Sierra Leone's courts have a reputation for providing fair,
 public trials. Defendants are allowed counsel of their
 choice, and convictions may be appealed. However, many poor
 defendants cannot afford counsel, and public defense is
 provided only in cases of capital offenses. Persons detained
 under the Public Emergency Act are not guaranteed a hearing
 (unless charged with a criminal offense).
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Legal safeguards against arbitrary invasion of the home are
 observed. Rights of the individual and family are not abused
 by the state. Censorship of mail and electronic eavesdropping
 on private conversations through bugging or wiretaps have not been
 reported. However, some organizations believe that informers
 report to the Government on their activities.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech is legally guaranteed, but under the
 Constitution this freedom can be abridged it the proper
 functioning of the party is deemed in jeopardy. In practice,
 the Government tolerates public criticism by individual
 citizens, and academic freedom is unabridged. However,
 since 1978 no opposition party has been permitted. Most
 organized opposition groups are based in the United States
 and the United Kingdom. There have been no reports of
 opposition groups attempting to publicly criticize the party
 or the Government inside Sierra Leone. Sierra Leone's Special
 Security Detachment (SSD) has a reputation for intimidating
 suspected dissidents. The fear of reprisals by SSD and local
 police may inhibit individuals from criticizing the Government.
 Freedom of the press was dealt a setback in 1983. Implemen-
 tation of the Newspaper Act of 1980 reduced the number of
 independent newspapers--which appeared with varying degrees
 of regularity--from 13 to seven. The legislation's purported
 purpose is to prevent irresponsible journalism. Defenders
 of the law point to many instances of unprofessional journal-
 ism, including the publication of false rumors about the
 Liberian Head of State which led to a rise in tensions between
 Liberia and Sierra Leone. Proponents of the legislation point
 out that the law leaves the door open for other newspapers to
 be registered if their editors are found qualified by the
 committee and they pay the required registration fee equal to
 $800. Whatever the motivation behind the legislation, its
 unmistakable result has been to reduce the volume and variety
 of information provided to the public and limit criticism of
 the Government by the press.
 There is no formal censorship of books, or of domestic or foreign
 publications. However, foreign publications have been removed
 from public sale on very infrequent occasions.
 
 
 311
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Constitution guarantees the rights of freedom of assembly
 and to form or belong to trade unions or other economic, social,
 or professional associations. However, it places limits on
 these rights, most significantly where assembly or association
 would conflict with the 'proper functioning of the party* or
 the requirements of public order. In practice, freedom of
 association in the nonpolitical sphere is respected. Trade
 unions normally operate freely and exercise the right to
 organize, negotiate, and to strike against employers. However,
 .when a trade union activity publicly challenges government
 policy, the Government may curtail rights to assembly and
 association and jail union leaders. Approximately 180 union
 members were arrested when the Sierra Leone Labour Congress
 called for a national strike in 1981 to protest economic policy.
 Late in 1982, the congress was allowed to elect a new executive
 committee, and it is now functioning independently of the Govern-
 ment. Most major sectors of the Sierra Leone economy, except
 the largest one (agriculture) are unionized.
 Private associations of citizens can and do make representa-
 tions to the Government on policy issues and are not subject to
 reprisals. However, such presentations of grievances are
 not publicized.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 There is a tradition of religious tolerance in Sierra Leone.
 Muslims (the most numerous religious group), Christians,
 animists, and adherents of other faiths practice their religions
 freely without government interference. The state is non-
 sectarian and does not discriminate on the basis of religious
 belief.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel,
 Emigration, and Repatriation
 The major official restriction on travel within the country is
 in diamond mining areas and is intended to control smuggling.
 There are few regulations restricting foreign travel. A few
 Sierra Leoneans who oppose the one-party government are in
 self-imposed exile.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to
 Change Their Government
 President Stevens is the dominant authority in Sierra Leone.
 Since independence in 1961, the clear trend in political develop-
 ment has been the increase of the executive power and the less-
 ening of constitutional checks on that power. At present, the
 unicameral Parliament is clearly subservient to the executive
 branch of the Government. President Stevens' term of office was
 extended by the Constitution for an additional seven years.
 Moreover, the Constitution provides that the leader of the party
 will be the sole candidate for the office of president.
 Candidates for Parliament are chosen in each constituency by the
 party's local executive committee. The executive committee
 chooses three candidates from the list of citizens who sought
 nomination. The Central Committee of the party has the power to
 disapprove the' nomination of any candidate selected by the local
 
 30-231 0 - 84 - 21
 
 
 312
 executive committees if it believes the candidate would be
 inimical to the state. The decisions of the Central Committee
 on candidacies are final. There were no reports that candidates
 were rejected by the Central Committee in the 1982 elections.
 In practice, the legal procedure for choosing candidates may be
 supplemented by an informal vetting process in which the Presi-
 dent influences the selection of candidates. In the 1982 elec-
 tions, there were contests in about two-thirds of the constitu-
 encies. Court challenges by electoral losers were independently
 reviewed by the judiciary. In the first 12 cases arising out
 of the 1982 elections, eight election results were overturned,
 including the apparent victory of a Cabinet minister.
 Prior to 1978, under the multi-party system, sectional and ethnic
 considerations were a key factor in party affiliation and elec-
 tions contributed to ethnic tension. The one-party government
 has had some success in reducing these tensions. The Cabinet
 named by the President after the 1982 elections was ethnically
 balanced. The post-election appointment of a former leader of
 the opposition party to a key Cabinet post is also seen by some
 observers as a sign that progress in healing sectional and ethnic
 rifts is being made.
 In addition to the national political system, there is also
 a traditional system which operates in the provinces outside
 of the urban area. Paramount chiefs are elected for. life by
 the members of the chiefdom council. They have considerable
 authority in local affairs and in resolving traditional
 disputes.
 There is universal suffrage, and no groups are precluded from
 voting because of sex, tribal, racial, or religious
 factors.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitudes Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 sierra Leone has not received inquiries from international human
 rights organizations during the past two years. In 1981,
 Amnesty International asked the authorities for information
 about detainees. No response was given, but the issue became
 moot a few days later when the detainees were released. In
 August 1983, Parliament ratified the Organization of African
 Unity's African Charter on Human and Peoples Rights. Amnesty
 International did not have a report for Sierra Leone this year.
 Freedom House rates it 'partly free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Sierra Leone, a nation of 3.7 million with a per capita gross
 national product (GNP) of $318 a year (1981 figures), is clas-
 sified by the United Nations as among the world's least
 developed countries. Over the past decade, its population
 growth rate ot 2.7 percent per year has exceeded GNP growth.
 Life expectancy at birth is 47 years and the infant mortality
 rate is 205 per 1,000. There are large disparities between
 rural and urban areas in levels of income and access to
 education and health services. For example, 75 percent of
 the urban population nas access to safe water while only one
 percent of the rural population does. Sixty-five percent of
 the rural population falls below the absolute poverty level.
 
 
 318
 The disparities that exist, however, are not based upon tribal
 or religious discrimination. About 45 percent of young males
 are enrolled in primary schools as compared to 30 percent of
 young females (39 percent total). Adult literacy is estimated
 at 15 percent (1980).
 The living standard of most Sierra Leoneans have declined
 over the past ten years. While some of the factors contribut-
 ing to the decline, such as the gradual depletion of alluvial
 diamond deposits, rising fuel import bills, and (since the
 late 1970's) declining world prices for mineral and agricultural
 exports, are beyond the Government's control, other factors are
 not. Budget deficits, an overvalued currency, and low producer
 prices have resulted in high inflation and widespread smuggling.
 Very low rates of domestic savings and investment have left the
 country almost totally dependent upon external assistance for
 development efforts. Widespread corruption has distorted devel-
 opment priorities. The privileged can obtain luxury goods while,
 for most of the population, medicines, essential foodstuffs, and
 books are often in short supply. The Government has just
 reached agreement with the International Monetary Pund on a
 program that should correct some of the distortions in the
 economy.
 Women in Sierra Leone are guaranteed equal rights by the Consti-
 tution. In practice, however, the status of women varies sub-
 stantially in different parts of the country and depends upon
 culturai values of various tribal groups. In some areas women
 have been elected to the prestigious position of paramount
 chief, in other regions this would not happen. In the modern
 sector, women are prominent in the professions and one woman
 is a Supreme Court justice. The political sphere continues
 to be overwhelmingly male dominated.
 
 
 314
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: SIERRA LEONE
 1981     1982     1983
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         9.4      10.4     8.7
 LOANS ...... .......     ...  2.3     3.0      3.6
 GRANTS .............         7.1      7.4      5.1
 A.AID  ....  ..................  2.8     3.1      1.0
 LOANS ..............  ....  0.0     0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............         2.8      3.1      1.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...         0.0      0.0       0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......         4.2      4.4      4.9
 LOANS ..................   2.3      3.0      3.6
 GRANTS .............         1.9      1.4      1.3
 REPAY. IN I-LCANS...            2.3      3.0      3.6
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  Il-TOTAL .........        1.9      1.4      1.3
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.          0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....         1.9      1.4      1.3
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...          2.4      2.9      2.8
 LOANS ..................   0.0      0.0      0.'0
 GRANTS .............         2.4      2.9      2.8
 PEACE CORPS ......         2.4      2.9      2.8
 NARCOTICS ........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ............        0.0       0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         0.0       0.0      0.0
 LOANS .............   .... 0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.E.TRNG ....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........        0.0       0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. a MIL...         9.4      10.4      8.7
 LOANS ..................   2.3      3.0       3.6
 GRANTS .............         7.1      7.4      5.1
 OTHER US LOANS ..........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......         0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER ................      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1981     1982     1983     1946-83
 TOTAL.........    52.6       9.0     20.0    262.2
 I8RD               0.0      0.0      0.0      18.7
 IFC                0.0      0.0      0.0       2.1
 IDA               30.5      5.0      20.0     97.5
 IDB                0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0
 ADB                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 AFOB               17.3     0.0       0.0     36 4
 UNDP               4.8       2.6      0.0     24:7
 OTHER-UN           0.0       1.4      0.0      4.3
 EEC                0.0      0.0       0.0     78.5
 
 
