 SIERRA LEONE
 Sierra Leone is a republic governed by a military junta, the National Provisional
 Ruling Council (NPRC). The NPRC, which rules by decree, seized power in 1992 in
 a military coup which ousted then-President Joseph Momoh. Captain Valentine
 E.M. Strasser was chairman of the NPRC, Head of State, Commander-in-Chief of
 the Armed Forces, and Secretary of State for Defense throughout the year. He was
 deposed in a palace coup in January 1996. The 4-year civil war and the collapse
 of law and order have caused more than 14,000 deaths, including an estimated
 3,600 in 1995. The war has also forced an estimated 2.4 million persons, more than
 50 percent of the population, into exile in refugee camps or facilities for the inter-
 nally displaced.
 Under the NPRC, the 1991 Constitution remained in force but with the suspen-
 sion of some of its provisions. In June the NPRC lifted the 10-year ban on political
 parties, but at the same time issued a decree banning 57 individuals from political
 activity for a period of 10 years. Elections were planned for February 1996, and at
 year's end, the Government and the Interim National Election Commission were
 seekinginternational donor support to finance voter registration and elections.
 The Sierra Leone Military Forces (RSLMF), supported by Western Area Security
 Patrols and the regular police force, are responsible for both external and internal
 security. The RSLMF, supported by the Nigerian and Guinean armies and a private
 South African mercenary firm Executive Outcomes, continued active operations
 against rebel forces, known as the Revolutionary United Front (RUF), led by Foday
 Sankoh. The RUF claims to seek the overthrow of the NPRC. The Government has
 acknowledged that in addition to its operations against the RUF, it must also con-
 tend with renegade RSLMIF soldiers and some civilians.
 While the RSLMAF made significant progress in operations against the RUF, it
 sustained casualties in numerous blooay attacks on villages and vehicles in the
 Eastern and Southern provinces, and in some areas of the Northern province. Dur-
 ing the first half of the year, rebel forces unsuccessfully attacked villages on the out-
 skirts of Freetwn. In October the RSL2MF briefly retook Kailahun district in the
 east, but lost it in an RUJF counterattack after less than 2 weeks' occupation. There
 were reported human rights abuses by all parties to the internal conflict, including
 summary executions and torture. Some members of the police and military also com-
 mitted human rights abuses outside the war zone. A number of RSLMF personnel,
 including officers, were court-martialed for offenses ranging from theft to murder.
 Sierra Leone is a very poor country. Before the war, more than 70 percent of the
 4.5 million citizens were involved in some aspect of agriculture, mainly subsistence
 farming. Although the country is rich in minerals, including futile (titanium diox-
 ide), diamonds, gold, and bauxite, official receipts from legal exports of gold and dia-
 monds have decreased over recent years, and rutile and bauxite mining ceased at
 the beginning of the year due to rebel activity. Significant portions of the gold and
 diamonds are smuggled abroad. Although Government forces with the assistance of
 Executive Outcomes recaptured the rutile mine and the major diamond producing
 areas from rebel control by mid-year, Government revenues from the mineral sector
 were still far below preconf ict levels.
 
 
 230
 The Government's human rights record improved somewhat, although serious
 robemsare main in certain areas. Most abuses, including extrajudicial killings by
 rebel units, were committed chiefly, though _not exclusively, in the area
 of armed conflict. The NPRC lifted its ban on political parties but continued to
 maintain control over government, social affairs, and the judiciary. Authorities con-
 tinued to restrict freedoms of speech, press, assembly, and aasociation, but to a less-
 er degree than previously. There were reports of disappearances, and security forces
 abused suspects during arrest and interrogation. There were prolonged pretrial de-
 tentions and lengthy celays in trials. Citizens do not have the right to change their
 government. Discrimination and violence against women remain widespread, as
 does violence against children.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Both government forces and RUF
 rebels engaged in these abuses. Government forces often tortured and killed sus-
 pected rebels. There were reports that undisciplined military and other security per-
 sonnel killed civilians while engaged in looting, robbery, and extortion (see Section
 1.g.) The military court-martialed two soldiers for murder in connection with
 looting. It sentenced one to prison and dishonorable discharge from the army. The
 Head of State had not yet confirmed this sentence. At year's end, the court martial
 of the other was in progress. Another soldier was found guilty of killing a fellow
 soldier in a dru -related incident and sentenced to death. The Head of State had
 yet to confirm this sentence and she remains in custody. Their trials were still in
 progress at year's end.
 In January RUF rebels attacked the Northern town of Kambia, reportedly killing
 15 civilians, including the daughter of a local chief and a former policeman. In
 March rebels summarily executed 18 relatives of a senior NPRC official in the
 Southern province. In June an armed group of men attacked Port Loko, killing ap-
 proximately 100-150 people. In September and October, rebels in the Southern
 province near Bo reportedly barricaded villagers in their huts and burned them
 alive. The rebels also amputated the hands of several villagers and sent them to
 Bo with the message that this would now prevent them from voting (see Section
 l"V.Disappearance.-Reports continued of disappearances of captured persons who
 were suspected to be rebels. Senior NPRC and RSL.MF officials have stated publicly
 and privately that suspected rebels, both military and civilian, are to be brought to
 army headquarters for intelligence interrogation. During operations in the Southern
 province in September and October, the army captured more than 100 rebel combat-
 ants, incarcerating them at army headquarters in Freetown. Guinean authorities ar-
 rested four high ranking RUF officials in November and turned them over to the
 RSLMF. It held them at army headquarters at year's end.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Although the Constitution prohibits torture, the police and military mistreated sus-
 pects during arrest and interrogation. Authorities sometimes beat detainees or muti-
 lated them prior to incarceration or judicial proceedings. Military personnel engaged
 in combat operations sometimes physically abused civilians (see Section 1.g.). The
 Government occasionally punishedthem for such abuses.
 The Government worked to improve the diet and medical care in prisons through-
 out the year, but conditions at times remained life threatening. Detainee cells often
 lack beds or toilet facilities. Despite the authorities' attempts to relieve the situa-
 tion, overcrowding is the norm at Freetown's Pademba Road prison. In January the
 Government released 76 inmates from the Eastern province who were suspected of
 being rebels. The Attorney General's office conducted an ongoing review of deten-
 tions at Pademba Road, an overcrowded prison whose conditions are of particular
 concern because shortcomings in the legal system often result in prolonged pretrial
 detention there. Male and female inmates are imprisoned separately, but together
 with juveniles. Homosexual rape is common.
 The Government continued to grant the International Committee of the Red Cross
 (ICRC) access to prisoners, including alleged rebels.
 d. Arbitrary arrest, Detention, or Exile.-In practice, the Government does not pro-
 vide adeate safeguards against arbitrary or unjust detentions, nor for their formal
 review. By law, atr an initial 24-hour detention, detainees must have access to
 legal counsel, families, and medical care, but authorities rarely obey the law unless
 detainees can afford legal counsel to demand compliance. In July authorities de-
 tained a teacher's union official and a journalist for 10 days without charge; the
 union official for allegedly subversive speech at a press conference and the journalist
 
 
 for reporting it. The Government did not detain other journalists who reported the
 same speech.
 Police and military officials have additional detention authority. Under NPRC de-
 crees, higher-ranking police and military officials may arrest without warrant and
 detain indefinitely any person suspected of posing a threat to public safety. In prac-
 tice, soldiers do arrest or detain civilians without charge. The military authorities
 do not formally notify relatives, but they do generally respond to inquiries. Arrested
 foreigners are often released but may not depart the country.
 The Government provides legal representation for the indigent only in cases of
 capital offenses. Lack of counsel in other cases frequently leads to wrongful convic-
 tion. Many indigent detainees are ignorant of their rights and assume, sometimes
 correctly, that law enforcement or judicial authorities will be paid by the accuser
 to rule against them. The Society for the Protection of Human Rights provides free
 legal counsel to some indigent detainees, and some local nongovernmental organiza-
 tions (NGO's) provide counsel and advice to women concerning their rights.
 Nineteen of the 24 former Government officials who were placed under house ar-
 rest in 1994 for failing to repay funds the Government said they had embezzled
 while in office remained under house arrest. The rest were released from house ar-
 rest, but were among the 57 individuals banned from political activity for 10 years
 (see Section 2.b.).
 The Government did not use exile. However, some officials of the former regime
 chose to leave the country, while others remain abroad rather than return to face
 possible retribution. In July 1994, the NPRC Attorney General resigned and went
 into self-imposed exile in England to protest the Government's imposition of the
 death penalty.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The NPRC can effectively control the judiciary.
 There is strong evidence that favoritism piays a role in court decisions. The NPR
 like governments that preceded it, employed special commissions of inquiry to cir-
 cumvent the judiciary.
 There    othree judicial systems: regular ourts; local or traditional courts; and
 courts-martial. Courts-martial try only military cases. The regular court system is
 based on the British model and consists of a Supreme Court, an intermediate Court
 of Appeals, a High Court of Magistrates, and Magistrates' Courts. There are crimi-
 nal and civil courts. Decisions by lower courts may be appealed in the high courts.
 There are delays of up to 5 years in bringing some cases to trial.
 Judges in the regular court system may serve until they reach the mandato  re-
 tirement age of 65, unless their appointment is revoked prior to that time. There
 were no known instances of judges being fired or transferred for political reasons.
 Elected indigenous leaders preside over the local courts and administer tribal law
 in civil cases, for example, dealing with family and property matters. These local
 courts are on    e  only legal institutions in rural areas. Fighting in the Eastern
 and Southern provinces severely hampered the functioning of the local court system
 in those areas.
 The court-martial system, based on British military codes and common law, pro-
 vides for commander adjudication of minor offenses. Soldiers accused of more se-
 ous offenses are transferred from field units to Headquarters. A number of courts
 martial were convened against officers and enlisted personnel for looting, murder,
 and dereliction of duty. In 1994 a senior officer convicted of aiding the enemy was
 sentenced to death by the standing court martial. The sentence, which is subject to
 review by the Head of State, has not been carried out.
 Minimum due process rights are not always respected. Authorities sometimes beat
 detainees, and mutilate or otherwise punish them prior to incarceration or to a
 court hearing (see Section 1.c.). In addition, the regular court system accepts and
 sanctions provisions of tribal, traditional, and Islamic law which discriminate
 against women and minorities.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-A  -
 though the Constitution prohibits arbitrary invasion of the home, the authorities
 still have broad authority under NPRC decrees to monitor actions or conversations
 within homes, to prevent a person from acting in a manner deemed prejudicial to
 public safety, to impose restrictions on employment or business, to control associa-
 tion or communication with other persons, and to interfere with correspondence.
 In practice, there were numerous occasions of abusive treatment of ordinary citi-
 zens by ill-disciplined soldiers and police, both within and outside the war zone.
 These abuses included forced entry into homes, robberies, and assaults, some of
 which were fatal. A number of soldiers accused of looting were court-martialed. One
 lieutenant found guilty of looting was sentenced to 5 years' imprisonment. Sixteen
 soldiers arrested for an attempted robbery were detained and awaited court-marital
 at year's end (see Section 1.e.).
 
 
 232
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 fiicts.-There were serious violations of humanitarian law in the internal conflict
 throughout the war zone chiefly summary executions of prisoners and noncombat-
 ants, and torture and killing of civilians. RSLMF forces continued to engage RUF
 forces, which at the outset of the conflict were supported inpart by Charles Taylors
 National Patriotic Front for Liberia, but now are entirely Sierra Leonean. The
 RSLMF also fought bandits and groups of Sierra Leonean military deserters. The
 conflict involves multiple ethnic groups and has resulted in an estimated 14,000
 deaths since 1991. Also, an estimated 1.7 to 2.1 million Sierra Leoneans have been
 displaced internally or are living as refugees in neighboring countries because of the
 war. Guinean and Nigerian troops serve with the Sierra Leonean military.
 Government troops committed many abuses against suspected rebels and their
 noncombatant suporters, including summary executions of prisoners. The RSLMF
 engaged in public humiliation and torture of captives, including disfigurement, beat-
 ing, and parading captives naked, and sometimes displayed human skulls as tro-
 phies. In its air operations against RUF targets, the Government destroyed some
 villages and killed an undetermined number of civilians.
 The rebels also committed numerous abuses of international humanitarian law
 against civilians, RSLMF soldiers and their mercenary advisors. In a February at-
 tack, the military aide to the Head of State the expatriate commander of the merce-
 nary advisory group, and several other injividuals were killed by rebels in an am-
 bush. None of the bodies was ever recovered, and reports indicated later that they
 were mutilated and put on display in rebel-held areas.
 In March RUE rebels summarily executed 18 relatives of a senior NPRC official
 in the Southern province. In a June attack at Port Loko in which rebels killed ap-
 proximately 100 to 150 people, rebels used the bodies of slain villagers as barricades
 across the road entering the town. Among the rebels, most ethnic groups are rep-
 resented, but Mende and Kissy groups predominate. Attacks by armed men on vehi-
 cles along the main roads from Freetown, particularly the road to Bo in the south
 and Kenema in the Eastern province, severely restricted delivery of relief food and
 other supplies to displaced persons in areas outside Freetown. The Government did
 not formally authorize the ICRC to deliver food assistance to rebel-controlled areas,
 but did not prevent them from doing so.
 There appears to have been little ethnically motivated violence in the hostilities
 to date.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Although the Constitution provides for freedom
 of speech, the Government abridges freedom of expression if it deems national secu-
 rity to be endangered. Criticizing government leaders or offending the dignity of the
 state are criminal offenses. Although the military regime can severely restrict free-
 dom of speech, there was nonetheless some criticism of the Government in the press
 and in other forums (see Section 1.d.). The Government has not always attempted
 to halt these challenges, although the Government detained and questioned a jour-
 nalist who printed remarks from a press conference criticizing the Government for
 hiring South African mercenaries to fight the war, holding him for 10 days without
 charge (see Section 1.d.). A theater director reported that the inspector general of
 police refused to permit the staging of a production because the names of some char-
 acters were politically sensitive. Three other theater directors claimed that the po-
 lice demanded to see scripts of their productions before granting them performance
 permits. A seditious libel case brought by the Government against employees of a
 newspaper which printed a controversialeditorial in October 1993 was settled in
 August. The court found the defendants guilty, fined and released them.
 Despite strict regtration and publication requirements, newsprint shortages, and
 a shortage of trained and professional journalists, there were 13 newspapers at
 year's end.
 Journalists continued to suffer threats and intimidation by government authori-
 ties. In January police arrested the president and a bard member of the journalists'
 association and interrogated them for 7 hours abut the 1991 publication of the
 RUF national anthem. In March a journalist was arrested and held for 10 days
 without charge in connection with die publication of a photograph of an RSLMF
 captain who had defected to the RUF. In April a freelance photojournalist was ar-
 rested and questioned about photographs he took showing government troops tortur-
 ing prisoners. Because of continuing verbal harassment by a senior NPRC official
 after his release, the journalist went into hiding. In September police arrested two
 journalists, human rights monitor and editor Paul Kamara, and fellow newspaper
 editor Vandi Kallon. Police accused both of giving the enemy useful information, but
 subsequently released them without formal charge.
 
 
 233
 The Government continued to require that all news reports concerning the coun-
 try's internal conflict be submitted to the Department of Defense for approval prior
 to publication or broadcast. Many journalists exercise self-censorship.
 One of the capital's two radio stations is government-controlled and reflects only
 the views of the Government. The other is operated by Christian missionaries and
 broadcasts religious programming and Voice of America news. Two more privately
 owned stations operate im the provinces. The Government owns and operates the
 only television station.
 There were no reports of detention of educators or threats to them for their teach-
 ing activities.
 T. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The 1991 Constitution pro-
 vides for freedom of assembly as well as the right to form political, economic, social,
 and professional organizations. The NPRC lifted its ban on political parties in June,
 but banned 57 individuals from participation in political activities for a period of
 10 years (see Section 1d.). The NPRC permitted peaceful demonstrations, routinely
 granting the required permits.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-There were no legal restrictions on travel within the country, but un-
 safe conditions often prevented travel outside Freetown and the western peninsula.
 Personnel at military and paramilitary checkpoints also delayed travel, frequently
 demanding bribes. NPRC decrees permit senior police and military officers to stop
 and question any person. Exit visas are required for anyone except diplomats seek-
 ing to travel outside the country. There are no restrictions on emigration or repatri-
 ation. Continuing conflict internally displaced as many as 1.7 million persons during
 1995, reducing food production and placing a severe strain on the economy. In addi-
 tion to the internally displaced, an estimated 400,000 Sierra Leoneans sought refuge
 in Guinea and Liberia.
 Sierra Leone continued to host approximately 5,000 Liberian refugees. The Gov-
 ernment did not force refugees to repatriate to countries in which they fear persecu-
 tion, but does not provide a formal process for granting political asylum.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens do not have this right. The NPRC controls all government institutions
 and appoints all senior government officials. The NPRC is composed of the Supreme
 Council of State (SCS), and the Council of Secretaries of State. The SCS formulates
 government policy, serving as a de facto legislature; day-to-day government oper-
 ations are overseen by the department secretaries, who make up the Cabinet.
 In late September, military authorities charged nine junior level NPRC body-
 guards with coup-plotting in Freetown; they await court-martial. In January 1996
 Brigadier Bio deposed Captain Strasser as Chairman of the NPRC.
 The RUF has publicly vowed to block elections in Sierra Leone, but does not ap-
 pear to promote a coherent political philosophy (see Section L.a.).
 Women are underrepresented in the Government. A woman heads the Depart-
 ment of Education, only the second female cabinet level official in the country's his-
 tory. The two largest cities have female mayors. Some senior civil service, police,
 and judicial positions are held by women. There are no female NPRC members.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government allows one local human rights group, the League for Human
 Rights and Democracy, to exist, and several local NGO's are active in defense of
 women's rights (see Section 1.d.). There is a local chapter of Amnesty International
 in Freetown.
 The Government also allowed the ICRC to visit prisoners in Pademba Road Prison
 and suspected rebels in various military barracks. It granted Amnesty International
 access to all prisoners which it requested to visit.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination against women and provides some pro-
 tection against official discrimination on the basis of race and ethnicity, except for
 the prohibition against citizenship for persons with a non-African father. This provi-
 sion effectively blocks citizenship and political participation by the Lebanese com-
 munity, persons of Afro-Lebanese descent, and persons with non-African fathers. On
 occasion, government commissions have publicized an intent to change this provi-
 sion of the Constitution, but have met strong public protest.
 
 
 234
 Women.-Violence against women, especially wife beating, is common. The police
 are unlikely to intervene in domestic disputes except in cases of severe injury or
 death. Few cases of such violence go to court. Sierra Leone does not recognize do-
 mestic violence against women as a societal problem and the Government gives it
 little high-level attention.
 Rape remains a recognized societal problem. It is punishable by up to 14 years'
 imprisonment. The Government does enforce this law.
 The Constitution provides for equal rights for women, but in practice women face
 both legal and societal discrimination. Their rights and status under traditional law
 vary significantly, depending upon the ethnic group. The Temne and Limba tribes
 of the north, for example, afford greater rights to a woman to inherit property than
 do the Mende, who give preference to male heirs and unmarried daughters. In the
 north, on the other hand, women cannot become paramount chiefs. In the south,
 there are a number of female paramount chiefs.
 Women do not have equal access to education, economic opportunities, health fa-
 cilities, or social freedoms. In rural areas women perform much of the subsistence
 farming, all of the child rearing, and have little opportunity for education. The aver-
 age educational level for women is markedly below that of men; only 6 percent are
 literate. At the university level, men predominate. Women Organized for an En-
 lightened Nation, a local NGO, seeks to educate women throughout the country on
 their civil rights and responsibilities. The group met with the Interim National Elec-
 toral Commission and gained additional representation for women at the National
 Consultative Conference in August. A Women's Bureau in the Department of Health
 and Social Services concerned itself with women's issues in the country at large, but
 was largely ineffective due to lack of resources and training. Every government de-
 partment, including State House, is mandated to have a coordinator for women's af-
 fairs work with the Women's Bureau to monitor treatment of women employees, but
 few perform effectively.
 Children.-The Government has made modest efforts to address, with the help of
 NGO's, the integration of "boy soldiers" back into society. Many underage boys were
 allowed to join military operations early in the war. The rebel forces routinely con-
 script young men and women into their ranks when they attack rural villages. The
 malnutrition rate among children, according to Medecins sans Frontieres, is ex-
 tremely high, an estimated 29 percent, while child mortality is also high, and in-
 creasing.
 Instances of ritual murders of boys and girls, as well as adults, associated with
 animist religious groups in the provinces, continued. The press reported these mur-
 ders widely, and they were openly discussed in public. The Government arrested
 several ritual murder suspects in 1995, but did not publicize any information about
 their court cases. Given the state of the judiciary, these cases, like many others, are
 still pending.
 Female genital mutilation (FGM), which is widely condemned by international
 health experts as damaging to both physical and psychological health, is widely
 practiced on girls at a young age, especially in traditional tribal groups and among
 the less educated. While one independent expert in the field estimates the percent-
 age of females who have undergone this procedure may be as high as 80 percent,
 local groups believe that this figure is overstated. Membership in female secret soci-
 eties which practice FGM in their initiation rites has been declining.
 People With Disabilities.-Questions of public facility access and discrimination
 against the disabled have not become public policy issues. The Department of Edu-
 cation has, however, an official whose function is to implement the mainstreaming
 of students with learning disabilities.
 No laws mandate accessibility to buildings or provide for other assistance for the
 disabled. There does not appear to be outright discrimination against the disabled
 in housing or education, but with the high rate of unemployment, few disabled per-
 sons work in offices or factories. The difficulty disabled people face in finding em-
 ployment places many facilities and services beyond their financial means.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-The Government does not officially approve
 of discrimination among people of different ethnic groups, but ethnic loyalty remains
 an important factor in government, military, and business. Complaints of corruption
 and ethnic discrimination in government appointments, contracts, military commis-
 sions, and promotions are common.
 Residents of non-African descent face institutionalized political restrictions. The
 Constitution restricts citizenship to people of Negro-African descent following a pat-
 rilineal pattern, effectively denying citizenship to many persons, notably in the Leb-
 anese community, the largest affected minority.
 
 
 235
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Unions have continued their activities under the
 NPRC. The Constitution provides for the right of association, and all workers, in-
 cluding civil servants, have the right to join trade unions of their choice. Unions are
 independent of the Government. Individual labor unions have by custom joined the
 Sierra Leone Labor Congress (SLLC), and all unions are members of it. Membership
 is, however, voluntary. There is no legal prohibition against the SLLC leadership
 holding political office, and leaders have held both elected and appointed govern-
 mentcpositions.
 Under the Trade Union Act, any five persons may form a trade union by applying
 to the Registrar of Trade Unions, who has statutory powers under the act to ap-
 prove the creation of trade unions. The Registrar may reject applications for several
 reasons, including an insufficient number of members, proposed representation in
 an industry already served by an existing union, or incomplete documentation. If
 the Registrar rejects an application, his decision may be appealed in the ordinary
 courts, but applicants seldom take such action. Approximately 60 percent of workers
 in urban areas, including government employees, are unionized, but unions have
 had little success in organizing workers in the agricultural and mining sectors.
 Unions have the right to strike without exception, but the Government may re-
 quire 21 days' notice.-NPRC decrees which prohibit disruption of public tranquility
 or disruption of supplies could be employed to prevent a prolonged strike. Although
 union members may be fired for participating in even a lawful strike, no such inci-
 dents were reported. Unions are free to form federations and confederations and af-
 filiate internationally. The SLLC is a member of the International Confederation of
 Free Trade Unions, and there are no restrictions on the international travel or con-
 tacts of trade unionists.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The legal framework for col-
 lective bargaining is the Regulation of Wages and Industrial Relations Act. Collec-
 tive bargaining must take piac in trade grup negotiating councils, each of which
 has an equal number of employer and worker representatives. Most entrprises are
 covered by collective bargaining agreements on wages and working conditions. The
 SLLC provides assistance to unions in _preparing for negotiations. In case of a dead-
 lock, the Government may intervene. ft has not, however, used decrees to prevent
 strikes.
 No law prohibits retribution against strikers. Should an employee be fired for
 union activities, he or she may file a complaint with a labor tribunal and seek rein-
 statement. Complaints of discrimination against unions are made to an arbitration
 tribunal. Individual trade unions investigate alleged violations of work conditions to
 try to ensure that employers take the necessary steps to correct abuses.
 The labor laws also apply to enterprises located in export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forcd or Compulsory Labor.-Under the Chiefdom's Council Act,
 compulsory labor may be imposed by individual chiefs, requiring members of their
 villages to contribute to the improvement of common areas. This practice exists only
 in rural areas. There is no penalty for noncompliance.
 The NPRC does not reqire compulsory labor. A decree does require that home-
 owners, businessmen, and vendors clean and maintain their premises. Failure to
 comply is punishable by fine or imprisonment. Determinations of such cleaning and
 maintenance may be made by any health officer, police officer, or member of the
 armed forces. The last Saturday of each month is declared a National Cleaning Day,
 and there were instances of security forces publicly humiliating citizens to ensure
 compliance.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum age for employment
 is officially 18 years, but in practice there is no enforcement becausethere is no gov-
 ernment entity specifically charged with this task. Children routinel assist in fam-
 ily businesses, especially those of vendors and petty traders. In r aareas children
 work seasonally on family subsistence farms.
 Because the adult unemployment rate is high (60 percent in some areas), few chil-
 dren are involved in the industrial sector. There have been reports that young chil-
 dren have been hired by foreign employers to work as domestics overseas at ex-
 tremely low wages and in appalling conditions. The Department of Foreign Affairs
 and International Cooperation is responsible for reviewing overseas work applica-
 tions to see that no one under 14 is employed for this purpose and to enforce certain
 wage standards.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no minimum wage. Purchasing power
 continued to decline, and most workers have to pool incomes with their extended
 families and engage in subsistence food production in order to maintain a minimum
 standard of living. The Government's suggested standard workweek is 38 hours, but
 this is not mandated, and most workweeks exceed 38 hours. The Government sets
 
 
 health and safety standards, but the standards are outmoded and often not en-
 forced. The Health and Safety Division of the Department of Labor has inspection
 and enforcement responsibility, but inadequate funding and transportation limit its
 effectiveness.
 Health and safety regulations are included in collective bargainin  a  ements,
 but there is no evidence of systematic enforcement of those health andsaety stand-
 ards. Trade unions provide the only protection for workers who file complaints about
 working conditions. Initially, a union makes a formal complaint about a hazardous
 work condition. If this is rejected, the union may issue a 21-day strike notice. If
 workers remove themselves from dangerous work situations without making a for-
 mal complaint, they risk being fired.
