 SIERRA LEONE
 The National Provisional Ruling Council (NPRC), which was formed in 1992 after
 a military coup led by Captain Valentine E.M. Strasser and a small cadre of soldiers
 from the Sierra Leone-Liberia war front, continued to rule Sierra Leone. The coup
 ended the government of President Joseph Momoh and his All Peoples' Congress
 (APC) party, which had held power since 1978. Captain Strasser is Chairman of the
 NPRC and Head of State. The Deputy Chairman of the NPRC, Julius Maada Bio,
 is Chairman of the Supreme Council of State (SCS), which includes NPRC members
 and other military officers, plus one civilian. The NPRC and the SCS formulate gov-
 
 
 ernment policy; day-to-day government operations are overseen by the department
 secretaries, who comprise the Cabinet.
 Following the coup, the NPRC dissolved Parliament and political parties and, rul-
 ing by decree, controlled all aspects of government. The 1991 Constitution tech-
 nically remains in force under the NPRC but its status has been diminished by a
 series of decrees and public notices. On November 26, Captain Strasser announced
 several important policy moves: a unilateral cease-fire in the fighting with the rebel
 forces, known as the Revolutionary United Front (RUF); an amnesty for surrender-
 ing rebels and RUF sympathizers; and a timetable for a transition to democracy,
 culminating in general elections in late 1995. In December the NPRC released a
 'Working Document on the Constitution" to serve as the basis for public debate
 leading to a referendum on a new constitution in May 1995.
 The Sierra Leone military forces (RSLMF), supported by Special Army and Police
 Units (SAPPS) and the regular police force, are responsible for both external and
 internal security. The RSMF continued active operations against the RUF forces,
 which are supported by the National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL). The 1992
 coup was in part motivated by dissatisfaction among frontline troops (including
 Strasser), and the NPRC set as its primary objective bringing the war to an end.
 Significant progress was made toward achieving that goal in 1993, with the recap-
 ture of large areas that had been subject to rebel control. There continued to be re-
 ports of human rights abuses on all sides in the internal conflict, including sum-
 mary executions and torture, as well as abuses by the police and military against
 criminal suspects outside the war zone.
 More than 70 percent of the 4.3 million population is involved in some aspect of
 agriculture, mainly subsistence farming. Although the country is rich in minerals,
 including titanium-bearing rutile, gold, ard diamonds, official receipts from legal ex-
 ports of gold and diamonds have decreased over recent years; significant portions
 of these resources leave the country outside legal, authorized channels. The major
 diamond-producing area was under rebel control from late 1992 until late 1993,
 which further disrupted diamond earnings. Despite the difficult security situation,
 the Government adhered to an International Monetary Fund structural adjustment
 program which has produced major improvements in the stability of exchange rates
 and reduced inflation.
 There were many human rights abuses, notably, but not only, in the areas of
 fighting aon  the Liberian border  where the RSM   and rebel units committed
 extrajudicial illings and torture, In August RUF rebels ambushed an aid convoy
 of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), killing two of the relief
 workers and wounding a third before burning the vehicles. Additionally, bth the
 police and army summarily executed criminal suspects and beat and otherwise
 abused suspects during arrest and interrogation.
 The NP RC continued to maintain firm ontrol over government and society with
 tight restrictions on freedoms of speech, press, assembly, and association. Discrimi-
 nation and violence against women remained widespread.
 RESPECT FOR IHUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extra judilal Killing.-Ther were numerous reports of
 extrajudicial killings and summary executions by military and the SAPPS, often in
 connection with criminal arrests.Many reports sugest that undisciplined military
 p ersonnel inflited civilian deaths while engaging in looting, robbery, and extortion
 Msee Section 1.g.).
 b. Disappearance.-There were continuing reports of the disappearance of sus-
 pected   FL rebels, captured in the conflict. The NPRC denied these reports and
 took the offensive by announcing an amnesty program for civilians and rebels re-
 turning from disputed territories.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Although the 1991 Constitution prohibits torture, there were reports of police and
 military mistreatment of detainees during interrogation and arrest. The practice of
 mutilating prisoners continued. In one well-publicized case, security forces cut off
 the ears of two criminal suspects. Military personnel sometimes physically abused
 civilians (see Section a.g.). In December the press reported an incident in which sol-
 diers beat and kicked a child in order to ascertain where the child had obtained the
 military boots he was wearing. Officials responsible for such abuses were sometimes
 punished.
 Prison conditions remained life threatening; deaths in prison due to malnutrition
 and inadequate medical attention are common. Detainee cells often lack beds or toi-
 let facilities. Overcrowding is the norm at Fretown's Pademba Read prison. These
 
 
 prison conditions are of particular concern because shortcomings in the legal system
 often result in prolonged detention. Men and women are segregated in the prisons,
 but separate facilities for incarceration of juveniles do not exist. Homosexual rape
 is not uncommon.
 Throughout the year, the Government granted the International Committee of the
 Red Cross (ICRC) access to prisoners, including some alleged rebel prisoners. Am-
 nesty International (AI) requested access to prisoners one time, and access was
 ranted. In May AI reported that some prisoners were being held in secret and that
 ys as young as 7 years of age were being incarcerated. The Government denied
 these charges.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-There are inadequate safeguards against
 arbitrary or unjust detentions and no provisions for their formal review in either
 criminal or political security cases. The laws provide that, after an initial 24-hour
 detention, detainees must have access to legal counsel, families, and medical care,
 but authorities rarely respect these provisions unless detainees can afford legal
 counsel to demand compliance.
 In political and security cases, police and security agencies have additional deten-
 tion authority. Under NPRC decrees, any police officer or member of the armed
 forces, with approval of the SCS or NPRC, may arrest without warrant and detain
 indefinitely any person suspected of posing a threat to public safety. In practice, sol-
 diers commonly arrest or detain civilians without charge. Relatives are not formally
 notified, but the authorities generally respond to inquiries. Arrested foreigners are
 often released but may not depart the country.
 The Government provides legal representation for the indigent only in cases of
 capital offenses. Lack of counsel in other cases frequently leads to abuse. Many indi-
 gent detainees are ignorant of their rights and assume, sometimes correctly, that
 law enforcement or judicial authorities will be paid by the accuser to rule against
 them. The Society for the Protection of Human Rights provides free legal counsel
 to some indigent detainees.
 During the year, the NPRC reviewed the cases of individual prisoners, resulting
 in the release of over 300 prisoners.
 The first anniversary of the April 1992 coup saw the release to house arrest of
 the more than 20 members of the former government who had been detained at the
 time of the coup. In December the Government announced that all suspected rebels
 had been released from detention, and one political detainee was released under the
 year-end amnesty.
 No one was exiled by the Government, but some persons chose to leave or, as in
 the case of some officials of the previous regime, remain outside the country rather
 than face possible retribution.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Tyial.-The NPRC has not fundamentally altered the pre-
 viously existing judiciary, but it has circumvented some of the authority of judicial
 institutions by the use of special commissions of inquiry.
 There are three judicial systems: regular courts, local or traditional courts, and
 courts-martial which try only military cases. The judiciary is subject to political ma-
 nipulation. There is strong evidence that favoritism plays a role in court decisions.
 The regular court system is based on the British model and consists of a Supreme
 Court, an intermediate Court of Appeals, a High Court of Magistrates, and mag-
 istrates' courts. There are criminal and civil courts. Decisions by lower courts may
 be appealed. The courts frequently grant attorneys' requests for adjournment or
 postponement; there are delays of up to 5 years in bringing cases to trial.
 Indigenous elected ethnic leaders preside over local courts and administer tribal
 law in civil cases, e.g., dealing with family and property matters. These local courts
 are often the only legal institutions in rural areas.
 The court-martial system, based on British military codes and the common law,
 provides for commander adjudication of minor offenses. More serious offenses are
 deferred from field units to force headquarters. There are allegations that enlisted
 personnel subjected to punishment by field commanders have in some cases ap-
 pealed to friends in the NPRC and had sentences overturned. During 1992, in an
 effort to curb military excesses, a standing court-martial was established to try mili-
 tary personnel for serious crimes (e.g. murder, manslaughter or aggravated rob-
 bery). Death sentences pronounced by this court must be reviewed and approved by
 the Head of State. None of the death sentences given by the standing court-martial
 in 1993 had been carried out by year's end.
 Under a December 1992 decree, the Government has the authority to create a
 Special Military Tribunal to try "any person, whether or not a member of the Armed
 Forces" who, in connection wit or in furtherance of any act of rebellion against the
 NPRC, commits treason, murder, manslaughter, aggravated robbery or any other se-
 
 
 254
 rious offense under Sierra Leonean law. In 1993 the decree was amended to permit
 appeal of the Tribunal's decisions to the courts.
 In a separate set of quasi-judicial proceedings, NPRC-appointed commissions of
 inquiry, investigating corruption under the previous Momoh regime held public
 hearings during 1993. At year's end, the commissions continued to submit findings
 to the NPRC. After reviewing the findings, the NPRC issues a "white paper" con-
 taining decisions on sanctions against officials of the previous regime found to have
 engaged in malfeasance. The NPRC has taken such actions as confiscating or order-
 in restitution of property and banning some persons from future public office.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-While
 the 1991 Constitution prohibits arbitrary invasion of the home, NPRC Decree 25
 had given broad authority to military and police personnel to enter and search any
 premise without warrant. During April the NPRC published amendments to the De-
 cree, curtailing that authority. However, officials still have wide authority under
 other NPRC decrees to monitor actions or conversation within homes, to prevent a
 person from acting in a manner prejudicial to public safety, to impose restrictions
 on employment or business, to control association or communication with other per-
 sons, and to interfere with correspondence.
 In practice, there were numerous occasions of abusive treatment of ordinary citi-
 zens by ill-disciplined soldiers and police, both within and outside of the war zone.
 These abuses included forced entry into homes, robberies, and assaults, some of
 them fatal. Offending soldiers have frequently been punished when caught; several
 remained under death sentences for the most serious crimes (see Section i.e.).
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-There were serious violations of human rights in the conflict centered in the
 eastern and southern provinces along the Liberian border. There, RSLMF forces
 fought the Revolutionary United Front forces, which are supported in part by
 Charles Taylor's NPFL forces from Liberia. The RSLMF was also involved in fight-
 ing bandits and groups of military deserters. This conflict involves different ethnic
 grups and has resulted in an unknown number of deaths. Some estimates indicated
 that more than 8,000 civilians have been killed since 1991 and that hundreds of
 thousands of people within Sierra Leone and adjacent countries have been dis-
 placed.
 Government forces took severe action against suspected rebels and their support-
 ers. There were credible reports of summary executions of prisoners by RSLMF
 troops, Troops also en gaged in public humiliation and torture of captives, including
 by disfigurement, beatings, andparading captives naked. Some RSLMF troops dis-
 played human skulls on military vehicles.
 Many reports indicated thatRUF rebels took similarly severe action against civil-
 ians and RSLMF soldiers. In August the RUF attacked an ICRC aid convoy, killing
 two ICRC workers and wounding a third. Also, there were reports that the RUF
 leaders in Kailahun District executed 16 of their own troops and 5 noncombatants
 for allegedly plotting to overthrow RUF leader Foday Sankoh. In December RUF
 forces reportedly killed about 20 civilians in two villages near Pujehun. They also
 pressed youths aged 12 to 15 into combat service.
 At times, the RUF controlled parts of the eastern areas along the Liberian border,
 but by the end of the year government forces had regained the initiative, and RUF
 did not control any specific areas. In early December, the NPRC declared a 4-week
 cease-fire, but, due to numerous new RUF attacks on government forces during the
 month, the cease-fire was not extended when it expired.
 The RUF does not appear to promote a coherent political philosophy. Most of its
 members are of the Mende and Kissy ethnic groups, but other members of those
 groups have not been immune from RUF aggression.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Although the Constitution provides unequivo-
 cally for freedom of speech, NPRC decrees permit the Government to abridge free-
 dom of expression if it deems national security to be endangered. Criticizing govern-
 ment leaders or offending the dignity of the State are criminal offenses. In practice,
 freedoms of speech and press were severely circumscribed.
 In May the NPRC repealed the section of its 1992 decree that had empowered the
 Government to prohibit attempts to influence public opinion in a manner likely to
 be prejudicial to public safety, public tranquility, or public order. However, a restric-
 tive set of conditions for registration of newspapers instituted in February reduced
 the number of newspapers by more than 50 percent and silenced some of those most
 openly critical of the Government.
 At the end of 1993, there were 10 active newspapers, 2 of which were controlled
 directly by the Government. The Government warned and castigated editors who
 
 
 255
 published articles displeasing to the NPRC. It detained several editors for 1 to 3
 ays and suspended one newspaper for several weeks. The then-deputy Chairman
 of the NPRC kicked one journalist because of an offending article. In these cir-
 cumstances, editors continued to exercise self-censorship.
 In October the authorities arrested five employees of a Freetown newspaper and
 six others, who have played roles in Sierra Leone politics in the past, after the
 newspaper published an article from a Swedish newspaper alleging corruption in
 the NPRC Government. The newspaper's office was ransacked. The Government re-
 leased seven of the detainees a short time later, but four journalists remained in
 jail for more than 2 weeks. They were then released on bail equivalent to $200,000
 each, an extremely high sum by Sierra Leone standards. The newspaper has not
 published since the incident.
 One of the capital's two radio stations is government controlled and reflects only
 the views of the Government. The other is operated by Christian missionaries and
 broadcasts religious programming and Voice of America news. A third radio station
 operates in one of the provincial cities. The Government owns and operates the only
 television station, which resumed broadcasting after a hiatus of several years.
 Academic freedom does not appear to have been impaired by the NPRC. There
 were no reports of educators being detained or threatened for their teaching activi-
 ties, and university students who staged protests over campus issues were not sub-
 jected to government retribution.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Although the 1991 Constitu-
 tion provides for freedom of assembly and the right of citizens to form economic, so-
 cial, and professional organizations, freedoms of assembly and association were not
 respected. All political parties remained banned.
 Under antidisturbance decrees, the NPRC may grant broad powers of arrest to
 public, military, or other authorized persons in any area or situation in which, in
 its opinion, there is likely to be difficulty in preserving "public safety" and "order.'
 In practice, the NPRC permitted peacefuldemonstrations.
 c. Freedom of Religion. -Freedom of religion is provided for by the 1991 Constitu-
 tion, and historically the ruling government has displayed religious tolerance. Mus-
 lims, the largest religious gup (comprising about 60 percent of the population),
 Christians, animists, and aderents of other faiths practice their beliefs freely; they
 may publish and distribute religious materials and conduct religious education with-
 out government interference.
 Although most clergy are indigenous, foreign Christian missionaries are active
 and there is a small number of Muslim clerics from other countries.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-There are currently no legal restrictions on travel within the country;
 however, for a substantial portion of 1993 three of the eastern districts were closed
 to civilian travel due to the rebel incursion. Military and paramilitary checkpoints
 also delayed travel, with soldiers frequently demanding money, transport, or goods.
 NPRC decrees permit senior police and military officers to stop and question any
 person.
 The Government requires all citizens to carry a national identification card which
 must be presented on demand to security personnel at checkpoints. However, as the
 Government was unable to provide cards for everyone, the requirement was only se-
 lectively enforced.
 Exit visas are required for anyone, except diplomats, seeking to travel outside the
 country. There are no restrictions on emigration or repatriation.
 Continuing conflict in the primarily agricultural eastern and southern provinces
 at times internally displaced as many as 400,000 Sierra Leoneans during 1993, re-
 ducing food production and placing a severe strain on the local economy. In addition
 to the internally displaced, an estimated 300,000 Sierra Leonean refugees sought
 refuge in Guinea and Liberia. There was considerable movement among the inter-
 nally displaced Sierra Leone populations and the Liberian refugees in response to
 the ebb and flow of the civil wars in Sierra Leone and Liberia.
 Sierra Leone continued to be host to thousands of Liberian refugees, although the
 number declined from 14,000 at the end of 1992 to an estimated 10,000 at the end
 of 1993. The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) provided
 relief aid to 6,000 refugees at the Waterloo refugee camp near Freetown. The Gov-
 ernment did not force refugees to repatriate to countries in which they fear persecu-
 tion.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens do not have this right. Captain Strasser and a small group of military
 officers control all institutions of government, and the NPRC appoints all senior gov-
 
 
 256
 eminent officials. The NPRC appointed an advisory Commission for the Return to
 Democracy, and the Commission submitted the draft of a new constitution to the
 NPRC for review. In December a "Working Document on the Constitution" was re-
 leased to serve as the basis for public debate leading to a referendum on a new con-
 stitution in May 1995. The NPRC timetable announced in December also calls for
 nonpartisan district council elections in November 1994; the formation of political
 parties in June 1995; and general elections late in 1995.
 Meanwhile, the ban on political parties remained in effect, and the Government
 qualified implementation of these steps by stating that the border fighting must end
 before elections could be held.
 Women are poorly represented in government. In December the NPRC appointed
 a woman as undersecretary in the Department of Education, the highest position
 held by a woman in the Government. A few senior civil service and judicial positions
 are held by women.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Local human rights groups are allowed to operate. The League for Human Rights
 and Democracy, a local organization, studies all human rights issues but con-
 centrates on issues related to freedom of the press and conditions of prisoners. Its
 effectiveness is hampered by government intimidation and a lack of resources. In
 at least one instance in 1993, the League's director was summoned by police for
 questioning regarding his activities.
 The Government allows visits by international human rights organizations. The
 ICRC visited prisoners in Pademba Road prison and in various military barracks
 where suspected rebels are sometimes detained. Amnesty International had access
 to prisoners in 1993 (see Section 1.c.).
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Women.-Although women have equal rights under the Constitution, in practice
 they face both legal and societal discrimination. The rights and status of women
 under traditional law vary significantly, depending upon the ethnic group. The
 Temne and Limba tribes, for example, accord more rights to a woman to inherit her
 husband's property than do the Mende, who give preference to male heirs and un-
 married daughters (in that order).
 In the broader society, women do not have equal access to education, economic
 oportunities, health facilities, or social freedoms. In rural areas they perform much
 of the subsistence farming and all of the child-rearing and have little opportunity
 for education. The average schooling level for women is markedly below that of
 males. A 1991 U.N. study showed that females receive one-fourth the schooling of
 males; only 6 percent of women are literate. At the university level, men predomi-
 nate. There is at least one recently formed rights group which has as its purpose
 improving economic opportunities and access to health services for women.
 Violence against women, especially wife beating, is common. The police are un-
 likely to intervene in domestic disputes except in cases of severe injury or death.
 Few cases of such violence go to court. The issue is not recognized as a societal prob-
 lem and receives no high-level attention by the Government. Rape is a problem in
 Sierra Leone.
 Children.-The Government recently signed the U.N. Convention on the Rights of
 the Child and in 1993 began addressing, with the help of nongovernmental organi-
 zations, the integration of"boy soldiers back into society. Many underage boys had
 been allowed to join military operations early in the war.
 There are reported instances of ritual murders of boys and girls, as well as of
 adults, associated with animist religious groups in the provinces. These murders
 have been widely reported in the press an openly discussed in public. The Govern-
 ment arrests and prosecutes suspects in ritual murder cases.
 Female genital mutilation (circumcision), which has been condemned by inter-
 national health experts as damaging to both physical and psychological health, is
 not addressed in Sierra Leonean law and is widely practiced on girls at a young age,
 especially in traditional tribal groups and among the less educated. According to an
 independent expert in the field, the percentage of females who have undergone this
 procedure may be as high as 80 percent.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Discrimination between people of different
 tribal groups is not officially sanctioned, but tribal loyalties remain important fac-.
 tors in government, military, and business transactions. The Momoh government
 was accused of discriminating in favor of persons of Limba descent (Momoh's ethnic
 group). The NPRC is heavily Mende in composition, and many high-level appointees
 
 
 257
 are from that ethnic group. Complaints are common of corruption and ethnic dis-
 crimination in government appointments, contracts, military commissions, and pro-
 motions.
 Residents of non-African descent face institutionalized political restrictions. Cur-
 rent law restricts citizenship to people of Negro-African descent following a patrilin-
 eal pattern, effectively den ang citizenship to many persons, notably in the Lebanese
 community, the largest affected minority. Residents of non-African descent are often
 victims of harassment.
 People with Disabilities.-Questions of public facility access or discrimination
 against the disabled have not become public policy issues. There are no laws that
 mandate accessibility to buildings or provide for other assistance for the handi-
 capped. There does not appear to be discrimination against the handicapped in
 housing or education but, with the high rate of unemployment, few handicapped
 people are found working in offices or factories. The difficulty the handicapped face
 in finding employment places many facilities and services beyond their financial
 means.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Unions have continued their activities under the
 NPRC. The 1991 Constitution provides for the right of association, and all workers,
 including civil servants, have the right to join trade unions of their choice. Unions
 are independent of the Government. Individual labor unions have by custom joined
 the Sierra Leone Labor Congress (SLLC), and all unions are members of the SLLC.
 Membership is however, voluntary. There is no legal prohibition against the SLLC
 leadership holding political office, and leaders have held both elected and appointed
 government positions.
 Under the Trade Union Act, any five persons may form a trade union by applying
 to the Registrar of Trade Unions, who has statutory powers under the Act to ap-
 prove the creation of trade unions. Applications may be rejected for several reasons,
 including an insufficient number of members, proposed representation in an indus-
 try already served by an existing union, or incomplete documentation. If the Reg-
 istrar rejects an application, his decision may be appealed in the ordinary courts,
 but such action is seldom taken.
 Approximately 60 percent of workers in urban areas, including government em-
 ployees, are unionized, but unions have had little success in organizing workers in
 the large agricultural and mining sectors.
 Unions have the right to call a strike without exception, but the Government may
 require 21 days' notice. In September teachers staged a strike demanding salary in-
 creases. The NPRC did not interfere, but NPRC decrees, which prohibit disruption
 of public tranquility or of supplies, could be employed to prevent a prolonged strike.
 The Sierra Leone Labor Congress is reviewing the labor law and hopes to have leg-
 islation approved in 1994 that would prohibit firing of a union member for participa-
 tion in a legal strike.
 Unions are free to form federations and confederations and affiliate internation-
 ally. The SLLC is a member of the International Confederation of Free Trade
 Unions, and there are no restrictions on the international travel or contacts of trade
 unionists.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The legal framework for col-
 lective bargaining is the Regulation of Wages and Industrial Relations Act. Collec-
 tive bargaining must take place in trade gup negotiating councils, each of which
 has an equal number of employer and worker representatives. Most enterprises are
 covered by collective bargaining agreements on wages and working conditions. The
 SLLC provides assistance to unions in preparing for negotiations. In case of a dead-
 lock, the Government may intervene.
 There is no law that prohibits retribution against strikers; however, if an em-
 ployee is fired for union activities, he may file a complaint with a labor tribunal and
 seek reinstatement. Complaints of discrimination against unions are made to the In-
 dustrial Court for arbitration. Individual trade unions investigate alleged violations
 of work conditions and ensure that employers take the necessary steps to correct
 abuses.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Under the Chiefdom's Council Act,
 compulsory labor may be imposed by individual chiefs, requiring members of their
 villages to contribute to the improvement of common areas. This practice exists only
 in rural areas. There is no penalty for noncompliance. The International Labor Or-
 ganization's (ILO) Committee of Experts repeated its earlier request to the Govern-
 ment that it amend provisions of this act that violate ILO Convention 29 on forced
 labor.
 
 
 Although the NPRC does not require compulsory labor, a decree requires that
 homeowners, businessmen, and vendors clean and maintain their premises. Failure
 to comply is punishable by fine or imprisonment. Determinations of such cleaning
 and maintenance may be made by any health officer, police officer, or member of
 the armed forces. The last Saturday of every month is declared a national cleaning
 day, and there were instances of security forces beating citizens to ensure compli-
 ance.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum age for employment
 is officially 18 years, but in practice there is no enforcement because there is no
 Government entity specifically charged with this task. Children routinely assist in
 small family businesses, especially those of vendors and petty traders. In rural
 areas young children work seasonally on family subsistence farms.
 Because the adult unemployment rate is high (60 percent in some areas), few chil-
 dren are involved in the industrial sector. There have been reports that young chil-
 dren have been hired by foreign employers to work as domestics overseas at ex-
 tremely low wages and in appalling conditions. Following an investigation, the Gov-
 ernment announced that the Department of Foreign Affairs would review overseas
 work applications to ensure that no one under 14 was being employed for this pur-
 pose andto enforce certain wage standards.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no legislated minimum wage. Pur-
 chasing power continued to decline, and most workers have to pool incomes with
 their extended families and engage in subsistence food production in order to main-
 tain a minimum standard of living. The Government's suggested standard work-
 week is 38 hours, but this is not mandated and most workweeks exceed 38 hours.
 The Government sets health and safety standards, but the standards are out-
 moded and often not enforced. The Health and Safety Division of the Department
 of Labor has inspection and enforcement responsibility, but inadequate funding and
 transportation limit its effectiveness. The SLLC is currently negotiating with the
 Government to update these standards.
 Health and safety regulations are included in collective bargaining agreements,
 but there is no evidence of systematic enforcement of those safety standards. Trade
 unions provide the only protection for workers who file complaints about working
 conditions. Initially, the unions make a formal complaint about a hazardous work
 condition. If this is rejected, the unions may issue a 21-day strike notice. If workers
 remove themselves from dangerous work situations without making a formal com-
 plaint, they risk being fired.
