Sierra Leone
Sierra Leone is making some political progress as the country begins to put
behind it the legacy of the 11-year civil war that ended in 2002, but still faces fundamental
challenges to ensuring the consolidation of respect for human rights.
Despite hundreds of millions of dollars of development aid, rampant corruption
and gross public financial mismanagement persist, along with major deficiencies
in the justice system.
Democratic Processes
The presidential and parliamentary elections held on August 11, 2007 were a crucial
and largely successful recent test of stability. The ruling Sierra Leone People’s
Party (SLPP) lost the presidency and its majority in parliament, and new president,
Ernest Bai Koroma of the All People’s Congress (APC), assumed power on
September 17. The ousting of the ruling party was widely viewed as a success for
democracy and as a referendum on the government’s failure to deliver on postwar
reconstruction.
Pre- and post-election violence between rival parties—including house burnings
and street clashes—left at least one person dead and dozens injured. However,
both domestic and international observers agreed that the polls themselves were
generally free, fair, genuinely contested, and well organized. The National
Electoral Commission was deemed competent, neutral, and independent. The
police and army—once seen as organs of the ruling party—acted professionally to
quell violence generated by all sides.
Legal Protection
The government has taken various steps to improve legal protection. During 2007,
for example, four important bills were passed by parliament aimed at ensuring
greater legal protection for women and children. The National Child Rights Bill,
passed in June, prohibits early marriage, military conscription of children, and
child trafficking. Three other bills—the Registration of Customary Marriages and
Divorce Act, the Domestic Violence Act, and the Devolution of Estates Act—create a legal framework criminalizing domestic violence, ensuring women’s property
rights, setting the minimum age for customary marriage at 18, requiring such marriages
have the consent of both parties, and recognizing rights to inheritance
without interference from extended family.
Corruption
Public and private corruption remains a major obstacle to development. The Anti-
Corruption Commission (ACC) established in 2000 largely at the behest of donors,
refers cases for prosecution to the president-appointed attorney general. So far it
has referred only low-level cases for prosecution. As in previous years, 2007 saw
few convictions, and none involving high level government officials. A UK assessment
of the ACC found that it had “little or no impact” on corruption, and as a
result withdrew its financial support for it.
Efforts to Establish the Rule of Law
Defects in the judicial system persist, including extortion and bribe-taking by
court officials; insufficient numbers of judges, magistrates, and prosecuting attorneys;
little representation for the accused; absenteeism by court personnel; inadequate
remuneration for judiciary personnel; and extended periods of pre-trial
detention. In 2007 some 90 percent of prisoners lacked any legal representation
during their trials.
On November 1, three men arrested in January 2006 on treason charges, including
former Revolutionary United Front (RUF) Spokesman Omrie Golley, were
released from prison for lack of evidence after 22 months in custody. The move
followed a commitment by newly elected President Koroma to conduct a review of
all detainees held on politically motivated charges. The trial of the three men was
marked by a failure to respect basic legal norms, including the alleged fabrication
of evidence and the lack of an arrest warrant.
At this writing, 20 individuals, including one woman, remain on death row, 10 of
whom following a December 2004 conviction for treason in connection with a
2003 coup attempt; their case is under appeal.
The only legal system accessible to some 70 percent of the population is a network
of “customary” courts controlled by traditional leaders and applying customary
law, which is often discriminatory, particularly against women. Local court officials
frequently abuse their powers by illegally detaining persons and charging
high fines for minor offenses, as well as by adjudicating criminal cases beyond
their jurisdiction.
Police and Army Conduct
The Sierra Leone police continue to engage in unprofessional and often illegal
conduct, despite a Commonwealth-run training program from 1998 to 2005, and
current efforts by the British government and the United Nations. This has included
widespread extortion from civilians, requiring victims of crimes to pay the
police to file reports or conduct investigations, and, in a few cases, sexual abuse
of female detainees.
Since 1999, the UK-led International Military Advisory and Training Team (IMATT)
has been working to reform the Republic of Sierra Leone Armed Forces (RSLAF). In
2007, there were a few reports of abuses and indiscipline by members of the
army, but the RSLAF leadership demonstrated their commitment to penalize and
sanction soldiers for offenses committed.
Detention Conditions
Numerous prisoners, including several children, are held in extended pre-trial
detention. At least 16 people died in detention in 2007, a consequence of the
overcrowding and lack of adequate food, clothing, medicine, hygiene, and sanitation
in Sierra Leone’s prisons. In August, then-President Kabbah ordered the
release of 50 prisoners convicted on minor offences in an effort to relieve overcrowding,
but the population of the country’s largest detention facility, designed
for 350 detainees, still stands at over 1,000.
Truth and Reconciliation Commission
The 2005 report of Sierra Leone’s Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC)
attributed the civil war largely to decades of corrupt rule by the political elite and recommended abolishing the death penalty, repealing laws that criminalize seditious
libel, increasing the transparency of the mining industry, improving good
governance, and establishing a reparations fund for war victims. The government
has either ignored or been slow to implement the recommendations, and openly
rejected some of them, including the abolition of the death penalty.
National Human Rights Commission
In October 2006 parliament approved five commissioners to lead a National
Human Rights Commission (NHRC), charged with investigating and reporting on
human rights abuses and pushing for the implementation of the TRC recommendations.
However, lack of government funding has undermined the ability of the
NHRC to fully carry out its mandate.
Accountability for Past Abuses
The United Nations-mandated Special Court for Sierra Leone has made progress
on achieving accountability for war crimes. The Special Court for Sierra Leone,
established after the war to bring justice to victims of atrocities, handed down its
first five judgments in 2007. In June, three members of the rebel Armed Forces
Revolutionary Council (AFRC) were convicted for, among other things, the recruitment
and use of child soldiers, the first such conviction by an international tribunal.
The judge noted that the three—Alex Tamba Brima, Brima Bazzy Kamara, and
Santigie Borbor Kanu—were “responsible for some of the most heinous, brutal,
and atrocious crimes ever recorded in human history.” In August, two members of
the Sierra Leonean Civil Defense Forces (CDF) were convicted of war crimes
including murder and pillage. A third CDF indictee, former interior minister Sam
Hinga Norman, died in custody in February.
The trial of former Liberian president Charles Taylor—charged with 11 counts of
war crimes and crimes against humanity for supporting Sierra Leonean rebel
groups—started in June 2007, but was postponed after Taylor boycotted the trial
and dismissed his lawyers. Taylor was appointed new counsel and the trial is
expected to resume in January 2008. For security reasons it will take place at The
Hague.
While several states, including the UK, US, the Netherlands, and Canada, made
additional contributions to the Special Court for Sierra Leone, which relies primarily
on voluntary funding, the court continued to suffer from serious financial
shortfalls.
Key International Actors
Sierra Leone’s key international partners, in particular the UK, have been playing
an important role in supporting the transition to democracy and the rule of law,
but have seldom publicly denounced government corruption and other problems.
In September, the Executive Representative of the UN Secretary General, the UK
and Nigerian High Commissioners, and the US Ambassador pressured the thenruling
SLPP to concede after it sought an injunction to restrain the National
Electoral Commission from releasing the results of the second round of voting in
the presidential election.
Since 2002, international donors have provided millions of dollars in assistance
to Sierra Leone. In 2006, the government agreed to benchmarks for reducing corruption,
but still refuses to publish audited accounts of government spending.
Following the complete withdrawal of UN peacekeepers in December 2005, the
UN Security Council approved a peacebuilding mission—the UN Integrated Office
for Sierra Leone (UNIOSL)—to address weak governance and rule of law. Sierra
Leone is on the agenda of the UN Peacebuilding Commission, created in
December 2005 to bridge the gap between peacekeeping and the consolidation
of peace.