Sierra Leone
Throughout 2009 the government of President Ernest Bai Koroma made notable
progress in addressing endemic corruption and weak rule of law, thus distancing
Sierra Leone further from the issues that gave rise to its 11-year armed conflict
that ended in 2002. However persistent weaknesses within the police and judiciary,
and several risk factors—notably the global economic crisis, high unemployment,
and growing insecurity in neighboring Guinea— illuminated the fragility of
these gains.
An outbreak of politically motivated violence between supporters of the ruling All
People’s Congress and the Sierra Leone People’s Party in early 2009 showed the
weakness of the Sierra Leone police and judiciary, which failed to adequately
investigate and hold accountable those responsible. However, swift reconciliation
efforts by the President avoided a deepening of the crisis.
Through the efforts of the United Nations-mandated Special Court for Sierra
Leone, there was significant progress in achieving accountability for war crimes
committed during the country’s civil war. However, there was little improvement
in access to key economic rights including healthcare and primary education.
Sierra Leoneans suffer the highest maternal mortality rates in the world.
Corruption
President Koroma and the Anti-Corruption Commission (ACC) continued to take
meaningful steps to address the scourge of corruption that has for decades posed
a major obstacle to development. During 2009 the ACC used its independent
powers to investigate, prosecute, and secure 11 convictions, including that of a
former ombudsman; at this writing dozens of other cases are in court. By October
the equivalent of more than US$375,000 in stolen state assets had been recovered
by the ACC. In November the ACC indicted the health minister for illegally
awarding contracts; he was at the same time removed from his post by the president.
Following Koroma’s lead in 2008, nearly all senior government officials and
parliamentarians had declared their assets, and in an unprecedented move,
employees of the notoriously corrupt ministries of health, education, and lands
were suspended and referred for investigation for corrupt practices. Concern
remained, however, that the ACC had failed to take adequate action against at
least one minister exposed for awarding illegal contracts.
Rule of Law
Serious deficiencies in the judicial system persist, including extortion and bribetaking
by officials; insufficient numbers of judges, magistrates, and prosecuting
attorneys; absenteeism by court personnel; and inadequate remuneration for
judiciary personnel. In 2009 some 90 percent of prisoners lacked any legal representation.
Hundreds of people—over 40 percent of the country’s detainees—were
held in prolonged pretrial detention.
Local court officials frequently abuse their powers by illegally detaining persons,
charging high fines for minor offenses, and adjudicating criminal cases beyond
their jurisdiction. The only legal system accessible to some 70 percent of the population
is one based on customary courts controlled by traditional leaders and
applying customary law, which is often discriminatory, particularly against
women.
A prison reform project somewhat reduced the chronic overcrowding in Sierra
Leone’s prisons. However, inadequate food, clothing, medicine, hygiene, and
sanitation remained of serious concern. The population of the country’s largest
detention facility—designed for 350 detainees—stands at over 1,100. In October
the government announced the reconstruction of a prison at Mafanta, planned to
house several hundred inmates and help relieve the problem of overcrowding.
The completion in April of a high-profile drug trafficking case in which 15 Sierra
Leoneans and Latin Americans were convicted of drug-related offences demonstrated
some improvement in the capacity of the rule of law sectors.
A concerted effort by the government, UN, and United Kingdom-funded Justice
Sector Development Programme (JSDP) to improve the rule of law continued to
make incremental improvements in the sector, including slight improvements in
healthcare and access to water for detainees, record-keeping, and pilot programs
to increase the numbers of magistrates available to adjudicate cases.
Police and Army Conduct
In September police used live ammunition to break up a demonstration about
crime levels and police involvement in a spate of armed robberies, leaving three
demonstrators dead and some 10 injured. Other deficiencies in police professionalism
included persistent allegations of crime victims being required to pay for reports to be filed or investigations conducted, and alleged police involvement in
extortion and other criminal acts. However, senior police leadership demonstrated
an increased willingness to investigate, discipline, and dismiss officers engaging
in unprofessional or corrupt practices.
The UK-led International Military Advisory and Training Team (IMATT) has been
working since 1999 to reform and advise the Republic of Sierra Leone Armed
Forces (RSLAF). The restoration in 2009 of a court martial board within the RSLAF
was an important step in ensuring discipline within the army. In 2009 IMATT continued
to assist in downsizing the force, with the joint goal of 8,500 troops
expected to be met by early 2010.
Accountability for Past Abuses
The last case to be tried at the Special Court for Sierra Leone’s (SCSL) location in
Freetown concluded in October after the appeals chamber decision upheld the
trial chamber’s February conviction of three former leaders of the rebel
Revolutionary United Front, Issa Hassan Sesay, Morris Kallon, and Augustine
Gbao. The three were sentenced in April to a range of between 25 and 52 years
each on charges of war crimes and crimes against humanity that included (for the
first time in an international court) forced marriage and attacks against UN peacekeepers,
as well as rape, murder, mutilation, enslavement, and recruitment of
child soldiers. To date, eight individuals associated with the three main warring
factions have been tried and convicted by the SCSL. All eight were transferred in
late October to Rwanda to serve out their sentences in a section of a prison that
meets international standards.
The SCSL trial of former Liberian president Charles Taylor—charged with 11 counts
of war crimes and crimes against humanity for his role in supporting Sierra
Leonean rebel groups during the conflict—made notable progress in 2009. In
February the prosecution finished its presentation of 91 witnesses. In July Taylor
took the stand as the first witness in the defense’s case, and testified for many
weeks. Taylor is the first sitting African head of state to be indicted and face trial
before an international or hybrid war crimes tribunal. For security reasons his trial
is taking place in The Hague, Netherlands, instead of Freetown.
A long-awaited reparations program to war victims, as recommended by the Truth
and Reconciliation Commission, registered some 28,000 war victims and initiated programs to provide medical and financial assistance to victims. The program was
funded by the UN Peacebuilding Fund.
National Human Rights Commission
The National Human Rights Commission struggled to carry out its mandate to
investigate and report on human rights abuses due to a persistent lack of funds.
During 2009 the government ensured that basic functions were covered, while
funding from the UN and other partners lapsed, leaving the commission unable to
fully implement its strategic plans and make fully operational its regional offices
in Bo, Kenema, and Makeni. The commission generally operated without government
interference.
Key International Actors
The UN and the UK government continued to take the lead in reforming and supporting
Sierra Leone’s rule of law sectors. The UK remained Sierra Leone’s largest
donor, providing some £62 million in the last fiscal year, including support for the
Anti-Corruption Commission and justice and security sector reform. The UN
Peacebuilding Fund has since 2007 approved more than US$34 million for projects
in Sierra Leone, which support reconciliation efforts and improving the communications,
justice, and security sectors.
In September 2009 the UN Security Council extended until September 2010 the
mandate of the UN Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL), the
fourth and leanest UN mission in Sierra Leone in 10 years. With some 70 staff, the
mission maintains a largely advisory role aimed at promoting human rights and
strengthening democratic institutions and the rule of law, including efforts to
address organized crime, drug trafficking, and youth unemployment.
While states including the UK, the US, the Netherlands, Canada, France, and
Germany continue to make important contributions to the Special Court for Sierra
Leone, which relies primarily on voluntary funding, the court continued to suffer
from financial shortfalls.