 SIERRA LEONE
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no reports of political killings.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Harsh physical treatment of prisoners by police is thought to
 be common. Amnesty International (AI) reported in 1987 and in
 1988 that prison conditions are poor and food shortages
 severe. Lawyers and journalists continued in 1988 to contend
 that deaths due to malnutrition, pneumonia, and diarrhea are
 common. Subsequent to AI's 1987 report, the President
 appointed a special commission of inquiry to investigate
 prison conditions, but the commission's anticipated report
 failed to appear in 1988 and is now projected for early 1989.
 Many Sierra Leoneans are concerned that the report will focus
 on misconduct by prison officials rather than on the
 conditions themselves.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Judicial review of arrests is part of Sierra Leone common
 law. Under normal circumstances, detainees not charged with
 an offense within 28 days of arrest must be released. There
 are reports, however, that judicial review, including the
 28-day limit, is not always observed. Attorneys and others
 have often alleged that police, to harass or to exact personal
 gain, sometimes detain persons without charge or judicial
 review. There are also reports that those too poor to hire a
 lawyer are often held for years without trial, particularly
 when the accuser has paid enforcement or judicial officials to
 violate the law.
 The application of due process in the pretrial period has been
 further eroded by the President's new economic emergency
 measures, announced in November 1987, which gave the
 Government additional detention and other powers to deal with
 smugglers and hoarders of currency and commodities. During a
 state of emergency, the Public Emergency Act comes into
 effect, and persons detained under its provisions are not
 guaranteed a hearing unless charged with a capital offense.
 Under the Constitution, the President may take measures to
 detain any person who is, or is reasonably suspected of being,
 dangerous to the well-being of the Republic. The Economic
 Emergency Law extended the definition of 'dangerous* to
 include activities relating to certain types of economic
 behavior.
 At the end of 1988, the number of persons held in detention,
 including under the emergency legislation, was not known, but
 several hundred persons were detained in the first months
 after the new measures went into effect. Most of the
 detentions under'the emergency legislation have been of short
 duration.
 
 
 302
 SIERRA LEONE
 Exile as a political weapon is not practiced in Sierra Leone.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Sierra Leone's judicial system is composed of a Supreme Court,
 an intermediate Appeals Court, a High Court of Justice, and
 magistrates courts. Judges are appointed by the President.
 Native courts presided over by local chiefs administer
 customary law.
 The judiciary has generally maintained its independence,
 although some critics charge that the legal system is
 increasingly subject to political manipulation, often before
 cases reach the courts, and that it has also been penetrated
 by corruption, particularly at the lower levels. Defendants
 are allowed counsel of their choice. Many defendants,
 however, cannot afford counsel. Public defenders are provided
 only in capital offense cases. Convictions may be appealed.
 Appeal Courts generally have a reputation of being less
 susceptible to corruption.
 There are no known political prisoners in Sierra Leone. The
 first appeal phase of the treason case involving the former
 First Vice President, Francis M. Minah, and 17 others was
 conducted in the Appeals Court in 1988. Minah and the others
 were accused of attempting to assassinate the President and
 take over the Government. In September the Appeals Court
 dismissed charges against 4 of the accused, reduced the prison
 sentences in 2 other cases, and retained death sentences of 12
 others, including Minah. Subsequently, the defendants
 appealed to the Supreme Court--a decision was not expected
 before the first quarter of 1989--and they still have the
 possibility later to appeal to the Clemency Board chaired by
 the President.
 Most observers considered the trial to be fair. The trial was
 open to the public and human rights monitors, and the
 defendants had legal counsel'. They were given adequate time
 to prepare their cases and call witnesses. Nevertheless, some
 attorneys criticized the trial judge's handling of the case,
 alleging in particular that the judge appeared to presume the
 defendants guilty before the proceedings commenced. The
 Appeals Court also received criticism for commending the trial
 judge's behavior before the appeals process was completed and
 for dismissing charges against four of the defendants without
 explanatory comment.
 Although the 1987 coup case--from arrest to trial to appeal--
 moved steadily, most court cases are not rapidly expedited.
 Sierra Leone's legal system is heavily overburdened and lacks
 resources, especially in trained personnel. This results in
 an average delay of 2 years before a case actually comes to
 trial. Additionally, often the official records of court
 proceedings are handwritten notes taken by the judges. This
 practice limits lawyers' access to written documentation and
 puts in question the impartiality of the official record.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Government does not generally interfere with the rights of
 privacy and family, and legal safeguards against arbitrary
 invasion of the home are usually observed. However, under the
 emergency legislation, which permits unrestricted search and
 
 
 303
 SIERRA LEONE
 seizure of private property, there were numerous actions in
 1988, especially during the initial emergency phase, involving
 search for diamonds, gold, and currency.
 Neither censorship of mail nor electronic eavesdropping by the
 State on private conversations has been reported. Some
 organizations, however, have claimed that informers report to
 the Government on their activities, and there have been
 reports that international phone calls are monitored.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Although freedom of speech is legally guaranteed, this can be
 abridged under the Constitution if the proper functioning of
 the Government is deemed to be in jeopardy. In practice, the
 Government generally tolerates public criticism by citizens,
 and academic freedom is respected. Political propaganda
 occasionally circulates clandestinely within the country from
 opposition groups based in Western Europe or the United States.
 A lively, privately owned press is subject to government
 restrictions. Of seven active newspapers, only two are
 considered government controlled. However, under the
 emergency regulations, the Government has broad powers to
 restrict press freedom, including through censorship. The
 emergency regulations provide for prison sentences of up to 7
 years and fines up to $750 for publication of any false
 statement calculated to bring another person into disrepute or
 for any statement in a newspaper (regardless of its veracity)
 that is likely to alarm the public, disturb the peace, or stir
 up feelings of ill-will among ethnic or religious groups.
 Although thus far the Government has been restrained in using
 these powers, there have been reported cases of harassment,
 including search and seizure of press property and overnight
 detention of editors. For example, in 1988 the police
 searched the offices of one newspaper after the editors
 published an editorial criticizing corruption in the police
 department. Nevertheless, newspapers continued in 1988
 routinely to report on sensitive political topics such as
 misuse of government funds, bribery, and bureaucratic
 indiscipline. The press has been particularly active in
 reporting on corruption since the Government began an
 anticorruption campaign in July 1987.
 Mindful of latent government powers, journalists customarily
 exercised self-censorship even before the new regulations.
 For example, most editors avoided publishing articles
 personally attacking the Head of State or portraying the
 country in negative terms. The Newspaper Act of 1983
 specifies qualification standards for editors and sets a fee
 for registration of newspapers. There has been no reported
 use of that Act to punish newspapers or their editors although
 the potential for such abuse is apparent.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Constitution provides for freedom of assembly and permits
 the formation of trade unions and other economic, social, or
 professional associations. These rights, however, are limited
 in practice, most significantly in the political sphere.
 Public demonstrations are generally not allowed. Permits must
 be obtained from the police for public meetings and
 demonstrations, and under the emergency regulations these are
 
 
 SIERRA LEONE
 not freely given. In three 1988 cases exemplifying this
 restriction, the Government denied permits to groups wishing
 to march against the American Embassy following the downing of
 an Iranian airliner, to market women wishing to march-on the
 State House to protest an increase in food prices, and to
 students wishing to stage a protest demonstration against
 inflated rice prices in Sierra Leone. With respect to the
 latter, there were also unconfirmed reports that some student
 activists were detained in order to discourage the planned
 demonstrations. Groups of citizens can and do make orderly
 representations to the Government on policy issues and are not
 subject to reprisals.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 A tradition of religious tolerance is practiced in Sierra
 Leone. Muslims, the largest religious group, Christians,
 animists, and adherents of other faiths practice their
 religions freely. They publish and distribute religious
 documents without government interference. The hajj (Muslim
 pilgrimage to Mecca) is an annual occurrence partially
 subsidized by the Government. Employment within the civil
 service and appointments at high political levels do not
 appear to be religiously biased. There appears to be no
 favored religion under the country's one-party system.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The President's economic emergency program if implemented
 fully, could affect the freedom of movement of people, e.g.,
 enabling the Government to resettle people to other areas if
 deemed necessary for administrative or economic reasons. Thus
 far, the only official control on travel within the country
 has been in the diamond-mining areas where restrictions are
 intended to control smuggling. There are no official
 regulations restricting foreign travel, but limitations on the
 amount of foreign exchange a person may take out of the
 country have this effect.
 Sierra Leone, a party to the U.N. Convention and Protocol
 Relating to the Status of Refugees, is host to approximately
 200 refugees, most of whom are students from Namibia. There
 was one reported incident of forced repatriation in 1988: a
 Lebanese citizen who was among the four persons acquitted in
 the 1987-88 treason trial.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Citizens do not have the right to change their government
 through pluralistic democratic procedures. Enshrined in the
 Constitution, Sierra Leone is a one-party state (the All
 People's Congress or APC), and no other parties are legally
 permitted. Since independence in 1961, the clear trend in
 political development has been to increase executive power and
 decrease constitutional checks on that power.
 The Constitution provides that the leader of the party will be
 the sole candidate for the office of President, and he is
 elected for 7 years. The Cabinet, selected by the President
 
 
 305
 SIERRA LEONE
 from elected as well as appointed members of Parliament, meets
 with the President regularly and is a key advisory body.
 The unicameral Parliament is subservient to the party and is
 largely an advisory body. It consists of 116 seats: 97
 popularly elected, 12 paramount chiefs elected by traditional
 councils, and 7 members appointed by the President. Debate in
 Parliament is often lively, and some backbenchers have gained
 prominence through their interventions criticizing government
 policy.
 Candidates for Parliament are chosen in each constituency by
 the party's local executive committee, which may select up to
 five candidates from a list of multiple party candidates. The
 Central Committee of the APC has the power to disapprove the
 nomination of any candidate selected by the local party
 executive if it believes that the candidacy would be inimical
 to the State. Parliamentary elections are held every 5 years,
 most recently in May 1986. Party leaders contend that
 opposition and strong challenges exist within the single party
 and that local party members have some influence in the
 designation of parliamentary candidates. There is universal
 suffrage in Sierra Leone.
 Although assertions have been made of favoritism in political
 appointments and the military based on tribalism, tribal
 participation appears to be broadly based. However, the
 Government continues to be male-dominated with only three
 female Members of Parliament.
 In addition to the national political system, a traditional
 system of local government. operates in the provinces.
 Paramount chiefs are elected for life by the members of local
 chiefdom councils. The paramount chiefs wield considerable
 authority in local affairs and are instrumental in resolving
 local civil disputes.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government generally has taken a positive attitude toward
 international and nongovernmental groups involved in
 monitoring human rights violations. In response to the 1987
 AI report, President Momoh convened a special commission to
 investigate possible human rights violations in the prisons.
 An AI representative attended part of the 1987 treason trial.
 The Government has not interfered with the activities of the
 Sierra Leone Bar Association's Society for the Preservation of
 Human Rights. This active human rights group, founded in
 1985, is supported by Members of Parliament, lawyers, judges,
 medical doctors, academics, civil servants, trade unionists,
 and the media. The Society won its first major court case in
 1986, obtaining the acquittal of a group arrested for
 demonstrating peacefully. Since then the group has obtained
 the release of several persons who were detained without
 judicial review. Local chapters of Amnesty International also
 exist.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 There is no officially sanctioned discrimination on the basis
 of sex, religion, language, or social status. However,
 
 
 306
 SIERRA LEONE
 citizens of non-African descent do face political
 restrictions. Persons born in Sierra Leone of Lebanese
 extraction have, in actual practice, fewer rights than Sierra
 Leoneans of indigenous ethnic origin. Although Lebanese
 residents may hold Sierra Leonean passports, the right of
 political participation currently is limited, including
 membership in the APC. Members of Sierra Leone's various
 ethnic and religious groups interact peacefully.
 Women in Sierra Leone are guaranteed equal rights by the
 Constitution, but their status varies widely in different
 parts of the country and depends heavily upon the cultural
 values and traditions of their ethnic group. These values
 affect women's access to education, including higher
 education. In most rural areas, women are farmers. In some
 areas of Sierra Leone, women have been elected to the
 prestigious position of paramount chief. Women are prominent
 in most professions; several have served as mayor of Freetown,
 and there is one female Supreme Court Justice.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Sierra Leone has a long history of trade unionism, and most
 sectors of the modern economy are unionized. Labor has the
 right to associate, to organize into unions, and to recruit
 members. Labor, including civil servants, is also permitted
 to strike. There have been a number of strikes and other
 forms of industrial action in recent years, most recently a
 teachers' work slowdown in 1987 and a strike among water
 workers in 1988. Unions also have the right to join
 confederations. The Government has favored one confederation,
 the Sierra Leone Labor Congress (SLCC), to which most unions
 now belong, and the Government exercises influence on labor
 through the SLCC. The head of the SLCC is a member of the APC
 and a Member of Parliament. The SLCC participates in Sierra
 Leone's delegation to the International Labor Organization
 (ILO) meetings and is a member of the International
 Confederation of Free Trade Unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Labor has the right to engage in collective bargaining. This
 takes place through the medium of trades councils, which meet
 according to a regular schedule (every 3 years for a major
 review, every 15 months for a wage review). However, both
 parties have the right to call for negotiations as and when
 the circumstances demand. Labor legislation is applied
 uniformly throughout the country.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 There is no forced or compulsory labor in Sierra Leone in
 practice. For many years the ILO Committee of Experts has
 asked the Government to repeal or amend a section of the
 Chiefdom Councils Act, under which compulsory farm labor may
 be required, so as to bring the law into conformity with ILO
 Convention 29 on forced labor.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 There is no minimum age for the employment of children, and
 child labor is practiced via apprenticeships in the trades and
 especially in subsistence, family farming.
 
 
 307'
 SIERRA LEONE
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The normal workweek is 5 days and 38 to 40 hours. In 1988 the
 Government eliminated Saturday workdays for all but essential
 government employees. An established code sets out acceptable
 standards for the workplace, covering maintenance of
 machinery, safety procedures, and sanitary conditions. In
 actual practice, manufacturers in Sierra Leone, of which there
 are very few, probably do not conform to the code, and there
 is no practical means of enforcing it. Sierra Leone has a
 legislated minimum wage, but inflation has long since rendered
 it meaningless. In the private sector voluntary wage councils
 establish minimum wages and work conditions that are usually
 followed.
 
 
 308
