 SIERRA LEONE
 Sierra Leone is a Republic governed by a military junta, the National Provisional
 Ruling Council (NRC). The NPRC was formed in 1992 after a military coup by a
 small cadre of soldiers from the war front, and rules by decree. Captain Valentine
 E.M. Strasser is Chairman of the NPRC, Head of State, Commander in Chief of the
 Armed Forces and Secretary of Defense.
 Under the NPRC, the 1991 Constitution technically remains in force but it is se-
 verely restricted, and superseded in places by military decrees. In late 1993, Cap-
 tain Strasser announced a timetable for Sierra Leonea transition to democracy, to
 culminate with a general election in December 1995 and the inauguration of a presi-
 dent in January 1996. The Government held public debates on the "WorkingDoeu-
 ment on the Constitutio, which was drafted by the National Advisory Counci
 (NAC), and scheduled a referendum on a new constitution for May 1995. In Novem-
 ber the Government established the National Commission for Democracy to provide
 education to the Sierra Leonea  n       their rights and obligations under the
 1991 Constitution.
 The Sierra Leone military forces (RSLMF), supported by Western Area Security
 Patrols (WASPS) and the regular police force are responsible for both external and
 internal security. The RSLMF continued active operations against rebel forces,
 known as the Revolutionr United Front (RUF), which were supported by the Na-
 tional Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL). The Government acknowledged, however,
 that much of the fighting was being conducted not by the RUP but by renegade
 RSLMF soldiers and other Sierra Leoneans. Thus, while significant progress was
 made in subduing the RUF, renegade RSLM F continued to stage numerous and
 bloody attacks on villages and on vehicles traveling the main roads in the Eastern
 and Southern Provinces, and a few parts of the Northern Province. There were re-
 ported human rights abuses on all sides in the internal confict, including summary
 executions and torture, and abuses by the police and military against criminal sus-
 pects outside the war zone.
 More than 70 percent of the 4.3 million population are involved in some as pest
 of agriculture, mainly subsistence farming. Although the country is rich in minerals,
 including titanium-bearing rutile, goeld, and diamonds, official receipts from legal ex-
 ports of gold and diamonds have decreased over recent years; significant portions
 of these Gsources are smuggled abroad. The major diamond-producing area was
 
 
 222
 wrested back from rebel control in late 1993, but at year's end, government reve-
 nues from the mineral sector were still far below preconflict levels.
 Human rights abuses were extensive chiefly, though not exclusively, in the areas
 of armed conflict where RSLMF and reel units committed extrajudicial killings and
 torture. In July, an armed group of men reportedly mutilated more than 100 villag-
 ers in Southern province, and there were numerous reports throughout the year
 that the rebels massacred civilians, and looted and destroyed their villages. Both the
 police and army summarily executed criminal suspects and beat and otherwise
 abused suspects during arrest and interrogation.
 The NPRC continued to maintain control over both government and social affairs,
 overseeing restrictions upon freedoms of speech, press, assembly and association.
 Discrimination and violence against women remain widespread. New press guide-
 lines in 1994 impose heavy financial burdens on publishers. Political parties remain
 suspended.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Both Government forces and RUF
 rebels engaged in these abuses. Government forces often tortured and killed sus-
 pected rebels. In September, a groupreported to be RUF rebels hunted down a local
 chief in the Bo District, mutilated im and then killed him. Many reports suggest
 undisciplined military and other security personnel, while they were engaged in
 looting, robbery, and extortion (see Section Lg.) also killed civilians.
 b. Disappearance.-Reports continued of disappearances of captured persons who
 were suspected to be rebels. The NPRC denied these reports, and in late 1993 im-
 plemented an amnesty program for civilians and rebels returning from disputed ter-
 ritories. The amnesty offer permitted many civilians trapped in rebel areas to turn
 themselves in, but the offer attracted few combatants.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Although the Constitution prohibits torture, the police mistreated subjects during
 interrogation and arrest. In one incident, soldiers at a military checkpoint mutilated
 the hand of a driver who failed to obey a command. Military personnel engaged in
 combat operations sometimes physically abused civilians (see Section 1.g.). The Gov-
 ernment occasionally punished them for such abuses.
 The Government worked to improve the diet and medical care in prisons through-
 out the year, but conditions at times remained life-threatening. Detainee cells often
 lack beds or toilet facilities. Overcrowding is the norm at Freetown's Pademba Road
 Prison. These prison conditions are of particular concern because shortcomings in
 the legal system often result in prolonged pretrial detention. In response both to
 overcrowding and prolonged detentions (many of which date back to the Momoh Re-
 gime which ended in April 1992), the Government undertook to review cases and
 released some prisoners outright, including 219 in late December. The courts re-
 leased additional prisoners. Men and women inmates are separated, but separate
 facilities for incarceration of juveniles do not exist. Homosexual rape is common.
 The Government continued to grant the International Committee of the Red Cross
 (ICRC) access to prisoners, including alleged rebels.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or E&ile.-In practice, the Government does not
 provide adequate safeguards against arbitrary or unjust detentions nor for their for-
 mal review. By law, after an initial 24-hour detention, detainees must have access
 to legal counsel, families, and medical care, but authorities rarely obey the law un-
 less detainees can afford legal counsel to demand compliance.
 Police and security agencies have additional detention authority. Under NPRC de-
 crees, higher-ranking police and military officials may arrest without warrant and
 detain indefinitely any person suspected of posing a threat to public safety. In prac-
 tice, soldiers do arrest or detain civilians without charge. Relatives are not formally
 notified, but the authorities generally respond to inquiries. Arrested foreigners are
 often released but may not depart the country.
 The Government provides legal representation for the indigent only in cases of
 capital offenses. Lack of counsel in other cases frequently leads to abuse. Many indi-
 gent detainees are ignorant of their rights and assume, sometimes correctly, that
 [aw enforcement or judicial authorities will be paid by the accuser to rule against
 them. The Society for the Protection of Human Rights provides free legal counsel
 to some indigent detainees.
 On the second anniversary of the coup which brought the NPRC to power, it re-
 leased 63 prisoners but did not disclose the charges on which they had been de-
 tained. In May, 24 officials of the former Government who had been arrested in the
 wake of the 1992 coup and detained for up to 2 years pending the outcome of gov-
 
 
 223
 ernmentrganzed commissions of inquiry, were rearrested when they failed to
 meet a Zeacrie for repayment of funds the Government said they had embezzled
 while in office. The Sierra Leone Bar Association and Amnesty International chal-
 lenged the legality of the arrests. Police released several prisoners after a few days,
 but kept most in prison or under house arrest until mid-August, when the majority
 were either set free or released to house arrest.
 The Government did not use exile. However, some officials of the former regime
 chose to leave the country, or to remain abroad rather -than return to face possible
 retribution.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The NPRC can effectively control the judiciary.
 There is strong evidence that favoritism plays a role in court decisions. The NPRC
 employs special commissions of inquiry to circumvent the judiciary.
 There are three judicial sstems: regular courts, local or traditional courts, and
 courts martial, which try only military cases. The regular court system is based on
 the British model and consists of a Supreme Court, an intermediate court of ap-
 peals, a high court of magistrates, and magistrates' courts. There are criminal and
 civil courts. Decisions by lower courts may be appealed, in part because there are
 delays of up to 5 years in bringing cases to trial.
 Judges in the regular court system may serve until they reach the mandatory re-
 tirement age of 65, unless their appointment is revoked prior to that time. There
 were no known instances in 1994 of judges being fired or transferred for political
 reasons. Indigenous elected ethnic leaderspreside over the local courts and admin-
 ister tribal law in civil cases, for example, dealing with family and property matters.
 These local courts are often the only legal institutions in rural areas.
 The court-martial system, based on British military codes and the common law,
 provides for commander adjudication of minor offenses. Soldiers accused of more se-
 rious offenses are transferred from field units to Force Headquarters. There are
 credible reports that enlisted personnel subjected to punishment by field command-
 ers have in some cases appealed to friends in the NPRC and had sentences over-
 turned.
 Minimum due process rights are not always respected. Authorities sometimes beat
 detainees and mutilate or otherwise punish them prior to incarceration or a court
 hearing. he regular court system contains provisions which discriminate against
 women and minorities by accepting and sanctioning discrimination embodied in
 tribal, traditional, and islamic law.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-AI-
 though the Constitution prohibits arbitrary invasion of the home, the authorities
 still have broad authority under NPRC decrees to monitor actions or conversations
 within homes, to prevent a person from acting in a manner prejudicial to public
 safety, to impose restrictions on employment or business, to control association or
 communication with other persons, and to interfere with correspondence.
 In practice, there were numerous occasions of abusive treatment of ordinary citi-
 zens by ill-disciplined soldiers and police, both within and outside of the war zone.
 These abuses included forced entry into homes, robberies, and assaults, some of
 them fatal. Superior officers frequently punished offending soldiers when caught. In
 November the government executed 12 soldiers who hadI been found guilty by a
 court-martial for crimes ranging from armed robbery to murder (see Section I.e.).
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-There were serious violations of humanitarian law in the conflict centered
 in the eastern and southern provinces along the Liberian border. In that region
 RSLMF forces fought Revolutionary United Front (RUF) forces, which are supported
 in part by Charles Taylor's NPFL from Liberia. The RSLMF was also involved in
 ighting bandits and groups of military deserters. This conflict involves different
 ethnic groups and has resulted in an unknown number of deaths. Some estimates
 indicate that more than 10,000 civilians have been killed since 1991. More than 1.25
 million Sierra Leoneans are displaced internally or are living as refugees in neigh-
 boring countries.
 The rebels also committed numerous humanitarian abuses against civilians and
 RSLMF soldiers. In one attack in July, the rebels reportedly killed and mutilated
 more than 100 villagers in the Southern District. In August they beat to death, then
 beheaded, an RSLMVIF offier caught in an ambush of a onvoy of civilian vehicles
 traveling under military escort in the Northern Provine. Rebels also abducted
 mothers traveling in the same convoy and threw their babies into the bush to die.
 Children as young as 12 reportedly participated in some rebel attacks. Most of the
 rebels are of the Mende and Kissy ethnic groups.
 Government troops committed many abuses against suspected rebels and their
 nonombatant suporers, including summary executions of prisoners. The RSLMF
 engaged in public humiliation and torture of captives, including disfigurement, beat-
 
 
 224
 "ns, and parading captives naked, and sometimes displayed human skulls as tr-
 phes. The RUa does not appear to promote a political phisophy.
 There appears to have been little ethnically motivated violence in the hostilities
 to date.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Although the Constitution provides for freedom
 of speech, the Government routinely abridges freedom of expression if it deems na-
 tional security to be endangered. Criticizing government leaders or offending the
 dignity of the state are criminal offenses. Although the military regime can severely
 restrict freedom of speech, there was nonetheless much criticism of the Government
 in the press and in other forams. The Government has not always attempted to halt
 these challenges, nor to exact retribution from those who criticize it.
 At the beginning of 1994 there were 10 active newspapers, two of which were con-
 trolled directly by the Government. In February, the Government announced new,
 stricter registration and publication requirements for newspapers, which resulted in
 the closing of several newspapers. The press criticized these new conditions as an
 attempt to limit freedom of expression. But several additional newspapers have
 been launched since, and at years end there were 13 in publication.
 Journalists continued to suffer threats and intimidation. In April a reporter was
 stripped naked and beaten unconscious by soldiers for articles he had written criti-
 cizing the Government. In August police arrested an editor and reporter after publi-
 cation of an article alleging corruption in a court proceeding. In September several
 journalists received anonymous death threats, in letters which accused them of un-
 dermining the Government and the military. In April the Government imposed a
 requirement that all news reports concerning the country's internal conflict be sub-
 mitted to the Department of Defense for approval prior to publication or broadcast.
 Manyjournalists exercise self-censorship.
 One of the capital's two radio stations is government-controlled and reflects only
 the views of the Government. The other is operated by Christian missionaries and
 broadcasts religious programming and Voice of America news. Two more privately
 owned stations operate in the provinces. The Government owns and operates the
 only television station.
 There were no reports of detention of educators or threats to them for their teach-
 ing activities, and university students who staged protests over campus issues were
 not subjected to Government retribution.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Although the 1991 Constitu-
 tion provides for freedom of assembly as well as the right to form political, economic,
 social and professional organizations, the regime has banned aIIpolitical parties.
 The NPRC permitted peaceful demonstrations. Permits were required to hold them,
 and were routinely granted. However, in one case a prominent politician who held
 office in the pre-NPRC period was refused a permit to speak in public.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion and
 there were no reports that the Government abridged this right. Although most cler-
 gy are indigenous, foreign Christian missionaries are active as well as a number of
 Muslim clerics from other countries.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-There were no legal restrictions on travel within the country, but un-
 safe conditions often prevented travel in the Southern and Eastern Provinces. Sol-
 diers at military and paramilitary checkpoints also delayed travel, frequently de-
 manding bribes. NPRC decrees permit senior police and military officers to stp and
 question any person. Exit visas are required for anyone except diplomats seeking
 to travel outside the country. There are no restrictions on emigration or repatri-
 ation. Continuing conflict in the primarily agricultural Eastern and Southern Prov-
 inces at times internally displaced as many as 950,000 persons during 1994, reduc-
 ing food production and placing a severe strain on the local economy. In addition
 to the internally displaced, an estimated 300,000 Sierra Leoneans sought refuge in
 Guinea and Liberia.
 Sierra Leone continued to host thousands of Liberian refugees. The Government
 did not force refugees to repatriate to countries in which they fear persecution, al-
 though no legal process for seeking political asylum exists.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens did not have this right. The NPRC controlled all government institutions
 and appoints all senior government officials. The Deputy Chairman of the NPRC,
 Julius Maada Bio, is the Chief Secretary of State. The NPRC is composed of the
 Supreme Council of State (SCS), and the Council of Secretaries of State. The SCS
 
 
 formulates government policy, serving as a de facto legislature; day-to-day govern-
 ment operations are overseen by the department secretaries, who make up the Cabi-
 net.
 Women are under represented in the Government. The NPRC appointed a woman
 to head the Department of Education, only the second female cabinet minister in
 the country's history. The two largest cities have female mayors. Some senior civil
 service and judicial positions are also held by women. There are no female NPRC
 members.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government permitted the sole local human rights group, the League for
 Human Rights and Democracy, to exist, but hampered its effectiveness by intimida-
 tion.
 The Government allowed the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
 to visit prisoners in Pademba Road Prison and in various military barracks, where
 it sometimes detained suspected rebels. The Government granted Amnesty Inter-
 national access to all prisoners it requested to visit.
 Section 5. Discrimination based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Women.-The Constitution provides equal rights for women, but in practice
 women face both legal and societal discrimination. Their rights and status under
 traditional law vary significantly, depending upon the ethnic group. The Temne and
 Limba tribes, for example, accord more rights to a woman to inherit her husband's
 property than do the Mende, who give preference to male heirs and unmarried
 daughters.
 Women do not have equal access to education, economic opportunities, health fa-
 cilities, or social freedoms. In rural areas they perform much of the subsistence
 farming and all of the child rearing and have little opportunity for education. The
 average schooling level for women is markedly below that of men. Only 6 percent
 of women are literate. At the university level, men predominate. One recently
 formed group has as its purpose the improvement of economic opportunities and ac-
 cess to health services for women, but its effectiveness has yet to be demonstrated.
 Violence against women, especially wife beating, is common. The police are un-
 likely to intervene in domestic disputes except in cases of severe injury or death.
 Few cases of such violence go to court. The issue is not recognized as a societal prob-
 lem and receives no high-level attention by the Government.
 Rape remains a societal problem. It is punishable by up to 14 years imprisonment;
 the law is enforced.
 Children.-The Government recently began to address, with the help of non-
 gonyVernmental organizations, the integration of "boy soldiersback into society.
 anunderage boyshad been allowed to join military operations early in the war.
 Instances of ritual murders of boys and girls, as well as adults, associated with
 animist religious groups in the provinces, continued. The press reported these mur-
 ders widely and they were openly discussed in public. The Government arrested sev-
 eral ritual murder suspects in 1994.
 Female genital mutilation (FGM), which international health experts have con-
 demned as damaging to both physical and psychological health, is widely practiced
 on girls at a young age, especially in traditional tribal groups and among the less
 educated. While one independent expert in the field estimates the percentage of fe-
 males who have undergone this procedure may be as high as 80 percent, local
 groups believe that this figure is overstated. Membership has been declining in fe-
 male secret societies which practice FGM in their initiation rites.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-The Government does not officially approve
 discrimination among people of different tribal groups, but tribal loyalty remains an
 important factor in government, military, and business. Complaints of corruption
 and ethnic discrimination in government appointments, contracts, military commis-
 sions, and promotions are common.
 Residents of non-African descent face institutionalized political restrictions. Cur-
 rent law restricts citizenship to people of Negro-African descent following a patrilin-
 eal pattern, effectively denying citizenship to many persons, notably in the Lebanese
 community, the largest affected minority.
 People With Disabiities.-Questions of public facility access and discrimination
 against the disabled have not become public policy issues. The Department of Edu-
 cation has, however, created a position to implement the mainstreaming of students
 with learning disabilities.
 
 
 226
 
 No laws mandate accessibility to buildings or provide for other assistance for the
 handicapped. There does not appear to be outright discrimination against the handi-
 capped in housing or education, but with the high rate of unemployment, few handi-
 capped people work in offices or factories. The difficulty handicapped people face in
 finding employment places many facilities and services beyond their financial
 means.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Unions have continued their activities under the
 NPRC. The Constitution provides for the right of association, and all workers, in-
 cluding civil servants, have the right to join trade unions of their choice. Unions are
 independent of the Government. Individual labor unions have by custom joined the
 Sierra Leone Labor Congess (SLLC), and all unions are members of it. Membership
 is, however, voluntary. There is no legal prohibition against the SLLC leadership
 holding political office, and leaders have held both elected and appointed govern-
 ment positions.
 Under the Trade Union Act, any five persons may form a trade union by applying
 to the Registrar of Trade Unions, who has statutory powers under the act to ap-
 prove the creation of trade unions. Applications for approval by the Registrar may
 be rejected for several reasons, including an insufficient numler of members, pro-
 posed representation in an industry already served by an existing union, or incom-
 plete documentation. If the Registrar rejects an application, his decision may be ap-
 pealed in the ordinary courts, but such action is seldom taken. Approximately 60
 percent of workers in urban areas, including Government employees, are unionized,
 but unions have had little success in organizing workers in the large agricultural
 and mining sectors.
 Unions have the right to strike without exception, but the Government may re-
 quire 21 days notice. NPRC decrees which prohibit disruption of public tranquility
 or disruption of supplies could be employed to prevent a prolongedstrike. Although
 union members may be fired for participating even in a lawful strike, no such inci-
 dents were reported. Unions are free to form federations and confederations and af-
 ffiiate internationally. The SLLC is a member of the International Confederation of
 Free Trade Unions, and there are no restrictions on the international travel or con-
 tacts of trade unionists.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The legal framework for col-
 lective bargaining is the Regulation of Wages and Industrial Relations Act. Collec-
 tive bargaining must take place in trade 'rup negotiating councils, each of which
 has an equal number of employer and worker representatives. Most enterprises are
 covered by collective bargaining agreements on wages and working conditions. The
 SLLC provides assistance to unions in preparing for negotiations. In case of a dead-
 lock, the Government may intervene. It has not, however, used decrees to prevent
 strikes.
 No law prohibits retribution against strikers. Should an employee be fired for
 union activities, he may file a complaint with a labor tribunal and seek reinstate-
 ment. Complaints of discrimination against unions are made to the industrial court
 for arbitration. Individual trade unions investigate alleged violations of work condi-
 tions to try to ensure that employers take the necessary steps to correct abuses.
 Two textile enterprises were granted status as export processing zones. The labor
 laws apply to them equally.
 c. P ohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Under the Chiefdom's Council Act,
 compulsory labor may be imposed by individual chiefs, requiring members of their
 villages to contribute to the improvement of common areas. This practice exists only
 in rural areas. There is no penalty for noncompliance.
 The NPRC does not require compulsory labor. A decree does require that home-
 owners, businessmen, and vendors clean and maintain their premises. Failure to
 comply is punishable by fine or imprisonment. Determinations of such cleaning and
 maintenance may be made by any health officer, police officer, or member of the
 armed forces. The last Saturday of every month is declared a National Cleaning
 Day, and there were instances of security forces publicly humiliating and beating
 citizens to ensure compliance.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum age for employment
 is officially 18 years, but in practice there is no enforcement because there is no gov-
 ernment entity specifically charged with this task. Children routinely assist in fam-
 ily businesses, especially those of vendors and petty traders. In rural areas children
 work seasonally on family subsistence farms.
 Because the adult unemployment rate is high (60 percent in some areas), few chil-
 dren are involved in the industrial sector. There have been reports that young chil-
 dren have been hired by foreign employers to work as domestics overseas at ex-
 
 
 227
 tremely low wages and in appalling conditions. The Department of Foreign Affairs
 is responsible for reviewing overseas work applications to see that no one under 14
 is employed for this purpose and to enforce certain wage standards. On at least two
 occasions during the year Sierra Leonean ambassadors abroad intervened to assist
 the repatriation of Sierra Leonean nationals who had suffered abuse.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no minimum wage. Purchasing power
 continued to decline, and most workers have to pool incomes with their extended
 families and engage in subsistence food production in order to maintain a minimum
 standard of living. The Government's suggested standard workweek is 38 hours, but
 this is not mandated, and most worweks exceed 38 hours. The Government sets
 health and safety standards, but the standards are outmoded and often not en-
 forced. The Health and Safety Division of the Department of Labor has inspection
 and enforcement responsibility, but inadequate funding and transportation limit its
 effectiveness.
 Health and safety regulations are included in collective bargining agreements,
 but there is no evidence of systematic enforcement of those heth ansafetyand-
 ards. Trade unions provide the only protection for workers who file complaints about
 working conditions. Initially, a union makes a formal complaint about a hazardous
 work condition. If this is rejected, the union may issue a 21-day strike notice. If
 workers remove themselves from dangerous work situations without making a for-
 mal complaint, they risk being fired.
