 SIERRA LEONE
 Sierra Leone became a one-party state on June 14,
 1978, when a national referendum, marred by charges of
 ballot box stuffing, approved a new Constitution. All
 parliamentary members of the opposition Sierra Leone
 People's Party agreed to join the ruling All People's
 Conqress (APC) party and several became Ministers in
 the new Cabinet announced on August 15, 1978. The
 human rights environment was improved by release of
 the remaining persons detained under the provisions
 of the Public Emergency Act in the aftermath of
 demonstrations which accompanied the 1977 parliamentary
 elections. The Constitution, however, if strictly
 applied, could lead to restrictions on rights of
 assembly, association, speech and movement and could
 dilute the independence of the judiciary.
 1.   Respect of the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a.   Torture
 There is no evidence of the use of torture in
 Sierra Leone. It is forbidden by the Constitution.
 b.   Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 There have been no reports of cruel, inhuman or
 degrading treatment or punishment. The Constitution
 prohibits "any punishment or other treatment which is
 inhuman or degrading."
 c. Arbitary Arrest or Imprisonment
 Under the 1978 Constitution the President may take
 measures to detain any person who is, or is reasonably
 suspected to be, dangerous to the wellbeing of the
 Republic, provided that a State of Public Emergency has
 
 (159)
 
 
 160
 been brought into force within 28 days after that
 person has been detained. If such an emergency is not
 declared, a detainee not charged with an offense must
 be released, unless he is held under the President's
 exceptional unlimited powers. There is no available
 evidence that anyone is so detained at present.
 d.   Denial of a Fair Public Trial
 All persons charged with a criminal offense are
 entitled to a fair hearing within a reasonable time
 by an independent and impartial court established by
 law. Sierra Leone's courts have a good reputation for
 providing fair public trials. Persons detained under
 the Public Emergency Act are not guaranteed a fair
 hearing unless charged with a criminal offense, however,
 and their acquittal would not ensure release from
 detention.
 e.   Invasion of the Home
 There are effective legal safeguards against
 arbitrary invasion of the home.
 2.   Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education.
 The 1974-79 national development plan calls for
 improved welfare for the broad mass of the population
 and a more equitable distribution of income. In
 1978-79 planned development spending accounts for 24
 percent of the total Government budget. Government
 spending for agricultural development has doubled over
 the past three years. The country's economy confronts
 difficulties, however, and funds available for direct
 assistance to the poor are limited. Many observers
 believe that corruption in Sierra Leone is pervasive
 and appears to have diverted significant resources
 away from vital needs.
 The income tax is progressive but export duties
 are regressive. An income tax law amendment enacted
 
 
 161
 in 1977, but not yet in force, increases the tax burden
 on the self-employed, property owners and companies.
 A forty percent export tax on agricultural crops,
 however, redestributes resources away from the rural
 sector, compelling the small farmer to finance a
 disproportionate amount of Government expenditures.
 3.   Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Includ-
 ing:
 a.   Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion
 and Assembly
 Freedom of thought and religion are observed and
 constitutionally guaranteed. The Government makes no
 effort to impose ideological conformity or to restrict
 intellectual inquiry. Freedom of speech is widely
 observed, but under the 1978 Consitution this freedom
 can be abridged if the proper functioning of the
 recognized party (the APC) is deemed to be in jeopardy.
 Freedom of assembly is widely observed, but under
 the Constitution this freedom can easily be restricted
 in the interest of party discipline. There is no
 opposition and thus no opposition press. All major
 forms of the media are heavily controlled by the
 Government and the recognized party. Labor organizations
 are allowed to operate freely and are not subject to
 government control, although the Government has at
 times attempted to impose its will on the national
 confederation and closely monitors the freedom of
 unions to strike.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration.
 There are no official restrictions on travel within
 the country, except those to control smuggling in
 diamond mining areas of Kono District. Regulations
 governing foreign travel are liberal, and there are
 minimal. legal restrictions on emigration.
 c.   Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 
 
 162
 Political activity in recent years has been marked
 by intense and occasionally violent competition among
 political factions that largely represent tribal groups.
 Elections in 1977, for example, were accompanied by
 numerous clashes between strong-arm squads of different
 factions. The one-party state was established on the
 ground that political divisions so exacerbated traditional
 tribal rivalries that the fragile unity of the nation was
 threatened. All former opposition parliamentarians
 decided to join the recognized party. As noted, several
 former opposition parliamentarians became members of the
 Cabinet established August 15, 1978. Whether the single-
 party state will resolve the conflicting tribal and
 regional claims remains to be seen. Other unresolved
 questions are the form and structure which the recognized
 party will take and its willingness to permit intra-party
 dissent and opposition. The party's leaders are examining
 the constitutions and structures of other single party
 states to develop a model for Sierra Leone.
 There is no government-approved discrimination based on
 ethnic, communal, racial or caste factors. The status
 of women varies from equality in the more modernized
 western area to the traditionally subordinated role in
 remote regions of the provinces. Increasing attention
 is being paid to the role of women in both political
 and professional actitivies.
 4.   Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The release of the last detainees prior to the national
 referendum in June muted criticism of the ruling APC
 party and one prominent self-declared exile has suggested
 that a national political reconciliation be undertaken
 now that a single-party state has been established. To
 the knowledge of the Department of State, there were no
 requests in 1977 or 1978 for outside investigation.
 Sierra Leone's responses to such requests would depend
 on the nature of the allegations and the reputation of
 the organization requesting the investigation.
 
 
