 SIERRA LEONE
 A former British colony, Sierra Leone gained its independence
 peacefully in April 1961 under a parliamentary system and as a
 member of the British Commonwealth. In April 1971 Sierra Leone
 adopted a new constitution, cutting the link to the British
 monarchy but remaining within the Commonwealth. By means of
 national referendum in June 1978, a one-party government under
 the All People's Congress was adopted with the President as head
 of state. The President exercises predominant executive authority.
 Basic civil and political rights, while generally respected in
 Sierra Leone, are limited to various degrees by the country's
 one-party structure, by governmental controls on the media, and
 through certain restrictions on freedom of assembly and associa-
 tion. There have been no major changes in the state of human
 rights during 1982. While the President's special security
 guard, numbering about 600, has been accused of limiting the
 exercise of civil and political rights at different times,
 there were no specific accusations to this end in 1982. The
 Constitution guarantees the right to property, prohibits dis-
 crimination based on race, tribe, color or creed, and provides
 for the freedom of association. National parliamentary elec-
 tions were held in April 1982. Within the one-party system,
 voters had a choice of candidates in various constituencies.
 There were reports of some deaths during confrontations
 between supporters of opposing candidates. Elections in
 thirteen constituencies had to be postponed because of
 violence or election irregularities.
 Sierra Leone is a poor country with an annual per capita gross
 national product of under $300. The economy has stagnated in
 recent years as the result of declining mineral production, a
 historic neglect of agriculture, and rising energy costs. The
 deteriorating economic situation has reduced the Government's
 capacity to undertake social welfare programs. During 1982
 comfnittee action was taken in the United Nations to add Sierra
 Leone to the list of least developed countries.
 National development plans have called for improved welfare
 for the population and a more equitable distribution of income.
 In recent years development spending, including external
 contributions, has accounted for 20-25 percent of the total
 government budget. International donors have concentrated
 development aid on the improvement and expansion of the
 country's agricultural and transportation systems. Worldwide
 recession and lower prices for Sierra Leone's major exports
 have contributed to expanding deficits both in the balance
 of payments and domestic budget. Consequently, the country's
 indebtedness has rapidly expanded. New IMF assistance may
 help this problem somewhat.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Killing
 Although there were some deaths during the campaigns for
 parliamentary elections, they were not politically motivated
 killings deliberately caused by government forces or oppo-
 sition elements. The deaths were apparently the result of
 generally spontaneous frictions over candidates and issues
 between rival party factions. There have been no other re-
 ports of politically-motivated killings.
 
 
 267
 b. Disappearance
 There have been no reports of abductions, secret arrests,
 or clandestine detentions.
 c. Torture.
 There is no indication that torture is used in Sierra Leone.
 It is specifically prohibited by the Constitution.
 d. Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 There have been no reports of cruel, inhuman, or degrading
 treatment or punishment. Health care and overall conditions
 in prisons are severe, but this seems to result from a
 general paucity of resources rather than a deliberate effort
 to inflict cruel or degrading punishment on prisoners. In
 places of detention, treatment is not differentiated by
 classification of prisoners by social class, race, sex, or
 religion. Allegations of poor prison conditions were,
 however, received by Amnesty International in 1981.
 e. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Habeas corpus is part of Sierra Leonean common law, but it
 is suspended while a state of emergency is in effect. Under
 the Constitution promulgated in 1978, the President may take
 measures to detain any person who is, or is reasonably sus-
 pected to be, dangerous to the well-being of the republic.
 A state of emergency must come into force within 28 days after
 the detention, or a detainee not charged with an offense must
 be released. If an emergency is declared, there are virtually
 no restrictions on detention. During the state of emergency
 which existed from September 1981 through early 1982, about
 180 individuals were detained on various charges. All such
 detainees were charged or released within a short period of
 time. There are no detainess at the present time.
 f. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 All persons charged with a criminal offense are entitled to
 a fair hearing within a "reasonable* time by an independent
 and impartial judiciary established by law, but, in reality,
 persons so charged may have to wait lengthy periods before
 coming to trial because of backlogs in the understaffed
 court system.
 Defendants are allowed counsel of their choice and convictions
 may be appealed. Sierra Leone's courts have a good reputation
 for providing fair public trials. Persons detained under the
 Public Emergency Act are not guaranteed a fair hearing (unless
 charged with a criminal offense) and their acquittal after
 usual constitutional procedures does not ensure release from
 detention.
 g. Invasion of the Hope
 There are legal safeguards, which are generally observed,
 against arbitrary invasion of the home. There have been no
 reports of bugging, wiretaps, or the like.
 
 
 268
 2. Respect for Civil and Political Rights, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech is legally guaranteed, but under the
 Constitution this freedom can be abridged if the proper
 functioning of the party is deemed in jeopardy. There is
 no opposition permitted and thus no opposition press but
 there are a number of independent newspapers which print
 stories critical of the Government and contain articles
 which do not appear in the government-controlled media.
 In 1981, however, the office of the most prominent of these.
 newspapers was ransacked and its printing press destroyed by
 government supporters. In mid-1980, an act was signed into
 law which imposes a significant newspaper registration
 fee and vests the power of registration with the Minister
 of Information. Decisions of the Minister can be appealed
 in court. The size of the registration fee would have
 the effect of putting many independent newspapers out
 of business. The law has not yet been put into effect,
 although the Government announced in September 1982 that
 it would be activated. Vigorous protests by the inde-
 pendent papers may be the cause for the continued delay
 in implementation. There is no formal censorship of
 domestic or foreign publications, although foreign
 periodicals have been removed from public sale on one
 or two occasions.
 Academic freedom is limited somewhat by self-censorship
 as teachers and students realize certain criticisms may
 not be palatable to the party or government, given the
 nation's one party structure.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly, although legally protected under
 normal circumstances, can be restricted under the terms
 of the Constitution. Groups seeking to organize for the
 purpose of seeking alternatives to one-party government
 could experience difficulties exercising the right of
 freedom of assembly. However, such a possibility did not
 occur in 1982.
 Labor organizations normally have been allowed to operate
 freely and have not been subject to government control.
 National strikes in the fall of 1981, during which about
 80 labor leaders were detained for varying lengths of time,
 resulted in the appointment of a commission of inquiry
 into labor matters. While the commission was conducting
 its inquiry, the executive committee of the central labor
 organization, the Sierra Leone Labor Congress, was suspended
 and a care-taker committee ran the organization's affairs.
 Following submission of the commission of inquiry report in
 September 1982, the Labor Congress was allowed to organize
 elections to form a new executive committee, which is now
 operating freely. Most major sectors are unionized, and
 unions exercise the right to organize, negotiate, and strike.
 Unions and professional organizations maintain relations
 with recognized international bodies in their field.
 
 
 269
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is respected and is constitutionally
 guaranteed.
 d. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The major official restriction on travel within the country
 is intended to control smuggling in diamond mining areas of
 Rono district. There are numerous police check points on
 major provincial roads. Regulations governing foreign
 travel are liberal, and there are minimal legal restrictions
 ,on emigration. There are no constitutional restrictions on
 repatriation. Possible revocation of citizenship and
 refugee concerns are not issues in Sierra Leone.
 e. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Only one party, the All People's Congress, is allowed to
 function in Sierra Leone. Membership in the single party
 permitted under the Constitution is open to all. There is
 a unicameral House of Representatives. There is universal
 suffrage and there is no discrimination based on sex, ethnic,
 communal, racial, or religious factors. In national elections
 held in April and June 1982, candidates were returned unop-
 posed in-about one-third of the constituencies. In a number
 of districts where voters had multiple choices, incumbents,
 including cabinet ministers, were defeated. Defeated candi-
 dates were free to petition in the courts for redress against
 alleged irregularities. The Government is balanced by tribal
 group and two women currently have cabinet posts. Some
 members of the former opposition party continue to hold
 significant positions with the Government and the All
 People's Congress.
 3.   Government Attitude Regarding International and Non-
 governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations of
 Human Rights
 Amnesty International, in September 1981, asked the Sierra
 Leonean government for information about the detention of
 labor leaders without charges and about allegations of poor
 prison conditions. The Government however, did not respond
 to Amnesty International's request.
 4.   Economic, Social, and Cultural Situation
 Sierra Leone, with a per capita Gross National Product of
 $272 (1980), is a poor land with large disparities in levels
 of income, education, access to health services and the
 overall quality of life. The majority of Sierra Leone's
 population, which is over 70 percent rural, could be cate-
 gorized as absolutely poor. In fact, 65 percent of the
 rural population falls below the absolute poverty level.
 African surnamed (i.e. tribal) Sierra Leoneans are dispro-
 portionately represented among the absolute poor because
 of the particular circumstances of the nation's history.
 The rural Sierra Leoneans tend to be of Muslim or animistic
 religious backgrounds, much more so than the more privileged
 urban groups.
 
 
 270
 Perhaps the greatest disparity in the quality of life in
 Sierra Leone is between those in the rural area and all
 but the poorest urban dwellers, a fact which is the main
 contributor to urban migration. For example, only one
 percent of the rural population has access to safe drinking
 water compared with 75 percent of the urban population.
 While adult literacy has more than doubled to 15 percent
 over a decade and total primary school enrollment has risen
 to 37 percent, rural areas are short of schools and are
 staffed by a large percentage of unqualified instructors,
 some of whom may not have gone beyond even a seventh grade
 education themselves. This causes families interested in
 their children's education and upward social mobility to
 move to Freetown or send their children to live with
 relatives in Freetown. Development in general has been
 concentrated in the Freetown/western area, an imbalance
 that was further increased by infrastructural improvements
 made in preparation for the 1980 Organization of African
 Unity Conference.
 Widespread corruption in all parts of the country has the
 effect of denying adequate medical care and nutrition to
 the poor, who often must pay bribes to obtain what should
 be free medical care, and who suffer most from the activities
 of those who make a practice of profiteering in the retailing
 of basic foodstuffs. Resultant malnutrition (the average
 Sierra Leonean's daily caloric supply has declined to only
 93 percent of nutritional requirements) and poor health care
 have helped to give Sierra Leone an infant mortality rate of
 207.5 per 1000 live births, one of the highest rates in the
 world. Nevertheless, life expectancy at birth has increased
 to 47 years. With increased life expectancy and a fertility
 rate of 6.1 births per woman, the population growth rate has
 increased to 2.6 percent per year.
 Women in Sierra Leone are guaranteed equal rights by the
 Constitution. In practice, however, the status of women
 varies substantially in different parts of the country.
 In the modern sector, women occupy such prominent posts
 as mayor of the capital city and supreme court justice,
 while in remote areas they traditionally have a more su-
 bordinate role. Even in the provincial areas, however,
 women can fill roles of significant status, such as para-
 mount chief of a district. On both official and unofficial
 levels, increasing attention is being paid to the role of
 women in political and professional activities.
 
 
 271
 U.3.0VFRSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS ANO LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: SIERRA LEONE
 .1980    -1981     1982
 .I.CON. ASSIST.-TOTAL,..           7.1      9.4      10.4
 LOANS...............         1.2      2.3       3.0
 GRANTS..........  ...       5.9      7.1       7.4
 A.AIO .................           2.0       Z.8      3.1
 LOANS.............  ,.0,0           0.0       0.0
 -GRANTS .............          2.0      2.9       3.1
 (SEC.UPP.ASST.)..            0.0      0.0       0.0
 b.F0U  FUR PEACE ......2 2.6               4.2      4.4
 ..LOANS..............         1.2      .2.3      3.0
 GRANT.S .....  ......       1.4      1.       1.4
 TITLE I-TOTAL........             1.2       2.3      3.0
 REPAY. IN  -LOANS .....          1.2      2.3       3.0
 PAY. IN F01. CURR..             .0.0      0.0       0.0
 TZTLE Il-TOTAL,....              1.4       1.9      1.4
 E.RE!.IEF.'.C.0,V t. WF2.        0.0      0.0       0.0
 VOL.RZLIEF ASSNCY.....           1.4      1.7       1.4
 C.OiHIER tCON. ASSIST...          2.5       2.4      2.9
 LOANS..............           0.0      0.0       0.0
 GRANTS.............. .    .2.5        2.4       2.9
 PEACE CORPS...              2.5      Z. .9
 NARCOTICS ........         0.0       0.0       0.0
 ., OThR..............  ..0.0       0.0       0.0
 II.MIL. A531ST.-TOTAL.             0.0      0.0       0.0
 LJANSo.............p         0.0      0.0       0.0
 GRAN0S .............          0.9      0.0       0.0
 A.MA? GRA!NTS...........         0.0       0.0      0.0
 i.;;E0ITSALE$-FS ....          00.0               0.0
 L.INTL MIL.tD.TRNG....           0.0      0.0       0.0
 Q.TRAN-tX0I_'S STOCX.           0.0      0.0       0.0
 E.OTHER GR4NTS ....... ".0                '1.0      3.0
 II.TOTAL ELON. 'r NIL..           7.1       ?o4     10.4
 LOANS ..........             1.2      2.3       3.0,
 GRANTS........       ......59         7.1       7o4
 0TJ1X US LOANS ,.0                           j.U      0.0"
 EX-M BANK LOAN                   0.0      0.0       0.0
 ALL OTHER ..........   I       .  0.0      0.0       0.0
 ASISTANC= FRUo INTERNATICNAL A.ENCIES
 TOTAL ........     4.3      2Z.1      1.4     19.1
 .RD.,                         0.0      0.0      15.1
 IFC                 2.1 -      .3     -.0        2.1
 IOA                 2.5      oo       0.0      34.0
 .6 0.0                                          0.0
 ADS                 C.O       0.0      0.0       0.0
 AF'6                0.u      17.4      0.0      3t.4
 UNOP                3.2       4..      0.0      Z?.l
 OTMR-1UN            0.5       0.0       1.4      4.3
 EC0.0.                   O.0      0.0      73.5
 
 
 272
