 SIERRA LEONE
 Sierra Leone is a constitutional republic with a directly elected president and a
 unicameral legislature; however, this democratically elected Government did not
 control the whole country effectively at any time during the year. In March the Gov-
 ernment, led by President Ahmed Tejan Kabbah, who had been elected in 1996, was
 returned to power after 9 months in exile. The President's party, the Sierra Leone
 People's Party, has had a majority in the Parliament since 1996. The Governments
 return followed the February ouster of the Armed Forces Revolutionary Council
 (AFRC) and Revolutionary United Front (RUF), which had overthrown the Kabbah
 
 
 367
 Government in 1997 and assumed power. The RUF had conducted an insurgency
 agwnst successive governments; the AFRC originated in a 1997 coup by elements
 of the Government's armed forces. The AFRC and RUF junta forces were defeated
 and driven out of Freetown by forces of the Economic Organization of West African
 States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG), led by the armed forces of Nigeria.
 In February and March there was fierce fighting throughout the country as
 ECOMOG and members of the Civil Defense Forces (CDF) continued to fight rem-
 nants of the AFRC and RUF, particularly in the larger cities outside the capital.
 However, government and ECOMOG forces failed to gain control of the whole coun-
 try, and the civil conflict continued throughout the year. In December AFRC AND
 RUF rebels infiltrated Freetown and, at year's end, controlled areas close to the cap-
 ital. The officially independent judiciary functioned only in part of the country and
 only during part of the year, but demonstrated substantial independence in practice
 when it did fnction.
 Among the Government's security forces, the police officially had primary respon-
 sibility for internal order. However, due to the continuing insurgency, the newly
 constituted army, the CDF and ECOMOG shared de facto responsibility with the
 police in security matters. Government forces, particularly poorly trained CDF units
 that included child soldiers, committed numerous serious human rights abuses, and
 ECOMOG forces also committed some abuses.
 Sierra Leone is an extremely poor country, with a market-based economy and a
 per capita income of less than $100 per year. It is estimated that only one-fifth of
 adults are literate. Although it is rich in natural resources and minerals (particu-
 larly diamonds, gold, rutile, and bauxite), and has large areas of fertile land suitable
 for farming, the junta period and the continuing insurgency have brought normal
 extraction and agricultural production almost to a standstill. There is little manu-
 facturing, and there are few exports; approximately 70 percent of the Government's
 budget comes from external assistance. Years of corruption and mismanagement
 have resulted in a crumbling infrastructure; many schools, hospitals, government
 buildings, roads, and bridges have been damaged or destroyed in the fighting and
 through neglect.
 The Government's human rights record was characterized by serious problems.
 Some members of the security forces, including the Civil Defense Forces, committed
 extrajudicial killings, and tortured and beat suspected rebels and rebel collabo-
 rators. Prison and jail conditions remained harsh and sometimes life-threatening.
 Government forces sometimes interfered with humanitarian relief efforts. The Gov-
 ernment arrested and detained persons under emergency decrees approved by Par-
 liament that authorized indefinite detention without trial. Pretrial detention often
 was prolonged. The Government restricted freedom of speech and of the press, and
 harassed, arrested and detained journalists for their coverage of security-related
 issues. Government forces limited movement within the country due to the civil con-
 flict. Violence and discrimination against women, and prostitution remained prob-
 lems. CDF units inducted child soldiers and female genital mutilation continued to
 be a widespread practice. Discrimination against ethnic minorities persisted. There
 was some forced labor in rural areas. Child labor persists. ECOMOG forces operat-
 ing in support of the Government occasionally beat and detained noncombatants. In
 the period directly following the removal of the junta from power, there was a sig-
 nificant number of vigilante-style extrajudicial killings by citizens; upon being re-
 stored to power, the Government, with EGOMOG support, acted forcefully to end
 these killings.
 Throughout the year, AFRC and RUF rebels committed numerous egregious
 abuses, including brutal killings, severe mutilations, and deliberate dismember-
 ments, in a widespread campaign of terror against the civilian population known as
 "Operation No Living Thing." While still in power in January and February, junta
 forces continued their previous pattern of abuse, which included assaults and other
 acts of intimidation against political opponents, nongovernmental and other civic
 and humanitarian organizations, and citizens. During the fighting for Freetown in
 February, their retreat to the interior in March, and their advance on the capital
 in December, junta forces were responsible for killings, kidnapings, mutilation, rape,
 and destruction of property. One particularly vicious practice was cutting off the
 ears, noses, hands, arms, and legs of noncombatants who were unwilling to cooper-
 ate with or provide for the insurgents. The victims ranged from small children to
 elderly women; in some cases, one limb was cut off, in others two limbs, typically
 two hands or arms. Rebel forces also detained, decapitated, burned alive, and in-
 flicted bullet and machete wounds on civilians; many died from their wounds before
 they could obtain any form of treatment. The rebel forces abducted missionaries and
 aid workers, ambushed humanitarian relief convoys and raided refugee sites. The
 junta forces continued the long-standing practice of abducting villagers and using
 
 
 them as forced laborers, as sex .slaves, and as human shields during skirmishes with
 Government and ECOMOG forces. Boys were forced to become child soldiers. Rebel
 forces used rape as a terror tactic against women. Rebel atrocities prompted the in-
 ternal displacement of hundreds of thousands of civilians. As many as half a million
 persons fled to neighboring countries to escape the civil conflict, and remain outside
 the country on their own or in refugee camps, primarily in Guinea and Liberia.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and -Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were persistent reports that
 some elements of the CDF refused to take prisoners and, after torture or other acts
 of physical abuse and interrogation, often killed captured insurgents and AFRC and
 RUF sympathizers. In November a senior CDF spokesman confnImed that the CDF
 had executed seven individuals who had been searching illegally for diamonds in the
 Tongo fields in the eastern part of the country, an area long contested by both the
 CDF's Kamajoh militia and the RUF.
 In the immediate aftermath of the overthrow of the rebel junta in February, there
 were dozens of reports of torture and vigilante-style executions in Freetown, Bo,
 Kenema, and other cities. Some of these abuses were committed by citizens in re-
 prisal against junta members and their alleged supporters. Victims were stabbed,
 eaten, and in some cases burned to death; there is no evidence that any of those
 responsible for the deaths were ever- formally charged or prosecuted. AFRC and
 RUF forces also committed such abuses as they were driven out of their strongholds.
 Many of the hundreds, if not thousands, of civilians killed by AFRC AND RUF
 insurgent forces in the conflict were executed deliberately for political motives. In
 March RUF leader Sam Bockarie summarily executed 10 prominent residents of
 Kenema, including former cabinet minister Bockari S. Massaquoi and paramount
 chief Momoh Tarawlie, for opposing the rebels. Also in March, RUF forces executed
 32 youths in Koidu for supporting Kamajoh CDF forces that previously had taken
 the town. In September rebel forces shot 50 individuals execution-style in Kamalu,
 and on October 4, RUF forces shot and killed contract employees of the Inter-
 national Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), who were traveling in clearly-marked
 trucks, in an ambush near Joru. On December 15, rebel forces killed a number of
 noncombatants in the village of Masiaka on the approach to Freetown.
 Government security forces retaking areas discovered mass graves of those killed
 by rebel forces in Bo (over 100 bodies) and on Bonthe island (more than 550 bodies);
 the latter had been considered a Kamajoh CDF stronghold, and the killings appar-
 ently were reprisals against islanders for supporting the Kamajohs.
 There were also several reports of indiscriminate, mass killings as villagers tried
 to escape from contested towns; for example, 50 persons reportedly were killed while
 fleeing fighting in Kabala in March, 22 in Malima, and 80 in Ngolahun. In May
 U.N. Special Representative for Children in Armed Conflict Olara Otunno described
 the continuing conflict as the "deliberate targeting of civilians," and described that
 strategy as "part of the objective of conflict fare, not just indiscipline on the part
 of fighters."
 b. Disappearance.-AFRC and RUF forces continued the RUF's long-standing
 practice of kidnapping youngsters and women and compelling them to work for the
 troops and, at times, act as "shields" in battles with government and ECOMOG
 forces. Women were also forced to act as sexual slaves. A conference sponsored by
 the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) noted that the RUF had captured
 children as young as 4 and 5 years of age. Seven girls between the ages of 7 and
 15 were abducted in March from the Ben Hirsh childcare center in Kenema. During
 the rebels' retreat, the insurgents kidnapped five medical missionaries and two
 French medical aid workers in the Lunsar area and held them captive for 2 weeks.
 In November RUF forces kidnapped an Italian priest, father Mario Guerra, from his
 mission in Kamalu in the Northern District; he still was held at year's end.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits torture; however, some of the security forces, in particu-
 lar the CDF, routinely tortured suspected insurgents upon capture to gather infor-
 mation.
 AFRC and RUF forces continued to use rape as a terror tactic against women.
 In February during their retreat from Freetown, rebel forces raped female patients
 at the Lunsar Eye Hospital. In March rebel forces gang-raped several teenage girls
 in Koidu after retaking the town from Kamajoh control. In May several women who
 had fled to Guinea reported that they were sexually assaulted by junta forces before
 they were able to escape. ECOMOG forces operating in support of the government
 occasionally beat and detained noncombatants. Rebel forces also were responsible
 
 
 369
 for many cases of deliberate mutilation, including the chopping off of hands, arms,
 ears and legs; attempted decapitations; and severe cuts with machetes. The victims
 have ranged from babies 10 months old to elderly men and women. Humanitarian
 organizations estimated that at least 2,000 individuals had one or both limbs ampu-
 tated, and that for every one of these wounded who eventually succeeded in securing
 medical aid, at least three or four died en route from their wounds, shock, and the
 hazards of the journey. Some victims who secured treatment in Freetown indicated
 that at times the junta members forced civilians to take part in macabre lotteries,
 in which the victim picked a piece of paper which indicated the sentence-from the
 loss of one limb to scalping or death. In other cases, rebel forces cut off the arms
 of men who refused to rape relatives.
 The rebel campaign, known as "Operation No Living Thing," drove thousands of
 persons from their homes into the countryside, where many have died from un-
 treated wounds, disease, and starvation. Over 250,000 citizens crossed the borders
 of Guinea and Liberia to escape the conflict; many thousands of others were dis-
 placed internally, and fled their homes to hide in wooded areas, or to towns where
 there are security forces and some degree of protection from rebel forces. In Novem-
 ber Amnesty International published a report that detailed rebel abuses and atroc-
 ities during the first 10 months of the year.
 Prison conditions and those in police lockup facilities generally are harsh; at best
 they are Spartan, and at worst life threatening. The Pademba Road maximum secu-
 rity prison, which was designed for 325 prisoners, housed almost three times that
 number at year's end. Diet and medical care were inadequate; only a handful of toi-
 lets was available for use by the prison population. Although male and female quar-
 ters were separate, adults and juveniles were incarcerated together. Convicted fel-
 ons, those in the middle of the judicial process, and those who had not yet been
 charged formally also were incarcerated together. Other prison facilities were equal-
 ly rudimentary; the holding cells in police offices are even further from compliance
 with international standards.
 The Government allowed the ICRC, U.N. human rights officials, and other observ-
 ers to visit the prisons, assess conditions, and see inmates.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Public Emergency Regulations en-
 acted by the Parliament in March at President Kabbah's request provide for indefi-
 nite detention without trial. In the immediate aftermath of its restoration, the Gov-
 ernment arrested and detained without specific charges persons suspected of col-
 laborations in crimes committed by the desposed junta. Although the Constitution
 and law provide for a speedy trial, in practice the lack of judicial officers and facili-
 ties often produced long delays in the judicial process. Due to the civil conflict, the
 judicial system did not function in some parts of the country at any time during
 the year, and functioned in other parts of the country only during part of the year.
 Many prisoners were held for months on suspicion of criminal activity before their
 cases were examined or formal charges were instituted.
 ECOMOG forces at times detained noncombatants (see Section 1.c.) In January
 and February, while still in control of the capital, the rebel junta continued its prac-
 tice of detaining individuals suspected of supporting the Government in exile and
 criticizing junta policies. The junta arrested three journalists from The Herald
 Guardian and detained them for several weeks in apparent retaliation for publish-
 ing a statement urging children to remain home rather than go to school because
 of the security situation. Several other persons were released after shorter deten-
 tions.
 The Government does not use forced exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary and the Government respects this provision in practice.
 Although there are often lengthy delays between arrest, detention, the imposition
 of charges, and judicial proceedings, trials are usually free and fair. Traditional jus-
 tice systems continued to supplement the central government judiciary extensively
 in cases involving family law, inheritance, and land tenure, especially in rural
 areas.
 After the overthrow of the rebel junta, the Government detained several hundred
 individuals on suspicion of treason and other charges stemming from their involve-
 ment with the junta. Some eventually were released; some remained in detention
 at year's end; and at least 103 persons were tried in four civilian trials and one
 court-martial proceeding. The trials and court-martial were open to the public, and
 were extensively monitored by U.N. personnel, foreign diplomats, and human rights
 observers from both within and without the country. Observers generally agreed
 that these high profile proceedings were conducted in an open and fair manner, and
 that the defendants had adequate opportunities both for counsel and to make their
 cases. The verdicts ranged from acquittals on all charges to guilty; the sentences
 
 
 given ranged from 5-years imprisonment to execution. However, some observers
 from international human rights organizations questioned the appropriateness of
 the treason prosecutibs or death sentences in the cases of five journalists and one
 75-year-old woman. Twenty-four former army officers convicted on treason charges
 subsequently were executed.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution and law prohibit such practices, and government authorities generally
 respected these prohibitions.
 Throughout the year, there were numerous instances in which rebel forces in-
 vaded, looted, and destroyed private property and terrorized civilians. Homes and
 businesses associated with former government members and supporters of the elect-
 ed Government were particular targets, but many homes of ordinary were citizens
 also looted, burned, or destroyed.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-During the year, there were reports that government security forces or
 ECOMOG forces hindered the safe passage of relief supplies on two occasions by
 commandeering vehicles that belonged to relief organizations. The CDF continued
 to accept, train, and induct children into its ranks.
 AFRC and RUF rebel forces routinely committed numerous serious abuses, and
 sought to coerce, intimidate, and terrorize those who either refused to cooperate
 with them or supported the Government. They massacred groups of persons fleeing
 fighting; maimed and cut off the limbs and ears of noncombatants; kidnapped chil-
 dren and women to work for them, and men to carry equipment; raped women as
 a means of punishment and to inspire fear and cooperation; forced individuals to
 commit atrocities under penalty of their own mutilation or death; commandeered re-
 lief supplies; and vandalized religious institutions, hospitals, and schools.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and of the press; however, the Government restricted these rights during the year.
 The Government has attempted to regulate the press through registration, and at-
 tempts to control the publication of information on security-related topics.
 There are over 50 newspapers published in Freetown alone, covering a wide spec-
 trum of interests. Their number fluctuated weekly; many contained sensational, un-
 documented stories and repeated items carried by other newspapers. Newspapers
 openly and commonly criticized the Government and its officials, as well as the'rebel
 forces.
 Due to low levels of literacy and the relatively high cost of newspapers and tele-
 vision, radio remained the most important medium of public information. There
 were several government and private radio and television stations; both featured do-
 mestic news coverage and political commentary. The government-controlled
 Sierratel communications company provided Internet access in Freetown, although
 the condition of its land lines often made Internet reception problematic.
 The Junta arrested three journalists and detained them for several weeks (see
 Section 1.d.).
 The Government generally respected academic freedom. All institutions of higher
 learning were wholly or partly closed during the year; most had been looted, burned,
 or used as quarters by rebels.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of assembly, and the Government respected this right in practice. The Gov-
 ernment was not known to deny requests to use public areas for meetings or dem-
 onstrations, many of which took place throughout the year. The Constitution pro-
 vides for freedom of association and the government respected this right in practice.
 There were numerous civic, philanthropic and social organizations, and the registra-
 tion system was routine and apparently nonpolitical. There were more than a dozen
 opposition parties, and there were no known restrictions on their formation or orga-
 nization.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respected this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for these rights, and the Government gen-
 erally respected them in practice. However, numerous ECOMOG and government
 roadblocks throughout the country due to the security situation hindered free move-
 ment. Citizens were required to get a police clearance within the 72 hours before
 international travel, but such clearances were issued nonrestrictively; the Govern-
 ment did not attempt to limit citizens' departure or return for political or discrimi-
 
 
 371
 natry reasons. There were reports of attempts by troops manning roadblocks to ex-
 tort food or money from travelers.
 At year's end, more than one million citizens, more than one-quarter of the popu-
 lation, either were displaced internally or had fled the country to escape the con-
 tinuing insurgency. More than 500,000 persons were in refugee camps in Guinea
 and Liberia; others had fled to The Gambia, Cote d'Ivoire, and other destinations
 in Africa, and still others were in countries outside Africa. Although thousands re-
 turned from abroad after the restoration of the Kabbah Government, most remained
 outside the country because of continuing security concerns.
 There is no formal process for granting political asylum. The Government cooper-
 ated with the United Nations High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR) and other
 organizations on repatriation matters, and continued to provide first asylum to over
 5,000 Liberians who had fled to Sierra Leone because of conflict in their home coun-
 try in earlier years of the decade. There were no reports of the forced return of per-
 sons to countries where they feared persecution.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides for the right of citizens to change their government,
 and the 1996 elections won by Ahmed Tejan Kabbah and his Sierra Leone People's
 Party were the first free and fair multiparty elections held in the country in 30
 years. In March the democratically elected Kabbah Government, which had as-
 sumed power in 1996 and which was deposed by the combined AFRC and RUF
 forces in May 1997, was restored to power. Several political parties were rep-
 resented in the unicameral legislature. Local government was controlled by locally
 elected councils and a traditional chieftancy system. Preparations for local elections
 were in progress at year's end.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A number of domestic and international human rights groups operated without
 government restriction, investigating and publishing their findings on human rights
 cases. Government officials were generally cooperative and responsive to their
 views. Representatives of various local and international nongovernmental organiza-
 tions (NGO's), foreign diplomats, the ICRC, and U.N. human rights officers were
 able to monitor freely andfully the major treason trials, and visit prisons and custo-
 dial facilities.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination against women and provides for protec-
 tion against discrimination on the basis of race and ethnicity, except for the long-
 time prohibition against citizenship for persons with a non-Afrcan father. This pro-
 vision effectively blocks citizenship for much of the sizable Lebanese community,
 and for other persons with non-African fathers.
 Women.-Violence against women, especially wife beating, is common. Police are
 unlikely to intervene in domestic disputes except in cases involving severe injury or
 death. Domestic violence is not recognized as a societal problem. However, rape is
 recognized as a societal problem punishable by up to 14 years imprisonment. There
 is a significant amount of prostitution: Many women, especially those displaced from
 their homes and with few resources, resort to it to secure income for themselves and
 their children. Rebel forces used rape as a terror tactic (see Sections 1.c. and 1.g.).
 The Constitution provides for equal rights for women, but in practice women face
 both legal and societal discrimination. In particular, their rights and status under
 traditional law vary significantly depending on the ethnic group to which they be-
 long. The Temne and Limba tribes of the north afford greater rights to women to
 inherit property than does the Mende tribe, which gives preference to male heirs
 and unmarried daughters. However, in the Temne tribe, women cannot become
 paramount chiefs. In the south, the Mende tribe has a number of female paramount
 chiefs. Women are nevertheless very active in civic organizations and NGO's, and
 were instrumental in pressuring the previous government to allow free and fair
 multiparty elections in 1996.
 Women do not have equal access to education, economic opportunities, health fa-
 cilities, or social freedoms. In rural areas, women perform much of the subsistence
 farming, and have little opportunity for formal education. The average educational
 level for women is markedy below that of men; only 6 percent are literate. At the
 university level, men predominate.
 Children.-Although the Government is committed to improving children's edu-
 cation and welfare, it lacks the means to provide basic education and health services
 
 
 372
 for them. Schools, clinics, and hospitals throughout the country have been looted
 and destroyed during the 8-year RUF insurgency, and most have not been replaced.
 Although in November, the Government began a program to pay the fees for 3 years
 of schooling for all children, lack of schools and teachers sti place even this much
 education out of the hands of many. Schools are financed largely by formal and in-
 formal fees that many families cannot afford.
 The recruitment for military service by the CDF and the kidnaping and forced
 conscription of children into rebel forces were a serious problem; an estimated 5,000
 youthful soldiers served alongside adults during the civil conflict. While the CDF
 forces accept children as volunteers, most children who join the insurgent ranks do
 so under duress: For years rebels have kidnapped young boys and girls to serve
 them and augment their forces. In some cases they have forced these children to
 commit atrocities involving family members. There are now several programs to
 deal with former child combatants, including those who have escaped from rebel
 forces. However, even children who escape and wish to leave the ranks sometimes
 are rejected by their families and communities for their perceived involvement in
 rebel activities.
 Female genital mutilation (FGM), which is condemned by international health ex-
 perts as damaging to both physical and psychological health, is widely practiced
 among all levels of society, although with varying frequency. The form practiced is
 excision. Some estimates of the percentage of women and girls who undergo the
 practice range as high as 80 to 90 percent. While UNICEF estimates the percentage
 of females who have undergone thfis procedure to be as high as 90 percent, local
 groups believe this figure is overstated. There is no law prohibiting FGM. There are
 a number of NGO's that are working to inform the public about the harmful health
 effects of FGM and to eradicate it; however, an active mass campaign by secret soci-
 eties countered the well-publicized international efforts against FGM.
 Occasional instances of ritual murders of boys and girls, as well as adults, associ-
 ated with illegal secret societies, have been reported in the past. There were no re-
 ported cases this year.
 People With Disabilities.-Questions of public facility access and discrimination
 against the disabled have not become public policy issues. No laws mandate acces-
 sibility to buildings or provide for other assistance for the disabled. Although a few
 private agencies and organizations attempted to train the disabled in useful work,
 there was no government policy or program directed particularly at the disabled.
 There does not appear to be outright discrimination against the disabled in housing
 or education. Given the high rate of general unemployment, however, work opportu-
 nities for the disabled appear to be few.
 Some of the many individuals who were maimed in the fighting, or had their
 limbs amputated by rebel forces, are receiving some special assistance from various
 local and international humanitarian organizations. such programs involve recon-
 structive surgery, prostheses, and vocational training to help them acquire new
 work skills.
 National]Ethnic/Racial Minorities.-The country's population is ethnically di-
 verse, and consists of members of at least 13 ethnic groups. These groups generally
 all speak distinct primary languages and are concentrated regionally outside urban
 areas. However, all ethnic groups use Krio as a second language, there was little
 ethnic segregation in urban areas, and interethnic marriage is common. The two
 largest etic roups are the Temne in the northern part of the country and the
 Mende in the southern part; each of these groups is estimated to make up about
 30 percent of the population.
 Ethnic loyalty remained an important factor in government, the military, and
 business. Complaints of corruption within ethnic groups and ethnic discrimination
 in government appointments, contracts, military commissions, and promotions were
 common. There did not appear to be a strong correspondence between ethnic or re-
 gional and political cleavages. Ethnic differences also did not appear to contribute
 appreciably to the RUF rebellion, the 1997 coup, or the civil conflict during the year.
 There was no identifiable ethnic or regional base of voluntary popular support for
 the rebels, who controlled territory by terror and coercion rather than by popular
 consent.
 Residents of non-African descent face institutionalized political restrictions. The
 Constitution restricts citizenship to persons of patrilineal Negro-African descent.
 This constitutional restriction effectively denies citizenship to many long-term resi-
 dents, notably the Lebanese community.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution provides for the right of association
 and, in practice, under the restored Government, workers had the right to join inde-
 
 
 pendent trade unions of their choice. About 60 percent of the workers in urban
 areas, including government workers, are unionized, but there has been little suc-
 cess in organizing agricultural and mine workers. All labor unions by custom join
 the Sierra Leone Labor Congress (SLLC), but such membership is voluntary.
 The Trade Union Act provides that any five persons may form a trade union by
 applying to the Registrar of Trade Unions, who has statutory powers under the act
 to approve the creation of trade unions. The Registrar may reject applications for
 several reasons, including an insufficient number of members, proposed representa-
 tion in an industry already serviced by an existing union, or incomplete documenta-
 tion. If the Registrar rejects an application, his decision may be appealed in the or-
 dinary courts, but applicants seldom take such action.
 There is a right to strike, although the Government can require 21 days' notice.
 Union members may be fired for participating in even a lawful strike. There were
 no reported strikes during the year.
 Unions are free to form federations and to affiliate internationally. The SLLC is
 a member of the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Regulation of Wages and
 Industrial Relations Act provides the legal framework for collective bargaining. Col-
 lective bargaining must take place in trade group negotiating councils, each of
 which has an equal number of employer and worker representatives. Most enter-
 prises are covered by collective bargaining agreements on wages and working condi-
 tions. The SLLC provides assistance to unions in preparations for negotiations; in
 case of a deadlock the Government may intervene.
 No law prohibits retribution against strikers. An employee fired for union activi-
 ties may file a complaint with a labor tribunal and seek reinstatement. Complaints
 of discrimination against trade unions are made to a tribunal. Individual trade
 unions investigate alleged violations of work conditions to try to ensure that employ-
 ers take the necessary steps to correct abuses.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 and bonded labor, including that by children. However, under the Chiefdom's Coun-
 cil Act, compulsory labor may be imposed by individual chiefs, who may require
 members of their villages to contribute to the improvement of common areas. This
 practice exists only in rural areas. There is no penalty for noncompliance. The last
 Saturday in each month is declared a National Cleanup Day; in Freetown traffic is
 proscribed before 10:00 a.m. so that everyone may clean their immediate area.
 There have been reports of security forces publicly humiliating citizens to ensure
 compliance; however, social and community values and pressures largely unrelated
 to the State were chiefly responsible for widespread compliance. There were no legal
 or formal governmental consequences of noncompliance.
 The AFRC and particularly RUF rebels forcibly impressed young boys and girls
 into their ranks and forced them into involuntary servitude, and to perform as sex-
 ual slaves. Many later become fighters with the rebel forces (see Section 5).
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The mini-
 mum age for employment is officially 18 years, but in practice there is no enforce-
 ment of this law because there is no government entity charged with the task. Chil-
 dren routinely assist in family businesses and work as petty vendors. In rural areas,
 children work seasonally on family subsistence farms.
 Because the adult unemployment rate remains high, few children are involved in
 the industrial sector. Children have been hired by foreign employers to work as do-
 mestics overseas at extremely low wages and in poor conditions. The Department
 of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation is responsible for reviewing over-
 seas work applications to see that no one under the age of 14 is employed for this
 purpose.
 School attendance through primary school is required by law. However, there is
 a shortage of schools and teachers, due both to inadequate government funding of
 public education, and to widespread destruction of educational facilities by rebel
 forces. Consequently, a large number of children receive little or no formal edu-
 cation. Many consequently enter the workforce with few skills and with limited, if
 any, literacy. The Constitution prohibits forced and bonded labor, including that by
 children; however, there was some compulsory labor possibly including labor by chil-
 dren in rural areas (see Section 6.c.).
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no minimum wage. Purchasing power
 continues to decline through inflation. Most workers support an extended family,
 often including relatives who have been displaced by the insurgency in the country-
 side, and it is common both to pool incomes and to supplement wages with subsist-
 ence farming.
 
 
 374
 The Government's suggested work standard is 38 hours per week, but most work-
 weeks for those who are employed exceed that figure. Although the Government sets
 health and safety standards, it lacks the funding to enforce them properly.
 Trade unions provide the only protection for workers who file complaints about
 working conditions. Initially, a union makes a formal complaint about a hazardous
 working condition. If this complaint is rejected, the union may issue a 21-day strike
 notice. If workers remove themselves from dangerous work situations without mak-
 ing a formal complaint, they risk being fired.
