 SIERRA LEONE
 On April 29, 1992, a military coup led by Captain Valentine Strasser and a small
 cadre of soldiers from the Sierra Leone-iberia war front ended the government of
 President Joseph Momoh. President Momoh's All Peoples' Congress (APC) party had
 held power since 1978. Under the decrees of the new National Provisional Ruling
 Council (NPRC), government policy is directed by the Supreme Council of State
 (SCS) which consists of Captain Strasser and his immediate NPRC military sup-
 porters. Captain Strasser serves as Chairman of the NPRC and Chief of State.
 ere is only one civilian member of the SCS. All government functions, including
 the military and police, are under the direction of the SCS and NPRC. Although the
 NPRC declared itself in favor of free, multiparty elections, none were scheduled, nor
 were political parties allowed to form.
 The Republic of Sierra Leone Military Forces (RSLMF) are engaged in the Sierra
 Leone-Liberia border war against the National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL)
 and, increasingly, with rebel _Sierra  onean forces. Although the April 29 coup was
 in part _motivated b, dissatisfaction among frntline troops (including Strasser), and
 the NPRC set as its primary objective bringing the war to an end, only limited
 progress was made toward achieving that go.aTotal military expenditures for 1989
 the last year for which the US. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency conducted
 a detailed analysis, were roughly estimated to be $5.5 million. As a result of the
 March 1991 NPFL incursion, the ongoing conflict with dissident rebel forces, and
 Sierra Leonean participation in the regional peacekeeping force in Liberia, there is
 no indication that efforts will be made to reduce military expenditures in the near
 future. While official information was sparse both preceding and following the April
 29 coup, and few observers were allowed to journey to the front, there continued
 to be reports of human rights abuses on all sides, including summary executions
 and torture.
 Over 70 percent of Sierra Leone's 4.3 million population is involved in some aspect
 of agriculture, mainly subsistence farming. Although the country is rich in minerals,
 including titanium-bearing rutile, gold, and diamonds, official receipts from legal ex-
 ports of gold and diamonds have decreased over recent years; significant portions
 of these resources depart the country outside legal and authorized channels. The po-
 tentially lucrative fishing industry brought few public benefits, and tourism de-
 clined. Under both the APC and the NPRC, the Government has adhered to a struc-
 tural adjustment program which was backed by the International Monetary Fund
 and which has raised revenue from diamond exports and customs duties levied on
 imports.
 Although the 1991 Constitution contained provisions for basic human rights and
 held a promise for democratic government, little real progress was made under
 Momoh's one-party government. In preparation for multiparty elections promised for
 late 1992, more than half a dozen political parties attempted to organize; all of them
 complained of harassment and threats from the APC government. The APC at-
 tempted to stifle criticism, and little progress was made in freedom of speech and
 press. The same 1991 Constitution technically remains in force under the NPRC,
 but its status has been further clouded by a series of decrees and public notices.
 These undermined such basic rights as freedom of speech, freedom of assembly, free-
 dom of the press, freedom from arrest without charge, and the right to a speedy
 trial. Political parties have been banned. At the end of the year, 29 people accused
 of coup plotting were executed.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-During the last week of 1992, an es-
 timated 29 persons, both civilian and military, were summarily executed by military
 firing squads. They were accused of participating in a failed coup. While some were
 tried in secret by a military tribunal, all were executed without right of appeal and
 probably without due process of law.
 
 
 230
 In the aftermath of the April coup, there were reports of summary executions of
 alleged looters. Eyewitnesses have reported at least one case of a motorist being
 beaten, possibly to death, by traffic police. Army personnel stood by while the motor-
 ist was being ea ten. Thirty-seven people were killed in the aftermath of the April
 oup, mosty through random      violence. (See Section 1.g. for reports of other
 exrau dicia killings.
 b. Disappearance.-Reports of the disappearance of captured suspected NPFL
 rebels continued. The NPRC government denies these and insists that it is imple-
 menting an amnesty pr    am for civilians and rebels returning from disputed terri-
 tories. Although several hundred "rebels" were reported to have surrendered shortly
 after the NPRC takeover, there have been few reports of additional surrenders. Mi-
 chael ONeill, a relief worker, was kidnaped by rebel forces in Koidu on October 24
 and released on November 29.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Although the 1991 Constitution prohibits torture, there were reports of police mis-
 treatment of suspects during interrogation and arrest. Military personnel sometimes
 physically abused civilians including clergy. Officials responsible for such abuse
 were not punished by the Government, although one official was removed from his
 Pt(See Section 1.g. for reports of mistreatment of civilians by the RSLMF and
 Prison conditions remained poor. Detainee cells often lack beds or toilet facilities.
 Overcrowding is the norm, and Freetown's Pademba Road Prison, which was built
 to accommodate several hundred, holds more than 600 inmates. Deaths in prison
 due to malnutrition and inadequate medical attention are common. The NPRC is-
 sued instructions for humane treatment, including medical care, of the detainees
 from the April coup. These instructions have been followed.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The 1991 Constitution sets 10 days as
 the maximum period of permissible detention without charge to investigate com-
 plaints in cases of capital offenses, offenses carrying life imprisonment, or economic
 or environmental offenses. Other offenses carry a maximum detention period of 72
 hours. This has seldom been observed in practice. Foreigners are often released but
 may not depart the country. The laws provide that detainees must have access to
 legal counsel, families, and medical care, but authorities do not always respect these
 provisions unless detainees can afford legal counsel to demand compliance.
 The NPRC has held 50 former senior APC government officials in jail without
 charge since the coup. Some other civilians, including relatives of former APC offi-
 cials, remain in detention without charge or trial. In November and December, 27
 people were detained for alleged subversion. Press reports indicate that they were
 arrested for suspeted activiti'es "not in the interests of the State." Some in each
 group were among those executed on December 29 (see Section l.a.).
 Fifteen survivors out of 60 Liberians detained since 1989 for rebel activity were
 released by the NPRC immediately after the April 29 coup. The others died in de-
 tention. Soldiers commonly arrest or detain civilians without charge. Relatives are
 not formally notified, but the authorities generally respond to inquiries. Two foreign
 diamond dealers were detained and beaten on suspicion of diamond smuggling.
 The Government provides legal representation for the indigent only in cases of
 capital offenses. Lack of counsel in other cases frequently leads to abuse. Many indi-
 ent detainees are ignorant of their rights and assume, sometimes correctly, that
 law enforcement or judicial authorities will be paid by the accuser to rule against
 them. The Society for the Protection of Human Rights provides free legal counsel
 to some indigent detainees.
 Police and security agencies may recommend to the President or Chief of State
 that a person be detained indefinitely on suspicion of threatening national security.
 Under NPRC decree any police officer or any member of the armed forces, with ap-
 proval of the Councif, may arrest without warrant any person whom he suspects has
 acted or is about to act in a manner prejudicial to public safety or to public order.
 After an initial 24-hour detention the person may remain in detention based on
 written permission from the NPRC. By decree, the NPRC may direct that any per-
 son be detained without judicial review where it considers such detention in the in-
 terest of public safety or public order. Thus, there are inadequate safeguards
 against arbitrary or unjust detentions and no provisions for their formal review.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-Sierra Leone has two judicial systems: the regular
 courts and the local or traditional courts. The regular court system reflects British
 influence and consists of the Supreme Court, an intermediate Court of Appeals, a
 High Court of Magistrates, and Magistrates' Courts. There are criminal and civil
 courts. Defendants are allowed to choose counsel, but many persons cannot afford
 legal representation. Decisions by lower courts may be appealed. Indigenous ethnic
 leaders preside over the local courts and administer tribal law, particularly in many
 
 
 231
 family matters. The local courts are often the only legal institution in rural areas.
 In December the NPRC issued Decree No. 12, establis      a military tribunal which
 may try both military and civilians for serious crimes (including treason, murder,
 manslaughter, and aggravated robbery). The tribunars decision may not be ap-
 pealed, and punishment may include the death penalty. The Government claims
 that this tribunal tried and sentenced those executed on December 29.
 The courts frequently grant attorneys' requests for adjournment or postponement;
 there are delays of up to 2 years in bringing cases to trial. The NPRC has appointed
 commissions of inquiry to investigate corruption. The commissions have been slow
 and generally inefficient. They have not so far led to any civilian charges. Hearings
 of the commissions are public.
 While the 1991 Constitution included provisions to strengthen the judiciary's
 independence from political manipulation, under both the Momoh Government and
 the NPRC the judiciary remained responsive to political influence and manipulation.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 1991 Constitution prohibits arbitrary invasion of the home; however, in security
 cases, authorities are empowered to enter homes without a search warrant. NPRC
 decrees which prohibit persons from orally or otherwise attempting to influence pub-
 lic opinion in a manner deemed prejudicial to public safety or tranquility could
 apply also to actions or conversation within homes. To prevent a person from acting
 in a manner prejudicial to public safety, there are NPRC decrees which state that
 the Council may issue an order prohibiting or restricting the possession or use by
 the person of any specific articles. The Council also may impose on a person deten-
 tion or restrictions regarding his employment or business, his association or commu-
 nication with other persons, and his activities relating to the dissemination of news
 or the propagation of opinion.
 Persons are prohibited from hoarding essential commodities. The NPRC can req-
 uisition from individuals foodstuffs, vehicles, and goods with compensation deter-
 mined by the NPRC. Similarly, the NPRC may require persons or businesses to
 store and transport goods and may also establish the prices charged. Senior police
 and military officers may enter and search (without a warrant) any premises, or
 step and search any vehicle, and stop and question any person.
 under NPRC decrees the Government has the right to interfere with correspond-
 ence and may censor letters and telegrams. There are reports of censorship of pri-
 vate mail.
 There have been numerous occasions of abusive treatment of ordinary citizens by
 soldiers, including forced entry into homes, robberies, and assaults. The NPRC
 formed a military tribunal to deal with such crimes, but actual punishment of of-
 fending soldiers has been sporadic. Several, however are under death sentences for
 the most serious crimes. In addition, immediately a;ter the coup, Freetown citizens
 were forcibly impressed into service to clean city streets.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-Conflict in Sierra Leone's Eastern and Southern Provinces along the Libe-
 rian border continued as RSLMF forces fought Liberian (NPFL) incursions as well
 as rebel forces. This resulted in human rights violations on all sides, and an un-
 known number of deaths. Civilians in the areas of conflict were forced to flee.
 Youths aged 12 to 15 are believed to be impressed into fighting by the rebels.
 Government forces took severe action against suspected rebels and their support-
 ers; there are several credible reports of summary executions of prisoners. Public
 humiliation of captives, including disfigurement, beating, or parading them naked
 are not uncommon actions. Display of human skulls on military vehicles in the inte-
 rior is not uncommon; religious leaders have called on the Government to stop the
 display of rebel heads (and other body parts) and to halt executions of rebels with-
 out trial.
 Rebel troops too have targeted civilians. One report indicates that rebel forces be-
 headed two traditional chiefs. A credible source reported that rebels burned the
 town of Tawahun and may have killed up to 200 civilians.
 Government and rebel forces have harassed relief workers and stolen their vehi-
 cles, making food distribution efforts to displaced persons very difficult.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Freedom of speech is provided by the Constitu-
 tion, but the Government legally may abridge freedom of expression if it deems na-
 tional security to be endangered. The -RC, like the APC, severely restricted this
 freedom. By decree, the NPRC prohibits attempts to influence public opinion in a
 manner likely to be prejudicial to public safety, public tranquility, public order, or
 the maintenance of supplies and services essential to the community. Criticizing
 government leaders or offending the dignity of the state are criminal offenses.
 
 
 The NPRC also may prevent or restrict the publication of material which it be-
 lieves to be prejudicial, including newspapers, documents, and photographs. Publish-
 ing a report or statement which is likely to cause alarm or despondency or to be
 prejudicial to public safety, public tranquility, and public order is also an offense
 and subject to fine and/or imprisonment. The Government describes this and similar
 measures as "emergency powers" necessitated by the war in the eastern part of the
 country. The Government has not used this authority but regularly calls for "respon-
 sible journalism" (i.e., journalism which does not undermine the NPRC). Editors
 have been detained for one or more nights because of perceived offensive reporting.
 There are more than a dozen active newspapers, on y one of which is controlled
 directly by the Government. The APC and former president Momoh were intolerant
 of criticism and subjected nonsupportive publications and journalists to harassment
 concerning licensing as well as occasional charges of libel. Four papers were banned
 by the APC for being improperly registered. A foreign journalist was detained brief-
 ly while attempting to cover the war. As a result, journalists practiced selfensor-
 s the NPRC practics restrictions similar to those of the previous government. One
 paper was harmed for 2 weeks for publishing an article about the arrival of Russian
 war materiel. Two editors were imprisoned; one was subsequently released, and the
 second has remained in prison (with a 1-week break) since April. In bth cases they
 were accused of "seditious libel." Under the NPRC, editors who published articles
 displeasing to the NPRC were summoned to State House to receive veiled warnings
 and some were publicly castigated. In September a lieutenant at a checkpoint 38
 miles from Freetown detained a schoolboy for 2 days because the adolescent had
 been carrying an article the lieutenant deemed "seditious." Given these cir-
 cumstances, editors under the NPRC continued to exercise self-censorship.
 The more functional of the country's two radio stations is government controlled
 and only reflects the views of the Government. There is no television.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The 1991 Constitution pro-
 vides for freedom of assembly as well as the right to form economic, social, and pro-
 fessional organizations. Before the coup, a number of political parties had been
 formed but were harassed by the Government. The APC banned rallies. All political
 parties were banned by the NPRC. Gatherings in support of the NPRC continue;
 there have been    no attempts to    demonstrate   against the NPRC. Under
 antidisturbance legislation, the NPRC may grant broad powers of arrest to public,
 military, or other authorized persons in any area or situation in which, in its opin-
 ion, there is or is likely to be difficulty in preserving "public safety" and "order" (see
 Section 1.d.).
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Freedom of religion is guaranteed by the 1991 Constitu-
 tion, and historically Sierra Leoneans have displayed religious tolerance. Muslims
 (the largest religious group), Christians, animists, and adherents of other faiths
 practice their belefs freely; they can publish and distribute religious materials and
 conduct religious education without government interference. Sierra Leoneans are
 free to choose their religious affiliation, and conversions are not restricted except by
 family or community pressure. Although most clergy are indigenous, foreign mis-
 sionaries are active.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-There are no legal restrictions on travel within the country; however,
 military and paramilitary checkpoints can delay travel and requests from soldiers
 for money, transport, or goods are not unusual. Sierra Leoneans seeking to travel
 outside the country must present an NPRC exit authorization which includes proof
 of payment of taxes. There are no restrictions on emigration or repatriation. The
 former government expelled, without due process, two foreigners who were long-
 term residents of Sierra Leone. One was accused of diamond smuggling; the other
 had made public statements-which angered the Government.
 Sierra Leone continues to be host to about 7,600 Liberian refugees. Continuing
 conflict in the primarily agricultural eastern and southern provinces displaced an
 estimated 200,000 Sierra Leoneans, placed a severe strain on the local economy, and
 in particular, reduced food production. The United Nations High Commissioner for
 Refugees (UNHCR) provides relief aid to 5,600 refugees at the Waterloo Refugee
 Camp near Freetown. Refugees are not forced by the Government to return to coun-
 tries in which they fear persecution. However, many leave Sierra Leone either be-
 cause of fighting along the Sierra Leone-Liberia border or because they fear being
 considered rebel sympathizers. Many refugees relocate to areas in Guinea or Libe-
 ria, where their own ethnic groups traditionally have lived.
 
 
 233
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 While the 1991 Constitution provides for the right to change the Government
 through direct elections of the President and Parliament by secret ballot, citizens
 were not able to exercise this right. President Momoh and the APC had promised
 elections by the autumn of 1992 but did not hold them before the April 29 coup.
 Momoh and the APC allowed political parties to form but banned all political rallies
 and harassed opponents, making effective organization almost impossible. In one
 case, a government worker who publicly supported an opposition party was fired
 from his job.
 The NPRC has stated that the country will be returned to civilian rule and ap-
 pointed a committee for this purpose on December 8. However, no time frame has
 been specified, parties are banned, and the Government says it must end the border
 fighting before holding elections. Senior government officials are appointed by the
 NPRC.
 A traditional system of local government operates in provincial areas but has been
 severely restricted by both the APC and the NPRC. Paramount chiefs are elected
 for life by members of the local chiefdom councils; some paramount chiefs wield con-
 siderable authority in local issues. Several women have been elected paramount
 chief. There are no women in senior government positions.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government allows visits by international human rights organizations. The
 International Committee of the Red Cross has visited former APC government offi-
 cials detained in prison.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Language, or Social Status
 Discrimination occurs, although it is not officially sanctioned. Tribal loyalties re-
 main important factors in government, military, and business actions. The Momoh
 government was accused of special consideration for persons of Limba descent
 (Momoh's ethnic group). The NPRC is heavily Mende, and a majority of appointees
 are colleagues from the same ethnic group. Complaints of favoritism in government
 appointments and contracts, military commissions, and promotions based on ethnic
 background, political affiliation, nepotism, and graft were common during the
 Momoh Government.
 There have been similar complaints about the ethnic character of NPRC appoint-
 ments.
 Citizens of non-African descent face political restrictions; for example, citizens of
 Lebanese origin may hold Sierra Leonean passports but may not run for Parliament
 (presently disbanded). Lebanese Christian residents of one city accused NPRC offi-
 cials and RSLMF officers of supporting efforts to drive them from their homes and
 businesses in favor of the Lebanese Shi'a community. Citizens of non-African de-
 scent often are scapegoats for the country's economic difficulties, and the resident
 Indian and Lebanese communities experience harassment (see Section 1.d.).
 Women in Sierra Leone are provided equal rights by the Constitution and are rep-
 resented in many occupations. Laws on inheritance and marriage, however, are dis-
 criminatory. The status of women varies widely in different parts of the country and
 depends heavily on the traditions of their ethnic group. In practice, women do not
 have equal access to education, economic opportunities, health facilities, or social
 freedoms. The average schooling level for women is markedly below that of males
 (a 1991 U.N. study showed that they receive one-fourth the schooling of males, and
 only 6 percent of women are literate). At the university level, men predominate.
 There is at least one recently formed women's rights group.
 Violence against women, especially wife beating, is common. The police are un-
 likely to intervene in domestic disputes except in cases of severe injury or death.
 Few cases of violence against women come to court. The issue receives no govern-
 ment attention. In a mid-year incident, a prominent non-NPRC government em-
 ployee was abducted, beaten, and raped. She claimed the attackers were prominent
 members of the armed forces and civilian government officials. The Government has
 not taken meaningful judicial action nor made arrests. Female genital mutilation
 (circumcision) is legal and widely practiced, especially in traditional tribal groups
 and among the less educated. According to an independent expert in the field, the
 percentage of Sierra Leonean women who have undergone this procedure may be
 as high as 80 percent. Ritual murders of young girls have been reported.
 
 
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The 1991 Constitution provides for the right of asso-
 ciation, and all workers, including civil servants, have the iight to join trade unions
 of their choice. Unions are independent of the Government. Individual labor unions
 have by custom joined the Sierra Leone Labor Congress (SLLC), and all unions are
 members of SLLC. Membership is, however, voluntary. There is no legal prohibition
 against the SLLC leadership holding political office and leaders have also held
 other government appointed positions. Under the Trade Union Act, any five persons
 may form a trade union by applying to the Registrar of Trade Unions, who has stat-
 utory powers under the Act to approve the creation of trade unions. Applications
 for approval by the Registrar may be rejected for several reasons including an insuf-
 ficient number of members, proposed representation in an industry already served
 by an existing union, or incomplete documentation. If the Registrar rejects an appli-
 cation, his decision may be appealed in the ordinary courts, but such action is sel-
 dom taken. In March, the International Labor Organization's (ILO) Committee on
 Freedom of Association regretted that the APC government had not responded to
 charges that it had interfered in the union elections in the Sierra Leone Teachers'
 Union in 1990. The Committee asked the Government to reinstate the union's exec-
 utive committee, which had been ousted by the Government's actions.
 Approximately 60 percent of workers in urban areas, including government em-
 ployees, are unionized, but unions have had little success in organizing workers in
 the large agricultural and mining sectors.
 Unions have the right to strike without exception, but the Government can re-
 quire 21 days notice. In early 1992, both school teachers and nurses staged strikes
 demanding payment of back wages and salary increases. The role of unions and the
 right to strike have not been tested under the NPRC. NPRC decrees which prohibit
 disruption of public tranquility or disruption of supplies raise doubts whether seri-
 ous union activity or a strike would be tolerated.
 Unions are free to form federations and confederations and affiliate internation-
 ally. The SLLC is a member of the International Confederation of Free Trade
 Unions, and there are'no restrictions on the international travel or contacts of trade
 unionists.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The legal framework for col-
 lective bargaining is the Regulation of Wages and Industrial Relations Act. Collec-
 tive bargaining must take place in trade group negotiating councils, each of which
 is comprised of an  ual number of employer and worker representatives. Most en-
 terprises are covered by collective bargaining agreements on wages and working
 conditions. The SLLC provides assistance to unions in preparing for negotiations.
 In case of a deadlock, the Government may intervene.
 The law prohibits any discrimination against union members. Complaints of dis-
 crimination against unions are made to the Industrial Court for Arbitration. Indi-
 vidual trade unions investigate alleged violations of work conditions and ensure that
 employers take the necessary steps to correct abuses.
 There are no export processing zones in Sierra Leone.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Under the Chiefdom's Council Act,
 compulsory labor may be imposed by individual chiefs, requiring members of their
 villages to contribute to the improvement of common areas. There is no penalty for
 noncompliance. This practice exists only in the rural areas. The ILO's Committee
 of Experts' annual report repeated its earlier request to the Government that it
 amend provisions of this Act which violate ILO Convention 29 on Forced Labor.
 Although the NPRC does not require compulsory labor, a decree requires that
 homeowners, businessmen, and vendors clean and maintain their premises. Failure
 to comply is punishable by fine and/or imprisonment. Determinations of such clean-
 ing and maintenance may be made by any health officer, police officer, or member
 of the armed forces. The last Saturday of every month is declared a National Clean-
 ing Day throughout Sierra Leone. Military personnel have been zealous in their en-
 forcement of National Cleani'ng Day, and there were incidents of public humiliation,
 beating, and forced labor to ensure compliance.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum age for employment
 is officially 18 years, but in practice there is no enforcement, because there is no
 government entity specifically charged with this task. Children routinely assist in
 small family businesses, especially those of vendors and petty traders. In rural
 areas children work at early ages seasonally on family subsistence farms. Because
 the adult unemployment rate is high (60 percent in some areas), few children are
 involved in the industrial sector. There have been reports that young Sierra
 Leonean children have been hired by foreign employers to work as domestics over-
 seas at extremely low wages and in appalling conditions. Although the Government
 
 
 235
 indicated it would investigate the situation, there have been no further reports or
 findings.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no legislated minimum wage. Pur-
 chasing power continued to decline in 1992, and most workers have to pool incomes
 with their extended families and engage in subsistence food .production in order to
 maintain a minimum standard of living. The Governments suggested standard
 workweek is 38 hours, but this is not mandated, and most workweeks exceed 38
 hours.
 Within the Department of Labor, there is an inactive Health and Safety Division.
 Health and safety regulations are included in collective bargaining agreements ne-
 gotiated by trade unions, but there is no evidence of systematic enforcement of these
 safety standards. Trade unions provide the only protection for workers who file com-
 plaints about working conditions. Initially, the unions make a formal complaint
 about a hazardous work condition. If this is rejected, the unions can issue a 21-day
 strike notice.
