 SIERRA LEONE
 The country is governed by the 1991 Constitution; provisions suspended by the
 National Provisional Ruling Council (NPRC) have been reinstituted. In an internal
 NPRC power struggle, General Julius Maada Bio ousted NPRC chairman (Captain)
 Valentine Strasser in January 1996. After 4 years of military government, which fol-
 lowed 25 years of one party rule, the Republic of Sierra Leone returned to civilian
 government after elections in March. With 70 percent of the electorate participating,
 Alhaji Abroad Tejan Kabbah was elected President in the first free and fair elections
 since 1967 and took office in March in a peaceful transfer of power from the NPRC.
 The judiciary is no longer subject to the intervention of special commissions of in-
 quiry that were established by the NPRC to circumvent the judicial system.
 On November 30, President Kabbah signed a peace accord with the Revolutionary
 United Front (RUF) which had been attempting to overthrow successive govern-
 ments since March 1991. Joint Government and RUF committees will oversee disar-
 mament and demobilization of RUF and government forces.
 The Sierra Leone Military Force (RSLMF) is responsible for external defense.
 During the civil war, the RSLMF and the police force provided internal security.
 The RSLMF was supported by Nigerian and Guinean military contingents and by
 Executive Outcomes, a private South African mercenary firm. The April cease-fire
 was broken by both sides, but ultimately the RSLMF and civil defense militias
 (Kamajohs) applied sufficient military pressure on the RUF to lead to successful
 peace negotiations. The Kamajohs were not under full governmental control. Clash-
 es between the RSLMF and the Kamajohs occurred. Government security forces
 committed numerous serious human rights abuses.
 Sierra Leone is a very poor country with alarming health statistics. The average
 life expectancy for a women is 47 years and 42 years for a man. One child out of
 four dies before age 5. Before the war, more than 70 percent of the 4.5 million citi-
 zens were involved in some aspect of agriculture, mainly subsistence farming. Al-
 though the country is rich in minerals, including rutile (titanium dioxide), dia-
 monds, gold, and bauxite, official receipts from legal exports of gold and diamonds
 have decreased over recent years. Significant portions of the gold and diamonds are
 smuggled abroad. Government revenues from the mineral sector were far below
 preconflict levels.
 Although the Government's human rights record has improved, serious problems
 remain. The security forces were responsible for extrajudicial killings, beatings, ar-
 bitrary arrest and detention, and illegal searches. There were reports that police
 abused suspects during arrest and interrogation. Prison conditions remain life
 threatening, and lengthy delays in trials, prolonged pretrial detentions, and viola-
 tions of due process remain problems. Over half of the 640 persons detained at the
 Pademba Road prison are awaiting trial. Most abuses, including extrajudicial
 killings by RSLMF units, were committed chiefly in the area of armed conflict. The
 Government has harassed, arrested, and detained journalists. Discrimination and
 violence against women remain widespread, as does violence against children.
 RUF rebels were responsible for numerous serious human rights abuses, including
 extrajudicial killings, torture, rape, and mutilation of civilians.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Both government forces and RUF
 rebels engaged in these abuses. A cease-fire was in effect, but there were violations
 by renegade RSLMF soldiers and RUF forces.
 Armed forces personnel were reportedly involved in political and extrajudicial
 killings. Renegade soldiers killed civilians while engaged in looting, robbery, and ex-
 tortion (see Section 1.g.). The military court-martialed three soldiers for murder, but
 none was sentenced to death.
 
 
 244
 There were several attempted political killings. On February 26, the night of the
 presidential elections, unknown persons attempted to kill Paul Kamara, the former
 editor of For Di People newspaper, and a critic of the NPRC. Kamara accepted an
 appointment on January 19 asNPRC Minister for Lands, Housing, and the Envi-
 ronment. Assailants dressed in military fatigues used military weapons in the at-
 tack in which Kamara was shot five times in the leg at close rang. NPRC delays
 in seeking appropriate medical treatment hindered his recovery. The Government
 made no arrests.
 On February 18, prior to the February election, an attempt was made to kill Dr.
 James Jonah, the head of the Interim National Election Commission, when a hand
 grenade was thrown into his residential compound. The Government made no ar-
 rests.
 Three policemen were charged with manslaughter for allegedly beating a suspect
 to death on July 4 at the central police station.
 Eight prisoners died in custody due to lack of food and inadequate medical treat-
 ment (see Section 1.c.).
 RUF forces killed civilians while engaged in looting, robbery, and extortion (see
 Section 1.g.).
 b. Disappearance.-Since the civilian Government assumed power, there have
 been no reports of disappearances of captured persons who were suspected to be
 rebels.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Although the Constitution prohibits torture, the police and armed forces personnel
 beat suspects during arrest and interrogation. Armed forces personnel engaged in
 combat operations sometimes physically abused or killed civilians (see Section 1.g.).
 The Government made some effort to investigate the incidents and punish those me-
 volved.
 On February 12, soldiers assaulted p residential candidate Thaimu Bangura in
 Freetown, preventing him from attending the National Consultative Conference.
 Soldiers dragged Bangura from his car beat him, and stole his car. The NPRC found
 and returned his car, but was unable to find Bangura's assailants.
 Prior to elections, beth government soldiers and rebel forces terrorized many vil-
 lags, cutting off fingers, hands, arms, ears, or lips with machetes. Some had slo-
 gans denouncing the elections cut into their backs and chests. While the RUF con-
 ducted many attacks in the northern province, responsibility in the southern prov-
 ince was harder to determine. Several victims in villages in Kakunya Chiefdom
 (Moyamba District) and Lubu Chiefdom (Bo District) from 19-22 February had their
 hands amputated. Others had "No Elections" cut into their backs or RUF cut into
 their foreheads. Fingers, upper lips, and ears were amputated. On February 22, one
 man from Sumbuy, Lubu Chiefdom had "RUF" and "No Elections" cut into his fore-
 head and back. His upper lip and right ear were cut off.
 Prison conditions at times remain life threatening. The civilian Government
 worked to improve conditions. While still overcrowded with 5 occupants in a cell
 built for 1 inmate, the civilian Government reduced numbers of prisoners in the
 Pademba Road prison by nearly one-half (1,200 to 640). Diet and medical care in
 the prison was often inadequate. Eight of 70 suspected rebels detained by the NPRC
 Government in 1995 died of malnutrition and lack of medical supervision. While the
 new Government provides better supervision of food and medical services for in-
 mates, these programs lack the required monitoring. Detainees sleep on mattresses
 on the floor, and toilet facilities are rudimentary. Over half of the 640 prisoners are
 awaiting trial. Male and female inmates are imprisoned separately but together
 with juveniles. Homosexual rape is common.
 * A nongovernmental group, Prison Watch, has been organized to focus attention
 on prison conditions. The Government continued to grant the International Commit-
 tee of the Rod Cross (ICRC) access to prisoners, including alleged rebels.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-In practice, the Government does not
 provide adequate safeguards against arbitrary or unjust detentions, nor for their
 formal review. By law, after an initial 24 hour detention, detainees must have ac-
 cess to legal counsel, families, and medical care, but detainees are seldom provided
 with these services unless they can afford legal counsel to demand compliance. The
 Government repealed NPRC decrees under which high-ranking police and military
 officials could arrest without warrant and detain indefinitely any person suspected
 of posing a threat to public safety. In practice, soldiers arrest or detain civilians
 without charge. Arrested foreigners are often released but may not depart the coun-
 try.
 The Government provides legal representation for the indigent only in cases of
 capital offenses. Lack of counsel in other cases frequently leads to wrongful convic-
 tion. Many indigent detainees are unaware of their rights and assume, sometimes
 
 
 245
 correctly, that law enforcement or judicial authorities will be paid by the accuser
 to rule against them. The Society for the Protection of Human Rights provides free
 legal counsel to some indigent detainees, and some local nongovernmental organiza-
 tions (NGO's) provide counsel and advice to women concerning their rights.
 During military operations, a number of rebels were captured by army forces.
 They were held at brigade headquarters in provincial capitals and at the defense
 headquars in Freetown. After initial interrogation, the RUF combatants were re-
 leased to family members who signed a guarantee to the military that the family
 was responsible to return the RUF combatant to the military if further discussions
 were needed. Under the peace accord, RUF combatants will be pardoned from mnci-
 dents connected with the war. The four high ranking RUF officials arrested by
 Guinean authorities in 1995 were initially held at army headuarters but at year's
 end were in custody at the police Criminal Investigation Division (CID) head-
 quarters and expected to be released soon as part of the Government's compliance
 with the peace accord.
 In April the authorities released the last three political detainees held by the Gov-
 ernment.
 The Government does not use exile to circumvent the judicial system. However,
 senior NPRC officials were offered short-term educational programs abroad by inter-
 national organizations to entice them to leave the political scene following the
 change of government. There are no restrictions on their return.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-There are constitutional provisions for an inde-
 pendent judiciary. No special commissions of inquiry operate under the new civilian
 government. A board headed by a justice on loan from the Commonwealth is review-
 ing actions taken by the previous special commissions of inquiry to determine
 whether actions by the special commissions were injurious to citizens.
 There are three judicial systems: Regular courts; local or traditional courts; and
 courts-martial. The regular court system is based on the British model and consists
 of a Supreme Court, an intermediate Court of Appeals, a High Court of Magistrates,
 and Magistrates Courts. There are criminal and civil courts. Decisions by lower
 courts may be appealed in the high courts. Under previous governments, there have
 been delays of up to 5 years in bringing some cases to trial. The new Government
 is attempting to improve working conditions and facilities for the judiciary to im-
 prove its performance, but the backlog of cases is of major concern.
 Judges in the regular court system may serve until they reach the mandatory re-
 tirement age of 65, unless their appointment is revoked. There were no known in-
 stances of judges being fired or transferred for political reasons. Elected indigenous
 leaders preside over the local courts and administer tribal law in civil cases. Local
 courts are often the only legal institution in rural areas, however, local courts in
 the eastern and southern provinces are still not functioning due to the unsettled
 conditions in these areas.
 The courts-martial system, based on British military codes and common law, pro-
 vides for adjudication of minor offenses by the military unit commander. Soldiers
 accused of more serious offenses are transferred from field units to Headquarters
 for trial. Although exact statistics are unavailable, the courts-martial system has
 convicted military personnel for murder, robbery, and other offenses. This year no
 military personnel were sentenced to death for capital offenses and no executions
 were conducted. The senior officer sentenced to death under the NPRC government
 in 1995 was released by the current Government.
 The right to minimum due process is not always respected. Authorities sometimes
 beat detainees or otherwise punish them prior to incarceration or a court hearing.
 There were no allegations of mutilation of detainees by law enforcement officials
 this year (see Section 1.c.). In addition the regular court system accepts and sanc-
 tions provisions of tribal, traditional, and Islamic law that discriminate against
 women and minorities.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Government has repealed the NPRC decrees that provided broad authority to mon-
 itor actions or conversations within homes, to prevent a person from acting in a
 manner deemed prejudicial to public safety, to impose restriction on employment or
 business, to control association or communication with other persons, and to inter-
 fere with correspondence. However, in practice, there were numerous occasions of
 abusive treatment of citizens by soldiers and police, both within and outside the war
 zones. These abuses included forced entry into homes, robberies, and assaults. A
 number of soldiers accused of looting were court-martialed.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-The internal conflict involves multiple ethnic groups and has resulted in an
 estimated 15,000 deaths since 1991. Also, an estimated 1.7 million Sierra Leoneans
 have been displaced internally or are living as refugees in neighboring countries be-
 
 
 246
 cause of the war. Guinean and Nigerian troops continued to assist the Sierra
 Leonean military.
 There were many serious violations of humanitarian law in the internal conflict
 throughout the war zone, including summary executions of prisoners and non-
 combatants, and torture, rape, mutilation, and  lling of civilians.
 On March 14, the NPRC with the assistance of the Government of Cote D'Ivoire
 negotiated an unconditional cease-fire with the RUF. The ICRC acted as a facilitator
 in its role of neutral intermediary. The new civilian Government continued talks
 with the RUF, and on April 22, the sides agreed to extend the cease-fire and ap-
 pointed groups to draft peace and disarmament accords. On May 28, the RUF sus-
 pended talks and said it would not disarm until Executive Outcomes, a private mer-
 cenary organization employed by the government, left Sierra Leone. The cease-fire
 generally continued to hold, although there were serious security incidents. The
 Government and the RUF signed a peace accord on November 30.
 Despite the cease-fire government security forces and RUF rebels continued to
 loot villages and ambush truck convoys. RUF forces abducted villagers and vehicle
 passengers and forced them to carry looted goods to RUF bases. Civilians were
 maimed, tortured, and murdered in these incidents. On August 29, between Gbaima
 and Mafombo on the Bo-Taiama highway, a car carrying seven passengers was am-
 bushed, reportedly by RUF combatants. Six persons were shot, and two died. In
 some cases, the perpetrators could not be identified; however, it is generally believed
 that undisciplined armed forces personnel, the RUF forces, and thieves committed
 attacks on civilians. The towns of Kamakwie, Kamallu, and Pendembu in Kambia
 and Bombail districts in the northern province were attacked. Many abductees were
 taken to a RUF camp in the Malal hills. The village of Kpatobu, Lubu Chiefdom,
 was attacked by an armed group in both military uniforms and civilian clothes,
 armed with sticks, machetes, guns, and rocket propelled grenades. The attackers
 killed two villagers and mutilated at least four others.
 There appears to have been little ethnically motivated violence in the hostilities.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of S  ech and Press.-The 1991 Constitution provides for freedom of
 speech and press. However, in practice, authorities arrested, beat, harassed, and de-
 tained journalists, and temporarily banned two newspapers for publishing unflatter-
 ing articles about the Government. There are 28 newspapers covering a wide politi-
 cal spectrum. Many feature sensational, undocumented headlines and articles.
 In April police arrested the editor of the Concord Times for a story critical of gov-
 ernment spending. Released after 10 hours, the editor was later charged with sedi-
 tious libel; the charges were dropped after the editor admitted inaccuracy in the
 story. In May police harassed and beat a reporter for Afro Times investigating a
 story at CID headquarters. In July police arrested the editor of The Point for a story
 concerning corruption and detained him for 10 hours. In August police detained the
 editor of Expo Times for 8 hours, and searched his office, for a story concerning the
 internal conflict between the RUF and government forces.
 The capital has four radio stations: one is controlled by the Government; one is
 privately owned; and two are operated by Christian missionaries and broadcast reli-
 gious programming and foreign news. A privately owned station operates in the pro-
 vincial capital of Bo. The Government owns and operates the only television station,
 which is seen only in the capital.
 The Government respects academic freedom. There were no reports of detention
 of educatrs or threats to them for their teaching activities.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Assocation.-The 1991 Constitution pro-
 vides for freedom of assembly as well as the right to form political, economic, social,
 and professional organizations. The Government has placed no restrictions on any
 of these provisions in practice.
 In September the NfRC decree banning 57 individuals from political activity for
 10 years was repealed.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Forein Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-There are no official restrictions on travel within the country, but nu-
 merus military checkpoints make travel difficult. As security increased in the coun-
 tryside, more travel by rad occurred between major cities. However, at various
 times, vehicles were ambushed or hijacked by armed forces and RUF personnel. A
 police clearance is requir-ed for citizens traveling outside the country.
 There are no restrictions on emigration or repatriation. Approximately 1.7 million
 citizens are displaced within the country. An estimated 350,000 Sierra Leoneans are
 refugees in Guinea and Liberia.
 
 
 247
 The Government cooperates with the Office of the United Nations Commissioner
 for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees.
 The Government has provided first asylum to Liberians during the 1990's. It contin-
 ues to provide first asylum to some 12,000 Liberians and provided it to an addi-
 tional 1,176 persons in 1996.Although in May the Government provided food and
 water to the Victory Reefer, a ship carrying some 100 Liberian refugees which had
 been searchingfor a port to disembark its passengers, it did not authorize disem-
 barkation. Wit the exception of the Victory Reefer, there were no reports of forced
 return of persons to a country in which they feared persecution. There is no formal
 process for granting political asylum.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 With the 1991 Constitution restored, citizens have the rigit to change their gov-
 ernment. As a result of great international and domestic pressure, the NPRC al-
 lowed presidential elections in February and March.
 Women were substantially involved in ensuring that elections took place, but they
 are underrepresented in government. In the new Government, women head 2 of 21
 ministries. The recently appointed foreign minister is a woman. Freetown and Bo,
 the largest cities in the country, have appointed female mayors. A few senior civil
 service, police, and judicial positions are held by women.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Active human rights groups include the National League for Human Rights and
 the Network Movement for Justice. There is a local chapter of Amnesty Inter-
 national in Freetown and human rights groups operate without restriction. Several
 organizations are providing human rights training.
 The Government allows the ICRC to visit prisoners and suspected rebels in the
 Pademba Road Prison and various military barracks. Amnesty International also
 continues to visit the prison.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination against women and provides for protec-
 tion against discrimination on the basis of race and ethnicity, except for the prohibi-
 tion against citizenship for persons with a non-African father. This provision effec-
 tively blocks citizenship ant peolitical participation of the Lebanese community, per-
 sons of Afro-Lebanese descent, and other persons with non-African fathers.
 Women.-Violence against women, especially wife beating, is common. Police are
 unlikely to intervene in domestic disputes except in cases of severe injury or death.
 Few cases of such violence go to court. Sierra Leone does not recognize domestic vio-
 lence against women as a societal problem, and the new Government has not given
 it high-level attention.
 Rape remains a recognized societal problem. It is punishable by up to 14 years'
 imprisonment. The Government enforces this law.
 The Constitution provides for equal rights for women, but in practice women face
 both legal and societal discrimination. Their rights and status under traditional law
 vary significantly, depending upon the ethnic group. The Temne and Limba tribes
 of the north afford greater rights to women to inherit property than does the Mende
 tribe, which gives preference to male heirs and unmarried aughters. However, in
 the Temne tribe, women cannot become paramount chiefs. In the south there are
 a number of female paramount chiefs.
 Women do not have equal access to education, economic opportunities, health fa-
 cilities, or social freedoms. In rural areas, women perform much of the subsistence
 farming, all of the child rearing, and have little opportunity for education. The aver-
 age educational level for women is markedly below that of men; only 6 percent are
 literate. At the university level, men predominate. A local NGO, Women Organized
 for a Morally Enlightened Nation, seeks to educate women throughout the country
 on their civic and civil rights and responsibilities.
 Children.-The Government is committed to improving childrens' education and
 health. The Government's Ministry of Gender and Children's Affairs seeks to work
 with all ministries to ensure children's concerns are addressed.
 With a peace agreement, the Government's demobilization program for both rebel
 and military forces will address the issue of "boy soldiers". Many underage boys
 were allowed to join military operations early in the war. Rebel forces routinely con-
 scripted young men and women into their ranks when they attacked rural villages.
 The new Government continued work with NGO's to address the integration of "boy
 soldiers" back into society.
 
 
 248
 Although statistics are not yet available for the year, infant and child mortality
 is very high. Statistics are expected to be similar to 1995 with one child in four
 dying before the age of 5 and one-third of children under the age of 5 being under-
 weight.
 Instances of ritual murders of boys and girls, as well as adults, associated with
 animist religious groups in the provinces, continued. Four women have been con-
 victed of manslaughter and are serving prison sentences for their participation.
 Female genital mutilation (FGM), which is widely condemned by international
 health experts as damaging to beth physical and psychological health, is widely
 practiced on young women and girls, especially in traditional ethnic groups and
 among the less-educated. While one independent expert estimates the percentage of
 females who have undergone this procedure may e as high as 90 percent, local
 troups believe that this figure is overstated. Membership in female secret societies
 that practice FGM in their initiation rites has been declining.
 There has been an active press campaign by secret societies that attempts to
 counter the well-publicized international condemnation of FGM. On August 17, a
 28-year-old woman was abducted by the Secret Bundo Society in Freetown and was
 subjected to FGM. The woman is bringing criminal charges against the Society and
 has retained a lawyer, but at the end of the year the case had not gone to trial.
 People With Disabilities.-Questions of public facility access and discrimination
 against the disabled have not become public policy issues. The Department of Edu-
 cation has an official whose function is to further mainstream education of students
 with learning disabilities.
 No laws mandate accessibility to buildings or provide for other assistance for the
 disabled. While there does not appear to be outright discrimination against the dis-
 abled in housing or education, with the high rate of unemployment, few disabled
 persons work in offices or factories.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Ethnic loyalty remains an important factor
 in government, the military, and business. Complaints of corruption and ethnic dis-
 crimination in government appointments, contracts, military commissions, and pro-
 motions are common.
 Residents of non-African descent face institutionalized political restrictions. The
 Constitution restricts citizenship to persons of Negro-African descent following a
 patrilineal pattern. This constitutional restriction effectively denies citizenship to
 many long-time residents, notably the Lebanese community.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution provides for the right of associa-
 tion. All workers, including civil servants, have the right to join trade unions of
 their choice. Unions are independent of the Government. All labor unions have by
 custom joined the Sierra Leone Labor Congress (SLLC), but membership is vol-
 untary. There is no legal prohibition against SLLC leadership holding political of-
 fice, and leaders have held both elected and appointed government positions.
 Under the Trade Union Act, any five persons may form a trade union by applying
 to the Registrar of Trade Unions, who has statutory powers under the act to ap-
 prove the creation of trade unions. The Registrar may reject applications for several
 reasons, including an insufficient number of members, proposed representation in
 an industry already serviced by an existing union, or incomplete documentation. If
 the Registrar rejects an application, his decision may be appealed in the ordinary
 courts,but applicants seldom take such action. Approximately 60 percent of workers
 in urban areas, including government employees, are unionized, but unions have
 had little success in organizing workers in the agricultural and mining sectors.
 Unions have the right to strike without exception, but the Government may re-
 quire 21 days' notice. The new Government repealed the NPRC decree that prohib-
 ited disruption of public tranquility or disruption of supplies, which could be used
 to prevent a prolonged strike. Although union members may be fired for participat-
 ingin even a lawful strike, no such incidents were reported.
 Unions are free to form federations and confederations and to affiliate internation-
 ally. The SLLC is a member of the International Confederation of Free Trade
 Unions, and there are no restrictions on international travel or contacts of trade
 unionists.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The legal framework for col-
 lective bargaining is the Regulation of Wages and Industrial Relations Act. Collec-
 tive bargaining must take place in trade group negotiating councils, each of which
 has an equal number of employer and worker representatives. Most enterprises are
 covered by collective bargaining agreements on wages and working conditions. The
 SLLC provides assistance to unions in preparation for negotiations. In case of a
 
 
 249
 deadlock the Government may intervene. It has not, however, used decrees to pre-
 vent stri]jes.
 No law prohibits retribution against strikers. Should an employee be fired for
 union activities, the individual may file a complaint with a labor tribunal and seek
 reinstatement. Complaints of discrimination against unions are made to an arbitra-
 tion tribunal. Individual trade unions investigate alleged violations of work condi-
 tions to try to ensure that employers take the necessary steps to correct abuses.
 Labor laws apply to enterprises located in export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Under the Chiefdom's Council Act,
 compulsory labor may be imposed by individual chiefs, requiring members of their
 villages to contribute to the improvement of common areas. This practice exists only
 in rural areas. There is no penalty for noncompliance.
 The Government does not require compulsory labor. However, an NPRC decree re-
 tained by the current Government requires that homeowners, businessmen, and
 vendors clean and maintain their premises. Failure to comply is punishable by fine
 or imprisonment. The last Saturday of each month is declared a National Cleaning
 Day, and there have been reports under the new Government of security forces pub-
 licly humiliating citizens to ensure compliance.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum age for employment
 is officially 18 years, but in practice there is no enforcement because there is no gov-
 ernment entity specifically charge& with this task. Children routinely assist in fam-
 ily businesses, especially those of vendors and petty traders. In rural areas, children
 work seasonally on family subsistence farms.
 Because the adult unemployment rate is high (an estimated 70 percent in some
 areas), few children are involved in the industrial sector. There have been reports
 that young children have been hired by foreign employers to work as domestics
 overseas at extremely low wages and in poor conditions. The Department of Foreign
 Affairs and International Cooperation is responsible for reviewing overseas work ap-
 plications to see that no one under the age of 14 is employed for this purpose and
 to enforce certain wage standards.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no minimum wage. Purchasing power
 continued to decline, and most workers have to pool incomes with their extended
 families and engage in subsistence food production to maintain a minimum stand-
 ard of living. The Government's suggested standard workweek is 38 hours, but most
 workweeks exceed 38 hours. The overnment sets health and safety standards, but
 the standards are outmoded and often not enforced. The Health and Safety Division
 of the Department of Labor has insyection and enforcement responsibility, but inad-
 equate funding and transportation limit its effectiveness.
 Health and safety regulations are included in collective bargainin agreements,
 but there is no evidence of systematic enforcement of those health andsafety stand-
 ards. Trade unions provide the only protection for workers who file complaints about
 working conditions. Initially, a union makes a formal complaint about a hazardous
 work condition. If this is rejected, the union may issue a 21-day strike notice. If
 workers remove themselves from dangerous work situations without making a for-
 mal complaint, they risk being fired.
