 SIERRA LEONE
 Sierra Leone is one of the few civilian-ruled, multi-
 party states in Africa. Established as a parliamentary
 democracy at the time of its independence in 1961, its
 basic democratic institutions have survived despite
 several military coups in the late 1960s, and the rough-
 and-tumble nature of Sierra Leonean politics. Stemming
 from the national parliamentary elections in 1977 a
 number of allegations were made of human rights violations,
 including arbitrary detention and infringement of the
 freedoms of speech and assembly.
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a.   Torture
 There is no evidence of the use of torture in Sierra
 Leone.
 b.   Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 The government of Sierra Leone does not countenance
 cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
 c.   Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 Following widespread demonstrations and extensive
 property damage, and the imposition of a state of
 emergency on February 1, 1977, several hundred persons
 were detained without charges. Detainees included three
 elected opposition members of Parliament.-
 d.   Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The judiciary remains relatively independent, and Sierra
 Leone's courts have a good reputation for providing fair
 public trials.
 (103)
 
 
 104
 e. Invasion of the Home
 There are effective legal safeguards against arbitrary
 invasion of the home.
 2.   Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health care
 and Education
 The 1974-79 National Development Plan calls for increasing
 the welfare of the broad mass of population and achieving
 a more equitable distribution of income. The plan
 accords the highest priority to raising the productivity,
 incomes and living conditions of the rural population,
 increasing rural employment, and improving human nutri-
 tion. In support of these goals the proportion of the
 development budget allocated to agriculture has steadily
 risen and is now 32 percent. Funds devoted to education
 constitute over 23 percent of the total budget, and
 health and social services comprise an additional ten
 percent. The country's economic situation is quite
 difficult, however, and funds available for direct
 assistance to the poor are limited. Many observers
 report that corruption in Sierra Leone is pervasive,
 and corruption appears to have diverted significant
 resources from the poor.
 3.   Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion
 and Assembly
 The constitutional guarantees of freedom of religion
 and speech are observed. Labor unions are allowed to
 operate freely and are not subject to government con-
 trol. The press is heavily influenced by the government
 and the ruling All People's Congress (APC) party. One
 opposition paper, however, is published and circulates
 without apparent hindrance. During the period from
 February 1 to May 6, 1977, freedom of assembly was
 restricted under the provisions of the State of Emergency
 act. Since the May 6 elections these restrictions have
 been eased considerably. The government makes no
 effort to impose ideological conformity or to restrict
 intellectual inquiry.
 
 
 105
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Eiigration
 There are no official restrictions on travel within the
 country, except those to control smuggling in the
 diamond mining areas of Kono District. Regulations
 governing foreign travel are liberal, and there are
 minimal legal restrictions on emigration.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Sierra Leone is one of the few civilian ruled, multi-
 party states in Africa. As is true in many other
 African nations, normal political rivalries are exacer-
 bated by tribal and regional animosities. The opposition,
 largely'concentrated in the Sierra Leone People's Party
 (SLPP), is not outlawed, but it has not been permitted
 to function effectively. The political events since
 the student demonstrations in January 1977 have strained
 Sierra Leone's traditional image as a politically
 tolerant nation. The administration is encouraging the
 formation of a one-party state on the grounds that
 political divisions exacerbate traditional tribal
 rivalries and threaten the fragile unity of the nation.
 The success or failure of this effort will determine
 the depth of public support for a multi-party state.
 4.   Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-Governmental Investigation of Alleged
 Violations of-Human Rights
 The government of Sierra Leone has supported U.S. human
 rights initiatives in general terms.
 There are a number of private individuals and groups
 both in Sierra Leone and outside who are strongly
 critical of the present government's human rights
 record. These critics are particularly vocal regarding
 alleged election abuses which they claim were instigated
 by the ruling APC party. In its most recent annual
 report, Amnesty International has cited several reports
 of human rights violations in Sierra Leone. Several
 of the individuals listed as detainees were recently
 released from custody.
 Sierra Leone's leaders are sensitive to outside criti-
 cism, particularly from self-declared exiles. There
 have been no requests for outside investigations, and
 Sierra Leone's response to such requests would hinge on
 the nature of the allegations and the reputation of the
 organization requesting the investigation.
 
 22-145 0 - 78 - 8
 
 
