 SIERRA LEONE
 Under the 1978 Constitution Sierra Leone has a one-party
 system of government in which the President, Dr. Joseph Saidu
 Momoh, exercises predominant executive authority. The
 unicameral Parliament is largely an advisory body. The All
 People's Congress [APC] is Sierra Leone's sole legal political
 party.
 The security structure includes the defense force of
 approximately 5,000 men, which is responsible for controlling
 external threats and civil disturbances in the country. The
 police, criminal investigation division, and the special
 security division have a combined complement of over 1,500
 personnel. The police were involved in 1990.in controlling
 several public demonstrations protesting deteriorating
 economic conditions which turned violent. Police shot and
 killed two demonstrators in Freetown and one in the northern
 city of Lunsar.
 A majority of the population of Sierra Leone, over 70 percent
 of the 3.9 million people, is involved in some aspect of
 agriculture, mostly subsistence farming. Sierra Leone is rich
 in natural resources, including titanium, rutile, gold, and
 diamonds. The President introduced new measures to counter
 the smuggling of gold and diamonds, the export of which
 generates most of the country's foreign exchange. Despite a
 new economic reform program highly praised by the donor
 community, its austerity features has led to a high level of
 public discontent.
 Human rights remained restricted in 1990. In the face of
 growing public pressure for political reform, the governing
 APC permitted discussion, within the party and in public
 forums, of multiparty democracy. The President and APC
 proposed reforms to the political system which would dilute
 the authority of the APC but retain the single party's
 constitutional monopoly on power. In October the President
 established the National Constitutional Review Commission to
 develop proposals to increase political participation within
 the one-party system. The Commission had not made its
 recommendations by the end of the year. Other areas of human
 rights concern included mistreatment of detainees by police,
 lack of independence of the judiciary, and denial of the right
 to fair trial, to association and assembly, and to freedom of
 expression. In 1990 the Government did not undertake any
 improvements in the harsh prison conditions which have
 contributed to high mortality rates in past years.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 Police fired on unarmed demonstrators in May, killing three.
 There were no known investigations into this incident by the
 end of the year (See Section 2.a.).
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 
 
 337
 SIERRA LEONE
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Although the Constitution prohibits torture, police
 mistreatment of suspects during arrest and interrogation
 continues to be a problem. There have been no cases of
 responsible officials being punished by the Government.
 Amnesty International (AI) has monitored the conditions of
 prisons such as Pademba Road prison in Freetown which was
 built to accommodate several hundred prisoners but now has an
 inmate population of over 1,000. Deaths in prison are common
 due to malnutrition and inadequate medical supplies. In
 October the contractor who was supplying food other than rice
 stopped the supply of food to two prisons until prison
 authorities made a payment against a $475,000 bill. The
 Government recognized the need for prison reform but took no
 known specific actions to ameliorate conditions in 1990. It
 also did not release the report, completed in 1989, of a
 Presidential commission appointed in 1987 to investigate
 prison conditions.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Constitution permits detention without charge for up to 28
 days for the investigation of criminal complaints. However,
 authorities frequently hold detainees beyond this limit,
 particularly when detainees are not represented by counsel.
 The Public Emergency Act permits the President to order the
 detention without charge of anyone suspected of threatening
 public security. Detainees are guaranteed access to legal
 counsel, families, and medical care, but authorities do not
 respect these guarantees unless detainees demand compliance.
 The Government does not provide legal representation for the
 indigent except in the case of capital offenses, and this
 frequently leads to abuse. The Society for the Protection of
 Human Rights has provided pro bono legal counsel to indigent
 detainees. In at least 6 cases, attorneys were able to secure
 the release of detainees on grounds of false imprisonment
 stemming from lack of initial legal representation. Many
 indigent detainees are ignorant of their rights and assume
 that law enforcement or judicial authorities will be paid to
 rule against them by the accuser.
 Police and security agencies may recommend to the President
 that a person be detained indefinitely on suspicion of
 threatening the national security. During a state of
 emergency, the President may also invoke the Public Emergency
 Act, which permits indefinite detention and suspends the right
 to a hearing unless the detainee is charged with a capital
 offense.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Despite the constitutional guarantee for fair and public
 trial, there are often long delays in bringing cases to trial,
 and it is believed that the judiciary is sometime subject to
 political influence and manipulation. Sierra Leone has two
 judicial systems: the regular court system and the local
 court system. The regular court system consists of the
 Supreme Court, an Intermediate Court of Appeals, a High Court
 of Magistrates, and magistrates' courts. Defendants are
 allowed counsel of their choice, but many persons cannot
 afford legal representation. Decisions by lower courts may be
 appealed.
 
 
 38
 SIERRA LEONE
 Under the Constitution, the President appoints all judges and
 may retire them after the age of 55. In 1990 President Momoh
 recommended that the constitutional provisions on appointment
 and retirement of judges be repealed to ensure greater
 autonomy for the judiciary. Long delays of up to 2 years in
 bringing cases to trial and lack of trained personnel further
 circumscribe judicial independence. Judges still take
 handwritten notes on court proceedings, which in itself can
 lead to inaccuracies in records and further delays in legal
 action.
 Indigenous ethnic leaders preside over the local courts and
 administer tribal law. The local courts are often the only
 legal institution in rural areas.
 There were no known political prisoners being held at the end
 of 1990.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Constitution prohibits arbitrary invasion of the home, and
 the Government does not generally interfere with the rights of
 privacy and family. In security cases, however, the
 Government has the authority to enter homes without a search
 warrant.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech is legally guaranteed, but most journalists
 practice self-censorship. The Government may abridge the
 right to freedom of expression under the Constitution if it
 deems national security to be endangered. The Government
 tolerates public criticism by citizens and academics. For
 example, participants in a debate on political reform at
 Fourah Bay College in Freetown concluded that multiparty
 democracy was urgently needed to improve Sierra Leone's
 declining economy. No reprisals were taken against the
 participants. At a seminar sponsored by The Society for the
 Preservation of Human Rights, multiparty democracy and the
 Government's record on human rights were freely discussed
 without reprisals against participants.
 There are at least 12 active newspapers, of which only 2 are
 considered to be government controlled. While most
 journalists avoid criticizing the President or his policies,
 the press does regularly criticize other government
 officials. Debate on the need for greater democratization
 increased in the press in 1990, with the daily independent
 newspaper New Shaft reporting that it had received 25,000
 signatures in its campaign calling for multiparty democracy.
 New Shaft also printed in full a letter from the Committee to
 'Protect Journalists inquiring into the case of Lansana Fofana,
 a reporter for We Yone who was imprisoned in 1989 for writing
 an article critical of the courts' handling of another
 journalist's conviction on criminal charges of possession of
 firearms. Fofana was granted amnesty by the President in
 September from the remainder of his 2-year sentence on charges
 of contempt of court. Earlier in the year, the Minister of
 Information ordered the editor of New Shaft, Franklin
 Bunting-Davies, to cease publication, questioning
 Bunting-Davies' qualifications as a journalist under the
 Newspaper Registration Act of 1980. Bunting-Davies was also
 
 
 339
 SIERRA LEONE
 charged with libel, stemming from an article he wrote about a
 Member of Parliament. The case was later settled out of
 court. This was the first known use of the Newspaper
 Registration Act in connection with a journalist's prosecution.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Constitution provides for freedom of assembly and
 guarantees the right to form economic, social, and
 professional organizations. In the political sphere, however,
 these rights are limited in practice to APC organizations.
 Permits must be obtained from the police for public meetings,
 and these are carefully controlled. Demonstrations are
 generally not permitted but, in the case of unauthorized
 demonstrations, police normally do not intervene unless
 violence occurs.
 There were significant demonstrations and riots in 1990 as
 public dissatisfactiod with the economy increased. A protest
 by secondary schoolteachers over longstanding salary arrears
 erupted into violence when the teachers, joined by students,
 refused a police order to disperse. Police used tear gas and
 fired on the crowd, killing at least three demonstrators.
 There were no known investigations into the incident.
 In February the Government lifted its ban on student union
 activities in the university system. The ban had been imposed
 3 years earlier following a serious outbreak of student unrest
 over deteriorating university conditions and slow payment of
 students' stipends. Universities opened on schedule and
 without incident in January. The Government had closed
 university system schools early for the December 1990 holiday
 break to prevent student demonstrations over this ban.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is guaranteed by the Constitution and
 religious tolerance is practiced in Sierra Leone. Muslims,
 the largest religious group, Christians, animists, and
 adherents of other faiths practice their beliefs freely, and
 they can publish and distribute religious materials without
 government interference. A wide cross section of Sierra
 Leoneans participate in the annual hajj (Muslim pilgrimage to
 Mecca). The Government partially subsidizes participation in
 the hajj.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no restrictions on freedom of movement within the
 country, foreign travel, or emigration and repatriation.
 Repatriates are not discriminated against by the Government.
 Sierra Leone, a party to the U.N. Convention and Protocol
 Relating to the Status of Refugees, is host to approximately
 125,000 refugees and 25,000 displaced persons who fled the
 1990 unrest in Liberia for sanctuary. Refugees are not forced
 by the Government to return to countries in which they have a
 fear of persecution.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of
 Citizens to Change Their Government
 Citizens do not have the right to change their government
 through peaceful means. Under the Constitution only the All
 
 
 SIERRA LEONE
 People's Congress is legally permitted to exist. Since
 independence in 1961, executive power has increased with a
 corresponding decline in constitutional checks on that power.
 In 1990 public pressure grew for political reform, and the
 Government permitted discussion of multiparty democracy within
 and outside APC circles. In June President Momoh reiterated
 his support for the one-party system but said he wanted to
 increase popular participation within that framework. In
 August the President proposed a series of changes, including
 lessening restrictions on civil servants running for public
 office and eliminating party endorsement of and numerical
 limitations on candidates for Parliament. In October
 President Momoh swore in the National Constitutional Review
 Commission, which is tasked with developing proposed reforms
 to the Constitution with the goal of increasing popular
 participation. The membership of the Commission is drawn from
 labor, commerce, academia, professional associations, the
 press, military, and the police and is scheduled to present
 its proposals by early 1991.
 A traditional system of local government operates in the
 provinces. Paramount chiefs are elected for life by the
 members of the local chiefdom councils. Several women have
 been elected paramount chief. They wield considerable
 authority in local issues. There are no special conditions or
 restrictions that significantly limit any elements of the
 population from playing a fair role in the system. In June
 the President also announced his support for election of town
 and city councils to replace appointed councils. Elections
 for these local bodies were tentatively scheduled for early
 1991.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Sierra Leone Bar Association's Society for the
 Preservation of Human Rights monitors human rights
 developments and in 1990 was able to obtain the release of six
 persons who had been detained without charges or judicial
 review. The Government consistently allowed visits by
 international human rights organizations such as Amnesty
 International.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 There is no officially sanctioned discrimination on the basis
 of sex, religion, language, or social status. Allegations
 have been made of favoritism in political appointments and in
 military commissions and promotions, particularly of President
 Momoh's Limba ethnic group. Many significant positions in the
 Government are held by members of the Limba ethnic group.
 Participation in private organizations appears to be broadly
 based. However, citizens of non-African descent face
 political restrictions, e.g., citizens of Lebanese origin may
 hold Sierra Leonean passports but may not hold membership in
 the All People's Congress.
 Women in Sierra Leone are guaranteed equal rights by the
 Constitution. They continue to suffer from domestic violence
 and female genital mutilation. Their status varies widely in
 different parts of the country and depends heavily on the
 traditions of their ethnic group. These values affect women's
 
 
 341
 SIERRA LEONE
 access to education. Women are represented in many
 occupations. Women appear to have equal access to education,
 except at the university level where men predominate.
 Violence against women, especially wife beating, is most
 common among the more traditional elements of society. The
 police are unlikely to intervene in domestic disputes except
 in cases of severe injury or death. Few cases of violence
 against women ever come to court. Neither the Government nor
 the APC women's group has specifically addressed this issue.
 Female circumcision is legal and widely practiced, especially
 in traditional tribal groups. As the education of women
 increases, many families are not allowing their daughters to
 undergo the women's secret society initiation rites. Shrouded
 in secrecy, these societies are a strong force in women's
 lives, and tradition guards these rites and works against
 change.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The right of association is provided for in the Constitution.
 Workers, including civil servants, have the right to join
 trade unions of their choice. Unions are independent of the
 ruling All People's Congress. However, they must join the
 single trade union confederation, the Sierra Leone Labor
 Congress (SLLC). There is no legal prohibition against the
 SLLC leadership holding political office, and its President
 holds appointive office in Parliament. However, the SLLC's
 Secretary General Kardeh Yilla, who does not hold political
 office, earlier in the year admonished the trade union
 movement to concentrate on economic rather than political
 issues. Under the Trade Union Act any five persons may form a
 trade union by applying to the registrar of trade unions, who
 has statutory powers under the Act to approve the creation of
 trade unions. If the registrar rejects an application, his
 decision may be appealed in the ordinary courts.
 Since wage negotiation is industrywide, the SLLC is
 endeavoring to organize unions according to industry and not
 the trade. At present, there can be as many as six trade
 unions in one industry. In recent years, the unions have
 successfully organized more workers, especially among lower
 wage earners. They have been less successful in organizing
 workers in the agricultural and mining sector, where workers
 face low wages and benefits and poor working conditions.
 Approximately 60 percent of the working population in urban
 areas including government employees is unionized.
 Unions have the right to strike in Sierra Leone. During
 1990, teachers, health care workers, and other civil servants
 staged strikes demanding immediate payment of salary arrears.
 In several instances the Government eventually paid overdue
 salaries.
 Unions are free to form federations and confederations and
 affiliate internationally, and there are no restrictions on
 international travel and contacts. The SLLC is affiliated
 with the Organization of African Trade Union Unity as well as
 with the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions.
 
 
 342
 SIERRA LEONE
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The law prohibits any discrimination against union members.
 Complaints of discrimination against unions are made to the
 Industrial Court for Arbitration. Individual trade unions
 investigate alleged violations of work conditions and ensure
 that employers take the necessary steps to correct abuses.
 The legal framework for collective bargaining is the
 Regulation of Wages and Industrial Relations Act. Collective
 bargaining must take place in trade group negotiating
 councils, each of which is comprised of an equal number of
 .employer and worker representatives. Most enterprises are
 covered by collective bargaining agreements on wage and
 working conditions. The SLLC provides assistance to unions in
 preparing for negotiations in which the Government can
 intervene in case of a deadlock.
 There are no export processing zones in Sierra Leone, and
 labor legislation is applied uniformly throughout the country.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Under the Chiefdom's Council.Act compulsory labor may be
 imposed. The International Labor Organization (ILO)
 reiterated its previous request for the Government to repeal
 or amend this provision of the Chiefdom's Council Act. The
 Government did not take such action in 1990.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The minimum age for employment of children is officially 18
 years, but in practice there is no enforcement of this minimum
 age. There is no government entity specially charged with
 enforcement of existing minimum age standards. In rural areas
 children at early ages work seasonally on subsistence family
 farms. Because the adult unemployment rate is as high as 60
 percent, there are few children involved in the industrial
 sector. Children often engage in street trading. Young
 Sierra Leonean children are reportedly hired by foreign
 employers to work overseas, primarily as domestics, in
 appalling conditions for extremely low wages. There has been
 no systematic collection of information to document the extent
 of the problem. The Government has, however, ordered the
 compilation of a list of all children employed by Lebanese
 nationals, believed to be the primary recruiters of the
 children, and is reportedly considering raising the minimum
 employment age to 21.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 There is no legislated minimum wage. In 1987 the Constance
 Davis commission recommended the establishment of a minimum
 wage and social security program, but at the end of 1990 the
 Government had not passed implementing legislation. Workers'
 purchasing power has declined in recent years, and most
 workers have to pool incomes with their extended families and
 engage in susbsistence food production in order to maintain a
 minimum standard of living.
 The standard legal workweek is 38 hours (8 hours on Monday
 through Thursday and 6 hours on Friday). There is no limit on
 overtime. The rate of overtime pay for public holidays is 2.5
 times the basic rate. For other days the overtime rate is
 double the normal rate of pay.
 
 
 343
 SIERRA LEONE
 Within the Ministry of Labor there is a moribund health and
 safety division. Health and safety regulations are included
 in collective bargaining agreements negotiated by the trade
 unions, but there is no evidence of systematic enforcement of
 these safety standards. Trade unions provide the only
 protection for workers who file complaints about working
 conditions. Initially, the unions make a formal complaint
 about a hazardous work condition. When this fails, the unions
 can issue a 21-day strike notice.
 
 
