 SIERRA LEONE
 Sierra Leone has a one-party system of government in which the
 President is the predominant executive authority. The term of
 President Siaka Probyn Stevens, who first assumed executive
 power in 1968 following two military coups, expired in 1985
 under the 1978 Constitution, and Stevens handpicked military
 force commander Major General Joseph Saidu Momoh as his
 successor. In a national referendum October 1, 1985, Momoh
 became President-elect. Authority was transferred to him in a
 ceremony on November 28, 1985. A Cabinet, selected by the
 President from elected as well as appointed members of
 Parliament, meets with the President regularly and has
 influence on the President's decisionmaking. Sierra Leone's
 unicameral Parliament usually takes its direction from the
 executive. The government security structure, which includes
 the police, the military forces, and the special security
 division used primarly for presidential protection, 4oes not
 generally interfere with the rights of individuals, although
 certain army units were criticized in 1985 for trying to force
 merchants on occasion to sell rice at fixed government prices
 only.
 Sierra Leone is considered by the U.N. to be among the least
 developed countries. About 70 percent of its 3.9 million
 population is engaged in agriculture, mainly at the subsistence
 level. The Constitution recognizes the right to own private
 property. Most of the modern sector of the economy is
 privately owned. There is also government ownership in certain
 key sectors, particularly mining and transportation.
 Human rights in Sierra Leone during 1985 were basically
 respected, and the ongoing peaceful transition of executive
 authority was a positive element. The eight privately-owned
 newspapers enjoy considerable though not complete freedom, and
 articles on sensitive political and economic topics, including
 investigative reporting into government shortcomings, have been
 published. The judiciary generally maintains its independence
 from the executive and has been reasonably effective in
 protecting legal rights, although there are continuing
 allegations that some court officials are subject to political
 manipulation or bribery. For the first time, members of the
 Sierra Leone Bar Association organized a society for the
 preservation of human rights and held a well-attended inaugural
 seminar July 12.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no reports of political killings in 1985.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of abduction of individuals by the
 Government or hostage taking by nongovernmental groups.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 There have been no specific reports of torture. However, harsh
 physical treatment of prisoners by police is probably common,
 and attorneys occasionally have been shown bruises and other
 
 
 278
 SIERRA LEONE
 marks of violence on detainees' bodies that attorneys believe
 could have been caused by police beatings. There is dangerous
 overcrowding of the prisons, and stories have appeared in the
 local press deploring prison conditions. Prison deaths due to
 malnutrition, pneumonia, diarrhea, and gastroenteritis are said
 by journalists and lawyers to be common.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Habeas corpus is part of Sierra Leone common law and generally
 observed in practice. It is widely believed in Sierra Leone
 legal circles that as a form of harassment persons are picked
 up by the police and held for short periods without charge
 before being released. Under the Constitution, the President
 may take measures to detain any person who is, or is reasonably
 suspected to be, dangerous to the well-being of the Republic.
 Writs of habeas corpus granted by the court during a state of
 emergency would not extend to suspects detained pursuant to an
 order under the Public Emergency Act. A state of emergency
 must come into force within 28 days after the detention, or a
 detainee not charged with an offense must be released. There
 is no one currently detained under Public Emergency regulations.
 Following violence in the Pujehun district in late 1983, the
 army detained from 100 to 150 persons in its efforts to restore
 order. While a state of emergency was not declared, some
 detainees were held for considerable periods before criminal
 charges were filed. In mid-1984, most of those originally
 detained were released or charged with various criminal
 offenses. However, press reports in 1984 and 1985 have
 suggested that between 10 and 20 of those detained ultimately
 died of malnutrition while still in prison. Several
 individuals originally detained in the Pujehun incident and
 charged with serious criminal offenses, including murder, still
 have not been brought to trial. While some in legal circles
 contend that the complexity of the legal cases and the
 overburdened legal system account for the delay, other
 observers claim that political pressure from the Government is
 responsible for the judicial lethargy.
 Exile is not practiced, nor is forced labor.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The judiciary has generally maintained its independence from
 the Government, although some critics charge that the legal
 system is increasingly subject to political manipulation, often
 before cases reach the courts. The 1978 Constitution gives the
 President power to retire Judges after age 55. This
 controversial provision was used most recently by President
 Stevens in mid-November to retire Chief Justice Ebenezer
 Livesey Luke. Luke's predecessor was retired by the same
 provision. This surprise move against Luke provoked
 considerable public criticism, particularly among the local
 legal community. Sierra Leone's courts have a reputation for
 providing fair public trials. Defendants are allowed counsel
 of their choice, and convictions may be appealed. However,
 many poor defendants cannot afford counsel, and a public
 defender is provided only in capital offense cases. Persons
 detained under the Public Emergency Act are not guaranteed a
 hearing unless charged with a capital offense. There are no
 political prisoners, although informed observers suspect that
 some of the individuals sentenced for criminal activity in the
 1983 Pujehun incident were originally held for political
 reasons.
 
 
 279
 SIERRA LEONE
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Legal safeguards against arbitrary invasion of the home are
 generally observed. Rights of the individual are not abused by
 the state. Censorship of mail and electronic eavesdropping by
 the state on private conversations through wiretaps have not
 been reported. Some organizations have claimed that informers
 report to the Government on their activities.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a.   Freedom of Speech and Press
 Although freedom of speech is legally guaranteed, this can be
 abridged under the Constitution if the proper functioning of
 the Government is deemed to be in jeopardy. In practice, the
 Government generally tolerates public criticism of individual
 citizens, and academic freedom is fully respected. However,
 since 1978 no opposition party has been permitted, and there
 have been no reports of opposition groups inside Sierra Leone
 attempting publicly to criticize the party or Government.
 Political propaganda occasionally circulates clandestinely
 within the country from opposition groups based in Western
 Europe or the United States.
 There is in practice considerable press freedom and no prior
 press censorship in Sierra Leone. Newspapers report on
 sensitive political topics such as misuse of government funds,
 bribery, and bureaucratic indiscipline. The Government, in the
 person of the President or Minister of Information, regularly
 issues press releases stating that there is no press
 censorship, but usually adds that critics should be fair and
 place events in the context of the development process.
 President-elect Joseph Saidu Momoh met the press the day after
 his nomination August 2 and, while reaffirming his support for
 freedom of the press, warned that press freedom must not lead
 to excessive criticism of the country. The Government thus
 expects journalists to exercise some self-censorship. Most
 editors avoid publishing articles portraying the country in a
 critical light or attacking the personality of the head of
 state. This approach is embedded in the Newspaper Act of 1983,
 which set qualification standards for editors and a fee for
 registration of newspapers.
 In 1985, two journalists were imprisoned for contempt, and the
 editor of an independent newspaper, For Di People, was
 imprisoned for over 70 days without charge or due process after
 publishing an article on the excesses of the special security
 division.
 b.   Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Constitution guarantees the rights of freedom of assembly
 and of forming or belonging to trade unions or other economic,
 social, or professional associations. However, it places
 limits on these rights, most significantly where assembly or
 association would conflict with the "proper functioning of the
 party" or public order. In practice, freedom of association in
 the nonpolitical sphere is respected.
 Trade unions normally operate freely and exercise the right to
 organize, to negotiate, to strike against employers, and to
 join in confederations and affiliate with international
 
 
 280
 SIERRA LEONE
 organizations. When trade union activities publicly challenged
 government policy in 1981, the Government arrested
 approximately 180 union members. Late in 1982, the Labor
 Congress was allowed to elect a new executive commmittee. It
 is now functioning independently of the Government and most
 sectors of the Sierra Leone economy, except agriculture, are
 unionized. The Labor Congress is a member of the democratic
 International Confederation of Free Trade Unions.
 Private associations of citizens can and do make
 representations to the Government on policy issues and are not
 subject to reprisals.
 c.   Freedom of Religion
 There is a tradition of religious tolerance in Sierra Leone.
 Muslims (the most numerous religious group), Christians,
 animists and adherents of other faiths practice their religions
 freely and publish their religious documents without government
 interference. The state is nonsectarian and does not
 discriminate on the basis of religious belief.
 I
 d.    Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The only official restriction on travel within the country is
 in diamond mining areas and is intended to control smuggling.
 There are few regulations restricting foreign travel. Sierra
 Leone, a signatory to the UN Convention and Protocol Relating
 to the Status of Refugees, is host to approximately 200
 refugees, most of whom are students. There have been no
 reported incidents of forced repatriation.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 President Stevens remained the dominant authority in Sierra
 Leone in 1985, although he arranged for his retirement and for
 his succession by Major General Joseph Momoh. The Parliament,
 at Stevens' behest, amended the Constitution to allow Momoh to
 become President without resigning his commission, and in
 August the single party, the All Peoples' Congress, under the
 control of Stevens, nominated Momoh as president-elect. Since
 independence in 1961, the clear trend in political development
 has been the increase in executive power and the decrease in
 constitutional checks on that power. The Constitution provides
 that the leader of the party will be the sole candidate for the
 office of President. The unicameral Parliament is subservient
 to the executive branch of the Government. Candidates for
 Parliament are chosen in each constituency by the party's local
 executive committee. The executive committee chooses three
 candidates from the list of citizens who seek nomination. The
 central committee of the party has the power to disapprove the
 nomination of any candidate selected by the local executive
 committees if it believes that candidacy would be inimical to
 the State. In addition to the national political system, there
 is also a traditional system which operates in the provinces
 outside of the urban area. Paramount chiefs are elected for
 life by the member of the chiefdom council. They have
 considerable authority in local affairs and in resolving
 traditional disputes.
 There is universal suffrage, and no groups are precluded from
 voting because of gender, tribe, race, or religion.
 
 
 281
 SIERRA LEONE
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 In 1985, members of the Sierra Leone Bar Association formed a
 society for the preservation of human rights. The Government
 did not interfere with the effort nor with the inaugural
 seminar held July 12 and attended by members of Parliament,
 judges, medical doctors, academics, civil servants, trade
 unionists and the media. Local chapters of Amnesty
 International exist. Amnesty International in its 1985 report
 expressed concern about reports of ill-treatment of prisoners,
 in some cases said to have resulted in death. Freedom House
 terms Sierra Leone "partly free".
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Sierra Leone is a nation of almost 3.9 million with a per
 capita gross domestic product (GDP) of $330 a year (1983
 figure). From 1970 to 1982, its population growth rate of 2.6
 percent per annum exceeded GDP growth, which averaged 2.0 per
 year. About 70 percent of the population is involved in
 agriculture, primarily at the subsistence level. Sierra Leone
 has relied upon the mining sector in general and diamonds in
 particular for its economic base.
 Since 1981, the economic situation has worsened due to
 depletion of alluvial diamond deposits, rising fuel import
 bills, and declining world prices for mineral and agricultural
 exports. Government economic policy and mismanagement have
 also contributed to the situation as budget deficits have led
 to high inflation (about 70 percent in 1984). The chronic
 overvaluation of the leone, despite a major devaluation in
 February 1985, has accelerated and with it, corruption,
 smuggling, and black market activities. Low rates of domestic
 savings and investment have left the country heavily dependent
 on external assistance for development efforts.
 Life expectancy at birth is only 38.5 years (I?85 figure) and
 the infant mortality rate is 195 per 1000 liv6 births. Calorie
 supply as a percent of basic requirements was estimated in 1977
 at 83 percent. Adult literacy is estimated at 15 percent.
 Primary school enrollment was estimated at 53.1 percent by a
 1980 estimate. Access to education for women remains more
 limited than it is for men. For example, from the group of
 primary school age girls, only 37 percent are enrolled in
 primary school; yet this figure indicates that gradual
 improvement has been made since independence.
 There is no minimum age for the employment of children. The
 work week is defined as 7 hours for 5 weekdays plus 3 1/2 hours
 on Saturday. There is an established code outlining acceptable
 conditions of work, but in actual practice in the very limited
 manufacturing sector of Sierra Leone, maintenance of machinery,
 safety procedures, and sanitary conditions probably does not
 conform to the code.
 Women in Sierra Leone are guaranteed equal rights by the
 Constitution, but their status varies substantially in
 different parts of the country and depends upon the cultural
 values of various tribal groups. In some areas of Sierra Leone
 women have been elected to the prestigious position of
 paramount chief. In the modern sector, women are prominent in
 some professions, and one woman is a Supreme Court Justice.
 The political sphere continues to be male-dominated.
 
 
 282
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORILATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: SIERRA LEONE
 1983     1984     1985
 ..........................................................
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL,..        8.7      8.5      6.0
 LOANS ..............       3.6      3.0      4.0
 GRANTS .......... .... 5.1          5.5      2.0
 A.AIO ........ .............  1.0      1.0      0.3
 LOANS .................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................   1.0      1.0      0.3
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOO  FOR  PEACE .......     4.9      4.6      5.7
 LOANS ..............       3.6      3.0      4.0
 GRANTS ................    1.3      1.6      1.7
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ..........      3.6      3.0      4.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....       3.6      3.0      4.0
 PAY.  IN  FOR.  CURR.....     0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  lI-TOTAL .........      1.3      1.6      1.7
 E.RELIEF.EC.OEV & WFP,        0.0      0.0      0.1
 VOL.RELIEF  AGENCY .....      1.3      1.6      1.6
 C.OTHER  ECON.  ASSIST...      2.8      2.9      0.0
 LOANS ..............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    2.8      2.9      0.0
 PEACE  CORPS ......      2.8      2.9      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ..............     0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST-TOTAL,..        0.0      0.0      0.1
 LOANS ..............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.0      0.0      0.1
 A.MAP  GRANTS ..........      0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREOIT FINANCING ....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL  MIL.EDTRNG ....      0.0      0.0      0.1
 O.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...       0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER  GRANTS ........      0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL  ECON.  &  MIL..,     8.7      8.5      6.1
 LOANS ..............       3.6      3.0      4.0
 GRANTS ................   5.1      5.5      2.1
 ----------------------------------------------------------
 OTHER  US  LOANS ..........     0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM  BANK  LOANS .......     0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL  OTHER ..............      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ..........................................................
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1983     1984    '1985    1946-85
 ---------------------------------------------------------
 TOTAL ........    21.0    22.5      5.6    212.8
 IBRO              0.0      0.0      0.0     15.7
 IFC                0.0     0.0      0.0      2.1
 IOA               20.0    21.5      0.0    119.0
 1OB                0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADa               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFOB              0.0      0.0      1.1     37.5
 UNOP               1.0     1.0      0.0     26.8
 OTHER-UN           0.0     0.0      4.5      8.7
 EEC               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
 283
