 SIERRA LEONE
 After gaining independence from Britain in 1961, Sierra Leone
 adopted a multi-party parliamentary system with an independent
 judiciary. In June 1978, a new Constitution was approved by
 national referendum which established a one-party government
 under the All People's Congress. Other parties challenged the
 legitimacy of the referendum but eventually acquiesced and
 joined the Congress. The Constitution also extended the term
 of President Siaka Probyn Stevens for an additional seven
 years. President Stevens first assumed executive power in
 1968. A year earlier, after his party had apparently won a
 narrow victory in multi-party elections, a military coup
 prevented Dr. Stevens from forming a government. A subsequent
 coup the next year restored civilian rule and brought Stevens
 to power.
 The President is the predominant executive authority in the
 country. A cabinet, selected by the President from elected
 members of parliament, meets with the President regularly and
 has influence on the President's decision-making. Sierra
 Leone's unicameral Parliament also takes its direction from
 the executive. The first elections for the one-party
 parliament were held in 1982. There were contested elections
 in about two-thirds of the constituencies.
 Violence marred the elections in several constituencies, and
 the results were challenged by those who lost the elections.
 The judiciary has decided 18 petition cases reversing
 victories in 5 cases. Two cases have yet to be heard and two
 cases are still in the courts. One of the latter involves the
 outcome in the Pujehun East constituency where a protegee of
 the then Minister of Justice won a disputed election. In that
 constituency (in southeastern Sierra Leone near the Liberian
 border) violence continued after the election. A local
 politician was murdered. Gangs, believed to be motivated by
 revenge and/or personal gain, murdered, looted and burned
 villages. The strong-armed methods of the indisciplined
 Special Security Detachment (SSD) of the police worsened the
 situation. After four SSD members were murdered in October
 1983 the Sierra Leone army was dispatched to the area to
 restore order. The troops detained between 100 to 150
 suspects in operations in November and December 1983. Unlike
 the SSD, the army showed discipline, and there were no
 fatalities caused by its operations. The Government never
 revealed the total number of detainees. A local newspaper in
 April 1984 charged that 122 suspects had been detained and
 that ten had died of natural causes because of unhealthful
 prison conditions. The Sierra Leonean paper called on the
 Government to charge the detainees or release them; but the
 Government did not respond. On July 13, one day after Amnesty
 International alleged in a broadcast on BBC that *political
 prisoners" were dying in Sierra Leone, the Government, while
 denying the accusations, charged 32 individuals with a variety
 of offenses including murder, arson and robbery, and released
 69 on bond while the investigation continued.
 The judiciary generally maintains its independence from the
 executive and has been reasonably effective in protecting
 basic legal rights. However, there are allegations that some
 court officials are increasingly subject to political
 manipulation and influence by bribes.
 The press rebounded in 1984. A year earlier, implementation
 of the newspaper act, which set qualification standards for
 
 
 281
 SIERRA LEONE
 editors and a fee for registration of newspapers, had
 temporarily caused the number of privately-owned newspapers to
 shrink drastically. There are now seven privately-owned
 newspapers appearing with varying degrees of regularity. They
 enjoy considerable freedom. There is no prior press
 censorship. Articles on sensitive political and economic
 topics, investigative reporting into government shortcomings,
 including on occasion criticism of ministers and the
 President, have been published. However, there are limits on
 the independent press. Two newspaper editors were imprisoned,
 without being formally charged with any offense, for
 publishing particularly critical pieces on government
 corruption.
 The Constitution recognizes the right of private property for
 Sierra Leone citizens, and most of the modern sector of the
 economy is in private hands. There is also government
 ownership, or partial ownership, in parts of certain key
 sectors, particularly mining and transportation. In addition,
 the Government attempts to control wholesale and retail
 prices, allocate foreign exchange, and set agricultural
 producer prices. Sierra Leone is considered by the United
 Nations to be among the world's least developed countries and
 its economy has been declining for the past decade.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no political killings in 1984.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of abduction of individuals by the
 Government or hostage taking by non-governmental groups.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 There have been no reports of torture or of degrading
 treatment or punishment. However, the country's economic
 decline, the resultant shrinking of budget revenues combined
 with a rising crime rate have led to a dangerous overcrowding
 of prisons. There were repeated stories in the local press
 throughout 1984 deploring prison conditions and reporting
 prison deaths due to natural causes including malnutrition,
 pneumonia, diarrhea and gastroenteritis. The Government has
 not responded to these local press reports but did take issue
 with an Amnesty International allegation broadcast by BBC that
 19 prisoners had died in detention due to neglect and
 malnutrition. The Sierra Leone Government responded that from
 January to July 1984 only five prisoners had died and
 malnutrition was not the cause of death.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Habeas corpus is part of Sierra Leone common law and is
 observed in practice. Under the Constitution of 1978, the
 President may take measures to detain any person who is, or is
 reasonably suspected to be, *dangerous to the well-being of
 the Republic'. Writs of habeas corpus granted by the court
 
 
 282
 SIERRA LEONE
 during such an emergency would not extend to applicants
 detained pursuant to an order under the Public Emergency Act.
 A state of emergency must come into force within 28 days after
 the detention, or a detainee not charged with an offense must
 be released. There is no one currently being detained under
 Public Emergency Regulations. In 1984 on two occasions
 journalists were detained for publishing articles critical of
 the Government.
 In November and December 1983, approximately 100 to 150
 persons were detained by the army in an operation to restore
 order in the Pujehun. No state of emergency was declared but
 there was a lengthy delay in charging the detainees. On July
 13 the Government finally charged 32 detainees with a variety
 of offenses including murder, arson, and robbery, and released
 69. The reasons for the delay are disputed. Some government
 officials say unusual circumstances caused the delay: i.e.,
 the large number of detainees, the fact they were rounded up
 in a military operation, the resultant slowness in police
 preparation of the reports, leading finally to further delay
 in the understaffed Attorney General's office. Other
 observers have claimed that the Government let the detainees
 languish in prison because they attacked its political
 supporters in the Pujehun.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The judiciary has generally maintained its independence from
 the Government, although some critics charge that the legal
 system is increasingly subject to political manipulation,
 often before cases reach the courts. The Constitution gives
 the President power to remove judges after age 55--a provision
 which has not to date been invoked. Sierra Leone's courts
 have a reputation for providing fair, public trials.
 Defendents are allowed counsel of their choice, and
 convictions may be appealed. However, many poor defendants
 cannot afford counsel, and public defense is provided only in
 cases of capital offenses. Persons detained under the Public
 Emergency Act are not guaranteed a hearing (unless charged
 with a criminal offense).
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Legal safeguards against arbitrary invasion of the home are
 observed. Rights of the individuals and family are not abused
 by the State. Censorship of mail and electronic eavesdropping
 on private conversations through bugging or wiretaps have not
 been reported. However, some organizations have claimed that
 informers report to the Government on their activities.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech is legally guaranteed, but under the
 Constitution this freedom can be abridged if the proper
 functioning of the party is deemed in jeopardy. In practice,
 the Government tolerates public criticism by individual
 citizens, and academic freedom is unabridged. However, since
 1978 no opposition party has been permitted. Most opposition
 groups are based in the United States and the United Kingdom.
 There have been no reports of opposition groups attempting to
 criticize the party or the Government publicly inside Sierra
 
 
 283
 SIERRA LEONE
 Leone. The political propaganda of exile opposition groups is
 not allowed to circulate in Sierra Leone.
 The Government affirms press rights. President Stevens has,
 on several occasions, stated publicly that there is no press
 censorship in Sierra Leone. But the President usually adds
 that criticism should be fair and not abusive, and that
 journalists, in criticizing, should try to place things in the
 context of the nation's development processes.
 There is considerable press freedom. The privately-owned
 press tested its limits in 1984 by reporting on sensitive
 political topics. For example, one series of investigative
 reports on mishandling of funds led to the firing of a cabinet
 minister and even the President was criticized for his
 handling of a cabinet shakeup. However, the Government
 expects journalists to exercise some self-censorship. When
 two newspaper editors published particularly critical pieces
 on corruption in top government circles, they were imprisoned
 without being charged with any offense, although their
 newspapers continued to publish. One of the offending
 articles was subheaded 'Time is Up for Pa's (i.e., President
 Stevens) Boys' and attacked members of the ruling All
 Peoples's Congress of which the President is
 Secretary-General, and called on the President to *clear away
 his corrupt and arrogant ministers...' The Acting Editor was
 imprisoned in September after his paper printed the foregoing.
 He was held without charge until December 11 when he was
 finally released.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Constitution guarantees the rights of freedom of assembly
 and to form or belong to trade unions or other economic,
 social, or professional associations. However, it places
 limits on these rights, most significantly where assembly or
 association would conflict with the 'proper functioning of the
 party" or the requirements of public order. In practice,
 freedom of association in the nonpolitical sphere is
 respected. Trade unions normally operate freely and exercise
 the right to organize, to negotiate, and to strike against
 employers. However, when trade union activities publicly
 challenged government policy in 1981, the Government arrested
 approximately 180 union members. Late in 1982, the Congress
 was allowed to elect a new executive committee, and it is now
 functioning independently of the Government. Most major
 sectors of the Sierra Leone economy, except agriculture are
 unionized.
 Private associations of citizens can and do make
 representations to the government on policy issues and are not
 subject to reprisals.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 There is a tradition of religious tolerance in Sierra Leone.
 Muslims (the most numerous religious group), Christians,
 animists, and adherents of other faiths practice their
 religions freely without government interference. The state
 is non-sectarian and does not discriminate on the basis of
 religious belief.
 
 
 284
 SIERRA LEONE
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The major official restriction on travel within the country is
 in diamond mining areas and is intended to control smuggling.
 There are few regulations restricting foreign travel. A few
 Sierra Leoneans who oppose the one-party Government are in
 self-imposed exile.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 President Stevens is the dominant authority in Sierra Leone.
 Since independence in 1961, the clear trend in political
 development has been the increase of the executive power and
 the lessening of constitutional checks on that power. At
 present, the unicameral Parliament is clearly subservient to
 the executive branch of the Government. President Stevens'
 term of office was extended by the Constitution of 1978 for an
 additional seven years. Moreover, the Constitution provides
 that the leader of the party will be the sole candidate for
 the office of President. Candidates for Parliament are chosen
 in each constituency by the Party's local executive
 committee. The executive committee chooses three candidates
 from the list of citizens who sought nomination. The central
 committee of the party has the power to disapprove the
 nomination of any candidate selected by the local executive
 committees if it believes the candidacy would be inimical to
 the state. The decisions of the central committee on the
 candidacies are final. There was no report that candidates
 were rejected by the central committee in the 1982 elections.
 In practice, the legal procedure for choosing candidates is
 supplemented by an informal vetting process in which the
 President influences the selection of candidates. In the 1982
 elections, there were contests in about two-thirds of the
 constituencies. Court challenges by electoral losers were
 independently reviewed by the judiciary.
 Electoral violence stemming from ethnic tensions is a
 continuing problem. The Cabinet named by the President after
 the 1982 elections was ethnically balanced. The post-election
 appointment of a former leader of the opposition party to a
 key cabinet post is also viewed as a sign that progress in
 healing sectional and ethnic rifts is being made.
 In addition to the national political system, there is also a
 traditional system which operates in the provinces outside of
 the urban area. Paramount chiefs are elected for life by the
 members of the chiefdom council. They have considerable
 authority in local affairs and in resolving traditional
 disputes.
 There is universal suffrage, and no groups are precluded from
 voting because of sex, tribal, racial, or religious factors.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitudes Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 In 1984 Amnesty International queried Sierra Leone about
 persons detained as the result of the Pujehun disorders who
 had been held for several months without being charged. No
 response was given but in July the detainees were either
 charged or released. In August 1983, Parliament ratified the
 
 
 285
 SIERRA LEONE
 Organization of African Unity's African Charter on Human and
 People's Rights. Freedom House terms Sierra Leone *partly
 free.'
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Sierra Leone, a nation of 3.8 million with a per capita gross
 domestic product of $386 a year (1982 figure), is classified
 by the United Nations as among the world's least developed
 countries. Its population growth rate of 2.6 percent per
 annum exceeded GDP growth from 1970 to 1982, which averaged
 2.0 per year. Since 1981, the situation has worsened. Life
 expectancy at birth is 41 years and the infant mortality rate
 is 197 per 1000. Adult literacy is estimated at 15 percent.
 Many of the factors contributing to the decline in the living
 standard of most Sierra Leoneans are beyond Sierra Leonean
 control. These include gradual depletion of alluvial diamond
 deposits, rising fuel import bills, and, since the late
 1970's, declining world prices for mineral and agricultural
 exports. Yet government economic policy and mismanagement
 have worsened the situation as budget deficits have led to
 high inflation (about 40 percent in 1983). The overvaluation
 of the leone has accelerated and with it smuggling and black
 market iEETiities.  Low rates of domestic savings and
 investment have left the country heavily dependent on external
 assistance for development efforts. Mismanagement has limited
 the return on the country's limited investment.
 Women in Sierra Leone are guaranteed equal rights by the
 Constitution. In practice access to education for women
 remains more limited than it is for men. For example, only 39
 percent of the children enrolled in primary school are female
 (1977 figure). Yet this figure indicates gradual improvement
 has been made since independence. The status of women varies
 substantially in different parts of the country and depends
 upon cultural values of various tribal groups. In some areas
 of Sierra Leone women have been elected to the prestigious
 position of paramount chief. In other areas, this would not
 happen. In the modern sector, women are prominent in the
 professions and one woman is a Supreme Court Justice. The
 political sphere continues to be overwhelmingly male-dominated.
 
 
 286
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF OOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: SIERRA LEONE
 1982     1983     1984
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        10.4      8.7      8.5
 LOANS ................. 3.0         3.6      3.0
 GRANTS .............        7.4      5.1      5.5
 A.AID ....... .............    3.1      1.0      1.0
 LOANS ..............    .. 0.0     0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............         3.1      1.0      1.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)..         0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......        4.4      4.9      4.6
 LOANS ................. 3.0         3.6      3.0
 GRANTS .............. 1.4           1.3      1.6
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........        3.0      3.6      3.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....        3.0      3.6      3.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I1-TOTAL .........        1.4      1.3      1.6
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.         0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        1.4      1.3      1.6
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...         2.9      2.8      2.9
 LOANS ................. 0.0         0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............      . 2.9      2.8      2.9
 PEACE CORPS ......        2.9      2.8      2.9
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............   ... 0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............. 0.0           0.0      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG ....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK ...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL....       10.4      8.7      8.5
 LOANS ..............   ... 3.0      3.6      3.0
 GRANTS .............      . 7.4      5.1      5.5
 OTHER US LOANS ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS                0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 ..........................................................
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1982     1983     1984     1946-84
 TOTAL ........     9.0     21.0     21.5    206.2
 IBRD               0.0      0.0      0.0     18.7
 IFC                0.0      0.0      0.0      2.1
 IDA                5.0     20.0     21.5    119.0
 IDS                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADS                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFDB               0.0      0.0      0.0     36.4
 UNDP               2.6      1.0      0.0     25.7
 OTHER-UN           1.4      0.0      0.0      4.3
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
 287
