 SIERRA LEONE
 Sierra Leone is controlled by a military junta. On May 25, dissident junior officers
 of the Republic of Sierra Leone Military Forces (RSLMF) violently seized power
 from the 14-month-old democratically elected Government of President Ahmed
 
 
 Tejan Kabbah. The United Nations Security Council condemned the overthrow of
 the government and called upon the military junta to restore the elected Govern-
 ment unconditionally. Major Johnny Paul Koroma, awaiting trial on charges stem-
 ming from a September 1996 coup attempt, was freed from prison and named Chair-
 man of the new Armed Forces Revolutionary Council (AFRC). The AFRC imme-
 diately suspended the Constitution, banned political parties and all public dem-
 onstrations and meetings, and announced that all legislation would be made by mili-
 tary decree. Koroma invited the rebel Revolutionary United Front (RUF) to join the
 AFRC in exercising control over the country. The RUF quickly took control of the
 military junta, although Koroma remains nominal Chairman of the AFRC. Rule is
 arbitrary; maintenance of law and order has collapsed. The judiciary, like other civil
 institutions, has effectively ceased to function.
 The Organization of African Unity (OAU) designated the Economic Organization
 of West African States (ECOWAS) to bring about the restoration of the constitu-
 tional government. Aer ECOWAS negotiations with a joint AFRC/RUF delegation
 failed to make progress toward the restoration of the elected Government, ECOWAS
 imposed regional sanctions and an embargo against the military junta. On October
 8, the United Nations Security Council imposed sanctions prohibiting the importa-
 tion of weapons, military materiel, and petroleum as well as international travel by
 members of the military junta. Dozens of civilians were killed in clashes between
 AFRC/RUF forces and the ECOWAS Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) as ECOMOG at-
 tempted to enforce the sanctions. On October 23, AFRCIRUF and ECOWAS delega-
 tions signed a peace plan calling for the restoration to power of President Kabbah
 on April22, 1998. Both President Kahbah and AFRC Chairman Koroma publicly en-
 dorsed the Conakry Plan. However, the junta did not cooperate in attempts to refine
 the details of the peace plan and by year's end had taken no steps to implement
 it.
 Before May 25, the RSLMF was responsible for external and, together with the
 olice internal security, primarily against RUF attacks. The RSLMF was supported
 yNigerian and Guinean military contingents and by personnel workin  under a
 training and logistics contract with Executive Outcomes, a private Southr African
 mercenary firm. In compliance with the November 1996 Abidjan Peace Agement,
 President Kabbah terminated the contract with Executive Outcomes at t  en o
 January. For 20 months, Executive Outcomes had played the critical role in govern-
 ment efforts to protect major towns and diamond mining areas from RUF attacks.
 Groups of traditional hunters (including the Mend Kamajohs, Temne Kapras, and
 Koranko Tamaboros) organized as civil defense militias, with government support
 defended their chiefdoms from RUF attacks and RSLMF looting. Neither the
 RSLMF nor the civil defense militia were fully under government control. After May
 25, the RUF joined with RSLMF troops loyalt the AFRC junta and renamed itself
 the People's Army of Sierra Leone. RSLMF forces hoyal to the AFRO appear to func-
 tion separately from RUF troops. They also fought occasional battles against each
 other. In June the AFRC formed joint military and police antilooting squads and
 gave them authority to shoot looters on sight.
 Before the coup on May 25, government security forces and the RUF committed
 numerous human rights abuses. After May 25, the scale of violence and human
 rights abuses committed against civilians by the AFR and RUF greatly increased.
 In addition members of the Civil Defense Force allegediy committed serious human
 rights abuses.
 Sierra Leone is an extremely poor country. Before the civil war began in 1992,
 more than 70 percent of the 4.5 million citizens were involved in some aspect of ag-
 riculture, mainly subsistence farming. Although the country has substantial mineral
 resources, including diamonds, gold, rutile, and bauxite, official receipts from legal
 experts have been small in recent years. For decades the majority of diamond and
 godproduction has been smuggled abroad. The economic infrastructure has nearly
 collapsed due to corruption, neglect, and war-related disruptions. The 6-year RUF
 insurgency dislocated more than 40 percent of the country's population, placing ad-
 ditional burdens on Sierra Leone's fragile economy. According to the United Na-
 tions, the average life expectancy is now only 34 years. One child out of four dies
 before the age of 5. The economic embargo imposed on the military junta by
 ECOWAS caused the customs duties to dry up, depriving the AFRO of 85 percent
 of its expected revenue flow.
 Sierra Leone's human rights record worsened significantly and is now extremely
 poor. Before the May 25 coup, government military forces committed serious human
 rights abuses, including extrajudicial killings, beatings, arbitrary arrest and deten-
 tion, and illegal searches. Under the elected Government as well as under the mili-
 tary regime, there were reports that police abused suspects during arrest and inter-
 rogation. Prison conditions remained life threatening. Prior to May 25, lengthy
 
 
 delays in trials, prolonged pretrial detentions, and violations of due process were
 problems. Government harassment of the press was also a problem. Discrimination
 against ethnic minorities persisted, and violence against women remained wide-
 spread, as was violence against children, including female genital mutilation (FGM)
 and the use of child soldiers.
 Prior to the coup, RUF forces continued to attack villages and ambush travelers,
 killing, torturing, raping, and mutilating civilians. The RUF abducted children and
 forced them to commit atrocities, including the torture and murder of their relatives.
 The RUF raped and sexually abused young girls and women during attacks.
 After May 25, AFRC and RUF forces committed numerous, serious human rights
 abuses including deliberate extrajudicial killings of unarmed civilians, torture, muti-
 lation, rape, beatings, arbitrary arrest and detention, and illegal searches. The mili-
 tary junta routinely jailed antiregime civic leaders and students without judicial
 process; junta forces killed some detainees; amputated the arms of others; and raped
 women as punishment for their opposition to the regime. After the coup, the court
 system ceased to function. The AFRC announced that it would replace the judiciary
 with People's Revolutionary Courts manned by ordinary citizens. There is no evi-
 dence that these or any other courts are functioning. The military junta harassed,
 beat, detained, and arrested journalists.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extra judicial Killing.-Before and after the coup, govern-
 ment military forces and the RUF committed political and extrajudicial killings. Sol-
 diers and RUF troops engaged in looting, robbery, and extortion frequently killed
 civilians. The situation became much worse on May 25 when coup eders freed
 hundreds of prisoners from Pademba Road prison and ave them military uniforms
 and weapons. Freed prisoners, AFRC troops, and RU forces engaged in looting,
 rape, and murder. Foreign countries evacuated several thousand foreign citizens
 and tens of thousands ofSierra Leoneans fled Freetown. Up to 100 civilians were
 killed in the violence surrounding the coup. Hundreds more have been murdered
 subsequently in both random violence and politicalkillings. In mid-June, AFRC offi-
 cials created antilooting squads including the Western Area Security Patrol and
 gave them authority to shoot looters on sight. Antilooting Decree Number Six pub-
 lished on November 28, but effective retroactively to May 28, made looting punish-
 able by firing squad. AFRC and RUF officials summarily executed at least 120 sol-
 --diers and civilians accused of looting and other crimes. Eight senior members of the
 AFRC who looted the Iranian Embassy on New Year's Eve were demoted or lightly
 fined.
 Throughout the last half of the year, there was fierce fighting between AFRC/RUF
 forces and Kamajohs in several areas in the Southern and Eastern Provinces.
 AFRC/RUF forces routinely summarily executed captured Kamajohs. AFRC/RUF
 forces routinely shot and tortured civilians and looted their property while searching
 for Kamajohs. -While the Kamajos usually turned AFRC/RUF prisoners over to
 ECOMOG, a few AFR/RUF prisoners were executed while in Kamajoh custody.
 At least one person was killed and another injured in Bo on May 27 when AFRC
 soldiers shot at a crowd of about 5,000 persons demonstrating against the coup. The
 demonstration started when large quantities of looted goods were discovered in the
 army's possession.
 At least 80 people, including 30 civilians, were killed during fighting in Kenema
 between RSLMF troops and Kamajohs during the first weekend in May. Fighting
 started when soldiers shot at a truck of Kamajohs, killing three, as they drove past
 the army base at Kpetema. At least 22 people, including at least 6 civilians, were
 killed in fighting that started that weekend between RSLMF troops and Kapras at
 Camp Charlie near Matotoka.
 On May 29, at Masingbi in the Eastern Province, AFRC soldiers ambushed a
 gup of Kamajohs, killing 20 of them. RUF forces firing automatic rifles, grenade
 launchers, and mortars repeatedly attacked the town of Moyamba at the end of
 June. During 1 attack they killed more than 10 people, including women and chil-
 dren.
 In June the Western Area Security Patrol and antilooting squads in other parts
 of the country executed at least two dozen people including four soldiers who tried
 to rape four nuns and loot their residence on June 11. Their bodies were dumped
 into the sea. In other cases, armed robbers were hacked to pieces or decapitated.
 A teenage boy caught breaking into a house in Freetown on June 25 was hacked
 to death; his arms and head were chopped off and one testicle placed in his mouth
 by the antilooting squad.
 
 
 On June 26, AFRC/RUF troops searching for Kamajohs killed at least 25 people
 in Bo District. Soldiers took Albert Sandy Demby, paramount chief of Baoma
 Chiefdom and father of Vice President Albert J.E. Demby, from his home in
 Gerihun, Bo District, and shot him in the stomach, killing him. The soldiers then
 attacked and burned the villages of Sembehun and Telu Bongor, the home of Deputy
 Defense Minister Samuel Hinga Norman.
 During an attack on the town of Moyamba at the end of June, RUF troops tor-
 tured student leader Sheku Kabbah in public before killing him; they gouged out
 his eyes and cut off his ears before cutting his throat.
 On July 8, a young woman was summarily executed by uniformed soldiers in
 Freetown for publicly supporting President Kabbah. Junta military officers executed
 three soldiers in July in Kenema for looting.
 On August 12, AFRC troops executed a soldier in Freetown after he shot and
 killed a mechanic who asked the soldier to pay for five gallons of gasoline that the
 soldier had taken from the gas station. An angry crowd chased the soldier to a po-
 lice station. Other soldiers rushed in and dragged him out, stripped off his uniform,
 and shot him at least five times.
 On August 18, at least 11 people were killed when AFRC forces attacked students
 attempting a "march for democracy" in protest against the AFRC. One student from
 Njala University was chopped into pieces by the military forces. Many students re-
 main missing and the number killed may be higher. Many students also were ar-
 rested arbitrarily and tortured(see Section 1.c.).
 In August AFRC soldiers beat and cut the throat of paramount chief Dessima
 from the Dame chiefdom near Kenema. His deputy was abducted and presumed
 killed. In late August, seven men were arrested and taken to Cockerill Military
 Headquarters after arriving at a Freetown wharf from Lungi across the river. Six
 were shot after being accused of involvement with FM 98.1 radio station; one later
 was released.
 On September 1, members of the Kamajoh and Kapra militias beheaded four peo-
 ple who they suspected of being soldiers or AFRO sympathizers. The four were trav-
 eling from Bo toMakeni in a commercial vehicle that stopped at a CDF checkpoint
 at Gumahun, 25 miles from Bo. After the vehicle was searched, the driver was iden-
 tified as a retired soldier and arrested. Two other men in military T-shirts also were
 arrested, along with the girlfriend of one of the men. All four were summarily exe-
 cuted. The other passengers in the vehicle were allowed to continue their journey
 to Makeni.
 Ten soldiers were executed by firing squad on October 25. Military police head
 Captain John Harleston said that all 10 had pleaded guilty to murder charges dur-
 ing a 1-day trial. Other sources said that two of those executed had been accused
 of beating the girlfriend of a military officer. Harleston said that the executions
 were meant to send a signal to undisciplined soldiers and to reassure the civilian
 population.
 Nine passengers on a bus traveling between Kenema and Bo were killed on No-
 vember 2 in a clash between AFRC soldiers and members of the Kamajoh militia.
 Sierra Leone Road Transport Company officials said the fighting began when sol-
 diers on the bus ignored an order to disembark at a Kamajoh roadblock.
 On December 3, eight armed robbers were executed by firing squad in a soccer
 field in Koidu town in the eastern Kono District. A junta spokesman said that the
 eight had appeared before a 1-day military tribunal. One of the eight persons exe-
 cuted, Jonathan Moore,. had been serving a 25-year sentence when he was released
 from prison during the coup.
 b. Disappearance.-Thousands of civilians disappeared following the May 25 junta
 takeover. In many cases, it is unclear whether the individuals were killed, captured
 by AFRC/RUF forces, or whether they successfully fled the country. Some individ-
 uals subsequently reap peared in refugee camps or in other parts of the country. The
 whereabouts of hundreds of people detained by junta officials since the coup remain
 unknown. In most cases, family members are too frightened of the junta to inquire
 about the location of their missing relatives.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Although the now suspended Constitution prohibits torture, there were numerous
 reports that government security forces at times used torture. For example in Janu-
 ary, a soldier on trial for treason for the September 1996 plot to overthrow the gov-
 ernment alleged that he had been forced to sign a confession under torture. Joseph
 Yajah, a former security officer at State House, testified in court that he was tor-
 tured at CID headquarters where deputy head Samuel Soumassa urged him to
 change his statement. Yajah said he was tied to a chair in the squad office, stripped
 naked, had ice water poured on him, and was subjected to electric shocks. He said
 police officers stuffed a cap in his mouth when he screamed. Yajah also testified
 
 
</pre>
<pre>
 301
 that a subinspector put out a cigarette on his head and ordered other men to scratch
 his back with wire. The police denied the allegations.
 In the week of the military takeover, the level of violence by military and RUF
 forces caused the exodus of hundreds of thousands of civilians from Freetown, the
 capital, and other population centers. Soldiers and released prisoners engaged in
 wholesale looting of private homes, businesses, diplomatic residences, international
 organizations, and warehouses of humanitarian assistance organizations. In particu-
 lar local and foreign officials and businessman were targeted for looting and beat-
 ings. Their female family members were targeted for rape. Similar acts of abuse and
 violence continued through the end of the year.
 Both AFRC and RUF forces used torture on numerous occasions. Since 1991 the
 RUF waged an armed rebellion marked by violent attacks against civilians. After
 the RUF joined theAFRC junta in Freetown, RUF Spokesman Eldred Collins ad-
 mitted responsibility for the atrocities committed in the country's interior. He as-
 serted that the RUF "burned, looted, maimed, and killed," not because it wanted
 to, but because "that was the only way we could have uprooted a rotten system."
 A leader of the AFRC1,eat student leader Ansu Bockarie and cut him with a razor
 blade in early June.
 On August 18, AFRC and RUF soldiers killed at least 11 students during a stu-
 -dent "march. for democracy" against the junta in Freetown. A large number of stu-
 dents and- other protesters suffered severe injuries when AFRC and RUF forces
 breaking up the march attacked them with machetes and bayonets. Four had their
 arms chopped off. Approximately 20 female students were arrested and taken di-
 rectly to the residences of AFRC/RUF leaders who sexually assaulted them. Some
 are still detained. One female student remains missing.    -
 President of the Civil Liberties Congress Soulaimart Banja Tejan-Sie was arrested
 on August 18 and beaten with military helmets and gun butts. His arms were tied
 with rope, and he was put in the truck of a car belonging to an AFRC leader. After
 several hours in the car, he was taken to Cockerill Military Headquarters where he
 was interrogated and beaten. He was later transferred to Pademba Road prison's
 death row and was denied washing and sanitary facilities. He was denied food for
 the first. 3 days that he was detained. The AFRC released Tejan-Sie on August 28,
 but kept him under close surveillance until he fled the country in early October.
 In the Eastern Province near Tongo, AFRC officials harassed, intimidated, and
 tortured miners to find the location of diamonds. In August a miner was roped over
 a fire in the Kono area by a junta official to make him disclose where he had hidden
 a recently found diamond. The miner surrendered the diamond and his tribe had
 to  afi RC officials a large ransom sum for his release.
 u soldiers tortured and killed numerous persons (see Section l.a.). On October
 2, three soldiers and one member of the RUF attacked Olu Jones at his house. He
 was tied, beaten, and stabbed in both ears with a bayonet. In the early mordng,
 the soldiers took him to Cockerill Military Headquarters.
 Refugees fleeing Sierra Leone reported torture and abuse of civilians by AFRC
 soldiers and the RUF, particularly in the Mende areas in the south and east where
 the p  a AFRC and R   wereAFRC/RU                       soldiers burned vil-
 lages suspected of supporting the Kamajohs. Civilians were beaten and tortured.
 Women and girls were raped, sexually tortured, and forced into sexual slavery.
 Both the AFRC and the RUF use rape as an instrment of control and punish-
 ment. The military junta has not taken steps to control violence by soldiers against
 women and often encourages it.
 Prison conditions remain life threatening. The quality of food and medical care
 was poor. In mid-May, Pademba Road prison held 60 percent more inmates than
 its capacity. The majority of those were on remand awaiting trial. When the AFRC
 seized power on May 25, it broke open the Pademba Road prison and freed all in-
 mates. By the end of the year, Pademba Road prison was again seriously over-
 crowded with persons detained by the AFRC. Many detainees are held in metal
 shipping containers at Cockerill military headuartrs.
 The     iRC junta occasionally granted the International Committee of the Red
 Cross (ICRC) and Prison Watch limited access to prisoners, many of whom were offi-
 cials in the previous government, journalists, or student protesters. In August Pris-
 on Watch reported that most detainees in Pademba Road prison were brutalized and
 beaten during arrest and interrogation, and none had been formally charged or had
 access to legal counsel.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The AFRC junta suspended the Constitu-
 tion and gave itself far-reaching powers of detention. Any person can be arrested
 "in the interest of public safety." There are no safeguards against arbitrary arrest
 or indefinite detention without charge or trial. Members of the elected Government
 and people associated with it, members of the Sierra Leone People's Party (SLPP),
 
 
 302
 journalists, students, and human rights activists have been arbitrarily arrested and
 detained without charge in what the junta calls "military safe custody." Police and
 military officials arrest without warrant and detain indefinitely any person they
 suspected of posing a threat to military rule. With the collapse of the rule of law,
 all civilians are at risk of arbitrary arrest and detention.
 Several hundred detainees are being held at Pademba Road prison, Cockerill mili-
 tary headquarters, Criminal Investigation Department (CID) headquarters, and po-
 lice stations or military installations throughout the country. While some detainees
 have been released after a short time, others have been held for weeks or months.
 Many have been beaten or tortured (see Section 1.c.). Most detainees who are re-
 leasedgo into hiding or flee from the country.
 k the days immediately following the coup, several members of President
 Kabbah's cabinet and other senior government and military officers were detained
 at Cockerill military headquarters. Soldiers conducted house-to-house searches for
 others. Most of these detainees were released after a few days. On June 16, at least
 eight senior military officers and seven civilians associated with the SLPP were ar-
 rested and accused of conspiring to overthrow the AFRC. None was charged with
 a crime; however, they were not allowed visitors. Most were released within several
 weeks.
 Hundreds of people have been detained and beaten by junta troops searching for
 the transmitter of a clandestine, prodemocracy radio station that began broadcast-
 ingin July.
 more than 120 people were arrested on August 18 and 19 as the National Union
 of Sierra Leone Students (NUSS) attempted to hold a "march for democracy" in pro-
 test against the AFRC. Eighty-six students were taken to Pademba Road prison
 where they were -held for 12 days before release. Another 35 students were taken
 to Cockerill military headquarters. Others were taken to CID headquarters and
 about 20 women were taken directly to the residences of junta leaders. In October
 the junta admitted that it was still holding 37 students; many more, including some
 women, remained missing.
 On September 16, People's Army troops attacked the town of Bonthe, on Sherbro
 Island, searching for a Kamajoh training center. The soldiers arrested 60 civilians
 suspected of sympathizing with the Kamajohs and took them to Moyamba for ques-
 tioning. It is not clear what happened to them afterwards.
 On October 13, the junta arrested eight people, including the elected Govern-
 ment's Deputy Minister of Marine Resources Mamoud Sesay, newspaper editor
 Prince Akpu, and Temne tribal chief Alhaji King Naimbana for "involvement in sub-
 versive activities." At the time the junta admitted to holding another 33 detainees
 it described as "prodemocracy activists."
 On November 26, the AFRC arrested Chief A.B. Tomboyeke in Baoma Chiefdom,
 Bo District while searching for Kamajobs.
 Prior to the coup, on March 29 RUF forces abducted several of its own members
 at Nongowa in Kailahun District in the Eastern Province. Two of those abducted,
 Fayia Musa and Ibrahim Deen-Jalloh, had been appointed as RUF representatives
 to the Commission for the Consolidation of Peace established by the Abidjan Peace
 Accord, which was signed by the Government and the RUF in November 1996. In
 April they were reported to be on trial in an RUF people's court for plotting to over-
 throw RUF leader Foday Sankob. The captives' condition was uncertain at year's
 end.
 The junta refused to allow several prominent businessmen, government officials,
 and journalists to leave the country. Because of the violence surrounding the coup
 and the RUFs reputation for brutality, hundreds of thousands of Sierra Leoneans
 fled the country fearing for their lives. Many more left later after being targeted
 by the junta. President Kabbah and members of his government are among those
 now in exile in Guinea.
 The junta does not practice forced exile; however, thousands have fled for their
 own safety.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The suspended Constitution included provisions
 for an independent judiciary. Virtually all magistrates have fled the country; several
 were beaten, and some were raped by prisoners released from prison during the
 coup. The court system has not functioned since May 25. The AFRC announced that
 it would replace the judiciary with People's Revolutionary Courts manned by ordi-
 nary citizens, but there is no evidence that these or any other courts are function-
 ing.J
 i. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 AFRC monitored actions by citizens to prevent them from acting in a manner it
 deemed prejudicial to its continuation in power and to control association or commu-
 nication with other persons. The junta erected roadblocks to control movement and
 
 
 303
 conducted surveillance of the homes of people it perceives as opponents. Telephones
 and mail are monitored by the military junta. There were numerous occasions of
 abusive treatment of citizens by soldiers and police throughout the country, includ-
 ing forced entry into homes, robberies, and assaults. Many of these abuses were
 sanctioned by or committed by high-ranking members of the junta. Joint military
 and police Antilooting Squads frequently executed soldiers caught looting homes.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-The RUF fighting against three successive governments resulted in an esti-
 mated 20,000 deaths since 1991. More than one-third of Sierra Leone's 4.5 million
 citizens are displaced internally or are living as refugees in neighboring countries
 because of insecurity and violence stemming from the civil war and the AFRC/RUF
 takeover. After taking power, junta forces seized food aid destined for displaced per-
 sons and refugees, and looted the headquarters and warehouses of international aid
 organizations, making humanitarian relief difficult. The AFRC also planted land
 mines around ECOMOG installations and at other strategic sites in an attempt to
 hinder their efforts to restore the constitutional government.
 There were many serious violations of humanitarian law throughout the country
 before as well as after the military takeover. Military and RUF forces committed
 summary executions of prisoners and killings, torture, rape, and mutilation of civil-
 ians. Traditional hunter societies (including the Mende Kamajohs, Temne Kapras,
 and Koranko Tamaboros) organized as civil defense militias and sought to protect
 their chiefdoms from both RUF attacks and military looters. At times they executed
 military or RUF forces that they had captured. Hundreds of civilians were killed
 in fighting between military and RUF troops and the civil defense forces.
 Despite the Abidjan Peace Agreement signed in November 1996, and a cease-fire
 in effect, RUF rebels and elements of the government security forces continued to
 attack villages and ambush vehicles. RUF forces continued to abduct villagers and
 force them into involuntary servitude, making them serve as porters, sexual slaves,
 human shields, and fighters, among other abuses. Civilians were murdered,
 maimed, tortured, and raped in these attacks. In some cases, perpetrators could not
 be identified; however, it is generally believed that RUF forces, military personnel,
 and ordinary thieves, committed attacks on civilians. Even in the instances where
 perpetrators could be identified, the Government took no action against them.  I
 In early May, the RUF resumed targeting international organizations. On May 7
 several miles from Makeni, RUF gunmen attacked two United Nations vehicles with
 machine gun fire. The driver of one vehicle was killed and another U.N. employee
 was injured. The next day two more humanitarian aid workers were injured when
 the RUF attacked two World Food Program vehicles on the Makeni-Lunsar road.
 Beginning on May 9, forces generally believed to belong to the RUF began a cam-
 paan of attacks against villages in the Northern province. Armed groups in both
 military uniforms and civilian clothes attacked at least 10 villages with sticks, ma-
 chets, guns, and rocket propelled grenades. The attacks caused 8,000 people to seek
 refuge in the Northern province capital of Makeni and thousands more to flee to
 Guinea. In the attack on Kalangba village, more than a dozen people were killed
 and 87 houses burned. In Gbandembu village, the clinic and 124 of 130 houses were
 burned. Scores of people whose hands and feet had been cut off by rebel forces
 sought medical attention in Makeni. Many people were also abducted in these at-
 tacks. On May 14, these forces, including many young boys, captured the northern
 town of Kamakwie, leaving dozens of corpses lying in the streets. They destroyed
 the hospital, dispensary, and pharmacy, and burned more than 60 houses. In sepa-
 rate attacks in mid-May, the RUF killed more than 100 people in the eastern towns
 of Kalihun and Bomaru.
 On the morning of June 2, after the junta broke off negotiations with the inter-
 national community, a Nigerian warship shelled AFRC/RUF military installations
 in the western end of Freetown for several hours. In response 150 RUF soldiers at-
 tacked and then set fire to the Mammy Yoko Hotel where some 600 foreigners were
 awaiting evacuation and where ECOMOG forces and Nigerian negotiators had set
 up their headquarters. At least one person at the hotel died in the attack and six
 were injured, including five Nigerian soldiers guarding the hotel. Later that day
 RUF troops also attacked the Bintumani hotel. At least 62 civilians were killed and
 more injured by the RUF-fired rocket-propelled grenades and Nigerian shells that
 fell into residential areas.
 In late June, virtually the entire population of Magburka fled 60 miles to Makeni
 after RUF troops entered the town and began harassing civilians. .
 On September 16, AFRC and RUF troops searching for a Kamajoh training center
 attacked the town of Bonthe on Sherbro Island, looting and destroying much of the
 town. At least 34 Kamajohs were killed. Sixty civilians were arrested and taken
 away for questioning.
 
 
 304
 In fighting during October, AFRC and RUF supporters looted and burned homes
 of President Kabba's family and supporters of the elected Government, including
 the homes of Chairman of the Commission for Consolidation of the Peace Desmond
 Luke, Minister of Works Emmanuel 0. Grant, and Deputy Minister in the Vice
 President's Office Theresa Koroma. At least seven villages in Baoma chiefdom, Bo
 District were abandoned in late October after AFRC/RUF troops burned the houses
 and stole the rice crop.
 On November 26, AFRC soldiers burned 13 houses in the villages of Pelewahun
 Ngiyeibu and Gerihun in Bo district while searching for Kamajohs.
 On December 3, Kamajohs seized a Sierra Leone Red Cross truck delivering relief
 food to Moyamba. They reportedly manhandled the Red Cross staff and told them
 that in the future, they should receive all relief supplies for distribution.
 -On December 9 and 10, AFRC and RUF forces launched attacks on Kamajoh
 strongholds in of Joru and Gorahun villages in Kenema District and Sonoshun,
 Fairo and Dia villages in Pujehun District. The villages were attacked by an AFRC
 helicopter gunship, artillery, and rocket propelled grenades. AFRC and RUF troops
 looted the villages, set fire to houses and rice farms, and raped several women.
 Similar AFRC/RUF attacks on Kamajoh strongholds throughout the eastern and
 southeastern parts of the country continued through the end of the year with signifi-
 cant fighting along the border with Liberia.
 ECOMOG artillery and rocket attacks killed numerous civilians. In June a Nige-
 rian warship shelled AFRC/RUF installations in Freetown for several hours. At
 least 150 civilians were killed and more were wounded during fighting that started
 on July 12 between AFRC/RUF and ECOMOG forces at the CO OG bases at
 Lungi Airport, Hastin s Airfield, Jui, and Kossoh near Freetown. Junta forces at-
 tacked the ECOMOG bases and nearby towns seeking a new clandestine radio sta-
 tion that had recently broadcast a speech by President Kabbah.
 About 15 civilians were killed in fighting that began when AFRC and RUF forces
 attacked the ECOMOG base at Lungi Airport on August 13. Most of the civilians
 were killed when ECOMOG troops tried to shell the attacking AFRC/RUF troops.
 A senior AFRC official said the junta would continue to harass ECOMOG troops
 until they left the airport.
 Twenty-one civilians were killed and many more wounded during heavy fighting
 that broke out on September 4 when ECOMOG troops at Lungi Airport launched
 artillery and air attacks against two container ships docking at Queen Elizabeth
 Quay in violation of the ECOWAS embargo. There were reports that some of the
 ECOMOG shells fell in residential areas. Most of the civilian casualties were at
 Marbela Market. It is not clear whether the market was hit by an ECOMOG shell
 or by antiaircraft rounds fired from AFRC positions at Fourah Bay College on
 Mount Aureol.
 On September 5, ECOMOG Force Commander Major General Victor Malu issued
 a "final warning" that ECOMOG would attack any ships violating the ECOWAS em-
 bargo. The next day a Nigerian Alpha jet dropped bombs into the water near a
 Ukrainian cargo ship Seaway as it unloaded in violation of the embargo. Three
 paramilitary policemen and a port official were seriously injured. The following day,
 another Nigerian aircraft dropped two bombs on the ship. No injures were reported
 in the second attack. General Malu claimed that, in addition to rice, the ship had
 been discharging arms and ammunition for the junta. In the following days, AFRC
 officials reportedly smuggled much of the rice into Guinea and sold it for their per-
 sonal gain.
 Hundreds of people died in 2 weeks of heavy fighting that started on October 8
 between AFRC/RUF troops and ECOMOG forces. Hostilities began when an AFRC
 helicopter gunship fired at an ECOMOG helicopter ferrying supplies between
 ECOMOG bases. In retaliation a Nigerian Alpha jet fired rockets at, and dropped
 bombs on, the AFRC helicopter after it had returned to its base at Cockerill Military
 Headquarters. The AFRC reported that four soldiers and two civilians were killed
 in the attack on Cockerill. AFRG and RUF troops then attacked ECOMOG positions
 at Lungi Airport, Kossoh Town, and Jui. Dozens of civilians were killed by artillery
 fired by both sides. The fighting spread as AFRC/RUF troops attacked Nigerian
 ECOMOG contingents at Bo and Kenema. AFRC military trucks patrolled Free-
 town, arresting soldiers who had gone AWOL and refused to fight against ECOMOG
 troops, and forcibly impressed others into service. On October 16, at least 14 civil-
 ians were killed in the eastern outskirts of Freetown by ECOMOG artillery fired
 from Lungi Airport at AFRC/RUF troops attacking ECOMOG forces at Jui and
 Kossoh Town. Eight civilians were killed and 20 injured the same day when a bomb
 dropped by a Nigerian Alpha jet exploded in a market at Kissy. The Alpha jets also
 targeted junta radio and television transmitters. The AFRC placed antiaircraft guns
 in residential areas. Shells fired by these guns frequently fell in residential areas.
 
 
 On December 11, AFRC forces at Daru barracks in Kailahun District fired on a
 Nigerian Alpha jet. The jet dropped two bombs that killed several people in the
 nearby village of Benduma.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The suspended Constitution provided for free-
 dom of speech and of the press. In practice, however, prior to May 25 the Kabbah
 Government detained some journalists without charge and charged some with sedi-
 tion, libel, and contempt of Parliament for their covera e of alleged  vernment cor-
 ruption, the civil war, and human rights issues. The elected Kabbah Government's
 frequent use of criminal libel and sedition charges encouraged self-censorship. Impo-
 sition of heavy frnes financially crippled some members of the private press. Forty-
 six newspapers circulated while the elected Government was in power. On May 14,
 Parliament passed the Media Practitioner Act, designed to drastically curtail the
 numbers of journalists and newspapers. The law required all journalists to have an
 academic degree in journalism and to register with the authorities every year, edi-
 tors are required to have 10 years professional experience. About 80 percent of the
 country's-journalists could not meet these criteria; if enforced, the law would pre-
 vent them from working as journalists.
 Shortly after .the coup, the AFRC.harshly criticized the Media Practitioner Act
 and asserted that press freedom would be unrestricted. However, journalists, like
 other critics of the junta, quickly became targets- for harassment and intimidation.
 Dozens of journalists fled the country in fear of the military junta. In September
 following publication-of a story inthe Standard Times- that revealed discord among
 members of the AFRC Supreme Council, the junta announced that newspapers were
 required to obtain permission before publishing. At year's-end, only about-six news-
 papers remained, all operating at the discretion of the AFRC Minister of Informa-
 tion. Under the elected Government five radio stations operated in Freetown and
 onein the provincial city of Bo. After May 25, the only regularly operating broadcast
 media were government radio and television stations tightly controlled by  the mili-
 tary junta and the-clandestine station FM 98.1 operated by the-elected Government
 in exile. The AFRC/RUF junta took severe measures.attempting to close FM 98.1,
 including torturing..people who might know its location and electronically jamming
 ,.its broadcasts. Many of the journalists who remained in Sierra Leone after May 25
 were harassed, detained; arrested, and beaten by the military junta for reporting
 perceived to be critical of the AFRC or the RUF.
 Under the elected Government, Punch newspaper correspondent Pat Kawa was
 arrested on January 24 on defamation charges after reporting allegations of finan-
 cial improprieties by government officials. The case was dismissed in court on
 March 3. Footprints magazine publisher Harry Evans was arrested on March 6 and
 held without charge for a week after publishing an article alleging that the Minister
 of Presidential Affairs had imported 50 automobiles without paying customs taxes.
 Footprints editor Mohammed -Karim and staff writer Njai Kanthba also were ar-
 rested and held for3 days on spurious charges of drug possession. Three journalists
 from Expo Times newspaper were arrested without charge on March 19 following
 publication of an article entitled "Abacha's Wild West Gangsterism," about the de-
 tention of RUF leader Foday Sankoh by the Nigerian government. They later were
 charged with spying and -possession of a secret military document and were released
 on bail after 2 weeks.
 - On May 27; AFRO military personnel looted the Concord Times newspaper offices.
 Fearing for their safety; the newspaper's staff went into hiding. On June 4, two
 armed men searching for a Kabbah Government minister broke into the home of
 Standard Times newspaper managing editor Phillip Neville. When he denied shel-
 tering the official, Neville was beaten. On June 9, Sky FM talk show host Ojukutu
 Macaulay went into hiding after a group of AFRC soldiers threatened to kill him
 for speaking against the military takeover. Following a June 11 story in For Di Peo-
 ple newspaper about travel to Libya b an AFRC delegation, the junta warned jour-
 nalists to seek clarification from AFR9 headquarters before publishing sensitive se-
 curity information. For Di People subsequently closed after receiving verbal threats
 from AFRC officials. In mid-June British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) stringer
 Sylvester Rogers went into hiding after learning that AFRC soldiers were trying to
 locate him. On October 2, AFRC Spokesman Allieu Kamara admitted that security
 personnel had taken Rogers into "safe restriction" after Rogers had attempted to
 eave the country without a police permit.
 On July 8, The Point newspaper managing editor Budu Hayes was arrested at
 his home and detained at AFRC military headquarters until the following day. The
 soldiers who arrested Hayes alleged that he was harboring people fighting against
 the revolution. Also on July 8, The Democrat newspaper reporter Saloman Conteh
 
 
 and freelance correspondent Jeff Bowlay Williams were arrested at Democrat offices
 by 20 soldiers and interrogated at AFRC military headquarters. They then were
 transferred to Pademba Road prison and held 11 days without charge. The Demo-
 crat stopped publication when they were arrested. Business Vision reporter Martins
 I. Martins was arrested on July 19 and detained at AFRC military headquarters for
 2 days on suspicion that he had communicated with President Kabbah. When he
 returned to his home, he discovered that it had been looted. On July 26, AFRO sol-
 diers arrested Unity Now editors Dominick Lamine and Sahr Mbayoh and con-
 fiscated the newspaper's computers. AFRO officials claimed that the newspaper had
 subversive materials. The two editors were had incommunicado and released several
 days later. AFRC soldiers continued to search for the newspaper's editor-in-chief
 Frank Kposowa, who went into hiding to avoid arrest. On July 26, Kenema-based
 BBC stringer Suliman Momodu also went into hiding after learning that he was
 being sought by AFRO soldiers. On July 28, AFRO soldiers arrested New Tablet pro-
 duction manager Suliman Janger and seized 900 copies of the newspaper. Soldiers
 also arrested five newspaper vendors. New Tablet editor Gibril Foday Musa went
 into hiding to avoid arrest. On July 30, AFRC soldiers seized 1,500 copies of the
 Standard Times at the newspapers offices. The soldiers were searching or manag-
 ing editor Philip Neville who had gone into hiding after receiving threatening phone
 calls for articles critical of the AFRC.
 On August 18, AFRC soldiers arrested Voice of America correspondent Kelvin
 Lewis, Sky FM talk show host Ojukutu Macaulay, and their driver as they were on
 their way to cover a student demonstration against the junta. Soldiers beat them
 with machetes and gun butts and threatened to kill them. They were detained over-
 night in a metal shipping container at AFRO Cockerill military headquarters but
 released the next day.
 On September 1, BBC stringer Prince Brimah was ordered detained by AFRO Sec-
 retary of State for the Southern province, Major Augustine Kamara, who reportedly
 was displeased by his report about the execution of four persons at a CDF roadblock
 on the road between Bo and Makeni (see Section 1.g.). Kamara ordered Brimah
 taken to a police station where he was detained for 4 hours in a cell full of feces
 and then released. On the morning of September 20,  several people who had gath-
 ered at the Mende Central Mosque in Freetown were beaten by security forces seek-
 ing information about the FM 98.1 radio station.
 In early October, Concord Times acting editor Foday Fofana and the acting sec-
 retary of the Sierra Leone Association of Journalists (SLAJ) Fallah Ensa-Ndemah
 went into hiding after receiving information that they were to be arrested on sub-
 version charges stemming from the SLAJ's denunciation of the AFRO junta and its
 control of the press. Freelance journalist Donald Davis was arrested on October 8
 and detained in Pademba Road prison. Freelance journalist Abdul Salam Timbo was
 arrested on subversion charges on October 10 and is being held incommunicado. On
 October 10, a truckload of solders arrested Punch newspaper Editor David
 Tambaryoh at his residence. He was held for 3 days on subversion charges stem-
 ming from his- alleged contact with legitimate Sierra Leone government officials.
 Armed men searching for Tambaryoh's personal property looted his sister-in-law's
 home and twice raped her and her daughter. After his release, Tambaryoh went into
 hiding. Umaru Fofana, a freelance correspondent for The Vision newspaper and the
 BBC was shot in the leg and physically abused on October 11 by junta forces who
 claimed that he was reporting for FM 98.1. He was released later that day. Demo-
 crat newspaper acting editor John Foray and freelance journalist Abdul Kpowsa
 were beaten by junta forces and detained without charge on October 11. AFRO sol-
 diers arrested For Di People editor Paul Kamara on October 16 and took him to
 Pademba Road prison. The soldiers smashed and looted the office, and confiscated
 the newspaper's computers and Kamara's car. The soldiers gave no reason for
 Kamara's arrest.
 On November 13, the AFRO temporarily suspended the Standard Times and de-
 tained several of its reporters after it printed a story suggesting that the AFRC/RUF
 junta was involved in a plot with Liberian President Oharles Taylor to overthrow
 the Government of Guinea. The suspension was lifted a week later after the news-
 paper retracted the story. On November 21, the AFRC temporally suspended The
 Democrat after it reported a burglary at the British High Commissioner's offices
 and home by seven uniformed men. It also subsequently retracted this story.
 On November 22, police arrested Standard Times editor Ibrahim Karim Sei, The
 Democrat editor Pious Foray, and Concord Times acting editor Dorothy Awonoor-
 Gordon, and four other journalists. A police spokesman said that all three news-
 papers had carried "dubious articles" that threatened to undermine the security of
 the State. The seven journalists were detained for a week without charges. The Con-
 
 
 307
 cord Times also had published an article disclosing the delivery of lubricating oil
 to the Freetown power plant, in violation of U.N. Security Council sanctions.
 On December 16, journalist Vandi Kallon was detained and brutally beaten by
 AFRC officials who accused him of passing information to radio station FM 98.1 and
 ECOMOG. There was no information on his circumstances at year's end.
 The elected Government respected academic freedom. All schools and universities
 were closed after May 25 as both teachers and students stayed away in- protest
 against the AFRC's seizure of power.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The suspended Constitution
 provided for freedom of assembly; however, at times the elected Government limited
 this right. The elected Government permitted many street demonstrations.
 In February, however, police and armed forces personnel killed two persons and
 injured 20 others in breaking up a riot by several hundred youths against the postal
 service. The police fired tear gas and started shooting after rioters hurled stones at
 them. One of the dead men was shot in. the chest as he emerged from an Ash
 Wednesday mass at Sacred Heart Cathedral near the post office where the riot was
 taking place. President Kabbah criticized the police for using excessive force in dis-
 persing the rioters.
 On March -11, pclice fired tear gas to disperse hundreds of students-at the Parade
 Grounds soccer field in. Freetown. The National Union of Sierra Leone Students
 (NUSS) had called the meeting to plan protests against the Government's decision
 to give retirement benefits to former President Major-General Joseph Momoh. The
 police refused to issue a permit for the meeting, claiming that security could not
 be ensured, and suggesting that the students meet instead on. college campuses.
 On March 14, police attacked 2,000 students attempting to meet in an open park.
 Before NUSS Secretary-General Abdulai Bayraytay was to address the crowd, 50
 riot policemen disrupted the meeting to arrest him and other student leaders. When
 students attempted to prevent the leaders' arrests, the police attempted to disperse
 the crowd with tear gas and batons, injuring at least 15 persons. Several more stu-
 dents were detained by-the police. A government statement said that police had
 been ordered "to take appropriate but reasonable action to prevent a student group
 meeting anywhere throughout Sierra Leone."It said that the students could hold
 meetings on any of the college campuses, but not elsewhere.
 After May 25, the military junta restricted freedom of assembly and banned pub-
 lic demonstrations and meetings.
 At least one person was killed and another injured in Bo on May 27 when AFRC
 soldiers shot at a crowd of about 5,000 people demonstrating against, the coup. The
 demonstration started when large quantities of looted goods were discovered in the
 army's possession. Nearly all the shops in Bo and an Action Contre La Faim ware-
 house were looted 2 days earlier when the junta released all the inmates at the Bo
 prison.
 The military junta violently broke, up a student march in Freetown on August 18.
 Using assault weapons and.machetes, AFRC/RUF soldiers killed at least 11 stu-
 dents and maimed many others withimachetes and-bayonets.,Soldiers shooting rock-
 et-propelled grenades and automatic weapons set up roadblocks and searched the
 streets, making arrests whereever a group had gathered. AFRC/RUF forces chased
 students into Connaught hospital and assaulted patients as they searched for stu-
 dents. Students and citizens harboring students were severely beaten when found
 and detained in the Pademba Road prison.
 Also on August 18, combined operation by AFRC and RUF troops and State Secu-
 rity Division police armed with automatic weapons, rocket-propelled grenades, and
 antiaircraft guns broke up a student demonstration in the Southern province capital
 of Bo. After marching for a short distance, the students were confronted by the secu-
 rity forces, who dispersed them with tear gas.
 The suspended Constitution provided for the right to form political, economic, so-
 cial, and professional organizations, and the elected Government respected this pro-
 vision m practice.
 The AFRC junta restricted freedom of association and outlawed political parties
 and activities.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The suspended Constitution provided for freedom of reli-
 gion. The Kabbah Government respected this right in practice. Most religious insti-
 tutions have continued to operate under -the junta. However, due to security con-
 cerns, most foreign missionaries left the country. On August 17, AFRC security
 forces .detained Secretary General of the Council of Churches in Sierra Leone
 (CCSL) Alimamy Kokomah at his church and ordered him to cancel an interreli-
 gious worship service scheduled for Freetown's national stadium. Security officers
 turned back people who attempted to reach the stadium that evening. The AFRC
 
 
 308
 also denied a CCSL request that it be allowed to host some form of worship service
 at its headquarters, alleging the possibility of infiltration.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The military junta tightly controls travel within the country. Most poli-
 ticians, government officials, and businessmen left the country immediately after
 the coup. Many prominent persons were given safe haven through international
 evacuation efforts following the coup. Numerous checkpoints manned by AFRC/RUF
 soldiers make travel difficult. The junta refused to allow several prominent busi-
 nessman, government officials, and journalists to leave the country. The junta se-
 verely restricts internal travel and emigration.
 Approximately 1.4 million of Sierra Leone's 4.5 million citizens are displaced with-
 in the country. An estimated 238,000 Sierra Leoneans are refugees in Guinea and
 Liberia, including as many as 40,000 who fled to Guinea and 25,000 to Liberia fol-
 lowing the coup. Several thousand more have sought refuge in The Gambia, Cote
 d'Ivoire, Guinea-Bissa, and Mali. Many middle class Sierra Leoneans fled to Eu-
 ree Great Britain, and the United States.
 Por tothe coup, the Government cooperated with the office of the United Na-
 tions High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organiza-
 tions in assisting refugees. Several hundred thousand refugees and displaced per-
 sons returned to their homes in the months following the November 1996 signing
 of the Abidjan Accord. Many of these returnees were forced to flee their homes again
 after the May 25 coup. Sierra Leone had provided asylum to 17,000 Liberians; sev-
 eral thousand of these refugees fled following the coup, but 5,500 Liberian refugees
 remained in the Freetown area, awaiting safe passage to Liberia. After the evacu-
 ation of United Nations personnel in early June, they were assisted by the ICRC.
 There-is no formal process for granting political asylum.
 Prior to the coup, there were no reports of forced return of persons to a country
 in which they feared persecution.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens do not. have the right to change their government. On May 25, a military
 junta seized power from the civilian government which was chosen in free and fair
 elections. The AFRC suspended the Constitution, banned political parties, and an-
 nounced that all legislation would be made by military decree. The military junta
 routinely threatened, harassed, imprisoned, tortured, and killed citizens who sought
 to challenge the military's seizure of power. The junta has not negotiated in good
 faith with the Committee of Five (C-5) foreign ministers appointedby ECOWAS to
 bring about the return of the Kabbah Government and the restoration of constitu-
 tional order. Parliament has not functioned since the military takeover. Many civil
 servants refuse to report to work until constitutional order is restored.
 There is 1 woman in the 34 member AFRC Supreme Council and 1 woman in the
 20 member Cabinet.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Under the elected Government, several local human rights organizations operated
 including a local chapter of Amnesty International, the Civil Liberties Congress,
 Prison Watch, the National Commission for Democracy and Human Rights, and the
 Society for Advancement of Civil Rights. Most members of these groups fled to
 Conakry, Guinea, from where they report on violations of human rights in Sierra
 Leone. Those who have stayed in Sierra Leone have to restrict their activities se-
 verely for their own safety.
 On August 17, soldiers seeking Civil Liberties Congress President Soulaiman
 Banja Tejan-Sie arrested and beat three people closely associated with him. He was
 arrested the next day and taken to Cockerill military headquarters where he was
 tortured. He was then forced at gunpoint to appear on national television and to
 call upon students to cancel the march for democracy" planned for that day. He
 was detained without charge at Pademba Road prison for 11 days and then placed
 under close surveillance until he fled the country in October.
 The junta allowed ICRC and Prison Watch to visit the Pademba Road prison at
 least through October.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The suspended Constitution prohibited discrimination against women and pro-
 vided for protection on the basis of race and ethnicity, except for the prohibition
 against citizenship for persons with a non-African father. This provision effectively
 
 
 309
 blocks citizenship and political participation of those of Lebanese descent, and other
 persons with non-African fathers.
 Women.-Violence against women, especially wife beating, is common. Police are
 unlikely to intervene in domestic disputes except in cases of severe injury or death.
 Sierra Leone does not recognize domestic violence against women as a societal prob-
 lem, and neither the elected Government nor the AFRC junta gave it high-level at-
 tention. Rape is a recognized societal problem and is punishable by up to 14 years'
 imprisonment. The elected Government enforced this law; however, the AFRC and
 the RUF use rape for both control and punishment.
 The suspended Constitution provided for equal rights for women, but in practice
 women face both legal and societal discrimination. Their rights and status under
 traditional law vary significantly, depending upon the ethnic group to which they
 belong. The Temne and Limba tribes of the north afford greater rights to women
 to inherit property than does the Mende tribe, which gives preference to male heirs
 and unmarried daughters. However, in the Temne tribe, women cannot become
 paramount chiefs. In the south, the'Mende tribe has a number of female paramount
 chiefs.
 Women do not have equal access to education, economic opportunities, health fa-
 cilities, or social freedoms. In 'rural 'areas, women perform much of the subsistence
 farming, all of the child rearing, and have little opportunity for education. The aver-
 age educational level for women is markedly below that of men;-only 6 percent are
 literate. At the university level, men predominate. Due to the military takeover, ef-
 forts by local NGO's to educate women on their civil rights and civic responsibilities
 have been suspended.
 Children.-Infant and child mortality is very high. In 1995 one child in four died
 before the age of 5 and one-third of children under the age of 5 were underweight.
 As many as a few thousand RUF fighters are child soldiers who are as young as
 8 years of age. They often are smaller physically than the rifles they carry. Ab-
 ducted by the RUF from their villages, brutalized, and used to transport sup plies,
 the children eventually become fighters. The armed forces also took boys off the
 streets of Freetown to expand its forces. The armed forces provided little or no train-
 ing to the boys. This undisciplined and unsupervised -group committed many atroc-
 ities. After the coup, parents began to ask the- traditional hunter societies to initiate
 their young male children to, protect them from abduction and forcible recruitment
 by the RUF. Human rights groups believe that a large number of the children ab-
 ducted into the various armed forces, or otherwise traumatized by the war as civil-
 ians, experience serious psychological problems.
 In late February, RSLMF soldiers and Kamajohs cooperating in a government op-
 eration rescued several hundred war -rphans, most from 9 to 15 years of age, living
 in the. forests in Kailahun and Kenema districts. Most of the children fled to the
 forests after RUF rebels attacked and destroyed their villages 4 years earlier.
 Occasional instances of ritual murders of boys and girls, as well as adults, associ-
 ated with illegal secret societies, have been reported in the past. There were no re-
 ported cases during the year.
 Female genital mutilation (FGM), which is condemned by international health ex-
 perts as damaging to both physical and psychological health, is widely practiced on
 young women and girls, especially in traditional ethnic groups and among the less-
 educated. While UNICEF estimates the percentage of females who have undergone
 this procedure may be as high as 90 percent, local groups believe this figure is over-
 stated.
 In January the women's Bondo society initiated approximately 600 young women
 in the Grafton displaced persons camp near Freetown in a ceremony that included
 FGM. About 100 girls required medical treatment for complications including bleed-
 ing and serious infections caused by the multiple use of unclean knives or glass used
 in the procedure. An active press campaign by secret societies countered the well-
 publicized international effort against FGM. The 28-year- old woman abducted in
 1996 by a secret society and subjected to FGM eventually found a lawyer to take
 her case, but now there are no functioning courts. On July 2, AFRO Chairman John-
 fly Paul Koroma told the executive council of the Bondo Society that he supports
 FGM and other traditional practices and that after the coup they could now perform
 these rites without hindrance.
 People with Disabilities.-Questions of public facility access and discrimination
 against the disabled have not become public policy issues. No laws mandate acces-
 sibility to buildings or provide for other assistance for the disabled. While there does
 not appear to be outright discrimination against the disabled in housing or edu-
 cation, with the high rate of unemployment, few disabled persons work in offices
 or factories.
 
 
 310
 Many citizens suffered debilitating injuries during the war. Many had limbs cut
 off by RUF fighters. A few NGO's have provided prostheses, but the vast majority
 of victims remain without assistance of any kind.
 National IRacial/Ethnic Minorities.-Ethnic loyalty remains an important factor
 in government, the military, and business. Complaints of corruption within ethnic
 groups and ethnic discrimination in government appointments, contracts, military
 commissions, and promotions are common.
 Residents of non-African descent face institutionalized political restrictions. The
 Constitution restricts citizenship to persons of patrilineal Negro-African descent.
 This constitutional restriction effectively denies citizenship to many long-time resi-
 dents, notably the Lebanese community.
 The Lebanese community was targeted for looting by military and RUF forces
 during the AFRC takeover. Nigerian citizens were also targeted by the junta for
 harassment, arrest, and, detention because of the dominant role played by Nigerian
 troops in the ECOMOG forces enforcing the U.N. and ECOWAS sanctions. RUF
 members killed two Nigerian citizens on September 9 in apparent retaliation for
 ECOMOG attacks against ships violating the ECOWAS embargo. In early Septem-
 ber, at least 20 Nigerian citizens were accused of spying for ECOMOG, arrested,
 and held at Cockerill military headquarters. Another six Nigerians were arrested
 in mid-September as they traveled from Freetown to the interior of the country. The
 reason for their arrest is unknown.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Under the elected Government, the now suspended
 Constitution provided for the right of association. All workers, including civil serv-
 ants, had the right to join trade unions of their choice. Unions were independent
 of the government. All labor unions had by custom joined the Sierra Leone Labor
 Congress (SLLC), but membership was voluntary. There was no legal prohibition
 against SLLC leadership holding political office, and leaders have held both elected
 and appointed government positions.
 The Trade Union Act provides that any five persons may form a trade union by
 applying to the Registrar of Trade Unions, who has statutory powers under the act
 to approve the creation of trade unions. The Registrar may reject applications for
 several reasons, including an insufficient number of members, proposed representa-
 tion in an industry already serviced by an existing union, or incomplete documenta-
 tion. If the Registrar rejects an application, his decision may be appealed in the or-
 dinary courts, but applicants seldom take such action. Approximately 60 percent of
 workers in urban areas, including government employees, are unionized, but unions
 have had little success in organizing workers in the agcoltural and mining sectors.
 Under the elected Government, unions had the right to strike without exception,
 but the Government could require 21 days' notice. Although union members may be
 fired for participating in even a lawful strike, no such incidents were reported.
 Unions were free to form federations and confederations and to affiliate internation-
 ally. The SLLC is a member of the International Confederation of Free Trade
 Unions, and the elected Government placed no restrictions on international travel
 or contacts of trade unionists.
 Following the coup most businesses shut down and school teachers and many
 other public servants refused to return to work until the elected Government was
 restored. Leaders of the SLLC defied a junta demand that SLLC order all its mem-
 bers back to work. At year's end, most businesses and government offices and all
 schools remained closed as employees continued to refuse to return to work, despite
 warnings by the AFRC that those who did not return to work would be fired.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The legal framework for col-
 lective bargaining is the Regulation of Wages and Industrial Relations Act. Collec-
 tive bargaining must take place in trade 'rup negotiating councils, each of which
 has an equal number of employer and worker representatives. Most enterprises are
 covered by collective bargaining agreements on wages and working conditions. The
 SLLC provides assistance to unions in preparation for negotiations. In case of a
 deadlock, the Government may intervene. It has not, however, used decrees to pre-
 vent strikes.
 No law prohibits retribution against strikers. Should an employee be fired for
 union activities, the individual may file a complaint with a labor tribunal and seek
 reinstatement. Complaints of discrimination against unions are made to an arbitra-
 tion tribunal. Individual trade unions investigate alleged violations of work condi-
 tions to try to ensure that employers take the necessary steps to correct abuses.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The suspended Constitution pro-
 hibited forced and bonded labor, including that by children. However, under the
 
 
 Chiefdom's Council Act, compulsory labor may be imposed by individual chiefs, re-
 quiring__members of their villages to contribute to the improvement of common
 areas. This practice exists only in rural areas. There is no penalty for noncompli-
 ance.
 The elected Government did not require compulsory labor. However, an old decree
 requires that homeowners, businessmen, and vendors clean and maintain their
 premises. Failure to comply is punishable by fine or imprisonment. The last S9atur-
 fay of each month is declared a National Cleaning Day. There have been reports
 of security forces publicly humiliating citizens to ensure compliance.
 The AFRC forcibly impressed teenage boys into military service. The RUF fre-
 quently abducted villagers, including children, during its attacks and forced the
 abductees into involuntary servitude as laborers for the RUF. Many of the children
 eventually became fighters for the RUF. This continued even after the RUF joined
 the AFRC junta.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The mini-
 mum age for employment is officially 18 years, but in practice there is no enforce-
 ment because there is no government entity specifically charged with this task.
 Children routinely assist in family businesses, especially those of vendors and petty
 traders. In rural areas, children work seasonally on family subsistence farms.
 Because the adult unemployment rate is high (an estimated 70 percent in some
 areas), few children are involved in the industrial sector. There have been reports
 that young children have been hired by foreign employers to work as domestics
 overseas at extremely low wages and in poor conditions. The Department of Foreign
 Affairs and International Cooperation is responsible for reviewing overseas work ap-
 plications to see that no one under the age of 14 is employed for this purpose and
 to enforce certain wage standards.
 The suspended Constitution prohibited forced and bonded labor, including that by
 children; however, there was some compulsory labor in rural areas (see Section 6.c.).
 The AFRC forcibly impressed teenage boys into military service.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no minimum wage. Purchasing power
 declined drastically as incomes dropped and inflation rose to 40 percent. Most work-
 ers have to pool incomes with their extended families and engage in subsistence food
 production to maintain a minimum standard of living. The Government's suggested
 standard workweek is 38 hours, but most workweeks for the few people who have
 jobs exceed 38 hours. The Government sets health and safety standards, but the
 standards are outmoded and often not enforced. The Health and Safety Division bf
 the Department of Labor has inspection and enforcement responsibility, but the lack
 of funding and transportation limit its effectiveness.
 Health and safety regulations are included in collective bargaining agreements,
 but there is no evidence of systematic enforcement of those health and safety stand-
 ards. Trade unions provide the only protection for workers who file complaints about
 working conditions. Initially, a union makes a formal complaint about a hazardous
 work condition. If this is rejected, the union may issue a 21-day strike notice. If
 workers remove themselves from dangerous work situations without making a for-
 mal complaint, they risk being fired.
