 SIERRA LEONE
 Sierra Leone has a one-party system of government with the
 President, Major-General Dr. Joseph Saidu Momoh, exercising
 predominant executive authority. The 1978 Constitution
 established the All People's Congress (APC) as the country's
 sole legal political party. The unicameral Parliament is
 subservient to the party and is largely an advisory body.
 The security structure includes the Defense Force (between
 1,500 and'2,000 men), the regular police (3,000 to 5,000), and
 a paramilitary branch of the police, the Special Security
 Division (1,000 to 1,500). The Defense Force is responsible
 for preventing external aggression and wide-scale civil
 disturbances. The police are responsible for law and order
 and internal security. The Special Security Division's role
 is not well defined, but, under the previous regime, was used
 to enforce the political decisions of the President.
 About 70 percent of Sierra Leone's 3.9 million population is
 engaged in agriculture, mainly subsistence farming. The
 Constitution recognizes a person's right to own private
 property, but the Government controls mineral exports. For
 many years the economy has been in a steady decline, in part
 due to falling world diamond prices and to reduced rice
 production. Mineral exports, notably titanium ore, gold, and
 diamonds, are the principal sources of foreign exchange. In
 1989 the Government introduced new measures designed to
 improve control over the mining. sector, e.g., it reintroduced
 gold and diamond licenses and required exporters to deposit 60
 percent of their proceeds in foreign currency to the central
 bank.
 Human rights remained significantly circumscribed in 1989.
 Principal human rights concerns were mistreatment of detainees
 and harsh and degrading prison conditions; arbitrary and
 excessively long detentions; restrictions on freedom of speech
 and press, assembly and association, and the right of citizens
 to change their government; and de facto discrimination and
 violence against women. Favorable developments included the
 lifting of a 1987 state of economic emergency that had
 augmented government power to detain and control people's
 movements and initial government efforts to improve prison
 conditions. In addition, observers generally agreed that
 correct judicial procedures had been followed in the State's
 handling of the controversial treason case of former vice
 president, Francis M. Minah and 11 others.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no reports of such killings.-
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Harsh physical treatment of suspected criminals, especially by
 police during interrogation, is conimon. In recent years,
 
 
 315
 SIERRA LEONE
 attention has been focused on prison .administration and harsh
 conditions. Amnesty International (AI) has in particular
 called attention to reports of deaths in prisons, such as
 Pademba Road Prison in Freetown. *In September 1987, the
 President appointed a special Commission of Inquiry to
 investigate prison conditions, including persistent reports of
 harsh conditions and..cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment of
 pisoners. The Commission ompleted its inquiry in 1989, but
 the Government had not made its findings publicly available by
 year's end. Nevertheless, abcording to reliable reports, the
 Commission found a number of specific cruel practices,
 including the stealing of food from prisoners. The Government
 reportedly. levied severe fines against the responsible
 officials and initiated steps to improve conditions,
 including, according to former prisoners, sparse, but adequate
 food suplies. Prisons remained, however, seriously
 overcrowded.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Judicial review of arrests is part of Sierra Leone's common
 law, but even under normal circumstances, detainees may be
 held for 28 days before being charged with an offense. There
 are reports, however, that judicial review, including the
 28-day limit, is not always observed. Attorneys and others
 have often alleged that police, to harass or to exact personal
 gain, sometimes detain persons without charge or judicial
 review and that those too poor to hire a lawyer are often held
 for years without trial, particularly when the accuser has
 paid law enforcement or judicial officials to violate the law.
 Under the Constitution, the President may take measures to
 detain any person who is, or is reasonably suspected of being,
 dangerous to the security of the Republic. The now expired
 economic emergency law extended the definition of "dangerous"
 to include a range of "economic" activities. During a state '
 of emergency, the Public Emergency Act comes into effect, and
 persons detAined under its provisions can be held indefinitely
 and are not guaranteed a hearing unless charged with a capital
 offense.
 There were no known political detainees or prisoners being
 held at the end of.1989.
 Exile as a political weapon is not practiced in Sierra Leone.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Sierra Leone's judicial system is composed of the Supreme
 Court, an intermediate Court of Appeals, a High Court of
 Justice, and magistrates' courts. Judges are appointed by the
 President. Local courts, presided over by indigenous ethnic
 leaders, administer customary law and are especially important
 in the rural areas.
 The judiciary has generally maintained its independence,
 although some critics charge that the legal system can be
 subject to political manipulation, often before-cases reach
 the courts, and that it has also been penetrated by
 corruption, particularly at the lower levels. Defendants are
 allowed counsel of their choice, but many cannot afford them.
 Public defenders are provided only in capital offense cases.
 Convictions may be appealed; the appeal courts generally have
 a reputation of bding less susceptible to corruption.
 
 
 316
 SIERRA LEONE
 In September the Supreme Court rejected the appeals of the
 former first Vice President, Francis M. Minah, and 11 others.
 Minah and the others were convicted of attempting to
 assassinate the President in a March 1987 coup attempt in
 which two policemen were killed. The defendants appealed to a
 clemency board chaired by the first Vice President and then to
 the President, who upheld the decision to execute six of the
 defendants. Six others had their sentences commuted to life
 imprisonment. On October 7, Minah and the five others
 condemned to death were executed by hanging. The trial was
 judged by most observers to be procedurally correct and fair.
 The 1987 coup case--from arrest to trial to appeal--moved
 slowly but steadily, but most court cases are not rapidly
 completed. Sierre Leone's legal system is heavily
 overburdened and lacks resources, especially in trained
 personnel. This results in an average delay of 2 years before
 a case actually comes to trial. Additionally, often the
 official records of court proceedings are handwritten notes
 taken by the judges. This practice limits lawyers, access to
 written documentation and puts in question the impartiality of
 the official record.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Government does not generally interfere with the rights of
 privacy and family, and legal safeguards against arbitrary
 invasion of the home are usually observed. In security cases,
 however, the Government has the authority to enter homes
 without a search warrant.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Although freedom of speech is legally guaranteed, the
 Government can abridge this right under the Constitution if
 the security of the State is considered at issue. Debate in
 the APC-controlled Parliament is often lively, and some
 "backbenchers" have gained prominence through their
 interventions criticizing government policy. In practice, the
 Government generally tolerates some public criticism by
 citizens and academics. Harsh direct criticism of the
 President and other senior officials and of the one-party
 system is rare. Opposition groups based in Western Europe or
 the United States occasionally circulate critical materials in
 Sierra Leone but must do so clandestinely.
 There is a lively, privately owned press. Of 12 active
 newspapers, only 2 are considered government controlled.
 However, the press is subject to government restrictions.
 Mindful of latent government power, journalists customarily
 exercise self-censorship and avoid publishing articles
 personally attacking the Head of State. The Newspaper
 Registration Act of 1983 in particular gives the Government
 extensive authority over the press. It specifies
 qualification standards for editors and sets a fee for
 registration of newspapers. That Act was used for the first
 time in late April when five newspapers were closed for
 failing to register. There were allegations that the closings
 were in fact due to criticisms in the newspapers of the
 Minister of Information. The Government denied the charges
 and allowed the newspapers to resume publication by late May.
 In a subsequent speech, the President strongly defended the
 
 
 317
 SIERRA LEONE
 right of a free press. without qualification, but there was no
 indication byyear's end that the.parameters of acceptable
 press commentary had been widened appreciably.-
 b. Freedom-of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Constitution.provides for freedom of assembly and permits
 the formation of trade unions and other economic, social, or
 professionql associations. These rights, however, are limited
 in practice, most significantly in the political sphere.
 Permits must be obtained from the police for public meetings
 and demonstrations, and in general public demonstrations are
 not allowed. The Government banned in 1987 a once active
 student union at the principal university and continued the
 ban in'1989 despite student requests to rescind it. Groups of
 citizens can and do make orderly representations to the
 Government on policy issues and are not subject to reprisals.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 A tradition of religious tolerance is practiced in Sierra
 Leone. Muslims, the largest religious group, Christians,
 adherents of other faiths, and animists practice their beliefs
 freely and publish and distribute religious documents without
 government interference. The hajj is an annual occurrence in
 which a wide cross section of Sierra Leoneans participate; it
 is partially subsidized by the Government. Employment within
 the civil service and appointments at high political levels do
 not appear to be religiously biased. There appears to be no
 favored religion under the country's one-party system.
 President Momoh, who is Christian, has Muslims as his chief
 adviser, Foreign Minister, and Chief of the Armed Forces.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The only official control on travel within the country has
 been in the diamond-mining areas where restrictions are
 intended to control smuggling. There are no official
 regulations restricting foreign travel, but government-decreed
 limitations on the amount of foreign exchange a person may
 take out of the country could have this effect if enforced,
 which generally is not the case.
 Sierra Leone, a party to the U.N. Convention and Protocol
 Relating to the Status of Refugees, is host to approximately
 100 refugees. A number of Namibian refugees were voluntarily
 repatriated in early 1989.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Citizens do not have the right to change the government
 through democratic means. The Constitution proclaims Sierra
 Leone a one-party state (the All People's Congress or APC),
 and no other parties are legally permitted. Since
 independence in 1961, the clear trend in political development
 has been to increase executive power and decrease
 constitutional checks on that power.
 Parliament has 116 seats: 97 popularly elected, 12 paramount
 chiefs elected by traditional councils, and 7 members
 
 
 318
 SIERRA LEONE
 appointed by the President. Candidates for Parliament, which
 is largely an advisory body, are chosen in each constitutency
 by the party's local executive committee, which may select up.
 to five candidates from a list of multiple party candidates.
 However, the Central Committee of the APC can override the
 nomination of any candidate if it chooses to do so.
 Parliamentary elections are held every 5 years by universal
 adult suffrage. Party leaders contend that dissent and strong
 challenges exist within the single party and that local party
 members have some influence in the designation of
 parliamentary candidates.
 In addition to the national political system, a traditional
 system of local government operates in the provinces.
 Paramount chiefs are elected for life by the members of the
 local Chiefdom Councils, and they wield considerable authority
 in local affairs and in resolving local civil disputes.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International afd
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government generally has taken a positive attitude toward
 international and nongovernmental groups involved in
 monitoring human rights violations. In response to the 1987
 AI report, President Momoh convened a special Commission of
 Inquiry to investigate possible human rights violations in the
 prisons. Additionally, an AI representative attended part of
 the 1987 treason trial.
 The Government has not interfered with the activities of the
 Sierra Leone Bar Association's Society for the Preservation of
 Human Rights. This active human rights group, founded in
 1985, is supported by a wide cross section of educated
 citizens. The Society won its first major court case in 1986,
 obtaining the acquittal of persons arrested for demonstrating
 peacefully. Since then the Society has obtained the release
 of several persons who were detained without judicial review.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 There is no officially sanctioned discrimination on the basis
 of sex, religion, language, or social status. Although
 allegations have been made of favoritism in political
 appointments and the military based on ethnic origin, ethnic
 participation in public and private service appears to be
 broadly based and well-integrated. However, citizens of
 non-African descent do face political restrictions, e.g.,
 citizens of Lebanese origin may hold Sierra Leonean passports
 but cannot hold membership in the APC.
 Women in Sierra Leone are guaranteed equal rights by the
 Constitution, but their status varies widely in different
 parts of the country and depends heavily upon the cultural
 values and traditions of their ethnic group. These values
 affect women's access to education. In most rural areas,
 women are farmers.
 Violence against women, especially wife beating, is widespread
 and is accepted among the more traditional elements of
 society. The police are unlikely to intervene except in cases
 of severe injury or death. The Government has never addressed
 this issue specifically. Few cases of violence against women
 
 
 319
 SIERRA LEONE
 ever come to the courts. Female genital mutilation
 (circumcision) is widely practiced and i& allowed by law.
 Section'6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The righe of association is provided for in the Constitution
 and workers have ihe right to join trade unions of their own
 choosing. Unions are independent of the ruling APC party, but
 they must join the single trade union confederation, the
 Sierra Leone Labor Congress (SLLC). Under the Trade Union Act
 any five persons can form a trade union by applying to the
 Registrar of Trade Unions ihich has statutor ' powers under the
 Act. If the Registrai rejects an application, the applicants
 can appeal against thi decision in the ordinary courts. 'Since
 wage negotU~tioh is industry-wide, the Sierra Leone Labor
 Congress is endeavoring to organize unions according to
 industry.and not the trade of workers. At present, there can
 be as many as six tride unions in one industry. In recent
 years, the unions have organized more workers, especially
 among lower wage earners. They have been less successful in
 organizing workers in the agricultural and mining sectors.
 Approximately 60 percent of the working population in urban
 areas is now unionized.
 Unions have the right to strike in Sierra Leone. During 1989
 workers staged several strikes, mainly against the Government
 to protest salary problems. In the. case of striking hospital
 workers and teachers, the Government~eventally paid overdue
 salaries.
 Sierra Leone has ratified the International Lbbor Organization
 (ILO) Convention on Freedom of Association and Protection of
 the Right to Organize. Unions' maintain affiliation with the
 Internatibnal Confederation of Free Trade Unions and the
 Communist-controlled World Federation of Trade Unions. There
 are no legal restrictions on regional, nation4, or
 international affiliation or on international travel afid
 contacts.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The law prohibits any discrimination against union members.
 Complaints of discrimination against unions are made to the
 Industrial Court for Arbitration. Individual �rade unions
 investigate alleged violations of work conditions and ensure
 that employers take necessary steps to correct abuses. In
 1989 one issue between unions and employers concerned the use
 of temporary workers but the SLLC did not make a formal
 complaint.
 The legal framework for collective bargaining is the
 Regulation of Wages and Industrial Relations Act. Collective
 bargaining must take place in trade group.negotiating councils
 each of which is comprised of an equal number of-employees and
 workers representatives. Most enterprises are covered by
 collective bargaining agreements on wage and working
 conditions. The SLLC provides assistance to unions in
 negotiation preparation. It is basically a bilateral
 negotiation, and the Government only intervenes in case of a
 deadlock.
 Labor legislation is applied uniformly throughout the country.
 
 
 320
 SIERRA LEONE
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced or compulsory labor is prohibited by law and is not
 practiced. Since 1964 the ILO Committee of Experts (COE) has
 asked the Government to repeal or amend a section of the
 Chiefdom Councils Act under which compulsory labor may be
 imposed. The Government has indicated that the pertinent
 section of the Act is not enforceable, but it has not yet
 replied to COE requests for an official declaration to that
 effect.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The minimum age for employment of children is officially 18
 years, but in practice, there is no minimum age. In the
 interior of the country, children at early ages work
 seasonally on subsistence family farms. Because the adult
 unemployment rate is as high as 60 percent, there are few
 children involved in the industrial sector. However, children
 often engage in street trading, and some children work with
 small fishing groups.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Currently, there is no legislated minimum wage. In 1987 the
 Constance Davis Commission recommended the establishment of a
 mimimum wage and social security program, but to date, the
 Government has not passed implementing legislation. The
 standard legal workweek is 38 hours (8 hours on Monday through
 Thursday and 6 hours on Friday). There is no limit on
 overtime. The rate of overtime pay for public holidays is 2.5
 times the basic rate. For other days the overtime rate is
 double the normal rate of pay.
 Within the Ministry of Labor there is a moribund Health and
 Safety Division. Health and safety regulations are included
 in collective bargaining agreements negotiated by the trade
 unions. However, there is no evidence of systemic enforcement
 of these safety standards. Trade unions provide the only
 protection for workers who file complaints about hazardous
 working conditions. Initially, the unions make a formal
 complaint to the Ministry of Labor. -When this fails, the
 unions can issue a 21 day strike notice. As a last resort the
 unions can strike to achieve their demands.
 
 
 321
