 EL SALVADOR
 El Salvador is a constitutional, multiparty democracy with an executive branch
 headed by a president and a unicameral legislature. Armando Calderon Sol of the
 Nationalist Republican Alliance (ARENA) was inaugurated President for a 5-year
 term in June 1994. In free and fair legislative elections in March 1997, the former
 guerrilla organization Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front (FMLN) won a
 third of the Legislative Assembly seats, leaving the ARENA party with a one-vote
 plurality. Seven other parties, representing a broad political spectrum, hold seats,
 including the conservative National Conciliation Party and the centrist Christian
 Democratic Party. The judiciary is constitutionally independent but suffers from in-
 efficiency and corruption.
 Under the terms of the Peace Accords that ended the 12-year civil war in 1992,
 the Government has reduced the armed forces (including civilian employees) by over
 70 percent; removed the internal security function from the military and placed it
 under civilian control; replaced the discredited National Police with a new Civilian
 National Police (PNC); and integrated the former guerrillas into political life. For
 the first time in the country's history, the President appointed a civilian as Minister
 of Defense. Although its internal policing mission has been eliminated, the military
 continues to provide support, on an emergency basis, for some PNC patrols in rural
 areas, a measure begun in 1995 to contain violence by well-armed, organized crimi-
 nal bands. The level of professionalism of the PNC continued to improve, but the
 5-year-old force remains understaffed, undertrained, and short on practical experi-
 ence. Civilian authorities maintained effective control of the military and security
 forces. Some members of the police committed human rights abuses.
 The country has a market-based, mixed economy largely based on agriculture and
 manufacturing. Some 40 percent of the work force is in the agricultural sector; cof-
 fee and sugar are the principal export crops and major sources of foreign exchange.
 Employing 6.4 percent of the work force, the manufacturing sector is dominated by
 apparel manufacturing (mostly in export processing zones) and represents the main
 source of new jobs. The Government is committed to privatization and free market
 reforms. The economy is open, and private property is respected. The rate of real
 economic growth was about 4 percent, and per capita gross domestic product was
 estimated to be $2,024. About 48 percent of the population lives below the poverty
 level.
 
 
 616
 The Government's human rights record improved somewhat; however, there were
 problems in some areas. There were two cases of extrajudicial killings by police. Po-
 lice sometimes used excessive force, mistreated detainees, and arbitrarily arrested
 and detained persons. The PNC and the Attorney General's office sought to identify
 and to punish police who committed criminal acts or violated established proce-
 dures, although with mixed results. There was a reduction in the number of human
 rights complaints against the police in some categories compared with the previous
 year. Prison conditions remained poor; although overcrowding was reduced, it re-
 mained a problem. The judiciary's inefficiency continued to lead to a backlog of
 cases, which resulted in lengthy pretrial detention and delays in trials; however, the
 court system showed. some improvement. Implementation of the new criminal and
 sentencing codes in April had a significant impact on the problems of violation of
 due process, prison overcrowding, overburdened court dockets, and trial delays.
 However, some criminals convicted of serious crimes were released on parole. By
 August, the courts cleared out 20,000 backlogged cases. The Supreme Court made
 further progress in increasing the professionalism of the judiciary, but disciplining
 or dismissing corrupt or incompetent judges remained a slow process. Impunity for
 the rich and powerful remained a problem. The office of the Ombudsman for the
 Defense of Human Rights (PDDH), established by the Constitution and the Peace
 Accords, was an independent and effective advocate for citizens' rights. However, its
 investigative capacity remained limited due to resource constraints. Discrimination
 against women, -the disabled, and the indigenous remained problems. Violence
 against -women and homosexuals and abuse of children were also problems. Union
 leaders charged that the dismissal of two groups of employees of the privatized state
 telephone company abridged freedom of association and the right to organize. Child
 labor is a problem, and some minors were forced into prostitution.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including  Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political
 killings; however, there were two cases of suspected extrajudicial killings.
 On March 8, the handcuffed body of Carlos Ernesto Lobo, age 26, was discovered
 in a river near San Salvador. The apparent cause of death was drowning. On March
 6, two PNC agents had arrested Lobo on suspicion of carrying stolen goods. The
 PNC agents claimed that Lobo escaped from custody, still handcuffed, and ran to-
 wards the area where his body later was found. The PNC told Lobo's father on
 March 7 that his son escaped. Both PNC agents involved were placed in custody
 for "negligence" in allowing Lobo to escape. At year's end, the PNC and Attorney
 General's office were investigating the death to -determine whether to bring further
 charges against the two policemen.
 On September 6, Jose Antonio Villalta was shot and killed in Santa Tecla.
 Villta's family charged that a PNC agent shot him in the back when Villalta at-
 tempted .to intervene to stp a group of poice who were reportedly beating two of
 his friends. The PNC opened an investigation, which was continning at year's end.
 There was mixed progress in cases of ejudicial killings from previous years.
 In 1997 a Santa Ara cour-t, citing insuffiient evidene, dropped charges against
 two PNC officers accused of the March 1996 extrajudicial killings of four gang mem-
 bers in Santa Ana. Witnesses reported that PNC agents apprehended the four per-
 sons for robbery and placed them in a police vehicle. Subsequently, the four were
 found murdered at a local farm. The Attorney General's office appealed the decision
 to a higher court, but the appeal was rejected. The case remained under investiga-
 tion at year's end.
 In October 1996, a PNC agent shot and killed Francisco Manzanares during what
 the police said was surveillance of ongoing criminal activity during an investigation
 in an extortion case. Although not active in politics at the time of his death,
 Manzanares' past as an FMLN combatant and party member raised the issue of po-
 litical killing. The judge handling the case stated that the killing could have been
 a premeditated act, and that the PNC had persecuted Manzanares prior to his mur-
 der. At year's end, the four police officers charged in the case (three as accomplices)
 were detained and the trial was in progress.
 On October 11, a jury unanimously found five PNC agents guilty of murder in
 the 1995 beating death of medical student Adriano Vilanova. The senior two agents
 each were sentenced to 25 years' imprisonment (the maximum penalty under the
 law) and the other three to 23 years' imprisonment each. Another two PNC agents
 charged with participation in the killing remained at large. An additional two
 agents accused in the case were exonerated in June. The defendants initially
 claimed that Vilanova died from a fall, but testimony from eyewitnesses who saw
 
 
 617
 Vilanova in police custody, and independent investigations by the PDDH and a
 major San Salvador daily newspaper, pointed to involvement of members of the
 PNC. While the guilty verdicts cannot be appealed, atyear's end, defense attorneys
 were seeking a mistrial, arguing that one member of the jury legally was not quali-
 fied to serve. The victim's parents expressed satisfaction with the guilty verdicts,
 but also alleged an attempted police coverup and called on the police and the Attor-
 ney General's office to identify and prosecute the "intellectual authors" of the crime.
 On October 14, the Attorney General confirmed that his office would continue to in-
 vestigate the case, which remained open at year's end.
 In January the authorities arrested Jose Julio Ortiz Vides, a member of a crimi-
 nal gang, for participating in the murder of Ramon Garcia Prieto in 1994. Jose
 Argueta Rivas, a former member of the National Police, was found guilty in 1996
 of Garcia Prieto's murder, and sentenced to 30 years in prison. In 1997 the Garcia
 Prieto family charged before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights
 (IACHR) that the Government failed to investigate the crime properly to determine
 who ordered the killings. In August unknown assailants shot at the victim's parents,
 but members of the PNC special protection division (who were guarding the couple)
 foiled the attack. The Government had provided police protection to the family, at
 the request of the IACHR, since early in the year. The case remained active at
 year's end.
 There were no further developments in the cases of two FMLN activists murdered
 in Nejapa during the 1997 election campaign. No concrete evidence has surfaced
 that the killings were politically motivated. The cases remained open at year's end.
 In the 1993 murder of FMLN leader Darol Francisco Velis Castellanos, the Gov-
 ernment extradited a former member of the National Police, Carlos Romero Alfaro,
 from the United States in 1996. In January the PNC arrested Jose Ismael Ortiz
 Diaz, who was already under detention for another crime, as an accomplice in the
 murder. In September the Supreme Court admonished the lower court that its han-
 dling of the case constituted a delay of justice and instructed the judge to issue a
 finding as quickly as possible. The case remained active at year's end.
 In July the authorities released on parole Jose Roberto Moreno Canjura, Luis
 Colindres Aleman, and Daniel Canales Ramirez, three of the five former national
 ardsmen convicted in 1984 for the 1980 murder of four American churchwomen,
 ased on the newly implemented sentencing law. The presiding judge denied parole
 to the other two, Carlos Contreras Palacios and Francisco Contreras Recinos, on the
 grounds that ther had failed to demonstrate good behavior during their incarcer-
 ation, as required by the new law. They are to remain in prison to serve their 30-
 year terms, the maximum sentence under law. The families of the slain women and
 the Lawers' Committee on Human Rights renewed charges thaf the killings were
 ordered by superior officers and that the Government had failed to investigate the
 murders to determine and punish the intellectual authors.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no confirmed politically motivated disappearances.
 Most cases of disappearances have been kidnaping for profit, which affects all lev-
 els of society and has become a common occurrence throughout the country. During
 the year, the PDDH accepted for investigation 8 cases involving forced or involun-
 tary disappearance, none of which involved allegations of political motivation.
 Rumors of political motivation surrounded the 1995 kidnaping of Andres Suster,
 the 15-year-old son of the former president of the state telephone company. In 1997
 police arrested a number of persons in connection with the kidnaping. A principal
 suspect in the Suster and other kidnapings, who was associated with the disbanded
 Communist Party, fled the country in 1997. In December a judge ordered five sus-
 pects released from detention due to lack of evidence. The judge also dropped
 charges against four additional suspects and lifted arrest orders against six others.
 At year's end, three suspects remained in jail facing charges.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits such practices, but some members of the PNC continued
 to use excessive force and otherwise mistreat detainees.
 During the year, the PDDH accepted a total of 849 complaints (an average of 71
 per month) of violation of the right of personal integrity (a category covering torture;
 inhuman or degrading treatment; mistreatment; disproportionate use of force; and
 improper treatment of detainees), compared with a total of 1,199 complaints (an av-
 erage of 100 per month) in 1997. The PDDH reported that the vast majority of these
 complaints involved the PNC and were the direct result of minor to serious viola-
 tions of arrest procedures. The year's monthly average represents a decrease of 29
 percent compared with the previous year. The PDDH received a monthly average
 of 87 complaints in this category in the period from June 1997 to May 1998; 108
 from June 1996 to May 1997; and 72 from June 1995 to May 1996. During this pe-
 riod, the PNC grew from 7,100 active members in June 1995 to a little over 17,000
 
 
 618
 by May 1998. From June 1997 to May 1998, the PDDH found human rights viola-
 ons in an average of 9.5 percent of all the complaints it accepted for investigation
 (covering all categories of human rights).
 The PNC Inspector General's office (IG), an entity separate from the PNC, an-
 swers directly to the Minister of Public Security and is charged with overseeing po-
 lice activities and investigating allegations of human rights abuse. The IG inves-
 tigated 96 cases of violation of the right of personal integrity through June, com-
 -pared with 73 cases in the same period in 1997.
 The PDDH received a large number of human rights complaints against the PNC,
 a monthly average of 142 for all categories of human rights violations from January
 through Jurie, indicating continuing problems. The PDDH cited the PNC for an av-
 erage of 190 cases per month d uring its most recent full reporting period, covering
 June 1997 to May 1998; and for 208 cases per month from June 1996 to May 1997.
 Through August the IG's investigations of complaints that it received (72 percent
 initiated by private citizens and 28 percent by individuals or offices within the PNC)
 found sufficient merit in an average of 15 cases a month to remit them to the PNC
 internal affairs offices for further investigation. Most of these complaints-12 per
 month-were in the "serious to very serious" category, compared with 8 per month
 in that category for 1997. The large number of complaints involving the PNC re-
 flected several factors: The PNC's authority to use force in carrying out arrests; its
 inexperience; the difficulty of its work in the face of critical, often violent crime lev-
 els; and a continuing need for training in human rights, the use of force, and correct
 arrest procedures.                    I
 The PNC internal affairs division units (which act on charges brought by the IG,
 the Attorney General's office, and other PNC offices) significantly increased their ef-
 forts to identify and punish improper or illegal police actions. Through August they
 handled a ,monthly average of 178 "grave" and 'very grave" charges against police,
 40 percent more than the 1997 monthly average of 127. Based on these complaints
 through August, the disciplinary tribunal of the PNC dismissed a monthly average
 of 36 PNC agents (compared with the 1997 rate of 13 per month) and sanctioned
 an additional monthly average of 99 agents (compared with 81 per month in, 1997).
 As of August, the authorities held 25 police agents in jail on criminal charges.
 Working together to improve PNC human rights awareness, the PDDH and the
 National Public Security Academy expanded and refined the human rights content
 of the standard curriculum for the academy's police officer basic training rogram.
 In May the Disciplinary Tribunal of thePNC dismissed from the police force four
 PNC agents charged with inflicting burns on detainee Ambrosio Perez in 1997 in
 an effort to obtain information about an alleged- hidden cache of arms. In June the
 Appeals Tribunal of the PNC upheld the decision to dismiss the agents. Prior to the
 decision of the Tribunal, the four agents had been suspended without pay, one for
 a year and the other three for three months.
 There were allegations from children's rights groups that street children suffer
 from police brutality; the PNC denied these charges (see Section 5).
 In October several persons reportediy were injured in a confrontation in San Sal-
 vador between police and approximately 1,000 former militia members demonstrat-
 ing to demand government compensation for some 25,000 former militia members
 for their services before and during the civil war. (Rural militias assisted the armed
 forces in rural areas, but were not members of the armed forces and were not in-
 cluded in the settlement offered to most former combatants under the 1992 peace
 accords.) Informed that the group intended to seize the cathedral, police intercepted
 them as they marched through a park; some marchers resisted police and police
 then used tear gas and rubber bullets to disperse the crowd. Police arrested eight
 persons but subsequently released them. On October 6, the PDDH issued a state-
 ment that criticized the police for overreacting to the demonstrators and the dem-
 onstrators for using women and children as human shields.
 On May 13, Leonardo Mena Marroquin, a communications advisor with the
 FMLN's electoral campaign committee, was wounded during an apparent attempt
 on his life. According to police reports, two gunmen stepped out of a parked car and
 opened fire on Mena as he left his mother's house. Mena fired back and, after a
 short exchange of gunfire, the assailants fled. Although the FMLN discounted a po-
 litical motivation for the attack, the police continued to explore all possible motives.
 Prison conditions remained poor, although the Government improved medical
 care, provided better food, and reduced overcrowding somewhat. As a result of the
 implementation in April of the new sentencing and penal codes, which limit preven-
 tive detention to more serious crimes, the prison population fell 20 percent by the
 end of August. Nevertheless, prisons remained severely overcrowded, with the num-
 ber of prisoners at 28 percent over the designed holding capacity of the penal sys-
 tem. As of September, there were 7,147 men held in 17 prisons with a combined
 
 
 capacity of 5,700 and 398 women in the 2 female prison facilities with a combined
 capacity of 180. In September the Government began construction of a new prison
 facility with capacity for 1,000 inmates. Gang violence, especially in the country's
 three largest and oldest penitentiaries, continued to plague the prison system, de-
 spite government efforts to separate different gangs. Prison authorities reported
 that during the year there were 10 deaths in the prison system due to violence, two
 of which resulted from attempted escapes and one of which occurred during a prison
 riot. The authorities also reported that 16 prisoners died as a result of illness.
 On June 23, approximately 1,000 prisoners in Apanteos prison rioted. Fighting be-
 tween members of rival gangs initiated the disturbances. Three prison guards were
 overpowered and taken hostage when they attempted to restore order, they were re-
 leased unharmed a few hours later. A group of inmates wielding hand-made weap-
 ons climbed onto the penitentiary's roof and demanded better treatment and speed-
 ier review of their cases. The uprising was resolved peacefully later the same day
 following negotiations with inmate representatives by the National Prison Director
 and representatives from the PDDH and the Attorney General's office. The Govern-
 ment agreed to increase visits by sentencing judges to enable more prisoners to be
 informed of the current status of their cases, to improve medical and dental care,
 to extend the time allowed for prisoners to receive food from family and friends, and
 to improve supervision of prison guards accused of mistreatment. The following dad,
 the authorities disarmed the inmates and began to transfer 260 inmates, mosty
 gang members, to other prisons.
 The 1995 Juvenile Offenders Law requires that all juveniles under detention or
 sentencing be housed separately from adults in rehabilitation centers. Most criminal
 cases involving juveniles are brought to trial or conciliation within 3 months. There
 are separate facilities for female detainees and prisoners.
 The Government permits prison visits by independent human rights monitors,
 nongovernmental organizations (NGO's), and the media.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution prohibits arbitrary ar-
 rest, but there were cases of arbitrary arrests and detentions by the PNC.
 During the year, the PDDH accepted a total of 287 complaints (an average of 24
 Ser month) for violations of personal liberty compared with a total of 724 complaints
 an average of 60 per month) in 1997. This year's monthly averge represents a 60
 percent decrease of complaints compared with the previous year. The PDDH accept-
 ed a monthly average of 47 cases in this category for theperiod from June 1997
 to May 1998; 62 from June 1996 to May 1997; and 75 from June 1995 to May 1996.
 PDD H statistics show moderate improvement in PNC respect for personal liberty.
 The courts generally enforced a ruling that interrogation without the presence of
 counsel amounts to coercion, and that any evidence so obtained is inadmissible. As
 a result, police authorities generally delayed questioning until a public defender ar-
 rived. Substantially increased salaries and improved supervision contributed to a
 growing pool of public defenders, greatly increased their ability to represent indigent
 detainees properly, and improved the protection of human rights.
 In November prosecutors charged three PNC investigators with evidence tamper-
 ing in the 1997 murder case of news reader Lorena Savaria (see Section 2.a.). In
 February the police had arrested eight suspects in the murder (including three po-
 lice officers) who reportedly were members of a gang responsible for kidnapings,
 murders, and extortion. However, in September a judge released the suspects and
 dropped all charges against them when a key witness retracted her testimony
 against them, alleging that she had been pressured by three investigating officers
 to give that testimony. The authorities indicted two of the three officers; the third
 remained at large.
 By law, the police may hold a person for 72 hours before delivering the suspect
 to court, after which time the judge may order detention for an additional 72 hours
 to determine if an investigation is warranted. Because of a lack of holding cells,
 such detainees often are sent to the already overcrowded prisons where they may
 be mixed with violent criminals. The law allows 120 days to investigate serious
 crimes and 45 days for lesser offenses, before a judge must bring the accused to trial
 or dismiss the case. In past years, most cases were not completed within the legally
 prescribed time frames. It is still too early to measure the full impact on this situa-
 tion of the fundamental legal reforms contained in the new criminal procedures and
 sentencing codes.
 The 1997 Penitentiary Code permits release on bail for detainees who are unlikely
 to flee or whose release would not impede the investigation of the case. Because it
 may take several years for a case to come to trial, some prisoners have been incar-
 cerated longer than the maximum legal sentence for their crimes. Any detainee may
 request a review (habeas corpus) by the Supreme Court. At the beginning of Sep-
 tember, 5,506 inmates in the prison system were awaiting trial, an improvement
 
 
 over the situation at the end of 1997 when 6,167 inmates were awaiting trial. As
 of April, new court case are handled under the new criminal and sentencing codes,
 which are designed to reduce the court caseload by sending cases to the prosecutor's
 office first and only allowing cases with merit to enter the court system. From May
 through September, the courts accepted a daily average of 20 cases, compared with
 an average of 278 cases per day in 1997. In addition, of those cases accepted since
 the implementation of the new law, about 10 percent were resolved through concilia-
 tion and abbreviated court procedures.
 The new system also is designed to improve court efficiency by removing the time-
 consuming investigative responsibilities from the judge and placing them with the
 police and the prosecutor's office. The number of pre-April backlogged cases was re-
 duced steadily through the efforts of the Supreme Coures case review center, which
 reviews, reopens, and recommends actions on old cases. Through August the center
 helped to resolve an average of 1,767 cases a month, and since its inception in 1996,
 has eliminated over 75,000 backlogged cases.
 The Constitution prohibits forced exile, and it is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, and the Government respects this provision in practice. However, the judici-
 ary suffers from inefficiency, and corruption.
 The court structure has four levels: Justices of the peace, trial courts, appellate
 courts, and the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court selects justices of the peace,
 trial judges, and appellate judges from a list of nominees proposed by the National
 Judicial Council. (The Council is an independent body provided for in the Constitu-
 tion to nominate, train, and evaluate judges.) All lower court judges serve until they
 voluntarily resign or are dismissed for: cause. The Legislative Assembly elects, by
 a two-thirds majority, 5 of the 15 Supreme Court justices and 5 of the 15 alternate
 justices every 3 years from a list provided by the National Judicial Council and the
 National Association of Lawyers. A justice serves for 9 years and may be reelected.
 Judges, not juries, decide most cases. A jury verdict cannot be appealed. However,
 the defendant may appeal the sentence to the Supreme Court for reduction. A jury
 verdict may be overturned by a mistrial determination resulting from serious prob-
 lems with jury panel selection or errors in trial procedures.
 The Government implemented wide-rahging reforms of the criminal justice sys-
 tem, specifically the Criminal Procedures Code (enacted in 1996) and the Penal and
 Penitentiary (Sentencing) Codes (enacted in 1997 and designed to speed up the trial
 process and reduce the number of detainees). Separate court systems for family mat-
 ters and juvenile offenders were established in 1996 and stress conciliation as an
 alternative to adjudication. The 1995 Juvenile Legal Code required minors under
 the age of 18 to be tried only in juvenile courts, included greater provisions for due
 process, raised the age of majority from 16 to 18 years, limited sentences for minors
 to a maximum of 7 years, andintroduced alternatives to incarceration.
 Under the Constitution, defendants have the right to a presumption of innocence,
 protection from self-incrimination, legal counsel, freedom from coercion, and com-
 pensation for damages due to judicial error. They also have the right to be present
 in court. While these rights are not always respected fully in practice, compliance
 with these provisions improved, in part due to increased judicial training programs
 and to evaluations and monitoring of judges conducted by the Judicial National
 Council and the Supreme Court. The Constitution and law require the Government
 to provide legal counsel to the indigent. While this-requirement has not always been
 implemented in- practice, the Government made considerable progress during the
 year toward ensuring provision of legal coverage to indigents. The Public Defender's
 office was strengthened significantly, with the addition of new attorneys and with
 a salary increase for public defenders. At year's end, the Public Defenders' office had
 279 attorneys compared with 113 in 1997, an increase of 147 percent.
 The new Penitentiary (Sentencing) Code implemented in April stresses criminal
 rehabilitation and prevention of future crimes and stipulates the provision of hu-
 mane conditions in prisons as well as the separation of violent offenders and pretrial
 detainees. It also establishes a new institution, the Criminal Sentencing Court, with
 responsibility for executing and monitoring the sentences imposed by the trial
 courts. Previously, the same judge that investigated, judged, and sentenced the ac-
 cused was also responsible for the imposition, monitoring, and suspension of the
 sentence. The new code also provides for alternatives to imprisonment for nonviolent
 offenders, designed. to reduce prison overcrowding. By the end of September, 150
 prisoners received paroles under the new code, which has more liberal requirements
 than its predecessor.
 There are still problems of corruption and incompetence in the judicial system,
 but the Supreme Court stepped up its efforts to discipline judges. While the court
 system steadily improved, the process remains deliberative and slow. Pay and bene-
 
 
 621
 fits for judges, prosecutors, and public defenders increased, and are sufficient to at-
 tract well-qualified individuals. However, despite significant investment in physical
 infrastructure, working conditions remain barely adequate, contributing to ineffi-
 ciency. Training programs improved, but focused on overcoming inadequate univer-
 sity education rather than judicial procedure and advanced professional develop-
 ment. While representing a marked improvement in procedures, the new criminal
 and sentencing codes entail a massive reeducation effort for the judicial sector.
 Impunity for those who are politically, economically, or institutionally well-con-
 nected continued, although there was some progress in addressing this historic prob-
 lem. The continued systemic weaknesses in the criminal justice system contribute
 to this impunity. Such impunity might take the form of a reluctance on the part
 of authorities to pursue aggressively and to conclusion allegations involving acts of
 violence or other major crimes. There is a clear perception among the public that
 those who are well connected, especially the rich and powerful, often have impunity
 with respect to the country's civil and criminal laws. Public suspicion that special
 groups receive special treatment under the law clearly diminishes confidence in the
 justice system, although during the year, the Government investigated prominent
 citizens involved in suspected criminal activity, including current and former gov-
 ernment officials, political leaders (across the political spectrum), diplomats, and
 businesspeople. However, there were no convictions, nor did the authorities make
 serious progress in prosecuting these individuals. The authorities also had little suc-
 cess in addressing general criminal impunity.
 The implementation of the judicial reforms created confusion and uncertainty
 among police, prosecutors, public defenders, and the courts. Inadequate police cov-
 erage (due to limited resources and lack of sufficient personnel) and intimidation
 (especially by gangs) of victims and witnesses made it difficult to identify, arrest,
 and prosecute criminals, diminishing public confidence in the justice system.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution requires the police to have the resident's consent, a warrant, or a rea-
 sonable belief that a crime is under way or is about to be committed, before entering
 a private dwelling. Government authorities generally respected these rights in prac-
 tice.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of the
 press, and the Government respects this right in practice. There are 4 daily news-
 papers, 10 television stations, approximately 150 licensed radio stations, and 2
 major cable television systems. Print and broadcast journalists from all major media
 outlets regularly and freely criticize the Government and report opposition views.
 Opposition figures are interviewed routinely on television and radio. According to
 major media associations, the Government did not use direct or indirect means to
 control the media. There were no instances of censorship of books, other publica-
 tions, films, or plays.
 A provision in the new Criminal Code allows judges to close court proceedings if
 public exposure could prejudice the case. The media and the Inter-American Press
 Association (IAPA) charged that the provision abridged press freedom, and that
 courts were using this authority in cases that did not merit the exclusion of the
 press. Several legislative deputies argued that the misuse of the provision could lead
 to impunity and corruption by limiting the "watchdog" role of the media.
 In August 1997, Lorena Saravia, a news reader employed by a commercial radio
 station, was shot and killed. In 1997 the IAPA listed this case among examples of
 violence directed against the media. There still is no concrete evidence linking the
 murder directly to Saravia's profession and the motives for the murder remained
 unclear. The case remained under investigation at year's end.
 In September a captain in the presidential bodyguard was videotaped striking a
 television reporter who was covering an ad hoc presidential interview. The President
 apologized the following day and instituted an investigation, which resulted in the
 dismissal of the guard captain.
 A former investigative reporter for a major San Salvador newspaper claimed that
 the newspaper fired her after she reported on police involvement in the 1995 beat-
 ing death of medical student Adriano Vilanova (see Section l.a.). She also reported
 receiving threats on her life that led her to flee the country.
 The Constitution provides for academic freedom. The Government respects this
 right in practice, although it was criticized for efforts in 1998 and 1997 to imple-
 ment minimum standards for operating universities.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 peaceful assembly for any lawful purpose, and the Government respects this right
 
 
 622
 in practice. There is no requirement for permits to hold public meetings, and public
 demonstrations are common. Demonstrators clashed with police in San Salvador in
 October (see Section 1.c.).
 The Constitution -provides for freedom of association, and the Government re-
 spects this right in practice. In 1997 the Government implemented a 1996 law that
 charges the Ministry of Interior with registering, regulating, and overseeing the fi-
 nances of NGO's and non-Catholic religious groups in the country. The law specifi-
 cally exempts unions, cooperatives, and the Catholic Church, and the Interior Min-
 ister stated that it would not affect other churches.
 Leaders within the NGO community expressed continuing concerns that the law
 would be used by the Ministry to control certain organizations. Several small, do-
 mestic human rights NGO's have reported that they have not been able to register.
 The law requires the Ministry to respond to applications within 15 days; if the Min-
 istry fails to do so, the law dictates that the NGO receives automatic registration.
 At year's end, the Supreme Court was considering a constitutional challenge to the
 NGO registration law brought by a group of NGO's.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for these rights, and the Government re-
 spects them in practice.
 The law does not include specific provisions for granting refugee or asylee status
 in accordance with the provisions of the 1951 U.N. Convention Relating to the Sta-
 tus of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol; however, the Government has signed and rati-
 fied both instruments.
 The Government cooperates with the office of the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees. The
 issue of the provision of first asylum did not arise in 1998 and has not arisen in
 recent years. There were no reports of the forced return of persons to a country
 where they feared persecution.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides citizens with the right to change their government
 peacefully, and citizens exercise this right in practice through periodic, free, and fair
 elections held on the basis of universal suffrage. The president and vice president
 are elected every 5 years. The Constitution bars the president from election to con-
 secutive terms. Voting is by secret ballot.
 Ten political parties and thousands of candidates, representing the full political
 spectrum, campaigned freely in the 1997 elections for the national Legislative As-
 sembly and all 262 municipal governments. The Government did not restrict opposi-
 tion participation. Observers found that the vote was without major flaws and pro-
 ceeded peacefully with fair access to polls for all. The FMLN-the principal opposi-
 tion party-and its allies won nearly a third of the assembly seats and many of the
 largest municipalities (including-San Salvador, in which an FMLN coalition can-
 didate was elected mayor). The governing ARENA party lost its legislative working
 majority and important-mayoral races. The next two largest opposition legislative
 parties won significant blocs of seats.
 There are no laws or overt practices that prevent women or minorities from voting
 or participating in the political and governmental systems, although both are under-
 represented in political offices. Women represented 50.6 percent of the registered
 voters in the 1997 election, and party campaigns and slates reflected strong atten-
 tion to this vote. Voters elected 14 women to the 84-seat legislature (representing
 about 17 percent of the total seats), an increase from the previous Assembly's 9.
 However, women held fewer positions (2 of 11) on the Assembly's governing board
 than in the previous legislature. One cabinet minister was a woman. The FMLN
 chose-Maria Marta Valladares (known during the war as Nidia Diaz) as its vice
 presidential candidate for the 1999 election. Women served on the Supreme Court,
 as head of the Social Security Institute, and in a substantial number of
 viceministerial and subministerial positions.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government demonstrated a willingness to discuss human rights issues and
 roblems with international, local, and nongovernmental organizations. Numerous
 ocalNGO's operated freely as did various international human rights groups, in-
 cluding migration and other humanitarian and technical assistance groups. Inter-
 
 
 623
 national and domestic NGO's were required to register with the Government under
 the terms of the 1996 NGO registration law (see Section 2.b.).
 The principal human rights investigative and monitoring body is the Ombudsman
 for the Defense of Human Rights, elected by the Assembly for a 4-year term. The
 Peace Accords specifically created the PDDH, which was formally established by a
 constitutional amendment that defined its role. Although the 1998 budget gave the
 PDDH a modest increase in funds, its investigative capacity remained limited due
 to resource constraints. The PDDH has been spread increasingly thin as the organi-
 zation sought to expand its scope of attention, extend its presence throughout the
 country, and meet increased public demand.
 The Assembly's election of a new ombudsman, begun in March, proved to be a
 drawn-out and politically charged process. Several candidates were unable to secure
 the constitutionally required two-thirds majority vote, until judge Eduardo Antonio
 Penate Polanco did so on June 30. However, after the vote and during the 30-day
 confirmation stage, the FMLN, the Social Christian Unity Party, and many in the
 NGO community questioned Penate's selection, citing a lack of experience in the
 human rights field, reports of poor performance as a judge, and charges that defend-
 ants in his court were not afforded the right to a speedy trial. The Supreme Court
 found no substance in these allegations, and the Assembly found no grounds to
 annul the election. The Assembly confirmed Penate on July 30. Penate's first
 months in office were difficult, with controversy over his administration and con-
 tinulng charges from NGO's that he is unqualified.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution states that all persons are equal before the law and prohibits
 discrimination based on nationality, race, sex, or religion. In practice, discrimination
 against women, the disabled, and indigenous people occurs in salaries, in hiring,
 and in access to credit and education.
 Violence against homosexuals was a problem. Between April and July, six trans-
 vestite prostitutes were murdered and at least three other transvestite prostitutes
 were shot in the San Salvador metropolitan area. NGO's, the PDDH, and the Catho-
 lic Church raised concerns that this might be part of a "social cleansing" campaign
 against this group in particular and the gay community in general. Both the PNC
 and the Attorney General's office conducted investigations, which continued at
 year's end. There was no corroborating evidence that the murders represented an
 organized campaign against the gay community.
 Women.-Violence against women, including domestic violence, is a widespread
 and serious problem. Once a taboo social subject, increasingly it is being recognized
 publicly and has become a topic for national debate. Government institutions such
 as the PDDH, the Attorney General's office, the Supreme Court, and the PNC co-
 ordinated efforts with NGO's and other organizations to combat violence against
 women through education, government efforts to increase enforcement of the law,
 and NGO support programs for victims. The National Secretariat for the Family
 maintains a hot line for victims to report domestic abuse. Statistics from the Salva-
 doran Institute for the Development of Women (ISDEMU) show a growing trend of
 reported domestic violence cases (principally against women) over the past few
 years; in 1998, however, the monthly average of cases received from January
 through November was slightly below the monthiy average for calendar year 1997.
 ISDEMU received 3,327 cases of domestic violence from January through November
 of 1998; 3,845 cases in 1997; 2,172 cases in 1996; and 1,753 cases in 1995. The Insti-
 tte of Legal Medicine, using different criteria, recorded a major increase. In 1997
 it reported 791 cases of intrafamily violence directed against women over the age
 of 15, an average of 66 cases per month. From January through November, it re-
 ceived 1047 cases, an average of 95 cases per month.
 Incidents of domestic violence and rape continued to be underreported for several
 reasons: Societal and cultural pressures against the victim; a fear of reprisal; poor
 handling of victims by the authorities; fear of publicity; and the belief that cases
 are unlikely to be resolved. The PDDH noted that hundreds of domestic abuse vic-
 tims who underwent psychotherapy refused to report their cases formally. ISDEMU
 received 290 cases of "sexual aggression" from January through November of 1998
 compared with 479 cases in 1997; 299 cases in 1996; and 258 cases in 1995. The
 Institute of Legal Medicine, using different criteria, recorded a moderate reduction
 in sexual crime. From January through August, it reported 226 cases of sexual
 crime against women over the age of 15, an average of 28 cases a month. In 1997
 it reported 402 cases, a monthly average of 34. Under the new Criminal Procedures
 Code (implemented in April), victim testimony is admissible evidence. The former
 law did not allow victims to testify, and since the rape victim is often the only wit-
 
 
 ness, this resulted in little chance for conviction in rape cases. In 1996 the Assembly
 repealed an old law that exonerated a rapist if he offered to marry the victim and
 she accepted.
 The Constitution grants women and men the same legal rights, but women suffer
 discrimination. The 1994 Family Legal Code amended laws that discriminated
 against women, especially affecting the large number of women in common-law mar-
 riages. The law also established special courts to resolve family disputes. Several
 NGO's are engaged in promoting women's rights and have conducted several rights
 awareness campaigns.
 Women suffered from cultural and societal discrimination resulting in signifi-
 cantly reduced economic opportunities. Priority generally is given to male children
 for schooling, to men for available jobs and promotions, and to sons for inheritances.
 Of the economically active female population, 65 percent worked in the informal
 economy. Women are not accorded equal respect or stature in traditional male-domi-
 nated areas such as agriculture, business, government and politics. While there is
 no definitive evidence available, it is widely believed that women often were paid
 less than men for equal work. The one sector in which there is an exception to this
 practice is in the export processing zones and in-bond assembly plants, the largest
 source of new jobs, where women made up 90 percent of the work force (see Section
 6.b.). However, even in this sector, men hold the great majority of management jobs.
 Training for women generaliy was confined to low-wage occupational areas where
 women already hold most positions, such as teaching, nursing, home industries, and
 small businesses.
 Children.-The Government focus on children's rights and welfare was con-
 centrated more toward reducing poverty and promoting family stability through eco-
 nomic growth than in direct expenditure on children's programs. Considerable pub-
 licity and the personal campaign of the First Lady focused attention on this prob-
 lem. The law requires education through the ninth grade. Although there was
 progress in increasing the availability and quality of schooling throughout the coun-
 try, rural areas still fell short of providinga ninth grade education to all potential
 students. A 1997 study by the Business Foundation for Educational Development
 indicated that 17 percent of urban children and 34 percent of rural youth were not
 attending classes.
 The Government worked closely through state institutions and with the United
 Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) to promote protection and general awareness of
 children's rights. However, children continued to fall victim to physical and sexual
 abuse, abandonment, exploitation, and neglect. The Salvadoran Institute for the
 Protection of Children (ISPM), an autonomous entity, is responsible for protecting
 and promoting children's rights. The ISPM estimated that it averaged 2,600 to 2,700
 children in its shelters, some abandoned and others victims of mistreatment. During
 the year, it received 1304 cases of physical mistreatment, 251 of negligence, and 122
 of abandonment. Using different criteria, the ISDEMU reported a significant in-
 crease in child abuse. ISDEMU recorded 5,933 cases of "abuse of a minor" for Janu-
 ary through November; 4,334 cases for 1997; 596 cases for 1996; and 449 cases for
 1995. The significant increase between 1996 and 1997 reflects increased reporting,
 partly the result of educational efforts by the Government and NGO's.
 A 1997 study by the NGO network Procipotes estimated that 1,000 children (up
 to age 16) were living on their own in the streets, 42 percent of whom were under
 the age of 5. Substance abuse (glue and paint sniffing) was an endemic problem
 among urban street children. In September the Assembly passed a law regulating
 the sale of glue and other substances used as street drugs, prohibiting their sale
 to minors. There are allegations from children's rights advocates that street children
 suffer from police brutality. The PNC denies these charges and has incorporated
 PDDH human rights training for police units that deal with juveniles. The PDDH
 also has called for the creation of drug treatment centers for minors.
 The Institute of Legal Medicine recorded a small increase in reports of sexual
 abuse of children under 15 years of age, with 308 cases for January through July,
 an average of 44 per month. This compared with 494 cases for 1997 (17.2 percent
 with male victims and 82.8 percent female victims), an average of 41 per month.
 The ISPM reported that it received 98 cases of sexual abuse in 1998, an average
 of 8 per month. According to the PDDH, over 85 percent of all abuse occurs in
 schools and at home, and only a small percentage of these cases were reported to
 the authorities.
 The PDDH estimated that 270,000 minors work, mostly as street vendors (see
 Section 6.d.). Besides losing their opportunity for an education, these children often
 fell victim to sexual abuse and were exploited as prostitutes. The.PDDH, NGO's,
 and the media have conducted for 2 years a publicity and investigative campai
 to highlight the plight of children. A November study on child-prostitution by Te
 
 
 Commission on the Family, the Woman and the Child of the U.N. High Commis-
 sioner for Human Rights concluded that child prostitution in the country was pro-
 moted by poverty, lack of a strong nuclear family, discrimination against women,
 and organized crime. A separate NGO study in November on the same issue indi-
 cated that at least 44 percent of the estimated 1,300 prostitutes in 3 major red light
 districts of San Salvador were between the ages of 13 and 18. The NGO report
 pointed to poverty and familial problems as the two major factors pushing children
 and adolescents into prostitution.
 Infant malnutrition continued to be a problem. A 1998 World Food Program study
 found that 12 percent of children under 5 years of age suffered from grave malnutri-
 tion, with an additional 38 percent experiencing less severe malnutrition. The Min-
 istry of Health listed malnutrition as one of the 10 principal causes of infant mortal-
 ity in the country. The Government has a nationalplan for infants designed to in-
 crease access to potable water, iodized salt, and vitamins, and to encourage breast
 feeding, but all of these remain problem areas, especially among the rural poor.
 People With Disabilities.-Except for the war wounded, who have secured both
 government and international funding for rehabilitation and retraining programs,
 the Government has no program to combat discrimination against the disabled.
 There are no laws mandating provision of access to public or private buildings for
 the disabled. The Government has not enforced the 1984 law requiring employers
 with over 50 workers (private companies, state-owned enterprises, and government
 offices) to have "persons with physical limitations" represent a minimum 'of 2 per-
 cent of their work force. Access by the disabled to basic education was limited due
 to lack of facilities and appropriate transportation. There was no provision of state
 services for the physically disabled. Only a few of the Governments community-
 based health promoters have been trained to treat the disabled, and they rarely pro-
 vided such service, tending rather to focus on life-threatening conditions and pre-
 ventive care for mothers and children. The Ministry of Health estimated that some
 form of disability afflicts 10 percent of the population. In 1997 the National Council
 of Disabled People estimated that there were 500,000 persons with disabilities, of
 whom 12,500 had disabilities directly attributable to the civil war. Other factors
 contributing to the large number of disabled persons were lack of prenatal care, mis-
 use of pesticides in food production, malnutrition, auto accidents, and criminal vio-
 lence.
 There were few organizations dedicated to protecting and promoting the rights of
 the disabled. Foreign funds for badly needed rehabilitation services channeled
 through the Telethon Foundation Pro-Rehabilitation, a local private voluntary orga-
 nization, helped address numerous rehabilitation issues and provided alternatives
 for the education and rehabilitation of the disabled population. A semiautonomous
 institute, the Salvadoran Rehabilitation Institute for the Disabled (ISRI), also pro-
 vided assistance to the disabled. The ISRI offered medical treatment, counseling,
 special education programs, and professional training courses. Founded in 1957, the
 ISRI has 10 centers throughout the country and received assistance from the Gov-
 ernment and national and international private and nongovernmental organizations.
 Indigenous People.-El Salvador is an ethnically homogeneous country, although
 a very small segment of the population still claims indigenous status. The Constitu-
 tion makes no specific provisions for the rights of indigenous people.
 Early in the century, facing active repression, most indigenous people adopted
 local customs and successfully assimilated into the general population, from which
 they are generally indistinguishable. There are a few very small communities whose
 members still wear traditional dress and maintain traditional customs to a recogniz-
 able degree without repression or interference. These small indigenous groups exist
 in the poorest parts of the rural countryside where employment opportunities are
 few and domestic violence is a problem. Indigenous people reportedly earned less
 than other agricultural laborers, and indigenous women in particular had little ac-
 cess to educational and work opportunities. As with the poor rural sector in general,
 access to land was a growing problem confronting indigenous people. Few possessed
 titles to land, and bank loans and other forms of credit were extremely limited.
 There are some small, active indigenous associations. The largest and best known
 is the National Association of Indigenous Salvadorans (ANIS). In July a long-run-
 ning internal political fight and land dispute caused a major split in ANIS. One fac-
 tion held a direct election that replaced long-time leader Adrian Esquino Lisco, who
 was accused of corruption and lying. Esquino refused to step down, claiming that
 his leadership position was perpetual. In September the authorities arrested
 Esquino on civil charges of illegally occupying ANIS property after his removal as
 leader and brought a criminal charge of fraud against him regarding his administra-
 tion of ANIS. In November Esquno was exonerated of the criminal charge of fraud.
 In the last few years, Esquino had charged that the Government was targeting the
 
 
 626
 
 indigenous community, and especially its leaders, with legal harassment and
 threats. There has been little evidence to support these allegations, and the new
 ANIS leadership does not endorse them.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution prohibits the Government from
 using nationality, race, sex, creed, or political philosophy as a means to prevent
 workers or employers from organizing themselves into unions or associations. In
 practice, the Government generally has respected this right. However, the Govern-
 ment, as an employer as well as the enforcer of the right of association, failed to
 provide protection or remedy for a number of labor leaders fired in the process of
 privatizing the state-owned telephone company.
 At the end of 1997, the Government began the privatization of the state-owned
 telephone company Antel. Antel was replaced by CTE, a fully state-owned private
 sector company,- which was to act as a legal vehicle for the sale of the telephone
 company. Labor leaders representing employees of the privatized telephone company
 charged that the Government, then the sole owner of CTE, fired 72 labor leaders
 to prevent unionization of the company, and that the Ministry of Labor stalled sub-
 sequent efforts to unionize in order to allow CTE to be auctioned off union-free. The
 final sale took place in July, culminating the privatization process. The initial union
 application, presented on January 2, the first workday after the creation of CTE,
 was not received by the Ministry of Labor until January 5, as the Government was
 officially on holiday. In February the Labor Ministry denied union recognition, stat-
 ing that several of the applicants were not employees of GTE, being part of the
 group of 72 labor leaders fired on January 2 for failure to show up for work (they
 had focused instead full-time on union business). The fired employees took the ac-
 tion to the Labor Court, which ruled that the four labor organizations involved had
 lost their legal status as well as job protection for their labor leaders when Antel
 was dissolved. The court determined that the firings were legal and that the law
 stipulated that oniy current, active employees may form unions. The same group of
 employees made subsequent union applications in March and May, both of which
 were denied based principally on the Labor Ministry's interpretation of an unclear
 section of the Labor Code that requires organizers to wait 6 months before reapply-
 ing for union status after a denial. The union asserted that different names allowed
 for a new, immediate application; the Labor Ministry argued that the entire group
 had to wait 6 months.
 The Government successfully-sold CTE to a foreign firm, and in October the for-
 eign-owned CTE fired 61 employees. Those fired included at least 36 whose names
 had appeared on the union applications submitted earlier in the year, and CTE
 labor leaders claimed that an additional 19 were known union sympathizers or sup-
 porters. Union leaders maintained that CTE fired these workers solely because of
 their efforts to organize, and that this was a continuation of the earlier campaign
 to destroy independent unionism in the company. CTE denied the charges, justifying
 the action as downsizing redundant employees, and the Labor Ministry maintained
 that the action was consistent with the law. Subsequently, the union leaders filed
 formal complaints with CTE, the Ministry of Labor, and the PDDH charging that
 the worker dismissals violated freedom of association and the right to form a labor
 union.
 Military personnel, police, and government workers may not form unions (but are
 allowed professional and employee organizations) and may not strike. The 1994
 Labor Code streamlined the process required to form a union in the private sector,
 extending union rights to agricultural, independent, and small-business workers,
 and extending the right to strike to union federations. The Labor Code prohibits
 partisan political activity by unions. The unions routinely ignored this prohibition,
 ut the Government took no punitive action against them.
 There is a small organized labor sector with approximately 150 active unions,
 public employee associations, and peasant organizations, representing over 300,000
 citizens, approximately 20 percent of the total work force. By law, only private sec-
 tor workers have the right to form unions and strike; some employees of autono-
 mous public agencies may form unions if they do not deal with essential services.
 Public employees may form employee organizations, but are prohibited from strik-
 ing. In fact, some of the most powerful labor groups are public employee associa-
 tions. These public sector labor groups take on the same responsibilities as unions-
 including calling technically illegal strikes and collective bargaining.
 The Government negotiated with public employee associations and generally
 treated strikes as legitimate, although the Labor Code provides for mandatory arbi-
 tration of public sector disputes. However, during a series of strikes by the union
 of social security doctors from January through May, labor courts on three occasions
 
 
 found that the strikes violated the legal bar against work stoppages by government
 workers in essential services. Just prior to a settlement with the union in May, the
 Government fired some doctors and threatened to fire all who participated in the
 most recent illegal strike. However, as part of the settlement, the Government re-
 hired the fired doctors.
 The law prohibits antiunion actions before a union is legally registered and pro-
 vides specific job protection to workers whose names appear on a union application.
 The Labor Code forbids foreigners from holding positions in unions.
 Unions and other labor organizations freely affiliated with international labor or-
 ganizations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Constitution and the
 Labor Code provide for collective bargaining rights, but only to employees in the pri-
 vate sector and to certain categories of workers in autonomous government agencies,
 such as utilities (which were undergoing privatization) and the port authority. How-
 ever, both private sector unions (by law) and public sector employee associations (in
 practice) used collective bargaining.
 The Ministry of Labor oversees implementation of collective bargaining agree-
 ments and acts as a conciliator in labor disputes in the private sector and in autono-
 mous government institutions. In practice, ministers and the heads of autonomous
 government institutions often negotiate with labor organizations directly, relying on
 the Labor Ministry only for such finctions as officially certifying unions. The Min-
 istry often seeks to conciliate labor disputes through informal channels rather than
 attempt to enforce regulations strictly, which has led to charges that the Ministry
 is biased against labor. Corruption continued to affect labor inspectors and courts,
 but improvements in training and an increase in pay in 1997 for Ministry of Labor
 employees have begun to address this problem.
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination against unions. It provides that union
 officials at the time of their election, throughout their term, and for I year following
 their term may not be fired, suspended for disciplinary reasons, removed, or de-
 moted except for legal cause. Employers generally observed this provision in prac-
 tice, but credible reports continued of employers using illegal pressure, including
 dismissal of labor activists, to discourage organizing. For example, union leaders
 charged that the privatized telephone company CTE fired a number of labor leaders
 to prevent unionization (see Section 6.a.). The law requires employers to rehire em-
 ployees fired for any type of union activity, and the Labor Ministry has increased
 efforts to enforce this requirement. In many cases, employees chose to take a cash
 payment in lieu of returning to work.
 There are six export processing zones (EPZ's) and several in-bond plants operating
 outside these zones. The Labor Code applies in the EPZ's; there are no special EPZ
 labor regulations. During the last few years, most EPZ companies and a large por-
 tion of the in-bond plants have accepted the provisions of voluntary codes of conduct
 from their parent corporations or foreign purchasers. These codes included worker
 rights protection clauses. In 1997 the apparel industry association announced imple-
 mentation of an industrywide code of conduct with worker rights protection. The
 great majority of companies in the EPZ's provided much better salaries and working
 conditions than those offered elsewhere in the private sector (see Section 6.e.). How-
 ever, there were credible reports that some factories dismissed union organizers,
 and only one EPZ company was unionized, with two active plant unions. In Novem-
 ber the PDDH released a detailed analysis of the maquila sector (covering both EPZ
 and non-EPZ in-bond plants) that indicated that 20.8 percent of the sector's workers
 "trusted" unions while 55.3 percent "did not trust" umons. Credible accusations per-
 sisted that some factories abused their workers and that some women were not
 hired because they were pregnant. According to the PDDH report on maquilas, 37.7
 percent of the workers surveyed stated that they had been mistreated, 37.7 percent
 had been threatened, 3.2 percent had been hit in some fashion, 3.5 percent had been
 sexually harassed by bosses, and 3 percent had been sexually harassed by other
 workers. Although the Labor Ministry improved its efforts to increase inspection
 and follow up on such complaints, it still had insufficient resources to cover all the
 EPZ's, much less the much larger national private sector.
 Although under 1996 legislation, the Government authorized the Ministry of
 Economy to withdraw free zone privileges from companies that violated labor regu-
 lations, there have been no instances in which this has been threatened publicly.
 There is also a tripartite (government, business, and labor) commission, established
 in 1996, to help resolve conflicts in EPZ and other bonded companies.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor, except in the case of calamity and other instances specified by
 law, and the Government generally enforces this provision. There were credible com-
 plaints of forced overtime in the maquila sector. While not dealing directly with the
 
 
 628
 
 issue, the PDDH report on the maquila sector indicated that 7.8 percent of workers
 in its survey sample were not paid legally required extra pay for working beyond
 the normal 44-hour work week, a strong indication of forced overtime. The survey
 also found that 50.2 percent of maquila workers did not work any overtime and 28.7
 percent averaged 5 hours or less overtime a week (roughly 10 percent of regular
 time). Although not specifically prohibited by law, forced and bonded labor by chil-
 dren are covered by the general prohibition, and there were no reports of its use
 in the formal sector. However, there was strong evidence that minors have been
 forced into prostitution (see Section 5).
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The Con-
 stitution prohibits the employment of children under the age of 14. Minors, age 14
 or older, may receive special Labor Ministry permission to work, but only where
 such employment is absolutely indispensable to the sustenance of the minor and his
 or her family. This is most often the case with children of peasant families who tra-
 ditionally work during planting and harvesting seasons. Those legal workers under
 the age of 18 have special additional rules governing conditions of work (see Section
 6.e.).
 Orphans and children from poor families frequently work for their own or family
 survival as street vendors and general laborers in small businesses, mostly in the
 informal sector. Children in these circumstances often do not complete compulsory
 schooling through the ninth grade (up to the age of 14) as the law requires. In No-
 vember, a joint report of the ISPM and UNICEF, based on nationwide data collected
 in 1996, indicated that ththe 1.8 million children between 5 and 17 years of age,
 roughly 6.6 percent, or 118,800, worked without attending school, and 36,200 of
 these were under the age of 14. An additional 5.8 percent, or 104,400, worked but
 also attended school. Of these, 55,300 were under the age of 14. The primary reason
 for working for over 45 percent of each group was familial economic survival. How-
 ever, the average income for child workers was less than half of the minimum wage
 and represented 18.7 percent of average family income. The second most important
 reason for working for 10 "percent of the non-student child workers and nearly 34
 percent of the child workers attending school was to learn a trade. Child labor is
 not found in the industrial sector and has disappeared in the EPZ's. The PDDH re-
 port on the maquila industry as a whole (both EPZ and non-BPZ companies) found
 no workers under the age of 17 and only one-half of one percent who were 17 (a
 legal working age, with some restrictions).
 The Ministry of Labor is res4ponsible for enforcing child labor laws and made an
 effort to do so. However, scarce resources and the difficulty of monitoring the large
 informal sector limited its effectiveness outside the urban formal sector. In 1997 the
 Government helped establish the National Committee for the Eradication of Child
 Labor (CNETI). The cNETI is a coordinating body with government, NGO, and pri-
 vate sector (labor and business) representatives that works to combat child labor.
 During the year, it began coordinating some educational programs and projects in
 this area. The Labor Code does not specifically prohibit forced and bonded labor of
 children, but they are covered by its general prohibition; there were reports that mi-
 nors were forced into prostitution.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The minimum wage is set by a tripartite (gov-
 ernment, labor, business) committee. Effective May 1, the minimum daily wage was
 $4.81 (42.00 colones) for commercial, industrial, and service employees; $3.57 (31.20
 colones) plus food allowance for coffee plantation workers; $2.61 (22.80 colones) plus
 food allowance for sugar and cotton plantation workers; and $2.47 (21.60 colones)
 plus food allowance for all other agroindustial workers. By law, a full-time mini-
 mum wage employee is paid a full 7 days (56 hours) for the 44-hour normal work-
 week and receives an average of 1 month's wage a year in required bonuses plus
 2 weeks of paid vacation. There were continuing allegations that the maquila sector
 underpaid workers. The PDDH report on aqilas found that 42.3 percent of the
 maquila workers surveyed received the minimum wage, 25.1 percent earned an
 amount moderately above the minimum wage, and 10 percent earned significantly
 more than the minimum wage. Of the 21.3 percent of the workers earning less than
 the minimum  wage, many were apprentices or workers in training, and under the
 law were not guaranteed the minimum wage. The minimum wage with benefits does
 not provide a decent standard of living for a worker and family. The Labor Ministry
 is responsible for enforcing minimum wage laws and does so effectively in the for-
 meal sector.
 The law limits the workday to 6 hours for youths between 14 and 18 years of age
 and 8 hours for adults, and it mandates premium pay for longer hours. The Labor
 Code sets a maximum normal workweek of 36 hours for youths and 44 hours for
 adults. It requires bonus pay for overtime and limits the workweek to no more than
 6 days for all workers.
 
 
 629
 
 The Constitution and the Labor Code require employers, including the Govern-
 ment, to take steps to ensure that employees are not placed at risk in their work-
 places. These laws prohibit the employment of persons under 18 years of age, and
 of all women, in occupations considered hazardous. Nevertheless, health an safety
 regulations are outdated, and enforcement, while improved, is inadequate. The Min-
 istry of Labor attempts to enforce the applicable regulations and has devoted re-
 sources to improving the professional training of its staff and inspectors. Increas-
 ingly, its investigations lead to-fines or other findings favoring workers. The Min-
 istry has restricted powers and only limited, but growing, resources to enforce com-
 pliance. The maquila sector continues to be subject to charges that it maintains
 .sweatshop" conditions in its factories. The PDDH study found that 70 to 80 percent
 of the workers surveyed were satisfied with bathrooms, drinking water, and eating
 facilities but that only 53 percent were satisfied with the ventilation, i.e., they indi-
 cated problems with dust and heat. Despite overall good grades for the sector, the
 report still found that some 20 to 25 percent of workers had inadequate or no bath-
 rooms, drinking water, or eating facilities and 47 percent were dissatisfied with ven-
 tilation. The serious problems with working conditions that exist were concentrated
 in smaller, non-EPZ plants. In general, the larger plants (which employ the majority
 of maquila workers) have adequate to excellent working conditions. Some of the
 largest companies have dust control, air conditioning, on-plant medical facilities,
 and enforced safety regimes.
 Workers can remove themselves from dangerous work situations without jeopard-
 izing their employment only in situations where they can p resent a medical certifi-
 cat issued by a doctor or the social security institute indicating that their health
 is at risk while using certain equipment or substances.
