 EL SALVADOR
 El Salvador is a constitutional, multiparty democracy with an executive branch
 headed by a president and a unicameral legislature. Armando Calderon Sol of the
 Nationalist Republican Alliance Party (ARENA) was inaugurated President for a 5-
 year term in June 1994. In free and fair legislative elections in March, the former
 guerrilla organization Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front (FMLN) won a
 third of the Legislative Assembly seats, leaving the ARENA party with a one-vote
 plurality. Seven other parties also hold seats, including the conservative National
 Conciliation Party (PCN) and the centrist Christian Democratic Party (PDC). The
 Constitution provides for a separate, politically appointed, independent judiciary.
 Since the Peace Accords ended the 12-year civil war in 1992, the Government has
 reduced the armed forces (including civilian employees) by 70 percent; redefined the
 role of the military, placing it under civilian control; created a new Civilian National
 Police (PNC); and integrated the former guerrillas into political life. Although its in-
 ternal policing mission has been eliminated, the military continues to provide sup-
 port for some PNC patrols in rural areas, a measure begun in 1995 to contain vio-
 lence by well-armed criminal bands. The professionalism of the PNC generally im-
 proved, but the 4-year-old force continues to be understaffed, only minimally
 trained, and short on practical experience. Members of the police committed human
 rights abuses.
 El Salvador has a market-based, mixed economy largely based upon agriculture
 and light manufacturing. Some 40 percent of the workforce is in the agricultural
 
 
 513
 sector, coffee and sugar are the principal export crops and major sources of foreign
 exchange. The growing light manufacturing sector (export processing zones) is domi-
 nated by apparel manufacturing and represents the main source of new jobs. The
 Government is committed to privatization and free market reforms. The economy is
 open, and private property is respected. The rate of real economic growth was about
 4 percent, and per capita gross domestic product was estimated to be $1,930. About
 52 percent of the population lives below the poverty level.
 The Government's human rights record improved somewhat; however, there were
 problems in some areas. In one new case, two police agents face charges of
 extraudicial killings. The police sometimes use excessive force and mistreat, arbi-
 trarily arrest and detain persons, although the PNC sought to identify and to pun-
 ish those within its ranks who committed criminal acts or violated established pro-
 cedures. Prison conditions remained poor and overcrowding worsened. The judi-
 ciary's inefficiency resulted in lengthy pretrial detention and long delays in trials.
 The Supreme Court made some progress in cleaning up the judiciary but did not
 move quickly to discipline or dismiss corrupt or incompetent judges. Impunity for
 the ric  an  powerful remained a problem; however, the Government took action
 to investigate, prosecute, and, in some cases, jail prominent citizens for crimes. Dis-
 crimination against women, the disabled, and indigenous people, violence against
 women and abuse of children are also problems.
 The United Nations General Assembly eliminated the position of Special Rep-
 resentative of the Secretary General, resident in El Salvador, reducing the U.N.'s
 on-site monitoring role in recognition of the progress made in implementation of the
 Peace Accords. The Human Rights Ombudsman, a position created by the Peace Ac-
 cords and the Constitution, continued to speak out on controversial issues. However,
 the investigative capacity of her agency, the office of the Counsel for the Defense
 of Human Rights (PDDH), remained limited and was hindered further by a shrink-
 ing budget.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extra judicial Killing.-There were no confirmed political
 killings. The FMLN charged that the February murder of two of its activists in
 Nejapa during the election campaign was politically motivated. In contrast, police
 authorities linked the killings to a criminal gang known to be operating in the area.
 The case remained under investigation at year's end.
 In October 1996, a PNC agent shot and killed Francisco Manzanares in what the
 police said was an investigation of an extortion case. Although not active in politics
 at the time of his death, Manzanares' past as an FMLN combatant and party mem-
 ber raised the issue of political killing. PNC agent Guillermo Linares was originally
 held for wrongful death, but in October, the court charged PNC agent Jose Santo
 Arevalo with the shooting. At that time, three PNC agents, including Linares, were
 charged as accessories to the crime. The judge stated that the killing could have
 been a premeditated act and noted that the PNC had persecuted Manzanares prior
 to his murder. At year's end, the four police officers were detained, and the case
 was under active investigation in preparation for trial.
 The authorities in June charged two PNC officers with the Maich 1996
 extrajudicial killings of four gang members in Santa Ana. Witnesses reported that
 the police apprehended the four persons for robbing spectators at a morning sport-
 ing event and placed them in a PNC vehicle. The four were found 3 hours later,
 murdered; the bedies were dumped at a local farm. On December 2, a Santa Ana
 court found that there was insufficient evidence to tie the PNC agents to the mur-
 ders, dropped the charges, and released the two policemen. The Attorney General's
 office has the option to appeal this decision to a higher court.
 There was mixed progress in cases from previous years. In April a court exoner-
 ated and released the last three suspects in the "Sombra Negra case. The Sombra
 Negra was a vigilante group that operated in San Miguel in 1994; it allegedly killed
 20 people it claimed were criminals. Four of the nine original suspects arrested in
 July 1995 were police officers.
 In February a court found two PNC agents guilty of killing four people in San
 Pedro Masahuat, Zacatecluca in March 1996, and found six other police guilty of
 complicity in the murders. The two murderers were sentenced to the maximum 30-
 year prison term, five other police officers received 12-year terms, and one a term
 of 10 years. In July an appeals court confirmed the guilty verdicts and sentences,
 and in October the Supreme Court refused to review the cases. In a related case,
 the authorities brought charges against two PNC officers for allowing six of the
 eight guilty police to escape detention in February.
 
 
 In February the authorities brought charges against seven police officers and ar-
 rested six of them for the December 1995 murder of medical student Adriano
 Vilanova (the seventh suspect was still at large at year's end). It took an investiga-
 tion by the PDDH, a series of investigative reporting articles, and a full reexamina-
 tion of the case by the Attorney General's office to reopen the case. At year's end,
 the six police were in custody, and their trial was under way.
 In April a court found PNC officer Tomas Coronado Valdes guilty of manslaughter
 and sentenced him to 1 year in prison for killing a demonstrator with a rubber bul-
 let in November 1995. It later suspended his sentence, placed him on 2 years' proba-
 tion, and ordered him to pay the victim's family an indemnification of $2,860 (25,000
 colones). Coronado was dismissed from the PNC and is not allowed to hold public
 office or work for a government institution.
 Following a high speed chase in January 1996, police shot and killed 16-year-old
 William Antonio Gaytan, a passenger in a stolen car. Based on testimony by one
 of the other persons in the stolen car, in January the PNC arrested police agents
 Miguel Palacios Contreras and Narcisco Escamilla Acosta and charged them with
 involuntary manslaughter. In September the authorities raised the charges to inten-
 tional homicide when they concluded that these police officers had continued firing
 after the car chase ended and that the youths in the stolen vehicle never fired at
 the pursuing police. In December a court found Escamilla guilty and sentenced him
 to 11 years in prison. It found Contreras not guilty, and he was released.
 Although a court found Jose Argueta Rivas guilty in October 1996 and sentenced
 him to 30 years in prison for the 1994 murder of Ramon Garcia Prieto, the Garcia
 Prieto family has charged before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights
 that the Government failed to investigate properly the crime to determine the intel-
 lectual authors. The Government stated that it is continuing the investigation into
 the murder.
 In the 1993 murder of FMLN leader Darol Francisco Velis Castellanos, the Gov-
 ernment extradited a former police detective, Carlos Romero Alfaro, from the United
 States in March 1996. Following this extradition, the PNC arrested another former
 police agent in connection with the murder and was investigating two other suspects
 at year's end. In May the Attorney General sought preventive arrest decrees for
 these two suspects. The case remained active at year's end.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no confirmed politically motivated disappearances.
 From January to July, of the 3,179 cases the PDDH accepted for investigation,
 there were 8 cases involving forced or involuntary disappearances, none of which in-
 volved serious allegations of political motivation. Kidnaping for profit affects all lev-
 els of society and has become a common occurrence throughout the country.
 There were allegations of political motivation behind several high-profile
 kidnapings, including one of a U.S. citizen, which took place in the early 1990 s. Ru-
 mors of political motivation surrounded the 1995 kidnaping of Andres Suster, the
 15-year-old son of the former president of the state telephone company (ANTEL)
 and close associate of former President Alfredo Cristiani. Suster was kidnaped in
 September 1995 and released 1 year later. In July police arrested several people in
 connection with the Suster kidnaping. In addition, one individual associated with
 the disbanded Communist Party has been jailed, and an important leader of the
 Communist Party fled the country, both in connection to the Suster and other
 kidnapings. At year's end, the Suster case remained active and police were continu-
 ing to investigate links between it and other kidnapings.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits such practices, but the PNC continued to be charged
 with the use of excessive force and other mistreatment of detainees. In late Decem-
 ber, the PDDH charged two PNC officers with burning detainee Ambrosio Perez
 over 30 percent of his body, during a January confrontation in a land dispute at
 the El Espino plantation on the outskirts of San Salvador, in an effort to obtain in-
 formation on the location of an alleged hidden cache of arms.
 In the first 9 months of 1997, the PDDH accepted 993 (a monthly average of 110)
 complaints of violation of the right of personal integrity (a category covering torture;
 inhuman or degrading treatment; mistreatment; disproportionate use of force; and
 improper treatment of detainees). The PDDH received a total of 1,295 such com-
 plaints (or 108 per month) from June 1996 through May 1997; and 861 (or 72 per
 month) from June 1995 through May 1996. The PDDH reported that the vast major-
 ity of these complaints were directed against the PNC and resulted from improper
 arrest procedures. During this period, the PDDH determined that an average of 12.4
 percent of the complaints it accepted in 1997 (for all human rights categories) were
 actual violations of rights.
 The PNC Inspector General's office (IG, an entity separate from the PNC, which
 answers directly to the Minister of Public Security) investigated 73 cases of violation
 
 
 515
 of the right of personal integrity through June, compared with 44 cases for the last
 8 months of 1996.
 The PNC continued to be the subject of more complaints of human rights viola-
 tions received by the PDDH than any other government institution. Covering all
 human rights (affecting 16 major PDDH categories ranging from due process and
 personal integrity to property and personal documents rights to the right to a clean
 environment and personal health), for the first 9 months of 1997, out of a total of
 3,987 complaints accepted by the PDDH, 1,894 pertained to the PNC, or 47.5 per-
 cent of the total. By comparison, 2,503 (51.2 percent) of the 4,882 complaints reg-
 istered by the PDDH for its June 1996 through May 1997 reporting period involved
 the PNC, as did 57.3 percent of the complaints in the June 1995 through May 1996
 reporting period. The PDDH also received human rights complaints involving other
 go vernment offices, including the Ministry of Education, the courts, the Mimistry of
 Helth, the Ministry of Labor, and local governments.
 The I Gal so noted an increase in complaints against the PNC.
 In the first 6 months, the IG investigated 229 cases, compared with 208 cases for
 the last 8 months of 1996. The concentration of complaints involving the PNC re-
 flected several factors: The PNC's authority to use force in carrying out arrests; its
 inexperience (the 1992 Peace Accords created the PNC as a replacement for the old,
 discredited security forces, and the first PNC deployment occurred in March 1993);
 the difficulty of its work in the face of critical, often violent crime levels; and a con-
 tinuing need for training in human rights. From January through September, the
 PNC internal affairs division processed 925 complaints against police for adminis-
 trative violations (such as drinking on duty, improper use of police equipment and
 vehicles, stealing from police funds, etc.) and criminal abuses. The division found
 police at fault in 368 cases and administratively disciplined (with temporary suspen-
 sion or frees) 212 police officers for violation of PNC regulations; fired agents in 92
 cases for serious violations or minor criminal abuses; and jailed 64 agents for seri-
 ous criminal acts.
 Working together to improve PNC human rights training, the PDDH and the Na-
 tional Public Security Academy incorporated additional human rights courses into
 the curriculum for the academy's police officer training program.
 Despite the volume of human rights complaints, public opinion polls gave the
 PNC relatively high marks amidst general dissatisfaction with government institu-
 tions as a whole. The IG conducted a nationwide poll in March in which 63 percent
 of the respondents gave the PNC good to excellent marks for its respect of human
 rights, and 68 percent gave good to excellent marks for the PNC's everyday treat-
 ment of citizens. A July poll taken by the Catholic University found that 40 percent
 of respondents had "some" or "a lot" of confidence in the PNC.
 In the only terrorism-related case, in June a court found innocent three university
 students arrested in June 1996 in connection with two bombings in April and May
 1996. No one was injured in either incident, and the motives remain unclear. Four
 students allegedly belonging to a left-wing terrorist group had been arrested ini-
 tially; one of the four was released soon after the arrest due to lack of evidence.
 Prison conditions remained poor, and overcrowding in prisons worsened. High
 crime rates, the increased number of arrests, and a slow judicial process kept the
 flow of new prisoners higher than the release rates. The prisons are filled with vio-
 lent inmates, and guards exercise little control. Responding to a highly critical 1996
 report on prisons by the PDDH, the Government sought to improve prison condi-
 tions through efforts to provide better food, medical care, and rehabilitation facilities
 in the prison system. Prison authorities report that from January to September
 there were 6 violent deaths in the prison system, compared with 24 violent deaths
 in all of 1996.
 Both female and juvenile prisoners have separate facilities. The new Juvenile
 Code expands the use of halfway houses and other nonpenal facilities for minors.
 The Government permits prison visits by independent human rights monitors,
 representatives of nongovernmental organizations (NGO's), and the media.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution prohibits arbitrary ar-
 rest, but there were cases of arbitrary arrests and detentions by the PNC.
 During the first 9 months of 1997, the PDDH accepted a total of 583 cases (or
 an average of 65 per month) for violations of personal liberty. Of these complaints,
 76 percent were lodged against the PNC for alleged arbitrary arrest and 20 percent
 against the PNC for alleged improper arrest procedures. In comparison, the PDDH
 accepted 745 cases (62 per month) in this same category from June 1996 to May
 1997 and 901 (75 per month) for the same period in 1995-96. The IG investigated
 48 cases of violation of personal liberty and due process from January to June. The
 courts generally enforced a ruling that interrogation without the presence of a pub-
 lic defender amounts to coercion, and that any evidence so obtained is inadmissible.
 
 
 516
 As a result, police authorities generally delayed questioning until a public defender
 arrived. Low salaries and insufficient supervision contribute to poor handling of
 public defender caseloads.
 By law, the police may hold a person for 72 hours before delivering the suspect
 to court, after which time the judge may order detention for an additional 72 hours
 to determine if an investigation is warranted. Because of a lack of holding cells,
 such detainees are often sent to the already overcrowded prisons where they may
 be mixed with violent criminals. The law allows 120 days to investigate serious
 crimes and 45 days for lesser offenses before a judge must bring the accused to trial
 or dismiss the case. Few cases, however, are comp eted within the legally prescribed
 time periods.
 The law permitted the release of detainees on bail only for crimes where the maxi-
 mum penalty was under 3 years. Many crimes, including homicide, manslaughter,
 rape, and crimes against property, carry penalties in excess of 3 years, thereby pre-
 cluding release pending trial. The new Penitentiary Code,'"passed in April, permits
 bail for crimes with a minimum penalty of over 3 years, if the suspect is unlikely
 to flee or his release would not impede the investigation. This law, set to take effect
 in 1998, is expected to reduce pretrial detention.
 Because it may take several years for a case to come to trial, some prisoners have
 been incarcerated longer than the maximum legal sentence for their crimes. Any de-
 tainee may request a review (habeas corpus) by the Supreme Court, but the Court
 denies the overwhelming majority of such requests. At the beginning of December
 74 percent of all inmates were awaiting trial or sentencing. The University of E1
 Salvador and the Public Defender's office continued a program to investigate the
 cases of 500 to 600 prisoners who did not have effective representation. The pro-
 gram helped to move these cases forward and, where appropriate, to seek habeas
 corpus,which resulted in a large number of prisoners being released.
 The Constitution prohibits compulsory exile, and it is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public TriaL-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, and the Government respects this prvision in practice.
 The court structure has four levels: justices of the peace, trial courts, appellate
 courts, and the Supreme Court.
 Judges, not juries, decide most cases. A jury verdict cannot be overruled by a
 judge nor appealed by the defendant; however, defendants may appeal the sentence
 to the Supreme Court. The new Criminal Procedures Code (to take effect in 1998)
 provides for full appeal of jury verdicts if there is evidence of corruption or vested
 interest by members of the jury.
 In fulfillment of commitments under the Peace Accords, the Assembly continued
 to enact wide-ranging reforms of the criminal justice system. Following the Criminal
 Procedures Code passed in December 1996, the Assembly passed the Penal Code
 and Peentiary (Sentencing) Code in April. Both codes are expected to speed up
 the trial process and reduce the number of detainees; these measures were ached-
 uled to enter into effect in 1998. There are two new court systems, for family and
 for juvenile offenders. Both systems stress conciliation as an alternative to adjudica-
 tion. The Juvenile Legal Code, which went into effect in March 1995, included great-
 er prvisions for due process, raised the age of majority from 16 to 18 years, limited
 sentences to a maximum of 7 years, and introduced alternatives to incarceration.
 The new Juvenile Code continues to suffer from the weaknesses of the institutions
 involved in its execution.
 Under the Constitution, defendants have the right to a presumption of innocence,
 protection from self-incrimination, legal counsel, freedom from coercion, and com-
 pensation for damages due to judicialerrr. They also have te eright to be present
 in court. While defendants often are not assured of these rights, compliance with
 these prvisions improved, in part due to judicial training programs and to evalua-
 tions of judges conducted by the National Council of the Judiciary (an independent
 body provided for in the Constitution to nominate, train, and evaluate judges) and
 the Supreme Court. Although legal counsel is supposed to be available at govern-
 ment expense for the indigent, there were too few public defenders to make this a
 reality.
 The new Penitentiary (Sentencing) Code, called for in the Truth Commission re-
 port, lays the foundation for extensive reform in the penitentiary system and adopts
 an approach stressing rehabilitation of the criminal and prevention of future crimes,
 rather than retribution, and stipulates the provision of humane conditions in the
 prisons as well as the separation of violent offenders and pretrial detainees. It also
 establishes a new institution, the Criminal Sentencing Court, with responsibility for
 executing and monitoring the sentences imposed bythe trial courts. Heretofore, the
 same judge that investigaten judged, and sentenced the accused was also respon-
 sible or the imposition, monitoring, and suspension of the sentence. The new code
 
 
 517
 also provides for alternatives to imprisonment for nonviolent offenders, which is ex-
 pected to reduce prison overcrowding.
 Problems of corruption and incompetence in the judicial system remain. The Su-
 preme Court disciplined judges for corruption, but it moved slowly. Judicial salaries
 are high enough to attract qualified judges, but salaries are still considered insuffi-
 cient to attract competent prosecutors or public defenders. Training programs are
 insufficient to compensate for inadequate university training, low pay, and poor su-
 pervision. This deficiency is expectedtobe further complicated by the implementa-
 tion of the new judicial codes. While they represent a marked improvement, the new
 codes also enti a massive reeducation effort forprofessionals in the judicial sector.
 The general public does not place much confidence in the judicial system, with
 over 70 percent of those polled saying that they had little or no confidence in it.
 Fifty-six percent of the respondents in a July Catholic University poll stated that
 they had little or no confidence in the Supreme Court.
 Impunity, especially of the politically, econbmicay,              ly well-con-
 nected, remained a problem. The systemic weaknesses in the criminal justice system
 contribute to this impunity. Such impunity might take the form of a reluctance on
 the part of authorities to pursue aggressively allegations involving acts of violence
 or other major crimes. There is a clear perception among the public that those who
 are well-connected, especially the rich and powerful, often have impunity with re-
 spect to the country's civil and criminal laws. Public suspicion that special groups
 receive special treatment under the law clearly diminishes confidence in the justice
 system. However, the Government took action during the year to prosecute and jail
 prominent citizens involved in financial scandals and theft, which represented a
 step forward in combating impunity and altering the public's perception.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Accord.
 ing to the Constitution, the police must have the resident's consent, a warrant, or
 a reasonable belief that a crime is under way or is about to be committed, before
 entering a private dwelling. Government authorities generally respected these
 rights.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of the
 press, and the Government respects this right in practice. There are 4 daily news-
 papers, 10 television stations, a proximately 100 licensed radio stations, and 2
 major cable television systems. Print and broadcast journalists regularly criticize
 the Government and report opposition views. Opposition figures are regularly inter-
 viewed on television and radio. According to major media associations, the  overn-
 ment did not use direct or indirect means to control the media.
 The new Assembly abrogated the 1996 telecommunications law, approved a re-
 vised law in August, and made final amendments to the new law in October. How-
 ever, the issue of providing free or low cost frequencies to "community radio" sta-
 tions was not resolved. The Supreme Court ruled that the Government had acted
 improperly in 1995 when it confiscated the equipment of 11 unlicensed, low-powered
 stations, operating in small rural communities, temporarily closing them down. The
 Court ordered the return of the equipment and overturned a fine, but found that
 the stations must get permits before broadcasting. Ten stations are broadcasting
 again, all without licenses. In practice, it takes years to get licenses, and the sta-
 tions argue that they cannot afford them.The inral law maintained the existing sep-
 aration bandwith (the broadcast spectrum is already over subscribed) and gave no
 special status to the community stations (requiring them to seek commercial li-
 censes to broadcast). The community stations and several NGO's charged that this
 law supported a monopolization of the airwaves and effectively violated the right of
 free expression.
 On August 25, Lorena Saravia, a news reader employed by a commercial radio
 station, was shot and killed. The PNC reacted quickly, mounting a major investiga-
 tion, which was still under way at year's end. Although the Inter-American Press
 Society cited this murder as an example of violence directed against the media,
 there was no indication that the murder had any direct connection to Saravia's pro-
 fession or that it had any relationship to the media.
 In July police using nightsticks struck media reporters covering a major financial
 scandal, There were no serious injuries. The chief of police apologized the following
 day and instituted an internal investigation. The President recognized publicly that
 the police had overreacted. After meeting with the El Salvador Association of Re-
 porters, the PNC formally and publicly promised that such action would not be re-
 peated.
 
 
 518
 The Constitution provides for academic freedom, and the Government respects
 thisright i n practice.
 b. Fredom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 peaceful assembly for any lawful purpose, and the Government respects this right
 in practice. There is no requirement for permits to hold public meetings, and public
 demonstrations are common.
 The Constitution provides for freedom of association, and the Government re-
 spects this right in practice. The Ministry of Interior began implementing the 1996
 law that gives it the authority to register, regulate, and financially oversee domestic
 and international NGO's and non- atholic religious groups working in the country.
 The law exempts organizations such as unions, cooperatives, and the Catholic
 Church, and the Interior Minister stated it will not affect other churches.
 Some leaders of the NGO community complained that the Ministry had not yet
 published implementing regulations defining procedures for reviewing applications.
 These NGO's also complained that the Government did not fulfill its promise of an
 "open dialogue" prior to the implementation of the law. Although the law went into
 effect December 1996, the Ministry of Interior extended the deadline for NGO reg-
 istration to the end of September and made efforts to allow all operating NGO's to
 present their documents. The law requires the Ministry to respond to applications
 within 15 days; if the Ministry fails to do so, the NGO receives automatic registra-
 tion. In June some 200 NGO's presented a constitutional challenge to the law ased
 on the right of free assembly. The Supreme Court accepted the challenge for consid-
 eration in September, but at year's end had not issued a judgment.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 In August the Ministry of Interior denied temporary resident status for some 100
 Japanese members of the Sun Myung Moon church. The Ministry determined that
 the members had violated their status as tourists by actively proselytizing. How-
 ever, none of the group were punished, and, while requiring the group to leave, the
 Government allowed the same members to reenter the country as tourists, but not
 for religious purposes. The Government noted that under the law, visitors must seek
 immigrant status in order to _practice religious proselytism.
 dFreedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for these rights, and the Government re-
 spects them in practice.
 The Government cooperates with the office of the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees. The
 issue of the provision of first asylum did not arise in 1997 and has not arisen in
 recent years. There were no reports of forced return of persons to a country where
 they feared persecution.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides citizens with the right to change their government
 peacefully, and citizens exercise this right in practice through periodic, free, and fair
 elections held on the basis of universal suffrage. The President and Vice President
 are elected every 5 years; legislative and municipal officials are elected every 3
 years. The Constitution bars the President from election to consecutive terms. Vot-
 in  s by secret ballot.
 In March there were elections for all 84 national Legislative Assembly seats and
 all 262 municipal governments. Ten political parties and thousands of candidates,
 representing the full political spectrum, campaigned freely. The Government did not
 restrict oppsitionparticipation. The voting procedure was without major flaws and
 prceeded peacefully with fair access to polls for all voters. The election resulted in
 significant gains for the FMLN (the principal opposition party) in the legislature
 and victories in many of the largest municipalities (including San Salvador, in
 which a FMLN coalition candidate was elected mayor). The governing ARENA party
 lost its legislative working majority and important mayoral races. The next two
 largest opposition legislative parties won a significant bloc of seats, leading to a true
 multiparty Assembly.
 There are no laws or overt practices that prevent women or minorities from voting
 or participating in the political and governmental systems. Women represented 50.6
 percent of the registered voters for the March election, and party campaigns and
 slates reflected a strong attention to this vote. Voters elected 14 women to the legis-
 lature (representing about 17 percent of the total seats), an increase from the pre-
 vious Assembly's 9. However, women held fewer positions on the Assembly's govern-
 ing board than in the previous legislature. One cabinet minister was a woman, a
 woman served as the Governments highly visible Human Rights Ombudsman, and
 
 
 a woman was the President's cabinet-level adviser for modernization. Women served
 on the Supreme Court, as head of the Social Security Institute, and in a substantial
 number of subministerial positions.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government demonstrated a willingness to discuss human rights issues and
 roblems with international, local, and nongovernmental organizations. Numerous
 ocal NGO's operated freely as did various international human rights groups, in-
 cluding migration and other humanitarian and technical assistance groups. Inter-
 national and domestic NGO's were required to regster with the Government under
 the terms of the 1996 NGO Registration Law (see Section 2.b.).
 The Peace Accords specifically created the PDDH, which was formally established
 by a cnstitutioInal amendment that defined its role. The PDDH's investigative ca-
 pacity remains limited due to resource constraints. Moreover, the PDDH is spread
 increasingly thin as the organization sought to expand its scope of attention, extend
 its presence throughout the country, and meet increased public demand. In Decem-
 ber 1996, the Assembly reduced the PDDH's budget allocation by 10 percent, but
 the Ombudsman and the PDDH continued to be active on all human rights issues.
 In July a University of Central America poll indicated that the PDDH retained the
 highest level of public trust of any governent institution, with 55 percent of the
 public reporting confidence in the PDDH.
 In November Human Rights Ombudsman Victoria de Aviles revealed that she had
 received death threats through her private cellular telephone. Police Chief Rodrigo
 Avila promised to enhance existing police protection and begin an investigation to
 find out who was making the calls.
 In December 1996, the U.N. General Assembly eliminated the position of Special
 Representative of the Secretary General resident in El Salvador and further reduced
 the U.N.'s presence to a small support unit. In late July, the General Assembly
 closed this support unit, while confirming that the U.N.'s verification responsibilities
 would be carred out from its headquarters. These resolutions reflected international
 acknowledgment of the continued progress in implementing the Peace Accords. The
 U.N. Development Program office continued assistance programs with the police,
 the judiciary, and the PDDH.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution states that all people are equal before the law and prohibits dis-
 crimination based on nationality, race, sex, or religion. In practice, discrimination
 against women, indigenous people, and the disabled occurs in salaries, in hiring,
 and in access to credit and education.
 Women.-Violence against women, including domestic violence, is a widespread
 and serious problem. One a taboo social subec, it is being inreasingly recognized
 publicly and has become a topic for national debate. Government institutions such
 as the PDDH, the Attorney General's office, the Supreme Court, and the PNC co-
 ordinate efforts to combat family violence. The National Secretariat for the Family
 maintains a hot line for victims to report domestic abuse. From March 1996 to
 March 1997, there were 3,033 reported cases of domestic violence, mostly against
 women, according to the Salvadran Institute for the Development of Women
 (ISDEMU). The Institute of Legal Medicine, using different criteria, reported 545
 cases from January to August. From January to September, the Attorney General's
 office received 208 cases of mistreatment of women, 144 cases of threats against
 women, and 31 cases of wounding of women.
 The authorities believe that cases of domestic violence and rape are underreported
 for several reasons: Societal and cultural pressures against the victim, a fear of re-
 prisal, poor handling of victims' feelings by the authorities, fear of publicity, and the
 elief that cases are unlikely to be resolved. The PDDH noted that hundreds of do-
 mestic abuse victims who underwent psychotherapy refused to report their cases
 formally. Reports of sexual abuse of women continued to rise. The authorities at-
 tribute some of this statistical increase to a growing willingness of victims to bring
 formal charges.
 The Attorney General's office reported 221 cases of rape and 18 cases of attempted
 rape from January through September. Under the new Criminal Procedures Code
 (to take effect in 1998), victim testimony will be admissible evidence. The current
 cdes do not allow victim testimony. As the victim of rape is often the only witness,
 this resulted in little chance for conviction in rape cases. In 1996 the Assembly re-
 pealed an old law that exonerated a rapist if he offered to marry the victim, and
 she accepted.
 
 
 The Constitution grants women and men the same legal rights, but women suffer
 discrimination. The 1994 Family Legal Code amended laws that discriminated
 against women, especially affecting the large number of women in common law mar-
 rxages. The law also established special courts to resolve family disputes. Several
 NGO's are engaged in promoting women's rights and have conducted several rights
 awareness campaigns.
 Women suffered from economic discrimination and in practice did not have equal
 access to credit and land ownership. Women were often paid less than men for equal
 work. Of the economically active female population, 65 percent worked in the infor-
 mal economy. However, women made up 90 percent of the work force in the export
 processing zone companies, which are the largest source of new jobs (see Section
 6.b.). Training for women was generally confined to low-wage occupational areas
 where women already hold most positions, such as teaching, nursing, home indus-
 tries, or small businesses.
 Children.-Government concern for children's rights and welfare was reflected
 more in its efforts to reduce poverty and promote family stability through economic
 growth than in direct expendture on children. The law requires education through
 t e ninth grade, and while there was progress in increasing the availability of
 schooling throughout the country, compliance with legal requirements was only fea-
 sible in the country's urban centers.
 The Government worked closely through state institutions and with the United
 Nations Children's Fund to promote protection and general awareness of children's
 rights. However, children continued to fall victim to physical and sexual abuse,
 abandonment, exploitation, and neglect. The Salvadoran Institute for the Protection
 of Children (ISPM), an autonomous entity, is responsible for protecting and promot-
 ing children's rights. The ISPM estimated that as of August it had 2,577 children
 in its shelters, some abandoned and others victims of mistreatment. Through Au-
 gust, it had received a total of 1,101 formal complaints, of which 178 were for phys-
 ical mistreatment, 133 for negligence, and 123 for abandonment. Using different cri-
 teria, the ISDEMU reported 959 cases of child abuse for the period March 1996
 through March 1997. Between January and September, the Attorney General's of-
 fice reported 54 formal cases of child abuse, and it brought 61 cases against parents
 for throwing minors out of the house.
 There were no reliable estimates of the number of children living on their own
 in the streets, but children's advocates agree that there is a sizable number. Many
 of these were involved in substance abuse (glue and paint sniffing). There are alle-
 gations from children rights advocates that street children suffer from police brutal-
 ity. The PNC denies these charges but has accepted PDDH human rights training
 for those police units that have the most contact with juveniles. The PDDH has also
 called for the creation of drug treatment centers for minors. The Supreme Court
 found unconstitutional key provisions of the 1996 Emergency Law against Common
 and Organized Crime, which negated parts of the 1995 Juvenile Code by lowering
 the age of majority for juvenile offenders to 14 years.
 The Institute of Legal Medicine recorded a reduction in reports of sexual abuse
 of children under 15 years of age, with 235 reports from January through August,
 compared with 301 for the same period in 1996 and a total of 454 for all of 1996.
 The Attorney General's office registered 26 cases of child rape for January through
 September. The ISPM reported 57 cases of sexual abuse for January through Au-
 gst. According to the PDDH, over 85 percent of all abuse occurs in schools and at
 home, and only a small percentage of these cases were reported to the authorities.
 The PDDH estimated that 270,000 minors work, mostly as street vendors. Besides
 losing their opportunity for an education, these children often fell victim to sexual
 abuse and are exploited as prostitutes. The PDDH, NGO's, and the media mounted
 throughout the year a publicity and investigative campaign to highlight the plight
 of children.
 Infant malnutrition continued to be a problem. Ministry of Health figures indi-
 cated that 50 percent of infants under the age of 5 had some nutritional deficiency,
 and 11 percent suffered from serious malnutrition. The Government has a national
 plan for infants designed to increase access to potable water, iodized salt, and vita-
 mins, and to encourage breast feeding, but all of these remain problem areas, espe-
 cially among the rural poor.
 People With Disabilities.-Except for the war wounded, who have secured both
 government and international funding for rehabilitation and retraining programs,
 the Government has no program to combat discrimination against the disabled.
 There are no laws mandating provision of access to public or private buildings for
 people with disabilities. The Government has not enforced a 1984 decree stating
 that I of every 500 employees must be a person with disabilities. Access by the dis-
 abled to basic education was limited due to lack of facilities and appropriate trans-
 
 
 521
 portation. There was no provision of state services for the physically disabled. Only
 a few of the Governments community-based health promoters have been trained to
 treat the disabled, and they rarely provided such service, tending rather to focus
 on life-threatenig conditions and preventive care for mothers and children. The
 Ministry of Health estimated that between 7 and 10 percent of the population is
 afflicted by some form of disability. In December the National Council of Disabled
 People estimated that there were 500,000 persons with disabilities, of which 12,500
 were directly attributed to the civil war. Other factors contributing to the large
 number of disabled were lack of prenatal care, misuse of pesticides in food produc-
 tion, malnutiition, auto accidents, and criminal violence.
 Therewerefeworganizationsdedicatedtoprotectingand promotingtherightsof
 people with disabilities. Foreign funds for badiy needed rehabilitation services chan-
 neled through the Telethon Foundation Pro-Rehabilitation, a local private voluntary
 organization, help address numerous rehabilitation issues and provided alternatives
 for the education and rehabilitation of the disabled population. A semiautnomous
 institute, the Salvadoran Rehabilitation Institute for the Disabled (ISRI), also pro-
 vided assistance to the disabled. The ISRI offered medical treatment, counseling,
 speial education programs, and professional training courses. Founded in 1957, the
 IRhas 10 centers throughout the country and received assistance from the Gov-
 ernment and national and international private and nongovernmental organizations.
 Indigenous People.-El Salvador is an ethnically homogeneous country, although
 a very small segment of the population still claims indigenous status. The Constitu-
 tion makes no specific provisions for the rights of indigenous people.
 Early in the century, facing active repression, most indigenous people adopted
 local customs and successfully assimilated into the general population, from which
 they are generally indistinguishable. There are a few very small communities whose
 members still wear traditional dress and maintain traditional customs without re-
 pression or interference. These small indigenous groups exist in the poorest parts
 of the rural countryside where employment opportunities are few and domestic vio-
 lence is a problem. Indigenous people reportedly earned less than other agricultural
 laborers, and indigenous women in particular had little access to educational and
 work opportunities. As with the poor rural sector in general, access to land was a
 growing problem confronting indignous people. Few possessed titles to land, and
 bank loans and other forms of credit were extremely limited.
 There are a few small indigenous associations. One, the National Association of
 Indigenous Salvadorans (ANIS), continues to be involved in a long-running land dis-
 pute with a neighboring cooperative. The dispute has caused division within the or-
 ganization, evictions of ANTS members from land and exchanges of threats with the
 neighboring group and among rival camps within ANTS. The ANTS charged that the
 Government was targeting indigenous leaders with legal harassment and threats.
 There has been little evidence to support these allegations.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution prohibits the Government from
 using nationality, rae  s, creed, or poitical philosophy as a means to prevent
 workers or employers from organizing themselves into unions or associations. The
 military, police, and government workers may not form unions (but are allowed pro-
 fessional and employee organizations) and may not strike. The 1994 Labor Code
 streamlined the process required to form a union in the private sector, extending
 union rights to agricultural, inde ndent, and small-business workers, and extend-
 ing the right to strike to union federations. The Labor Code prohibits partisan politi-
 cal activity by unions, but they routinely ignored this prohibition.
 There were approximately 150 active unions, public employee associations, and
 peasant organizations, which represent over 300,000 citizens, approximately 20 per-
 cent of the total work force. Only private sector workers have the right to form
 unions and strike; employees of autonomous public agencies may forn unions but
 not strike. Nevertheless, many workers including those in the public sector form em-
 ployee associations that frequently carried out strikes that, while technically illegal,
 were treated as legitimate.
 Some of the most powerful labor groups are public employee associations, which
 take on the same responsiblities as unions-incuding caling srinkes and collective
 bargaining. Negotiations between public employee associations and the Government
 cly settled pubic sector strikes, although the Labor Code provides for manda-
 geera           ublic sector disputes.
 The law prohibits antiunion actions before a union is legally registered. The Labor
 Code forbids foreigners from holding positions in unions.
 Unions and other labor organizations freely affiliated with international labor or-
 ganizations.
 
 
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Constitution and the
 Labor Code provide for collective bargaining rights but only to employees in the pri-
 vate sector and in autonomous government agencies, such as utilities (currently un-
 dergoing privatization) and the port authority. However, both private sector unions
 (by law) and public sector employee associations (in practice) used collective bar-
 g a i in .g .
 The   Mstry of Labor oversees implementation of collective bargaining agree-
 ments and acts as conciliator in labor disputes in the private sector and autonomous
 government institutions. In practice, ministers and the heads of autonomous govern-
 ment institutions often negotiate with labor organizations directly, relying on the
 Labor Ministry only for such functions as officially certifying unions. The Ministry
 often seeks to conciliate labor disputes through informal channels rather than at-
 tempting to enforce regulations strictly, leading to charges that the Ministry is bi-
 ased against labor. Corruption continued to affect labor inspectors and courts, but
 improvements in training and Ministry of Labor pay scales began to address this
 problem.
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination against unions. It provides that union
 officials at the time of their election, throughout their term, and for 1 year following
 their term may not be fired, suspended for disciplinary reasons, removed, or de-
 moted except for legal cause. Employers generally observed this provision in prac-
 tice, but credible reports continued of employers using illegal pressures, including
 dismissing labor activists, to discourage organizing. The law requires employers to
 rehire employees fired for any type of union activity, and the Labor Ministry has
 increased efforts to enforce this requirement. In many cases, employees chose to
 take a cash payment in lieu of returning to work.
 There are six export processing zones (EPZ's) and several in-bond plants operating
 outside of these zones. There are no special labor regulations for the EPZ's. During
 the last few years, most EPZ companies and a large portion of the in-bond plants
 have accepted the provisions of voluntary codes of conduct from their parent cor-
 porations or foreign purchasers. These codes included worker rights protection
 clauses. In April the Salvadoran Apparel Industry Association announced implemen-
 tation of an industrywide code of conduct with worker rights protection. The great
 masjority of companies in the EPZ's provided much better salaries and working con-
 ditions than those offered elsewhere in the private sector. There were credible re-
 orts that some factories dismissed union organizers, and only one EPZ company
 ad an active plant union. Credible accusations persisted that some maquila fac-
 tories abused their workers, as well as reports that some women were notinred be-
 cause they were pregnant. Although the Labor Ministry made measurable improve-
 ments in its efforts to increase inspection and follow up on such complaints, it still
 had insufficient resources to properly cover all the EPZ's, much less the much larger
 national private sector..
 The Labor Ministry made significant progress in modernizing its facilities and
 professionalizing its staff. Although under 1996 legislation the Government author-
 ized the Ministry of Economy to withdraw away free zone privileges from companies
 that violated labor regulations, there have been no public cases where tis has been
 threatened. There is also a tripartite (government, business, and labor) commission,
 established in 1996, to help resolve conficts in EPZ and other bonded companies.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor, except in the case of calamity and other instances specified by
 law. Thisprovision is followed in practice. Although not specifically prohibited by
 law, forcecaddbonded labor by children are covered by the general prohibition, and
 there were no reports of its use in the formal sector. However, there was strong evi-
 dence that children and minors have been forced into prostitution.
 d Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The Con-
 stitution proibits the employment of children under the age of 14. The law does
 not s      ifically prohibit forced and bonded labor of children, but both activities are
 forbidden in general (see Section 6.c.). Minors may receive special Labor Ministry
 permission to work, but only where such employment is absolutely indispensable to
 the sustenance of the minor and his family. This is most often the case with chil-
 dren of peasant families who traditionally work during plantingand harvesting sea-
 sons. Those legal workers under the age of 18 have special additional rules govers-
 ing conditions of work (see Section 6.e.).
 Orphans and children from poor families frequently work for their own or family
 survival as street vendors and general laborers m small businesses, especially in the
 informal sector. Children in these circumstances often do not complete compulsory
 schooling through the ninth grade (up to the age of 14) as the law requires. Child
 labor is not usually found in the industrial sector and has disappeared in the EPZ's.
 
 
 The Ministry of Labor is responsible for enforcing child labor laws and made an
 effort to do so. However, scarce resources and the difficulty of monitoring the large
 informal sector limited its effectiveness outside of the urban formal sector. In Au-
 gust the Government participated in the establishment of the National Committee
 or the Eradication of Child Labor (CNETI). The CNETI is a coordinating body with
 government, NGO, and private sector (labor and business) representatives that
 works to combat child labor.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Effective July 1995, the minimum wage was
 $4.40 (38.50 colones) per day for commercial, industrial, and service employees; and
 $3.30 (28.60 colones), plus a food allowance, per day for agroindustrial workers.
 However, full-time minimum wage employees are paid by law a full 7 days (56
 hours) for the 44 hour week and receive an average of 1 month's wage a year in
 required bonuses plus 2 weeks of paid vacation. The minimum wage with benefits
 was insufficient to provide a decent standard of living for a worker and family. For
 the third year in a row, minimum wages did not keep up with the Ministry of
 Economy's estimate of the increase in the cost of living. The Labor Ministry is re-
 sponsible for enforcing minimum wage laws and does so effectively in the formal
 sector.
 The law limits the workday to 6 hours for youths between 14 and 18 years of age
 and 8 hours for adults, and it mandates premium pay for longer hours. The Labor
 Code sets a maximum normal workweek of 36 hours for youths and 44 hours for
 adults. It requires bonus pay for overtime and limits the workweek to no more than
 6 days for all workers.
 The Constitution and the Labor Code require employers, including the Govern-
 ment, to take steps to ensure that employees are not placed at risk in their work-
 places. These laws prohibit the employment of persons under 18 years of age, and
 all women, in occupations considered hazardous. Nevertheless, health and safety
 regulations are outda , and enforcement, while improved, was inadequate. Work-
 ers can remove themselves from dangerous work situations without jeopardizing
 their emploent only in situations where they can p resent a medical certificate is-
 sued by a docr or the Social Security Institute indicating that their health is at
 risk while using certain equipment or substances. The Ministry of Labor attempts
 to enforce the applicable regulations and has "devoted resources to improving the
 professional training of its staff and inspectors. Increasingly, its investigations lead
 to fines or other findings favoring workers. The Ministry has restricted powers and
 only limited, but growing, resources to enforce compliance.
