 EL SALVADOR
 During 1982 El Salvador changed from a country ruled by a
 civilian-military junta to one in transition to a multiparty
 democracy. This change was brought about by the election on March
 28 of a Constituent Assembly in the country's first truly free
 election in fifty years. Since this election, El Salvador has
 been governed by a provisional executive body elected by the
 Assembly, consisting of President Alvaro Magana, an independent,
 and three Vice Presidents, each representing one of the major
 democratic political parties. The Assembly exercises legislative
 authority and is drafting a new constitution. Presidential and
 municipal elections are scheduled to be held no later than March
 28, 1984. Constitutional democracy in El Salvador continues to be
 limited by the suspension of constitutional rights in a response
 to the present military emergency resulting from guerrilla and
 terrorist attacks. The armed forces remain a significant
 political force in the country.
 All human rights conditions in El Salvador are strongly affected
 by the on-going civil strife. As is common during civil strife,
 the achievement of a public order, that would protect each
 person's rights, has been disrupted by military operations,
 partisan hatreds, acts of revenge, the satisfaction of personal
 grudges, pervasive fear, and a prevailing uncertainty dominated by
 violence. This situation contributed to, and is complicated by,
 the near-paralysis of the judicial system, which is caused in part
 by corruption and intimidation and which is most evident when
 crimes of a political nature are being considered.
 Civil strife has led to human rights violations by all parties
 involved in the conflict, the guerrillas of the left, terrorist
 groups on the right, and the forces employed by the Government.
 In 1982, the armed conflict continued between the elected govern-
 ment supported by the armed forces, and the leftist Democratic
 Revolutionary Front and the Farabundo Marti National Liberation
 Front (FDR/FMLN), which are trying to destroy the country's eco-
 nomy and seize political power by force of arms. An intense guer-
 rilla war in the countryside and both urban and rural terrorism,
 in accordance with the guerrillas' strategy of prolonged warfare,
 characterize the military security situation. The Salvadoran
 armed forces reportedly suffered 1,073 killed in action and 2,584
 wounded in action during 1982.
 Serious human rights problems continued in El Salvador in 1982,
 despite signs of improvement throughout the year. Incidents of
 political assassinations, killings of civilians, disappearances,
 and torture continue to be reported, although at substantially
 lower levels than in 1981. The judicial system has failed to
 function effectively in the face of a guerrilla movement and
 abuses committed by elements of the security forces and rightist
 groups. In 1982, the armed forces demonstrated an increased
 awareness of the need to respect human rights and took some
 limited steps to improve their performance. Guerrillas were taken
 prisoner during combat operations, and some military personnel
 were disciplined for human rights abuses. The new Government
 established an official Human Rights Commission to scrutinize
 instances of human rights violations. The exercise of civil
 liberties remains severely curtailed by the passage of state of
 siege Decree 507.
 
 
 491
 In December 1980, the then-ruling junta decreed a state of siege
 to grant the armed forces a legal basis for the exercise of extra-
 ordinary authority in combating insurgency. It has been renewed
 every thirty days since. State of siege Decree 507 is based on
 Article 177 of the 1962 Constitution, which permits the temporary
 suspension of constitutional guarantees of individual rights in
 times of civil strife or subversion. Rights suspended include
 free transit, inviolability of correspondence, free expression and
 free assembly. The armed forces have the legal right to arrest
 without a warrant. Individuals charged with crimes against the
 state (e.g., sedition, treason) or related crimes (e.g., acts of
 terrorism) are remanded to secret military tribunals and subjected
 to the Military Code of Justice.
 Whether the Government bears full responsibility for the crimes of
 certain rightist elements, and the members of the security forces
 associated with them, is difficult to establish for two reasons.
 First, the Magana Government presides uneasily over a collection
 of quite diverse parties in the Constituent Assembly and other
 non-government groups, whose actions it-does not or cannot fully
 control. Second, it is characteristic of Salvadoran society that
 personal loyalties to relatives or locally powerful individuals
 are strong and often compete with loyalties to legal superiors
 within the organizations of the Government or to officers within
 the military chain of command. Thus, it is often difficult to
 know whether, in taking a given action, a member of the security
 force is obeying orders handed down through the military or
 Government chain of command, carrying out the wishes of some local
 patron or acting on his own..
 A Catholic society of Spanish colonial heritage, modern
 El Salvador is characterized by a small capital-owning class, a
 small but expanding middle class and a large mass of primarily
 subsistence level agricultural workers. The population growth
 rate is a high 3.2 percent per year. El Salvador's developing
 economy was expanding until 1978, when leftist terrorism, rightist
 counter-violence, and pressure for reforms led to massive capital
 flight and a general deterioration of investor confidence. Since
 that time the gross domestic product has fallen by over 25
 percent, and unemployment has risen to about 40 percent in many
 areas of the country. Manufacturing and export-oriented
 production of coffee, cotton, and sugar have all been hard hit,
 bobh by the weakened regional and world economy and by the
 guerrilla-instigated violence. The economic and transportation
 infrastructure and productive facilities continue to be priority
 targets for terrorist attacks. In March 1980, El Salvador
 initiated sweeping social and economic reforms, designed to
 transfer ownership of farmlands from a small number of large
 landholders to a.,larger number of agricultural workers. Despite
 difficulties, these reforms continued in 1982. Upon completion,
 some 750,000 people will directly benefit, and more than 23
 percent of the nation's farmland will have changed ownership. As
 of November 1982, land reform had benefitted approximately 416,000
 Salvadorans.
 The development of a strong and violent revolutionary opposition
 in the late 1970's can be attributed in part to the extreme rigi-
 dity of the former political system, closed to participation by
 other than a few officially-accepted parties, under the control of
 an economic oligarchy backed by the security forces and the mili-
 tary. This situation changed fundamentally on October 15, 1979,
 when reformist officers overthrew the government of General Romero
 and established a broad-based civilian-military revolutionary
 junta, which included the representatives of parties from the left
 
 
 of the political spectrum. In early 1980, the leftist partici-
 pants abandoned this junta to join the extreme left in a situation
 of mounting civil strife. The Christian Democratic Party, led by
 Jose Napoleon Duarte, then joined the junta's military members,
 preserving civilian participation in the governing group. This
 junta initiated a program of agrarian, banking, and trade
 reforms. It carried through these reforms in the face of strong
 opposition from both the conservative right and the guerrilla
 left. The Christian Democratic-military junta governed
 El Salvador until the March 28, 1982 Constituent Assembly
 elections. These elections shifted the ground of political action
 and were a major human rights development. The military adopted a
 neutral ro14 by not voting. However, the military and security
 forces did provide security for voters wishing to cast their
 ballots. Some opposition forces, which traditionally regarded
 each other as subversive enemies, openly competed in the election
 campaign. Although the spectrum of participation was to a degree
 limited, since the extreme left rejected and sought to disrupt the
 electoral process, those who did choose to participate continue to
 peacefully compete in-the democratic political forum provided by
 the Constituent Assembly. Members of those parties and political
 independents are represented in various government agencies and
 specialized commissions.
 The Salvadoran Government, which has embarked on this transition
 to democracy, is currently being challenged by the FMLN--a
 coalition of Marxist/Leninist-led guerrilla organizations. The
 political affiliate of this organization, the FDR, includes
 elements of social democratic origin. One of the strategies of
 the FMLN involves the destruction of the Salvadoran economic
 infrastructure. Also targeted are municipal and national
 government installations, military personnel, and alleged
 government collaborators. The guerrillas and the FDR have
 published a general public program for a future government which
 includes a mixed economy and maintenance of certain individual
 liberties. Privately, the guerrillas and their affiliates have
 expressed admiration for Cuban and Nicaraguan domestic policies.
 The Salvadoran Government is attempting to institutionalize a
 democratic process and promote greater respect for human rights.
 This nascent democratic trend is fragile and is threatened by
 extremists of the left and right. In this process, the role and
 attitude of the army will be very critical. Thus far, the lead-
 ership of the army has made a contribution to the democratic
 trend, by supporting the elections and encouraging compromise
 among the winning parties in the post-election period. Attitudes
 toward human rights among lower-ranking elements of the security
 forces and civilian defense force are improving but remain a
 problem. While the civil strife continues, short-term trends in
 human rights will vary greatly with the general level of violence.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Killing
 Violence in El Salvador is endemic. Political polarization has
 exacerbated the levels of violence. Extremes of the right and the
 left regularly utilize assassination to eliminate and terrorize
 suspected opposition members and their sympathizers. Political
 assassination claims victims from all social classes. It is an
 institutionalized method in the warfare between
 
 
 493
 the guerrillas of the FMLN and the far right, together with their
 sympathizers in the Salvadoran armed forces. Some groups
 associated with the military security forces identify and elimi-
 nate suspected collaborators of the PMLN and the FDR. Leftist
 terrorists in turn assassinate members of the armed forces, mem-
 bers of the paramilitary forces, civilian government authorities,
 and other citizens.
 Attribution of killings is difficult. Groups rarely claim
 responsibility and witnesses are often reluctant to give testimony
 to an atrocity. Many victims could have been the targets of
 either the right or the left, or in at least some cases, victims
 of common violent crime. A number of political leaders, including
 about 26 local leaders of the Christian Democratic Party, were
 assassinated in 1982. Personally motivated assassination has on
 occasion been disguised as political assassination. At times the
 circtnstances or the identity of victims can point to the
 perpetrator. For example, the assassination of the president of
 the International Trade Fair, Nicolas Nasser, on July 15, 1982,
 was likely to have been perpetrated by leftist terrorists, while
 many of the individuals removed from their homes after dark in
 urban areas and later found dead may be considered victims of
 armed groups of the right, including elements of the security
 forces.
 There was a significant decrease in civilian deaths attributed to
 political violence in 1982. This decrease follows the downward
 trend identified in the latter half of 1981. The average of 445
 deaths per month (as measured by press reports) in 1981 fell to an
 average of 219 deaths per month during 1982. While it is cer-
 tain that these figures underreport the actual incidence of poli-
 tical violence, they do reflect trends. Supporting evidence of
 the decline in political violence can be derived from reports in
 the press of disappeared persons, some of whom undoubtedly were
 killed. These dropped from an average of 160 per month in 1981 to
 38 in 1982.
 Sources of information on political violence include newspapers,
 the armed forces, court records, human rights organizations,
 leftist organizations, and personal testimonies. Each of these is
 subject to limitations and/or biases. The four press dailies
 do report on violence. Although access to some rural areas
 is limited, press reports of deaths are considered a valid basis
 for data on political violence in rural areas. The armed forces
 have increased the release of information to the public, including
 casualty figures. Government information on guerrilla
 casualties,.however, is subject to exaggeration. Court records
 list victims of violence identified by justices of the peace
 throughout the country. Such reports yield little additional
 information in cases of political violence since witnesses rarely
 come forward. However, they are useful to determine trends.
 Organizations which report on violence, besides the Government's
 Human Rights Commission, include the Archdiocese Commission of
 Justice and Peace, Christian Legal Aid (Socorro Juridico
 Cristiano), the Committee of Mothers and Relatives of Political
 Prisoners and the Disappeared, and-the El Salvador Human Rights
 Commission. In addition, the Center for Investigation and
 Documentation of the Jesuit-run University of Central America is a
 human rights information clearing house. These groups rely
 primarily on newspaper reporting, supplemented with other sources
 such as announcements by guerrilla groups and personal testimony.
 In an effort to overcome what many in the Government feel is the
 leftist bias of these human rights groups, President Magana
 created a Human Rights Commission, which is composed of leaders of
 the church, labor, private sector and the National Police. The
 Commission will monitor and analyze the human rights situation and
 recommend to the President ways in which it can be improved.
 
 
 494
 The most significant contradiction in violence reporting concerns
 guerrilla combat casualties. During combat operations, the armed
 forces usually report all non-government casualties as guerrilla
 casualties. The independent human rights organizations men-
 tioned above and Radio Venceremos report such casualties as civi-
 lian deaths. Both the armed forces and guerrillas tend to exag-
 gerate and distort the data on casualties during combat for their
 own purposes. Estimates of the total number of persons who have
 died in El Salvador by political violence are subject to an
 unknown degree of inaccuracy.
 In 1982 politically motivated civilian deaths numbered
 approximately 2,630, according to U.S. Embassy tabulations of
 press reports. Statistics collected by Salvadoran human rights
 groups are higher because, as stated earlier, since August 1982
 these groups have included all deaths during combat operations,
 announced by the military, except Salvadoran Government
 casualties, as civilian political deaths. This change in
 methodology largely accounts for the higher figures reported by.
 these groups in the second half of 1982.
 The number of deaths reported in the press in 1982 is about 50
 percent lower than the previous year. Information available from
 a variety of sources indicates that peak periods of political
 violence tend to correlate closely with increases in leftist
 violence. Examples include the August 1980 general strikes, the
 January 1981 "final offensive,* guerilla attempts to disrupt the
 March 1982 elections, and several waves of urban terrorism. Since
 the second half of 1981, there has been an overall decline in
 political violence. One explanation for this decline may in fact
 be the armed left's reduced ability to act at will in the cities.
 In 1982, the organized death squads of the far right virtually
 disappeared from the public scene. The most prominent of the
 death squads, the Maximiliano Hernandez Martinez Brigade, made
 only two public statements in 1982, both denying connection with
 other groups linked to extreme rightist violence. While such
 squads may continue to exist, their program of sowing public
 terror through violent elimination of suspected subversives
 appears to have subsided.
 The leadership of the armed forces demonstrated a concern for
 reducing political violence in 1982. However, because of the
 inability of the judicial system to deal with politically-
 motivated crimes, a thorough administration of justice is unlikely
 in the near future. Nevertheless, Defense Minister General Garcia
 issued orders in March, based on a previously developed code of
 conduct, that those accused of human rights violations would be
 punished. A special campaign was directed at the civil defense
 forces, whose members have been accused of human rights abuses.
 General Garcia spoke to over 200 local commanders of civil defense
 forces on October 6, 1982. In that well-publicized meeting, he
 warned commanders that human rights violations were betrayals of
 public and armed forces trust and would be punished. By the end
 of 1982, 141 members of the armed forces and about 55 members of
 the civilian defense had been jailed for abuses of authority.
 While it is difficult to impute causes, increased professionalism
 and control over the armed forces is responsible for some of this
 decline. Any assumptions about the extent of killings and their
 specific motivation must be made with the caveat that most
 killings are unattributable or occur in isolated areas, making
 confirmation and explanation both deductive and difficult.
 
 
 495
 b. Disappearance
 In 1982, reported disappearances averaged 38 per month. This
 compares with 160 per month in 1981, and 200 per month in 1980.
 Information on disappearances is available primarily from urban
 areas. Disappearances occurred under a variety of circum-
 stances. Many of those who disappear become victims of political
 assassination. Also, some individuals may voluntarily disappear
 by going underground. Reports of guerrilla imprisonment are
 frequent. Kidnappings continue to occur; the victims are gene-
 rally middle or-upper middle class professionals who lack the
 protection of wealthier victims. In some kidnap cases the perpe-
 trators can be determined. On December 5, 1982 in San Sebastian,
 El Salvador, guerrillas led over 136 soccer players and specta-
 tors away to their camps at gunpoint. Most were released within a
 few days. In most kidnap cases, however, the perpetrators are
 never known.
 Family members and other groups and individuals attribute many
 disappearances of private citizens to units of the army, security
 forces, or paramilitary forces. Counterinsurgency units of the
 various security forces routinely practice arbitrary arrest and
 clandestine detention. The former is permitted under Decree 507.
 The capturing unit has 72 hours in which it can hold a prisoner
 before bringing charges. At any one time several hundred
 individuals may be held under these provisions or under extra-
 legal clandestine detention. Individuals "disappear", despite
 witnesses to their capture by uniformed forces or heavily armed
 men.
 Under Decree 507, any citizen may file a writ, called a "Writ of
 Personal Exhibition,* with the Supreme Court. On the basis of the
 writ, an appointed lawyer may make an inquiry to detention centers
 concerning the individual in question. There were some 500 of
 these writs pending in Supreme Court files at the end of August.
 Of these, approximately 50 individuals have been located and the
 rest have been classified as 'under investigation," which in
 essence means the case is virtually closed because the indivduals
 cannot be found.
 The Archdiocese Commission of Justice and Peace keeps a record of
 persons who have disappeared from the San Salvador area. The
 Commission files a Writ of Personal Exhibition with the Supreme
 Court for each case, which is based on family testimony. Complete
 information is available for the month of May, and provides an
 indication of the fate of disappeared. Of 68 disappearances
 reported to the Commission, five persons were found dead, 13
 captured by security forces (of whom six were released and seven
 remanded to the military tribunals), and 50 remain unaccounted for.
 c. Torture
 Torture by elements of the Salvadoran armed forces, and on occa-
 sion by guerrilla forces, does occur. It is not possible to
 establish the prevalence of torture because valid and systematic
 means for documenting cases do not exist. Some elements of the
 security forces engage in the use of psychological and physical
 coercion to extract information from suspected leftists. There is
 evidence that on these occasions the use of torture has been
 prolonged and extreme.
 The embassy has specific reports of eight cases of torture in 1982
 by elements of the security forces. These range from psy-
 chological abuse such as threats of death to deprivation of food
 
 
 496
 and sleep, and the infliction of electric shock and severe beat-
 ings. Evidence of torture on the bodies of the dead is wide-
 spread. It is believed that torture primarily occurs during the
 initial stages of detention, particular at clandestine detention
 cells.
 The 1962 Constitution specifically prohibits torture. However,
 under Decree 507 military tribunals are given discretion over
 acceptable evidence, including extrajudicial confessions, which
 are inadmissable under Salvadoran law. Torture appears to have
 declined in 1982 along with civilian deaths attributed to poli-
 tical violence. (The statement that torture appears to have
 declined in 1982, is an assumption based on two observations: 1)
 the incidence of mutilated bodies of civilian victims attributed
 to political violence found dead has declined. 2) The number of
 incidental reports of torture from individuals and human rights
 organizations has declined.)
 d. Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 There are approximately 100 known detention locations under armed
 forces control and 25 prisons under Ministry of Justice authority
 in El Salvador. There may also be an unknown number of clandes-
 tine detention centers.
 In the civilian-administered penal centers and penitentiaries,
 conditions range from poor to relatively good. Lack of resources
 is the primary constraint to improving conditions. The largest
 prison in El Salvador is Mariona Penitentiary, with over 1,000
 prisoners. It includes a well-developed recreation and rehabili-
 tation program.
 Over 600 men at Mariona and 100 women at Ilopango Women's Prison
 are being held as political prisoners under the provisions of
 Decree 507. The prisoners are organized, with an outside support
 group. They hold regular meetings with prison directors who are
 generally responsive to their demands. Political prisoners' cell
 blocks are subject to search by security forces.
 Although there are no unusual punishments or sentences provided
 for in El Salvador's Napoleonic Code, the seriously weakened and
 overburdened judicial system leaves most prisoners in jail for
 long periods of time before trial. Of a total of 3,200 pri-
 soners, only 400 are serving sentences after having been tried and
 convicted by the courts. Delays of up to three years before a
 case comes to trial are common.
 Decree 507 rescinds civil liberties because of civil strife and
 subjects political prisoners to military justice. The specified
 180-day investigation period has lapsed for about 400 of the over
 700 political prisoners. Forty-five prisoners have been held for
 at least two years without trial. Most remain in a legal limbo,
 without representation.
 e. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Arrest without warrant is permitted by Decree 507. Arresting
 officers are not obliged to identify themselves. There have been
 numerous reports of arrests at night by "heavily-armed men,
 dressed in civilian attire.* Arrests are regularly conducted on
 the basis of a "denunciation," made by virtually any citizen.
 Under Decree 507, the armed forces may detain an individual for
 investigation without charge for up to fifteen days. After this
 period they must remand the individual to the military tribunals
 or release him. The security forces generally comply with this
 
 
 497
 rule in cases of acknowledged detentions. The largest security
 force detention center is the National Police Headquarters in San
 Salvador. As many as 250 individuals, mostly common criminals,
 may be held there at any one time. However, reports of clandes-
 tine detention are frequent. One-fourth to one-half of those
 held at National Police Headquarters may be held under Decree 507
 as suspected subversives at any given time. Approximately one in
 twenty is remanded after arrest to the military tribunals under
 Decree 507. :The rest are either released or held for prolonged
 periods. A military tribunal may order *corrective detention"
 for 120 days.
 The closest parallel to habeas corpus in the Salvadoran legal
 system is the *Writ of Personal Exhibition.' Under this legal
 procedure when a writ is filed the Supreme Court, which has
 jurisdiction over all such petitions, appoints a 'Judge executor"
 who attempts to locate the subject of the petition. If success-
 ful, he then recommends to the Supreme Court whether legal
 grounds exist for continued detention of the individual. The
 state of siege extends the possible legal grounds for detention,
 but does not suspend the writ of personal exhibition. The 'Writ
 of Personal Exhibition' is of little use in cases of unreported
 detentions since the 'Judge executor' is unable to locate indivi-
 duals held in clandestine cells. On the basis of these writs,
 the Supreme Court determined that there were no grounds for
 holding over 300 detainees, between January of 1981 and September
 1982.
 f. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The civil strife in El Salvador has seriously weakened the crimi-
 nal justice system. The court system is three-tiered with a
 Court of First Instance, an Appeals Court, and a Supreme Court.
 The system functions very slowly in criminal cases, where delays
 of two and three years are common. The courts are susceptible to
 coercion in cases involving members of the armed forces, persons
 of influence, or political cases. Judges, lawyers, witnesses,
 and jury members have been subject to bribery and to coercion by
 threats and acts of violence, including machine-gunnings and
 bombings.
 most political cases are dealt with under Decree 507 by the mili-
 tary and not by the civilian courts. Most crimes against the
 state, such as treason and sedition, and associated crimes
 related to subversion or terrorism are subject to trial by mili-
 tary tribunals. Once remanded to the tribunals, individuals
 may be held for up to 180 days during a preliminary investi-
 gatory period, which the tribunal may extend. most of the over
 700 political prisoners are in this extended status. They are
 not permitted legal representation during this period, nor are
 lawyers permitted access to evidence. The tribunal has authority
 to determine admissibility of evidence, including extrajudicial
 confessions and denunciations. Identities of the members of the
 tribunals, who are active duty military officers, are secret.
 Less than ten percent of the political prisoners have entered the
 trial stage. The Supreme Court has the authority to overturn
 decisions taken by these tribunals; however, this is rarely
 done. One case is currently under appeal in the Supreme Court.
 The junta has renewed its offer of amnesty to guerrillas every
 year since 1980. It remains in effect under the current govern-
 ment. In 1982, several hundred members of leftist organizations,
 primarily guerrilla supporters from rural areas, availed them-
 selves of the amnesty granted by the armed forces. The armed
 forces appeared to have respected the human rights of amnesty
 recipients, including the guerrilla combatants who have turned
 themselves in, and made efforts to resettle them and to otherwise
 ensure their well-being.
 
 
 498
 
 The multiparty Pact of Apaneca, signed on August 2, commits the
 Government to the creation of Political, Human Rights, and Peace
 Commissions. One of the priority tasks of the Peace Commission
 will be the development of a comprehensive amnesty program that
 will enable guerrillas and their sympathizers to turn themselves
 in to government authorities in return for government protection.
 g. Invasion of the Home
 Decree 507 permits search and seizure, including residences,
 without a warrant. Members of the armed forces routinely use
 forced entry to conduct arrests and investigations. On occasion
 captures of individuals are accompanied by thefts of personal
 belongings. Terrorists of the left and right also engage in
 invasion of the home and thefts and destruction of personal and
 commercial property.
 2. Respect for Civil and Political Freedoms, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 State of siege Decree 507 suspends the constitutional rights of
 freedom of speech and press. However, in practice there is no
 official, institutionalized censorship. Violent political polar-
 ization and fear of reprisals are de facto the greatest impedi-
 ments to free expression. The political polarization also inhi-
 bits free speech. As a result, Salvadorans are reserved in their
 remarks to strangers.
 Foreign correspondents regularly file their stories without cen-
 sorship or delays. The four daily papers exercise voluntary con-
 straint on reporting news and opinion from the left. However,
 they do accept paid advertisements from organizatons loosely
 associated with the left. Their editorial boards tend to favor
 conservative viewpoints and conservative criticism of the Govern-
 ment is frequent. In 1982, newspapers were not the targets of
 terrorist bombings, as had been the case in previous years. A
 new weekly, launched in September, has a moderate perspective.
 In spite of a pervasive fear of extremist reprisal, a number of
 sources publish dissenting opinions. Most prominent are the fre-
 quent news releases from Salvadoran organizations denouncing
 human rights violations, such as: "Human Rights*, the Catholic
 Church Newsletter 'Orientacion", and the bimonthly journal of the
 Jesuit-run University of Central America, "Estudios Centro-
 americanos" (ECA). These journals reflect a pro-FMLN viewpoint.
 A recent issue of "Estudios Centroamericanos" was dedicated to
 an analysis of the Salvadoran situation since the October 1979
 coup and is extremely critical of the government. Its editorial
 policy also advocates negotiations with the guerrillas, which is
 contrary to Government policy.
 Amnesty International, citing in particular the kidnapping and
 deaths of four Dutch journalists, urged the Government to
 safeguard the safety of all journalists working in the country.
 The Constitution guarantees academic freedom. This right is not
 affected by the state of siege. In practice most universities
 voluntarily control or limit subjects and material taught. Only
 one of Salvador's 25 institutions of higher learning has a
 department of political science which teaches the country's only
 course on Marxism. Political science students are careful not to
 take books on socialism and Marxism off the university grounds.
 The National University has been closed since June 1980, but the
 university continues to operate in a number of rented classrooms.
 
 
 499
 It is widely believed that the national telephone company, ANTEL,
 has the ability to monitor telephone conversations. No legisla-
 tion exists on the subject of wiretapping.
 The constitutional provision protecting the inviolability of cor-
 respondence is suspended under the state of siege. Postal
 officials have the authority to inspect correspondence, although
 the prevalence of this practice is not known.
 Both the government and the guerrillas have informer networks.
 Phone numbers for making denunciations to security forces are
 often announced in the media. Security forces rely heavily on
 these informers and anonymous denunciations about subversive and
 criminal activities. There are reports that human rights abuses
 often are triggered by anonymous reports to either security or
 guerrilla forces.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 State of seige decree 507 suspends the constitutional right to
 free assembly and association. The suspension of these rights is
 aimed particularly at the popular organizations of the revolu-
 tionary left. These organizations had all but disappeared
 from the public scene by 1981 and now exist clandestinely on a
 much smaller scale. Mass demonstrations in San Salvador
 organized by these organizations had been used in the past to
 incite violence and provoke security force reaction.
 During the January-March Constituent Assembly election campaign,
 the Salvadoran Government reinstated the right to assembly to all
 participating political parties. Government policy has been
 tolerant of peaceful assembly when it has not been used for what
 the Government regards as subversive purposes.
 Organized labor has traditionally played an important role in El
 Salvador. This role has recently diminished, due to the current
 economic crisis. With a 25 percent drop in the GDP in the last
 three years and unemployment reaching 40 percent in some areas,
 unions are fighting a defensive struggle to preserve what they
 have achieved, rather than pressing for further gains. Salvado-
 ran unions are independent and free from government control.
 There is no official labor federation. Organized labor federa-
 tions run the full political spdctrum in El Salvador, including
 the left wing Popular Democratic Union. The Salvadoran labor
 code recognizes labor's right to organize, negotiate, and
 strike. The right to strike, however, is rescinded by state of
 seige decree 544. In practice, there were a number of local
 wildcat strikes in 1982 with no significant reaction from the
 Government. The strength of the organized leftist labor federa-
 tions has dissipated in recent years, and the continuing politi-
 cal crisis and terrorism have driven some leftist labor leaders
 and organizations underground. The three largest leftist labor
 federations belong to the FDR. Nevertheless, they still exist as
 legal organizations. Several leftist labor leaders have disap-
 peared and some have been arrested for subversive political acti-
 vities, such as organizing attempted strikes during the January
 1981 'final offensive.'
 Less than ten percent of the work force belongs to any organized
 labor oranization. This includes peasant organizations, which
 are not recognized formally as labor unions. El Salvador's labor
 organizations maintain close relations with most of the important
 international labor movements. The relative weakness of the
 organized labor movement in El Salvador during the past three
 
 
 500
 years is due primarily to the catastrophic state of the economy
 and to political violence. Evidence indicates, however,
 that labor strength is on the rise again. The peasant organi-
 zations are particularly vibrant and growing.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion exists in El Salvador and is constitu-
 tionally guaranteed. Catholicism is historically dominant, and
 the Catholic Church remains one of the society's most influential
 institutions. Apolitical activity by the church has not been
 impeded by the Government. Some clergy have been victims of
 political violence, presumably from the far right. Over 20
 clerics were killed between 1980 and 1981, including Archbishop
 Romero and the four American churchwomen. Such violence against
 church persons has declined, and according to the Catholic
 Church, no clergy and fewer than 100 lay people were subjected to
 any violence in 1982.
 The Catholic Church, including the hierarchy, is divided between
 conservative and liberal tendencies. In some cases individual
 priests have become identified with the cause of the leftist
 forces. The Salvadoran right has accused these clerics of poli-
 ticizing the urban and rural poor, and many have then become the
 victims of rightist violence.
 The Apostolic Administrator, Monsignor Rivera Damas, publicly
 criticizes both the FMLN and the armed forces for the continuing
 violence. In forming the Archdiocese Commission of Justice and
 Peace in April, Rivera Y Damas expressed the hope that this
 organization would be able to increase human rights awareness.
 In recent years, evangelicalism, which is fervently apolitical,
 has attracted growing numbers of the Salvadoran people. Perhaps
 as many as one-fourth to one-half of the churchgoing population
 now belongs to one of the many evangelical movements. Some of
 the larger churches include the Assembly of God, Seventh Day
 Adventists, Mormons, Jehovah's Witnesses, and Baptists.
 d. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 State of seige Decree 507 also formally suspends the constitu-
 tional right to free movement. In practice, this suspension has
 little effect. Three major factors affect internal movement:
 the seasonal migration of large numbers of subsistence farmers
 primarily from the northern highlands to the coffee, cotton, and
 sugar lands during the November to March harvest season; the
 rural to urban migration of the poor, due to popUlation growth
 and a belief of better opportunity; and the displacements due to
 violence primarily in the northern and eastern departments.
 There are approximately 249,000 displaced persons within El Sal-
 vador and approximately 60,000 to 75,000 refugees in camps out-
 side the country, primarily in Honduras, Nicaragua, and Costa
 Rica. Over 500,000 Salvadorans have left in the past decade to
 seek employment in other countries, primarily the United States.
 About 10,000 individuals have sought political asylum in other
 countries, including the United States. There are no restric-
 tions on emigration or on repatriation. Economically-motivated
 migrants returned to El Salvador by neighboring countries are not
 subject to any penalties and are free to reintegrate themselves
 into Salvadoran society.
 
  501
 e. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 El Salvador is a country in transition to a multiparty democracy.
 The armed forces have an important influence on politics. The
 Government is composed of members from the major parties that
 participated in the March 28 elections, including political
 independents. The President, Alvaro Magana, is a political
 independent, selected as a consensus candidate after no'single
 party received a majority of seats in the 60-deputy Constituent
 Assembly. On March 28, 1982, 1.5 million Salvadorans went to the
 polls to elect deputies to represent them in the country's
 legislative body, the Constituent Assembly. This massive popular
 turnout followed a four-month electoral campaign in which six
 parties ranging from the center-left to the far-right
 participated. The political front of the guerrilla movement was
 invited to field candidates in the elections, but claimed that
 conducive conditions did not exist. The front supported the
 guerrillas who attempted to violently disrupt the elections. The
 Central Elections Council and over 200 international observers
 agreed that the electiqns, also witnessed by over 700 members of
 the international press, were fair and honest, the first such
 elections in over fifty years.
 The Constituent Assembly is made up of twenty-four representa-
 tives from the Christian Democrat Party, nineteen from the Natio-
 nal Republican Alliance, fourteen from the Party of National Con-
 ciliation, two from the Democratic Action Party, and one from the
 Salvadoran Popular Party. Political parties representing
 interests that previously tended to express their opposition
 through violence are now competing in the democratic forum of the
 Assembly. Political debate is often divisive, but the parties
 have shown themselves capable of reaching important compromises.
 The Constituent Assembly exercises legislative authority and is
 engaged in drafting a new consitution. The 1962 Constitution
 remains in effect in the interim, subject to the requirements of
 Decree 507, Decree 544 and the agrarian reform.
 Following the March elections, the Christian Democratic-military
 junta disaolved and transferred its authority to a provisional
 executive body. This body, elected by the Constituent Assembly,
 consists of President Alvaro Magana, an independent, and three
 vice presidents, each representing one of the three major demo-
 cratic parties. In September, the Political Commission esta-
 blished the date for presidential and municipal elections for no
 later than March 28, 1984. The political parties, with the
 exception of the minor Democratic Action party, signed the Pact
 of Apaneca of the Government of National Unity on August 2. The
 Pact establishes goals for the-Government under the headings:
 pacification, human rights, economic recuperation, reforms, con-
 fidence and security, and strengthening E1 Salvador's internatio-
 nal position. The Pact sets forth three commissions: Political,
 Peace, and Human Rights. The commissions will serve to set
 specific objectives and consider initiatives such as judicial
 reform and a further opening of the political system to elements
 of the left. On August 31, the Political Commission was formed.
 Likewise, the Human Rights Commission was created in December
 1982.
 These first steps toward representative democracy are significant
 changes in E1 Salvador's traditionally closed political system,
 which in the past primarily served and was dominated by the inte-
 rests of a small economic oligarchy. The elections and the
 
 
 502
 subsequent efforts of President Magana to foster consensus have
 to some degree checked the trend towards further political pola-
 rization and extremism which had made extralegal measures the
 predominant means of holding and transferring political power.
 It remains to be seen if democratic elements of the FDR, who have
 allied themselves to the guerrilla groups, will be willing to
 enter this evolving process. The Government and the military
 continue to believe that elements identified with the revolutio-
 nary left are subject to exclusion as long as they maintain ties
 to those who advocate the violent overthrow of the Government.
 Women are not excluded from political activity. There are many
 women professionals in the country. Women are deputies in the
 Constituent Assembly and hold positions in the administration.
 There are seven female deputies out of a total of sixty. A woman
 is a vice president of the Constituent Assembly.
 3. Government Attitude Regarding International and Non-
 Governmental Investigations of Alleged Violations of
 Human Rights
 El Salvador is the focus of considerable human rights-related
 attention in international organizations. The United Nations
 Human Rights Commission (UNHRC) has a special representative for
 El Salvador who visited the country in 1981 and 1982 at the invi-
 tation of the Government, and has prepared special reports to the
 United Nations General Assembly (UNGA) and UNHRC. The last
 report, presented in December 1982, recognized the Government's
 increased cooperation in its preparation. Two successive UNGA
 resolutions have condemned human rights violations in El Salva-
 dor. A resolution passed at the 36th UNGA used the human rights
 issue as a vehicle for proposing negotiations between the Govern-
 ment of El Salvador and the guerrillas, as did a resolution
 passed at the 38th UNHRC session. El Salvador opposed the human
 rights resolution because it contained calls for negotiations,
 which the government maintained would have legitimized the guer-
 rillas' use of force to achieve political power in the country.
 In contrast, El Salvador won broad support from the Latin Ameri-
 can countries when the Organization of American States General
 Assembly passed a resolution in December 1981 advocating a demo-
 cratic solution to the country's problems.
 Freedom House in its 1982 report characterized El Salvador as
 "Partly Free.' Amnesty International's 1982 report listed
 reports of arbitrary arrests, abductions and subsequent disap-
 pearances, torture, and extralegal executions as its concerns in
 El Salvador. In addition, the Inter-American Human Rights Com-
 mission expressed concern about violations of human rights
 against members of local human rights organizations in El Salva-
 dor.
 The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) is active in
 El Salvador with the concurrence and cooperation of the Salvado-
 ran Government. One of its main tasks is visiting prisoners held
 in the country's prisons and detention facilities.
 Within El Salvador, there are five organizations (in addition to
 the Government's Human Rights Commission) which have the defense
 of human rights as their stated objective: the Archdiocese
 Commission of Justice and Peace, Christian Legal Aid, the El
 Salvador Human Rights Commission, the Committee of Mothers and
 Relatives of Political Prisoners and the Disappeared,and the
 University Center for Investigation and Documentation, an infor-
 mation clearing house at the Jesuit-run University of Central
 America. Apostolic Adminstrator Rivera Y Damas has stated his
 hope that the Commission for Justice and Peace might serve as
 
 
 503
 mediator in a possible dialogue between the'Government and.the
 guerrillas. For the most part, their activities are limited to
 collecting data, filing writs of recourse in cases of disappeared
 persons, and attending to political prisoners. These groups are
 highly critical of government policy and denounce both the
 Government and the armed forces for human rights violations.
 These groups do not normally criticize guerrillas for similar
 violations. Some elements of the security forces regard them as
 having guerrilla sympathies and members of these organizations
 have been subject to arrest. Several disappeared in 1982.
 4. The Economic, Social and Cultural Situation
 El Salvador has a per capita gross national product of approxi-
 mately $592 per year. Production is largely based on agricul-
 ture. Decapitalized farms and investment uncertainties (in part
 related to agrarian reform), increasing population pressure on
 scarce land, and guerrilla attacks on the economic infrastructure
 have affected production and growth. Since 1960, and prior to
 1980, there had been rapid development in manufacturing, merchan-
 dising and industrial services. The political disintegration,
 which followed the October 15, 1979 coup, curtailed this progress.
 El Salvador's economy faces severe structural problems: e.g.
 extremely high population density for an agriculturally-based
 economy, high unemployment and underemployment, a lack of mineral
 wealth, and an inadequate health and education infrastructure.
 El Salvador is very densely populated, with 4,982,000 people
 within an area the size of the state of Massachusetts. The high
 population growth rate of 3.2 percent per year places constant
 pressure on meager government revenues. The population growth
 rate has increased substantially since 1960, when it was 2.3
 percent per year, due largely to an improvement in life expec-
 tancy (up from 50 years to 63 years) and in the infant mortality
 rate (down from more than 108 per 1,000 live births to 53 per
 1,000 live births). Education has also improved. Literacy is
 about 53 percent of the total adult population, up from 49 per-
 cent in 1960. In large part, this was a result of the mandatory
 lengthening of the primary school curriculum by three years in
 1971. Some 82 percent of all school-age children are enrolled,
 with virtually no discrimination on the basis of sex. Roughly
 ten-percent of the population has an inadequate caloric intake,
 an improvement from 20 percent in 1960. Some 53 percent of the
 population lives within easy access to potable water, up from 40
 percent in 1960. In the last two years, guerrilla attacks on
 aqueducts and the electrical grid have severely hindered access
 to potable water in many areas, particularly the eastern third of
 the country.
 Much of the progress in health and education programs took place
 in the 1970's. Civil strife during the last three years, how-
 ever, has disrupted development, especially in rural areas.
 Leftist guerrillas have specifically targeted the economic
 infrastructure, attacking the power grid, bridges, roads,
 railroads, the telephone system, and crop processing and storage
 facilities.
 In March 1980, El Salvador instituted sweeping social and econo-
 mic reforms designed in part to transfer ownership of farmlands
 from a small number of large landholders to those who worked the
 land. Under Phase I of the land reform program, all farms of
 more than 500 hectares were converted into worker cooperatives to
 be managed jointly by the members themselves and the Government
 land reform institute for a period of up to five years, after
 
 
 504
 which the Government would withdraw and the cooperatives would
 become autonomous. The titling process, after a slow start, is
 continuing. Under Phase III of the land reform process, farms
 not worked directly by their owners can be claimed, in parcels of
 up to seven hectares each, by the tenant farmers or sharecroppers
 who work them. In spite of the administrative complexity of this
 task, 34,674 provisional titles (provisional because adequate
 contract surveys take time and because arrangements for compen-
 sating former owners are not completed) have already been issued
 to new owners. Approximately 416,000 people have directly bene-
 fitted from Phases I and II of the land reform.
 Following the March elections some members of the Constituent
 Assembly attempted to dismantle land reform. A series of
 loosely-worded decrees, that were subject to broad interpreta-
 tion, placed the reforms in jeopardy. Thousands of peasants were
 illegally evicted by landowners who felt the passage of these
 decrees signaled the end of land reform in El Salvador. This
 attempt to derail land reform has been halted. By means of exe-
 cutive decree the President closed the legal loophole that would
 have left thousands of peasants without legal recourse to regain
 their land. The Government mounted a major media campaign to
 identify those illegally evicted. Approximately 4,800 peasants
 reported being forced off their land, although the actual number
 is probably higher. Elements of the military accompanied pea-
 sants back to the land. Roughly 50 percent of those reportedly
 evicted have not yet been restored. Many of these cases have
 been passed to the judiciary to decide. Given the virtual break-
 down of the legal system, it is unlikely that these cases will be
 decided expeditiously.
 Upon completion of both the Phase I and Phase III programs, some
 750,000 persons should directly benefit, and more than 23 percent
 of total farmland will be affected by the reform effort. Imple-
 mentation of Phase II of the agrarian reform program, affecting
 medium-sized farms (100-500 hectares), except for voluntary land
 sales, has been postponed indefinitely due to administrative and
 financial problems, in spite of some continuing support within
 the Salvadoran Government. Bureaucratic delays and guerrilla
 warfare in the countryside have hampered the implementation of
 all land reform measures.
 Although E1 Salvador has traditionally supported and continues to
 support private property rights, compensation of former owners of
 expropriated property, in the form of cash and bonds, is being
 paid slowly. As of December 1982, 130 affected owners of Phase I
 properties of over 500 hectares have received 72.6 million dol-
 lars in agrarian reform bonds and six million dollars in cash.
 Under the Decree 207 program (Phase III) transferring property to
 tenant farmers and sharecroppers, 3,584,199 dollars have been
 paid in compensation, to 136 former owners.
 In an effort to promote agrarian reform, to facilitate structural
 change, and to broaden credit availability, the government
 nationalized the commercial banking system, and placed under
 state monopoly the foreign marketing of coffee and sugar, two of
 the nation's three major export crops. Tight foreign exchange
 controls are in effect, restricting outflows of capital and
 imports. Domestic credit is also in short supply for both public
 and private sector uses.
 In 1982, El Salvador's economy experienced its fourth consecutive
 year of decline. In 1982, output showed a further deterioration,
 and unemployment, already dangerously high (about 40 percent),
 has risen further. The principal reasons have been higher import
 
 
 505
 costs, weakness in the world markets for its major exports,
 disruption caused by terrorism and guerrilla warfare, and a deep
 lack of investor confidence in the economy. The weakness in the
 economy has placed a severe strain on government resources,
 impeded smooth implementation of reforms,.reduced the nation's
 capacity to continue development in education, health and lower-
 income housing, and added to the political and administrative
 difficulties by increasing discontent and further dividing the
 nation. In July 1982, the International Monetary Fund approved a
 stand-by agreement for El Salvador, under which the Government
 has undertaken a number of measures to stabilize its economy.
 
 
 506
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS ANO GRANTS- 0-3LIGAT:O1S AND LOAA AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.o.FISCAL YEARS - M.LLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 LOUNTRY: EL SALVADOR
 19s0     19R1     1982
 I.tCUN. ASSIST-TTAL...         58.3   114.0     152.2
 LOANS .............        40.4      80.0     63.8
 GR;,NTS .............      17.9      34.0    118.4
 A.AIO  .................        52.3     78.3    154.6
 LOANS ...............      37.4      53.a     43.9
 .GRANTS .............   ... 14.9     24.5    110.7
 (SEC.SUPPASSIST,)...         9.1     44.9    115.0
 B.F003 FOR PEACE .......        5.5      35.3     27.6
 LOANS .......  ..... 3.0            25.2     19.9
 GRANTS .............        ..5       7.1      7.?
 TITLE I-TOTAL .......            3.0     26.2     19.9
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS,....         3.0      26.Z     19.9
 PA. IN FOR. CURR,....         0.0       0.0      0.0
 TITLE II-TOTAL .........         2.5      ?.1      7.7
 d.RELIEF.EC.DEV S WFP.         0.5       4.2      5.5
 VOL.RELIEF AGEN;Y .....        2.0       4.9      2.2
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...         0.5       0.4     .0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............. 0.5            0.4      0.0"
 PEACE CORPS ......        0.5      0.0       0.0
 NARCOTICS ........       .0.0      0.0       0.0
 OTHER.............       0.0      0.4       0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL,.          5.9      35.5     82.0
 LOANS .................     5.7      10.0     16.5
 GRANTS ................   0.2      25.5     65.5
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........        0.0      25.0     63.5
 B.CREODT SALES-FMS ....         5.7     10.0     16.5
 G.INTL'MILE0,TRNG ...         .0.2      0.5      Z.0
 D.TRAN-EAXESS STOCK,..         0.0       0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS,.....,0         000      0.0       0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON.   MIL .        64.2     149.5    264.2
 LOANS. .............. .. 46.1      90.0     80.3
 GRANTS.............        16.1      59.5    183.9
 OTHER US LOANS .......0..          .1      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......        0.1      0.0       0.0
 ALL OTHER .................     0.0      0.0       0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1980     1931     1982    .1946-82
 TOTAL ........    48.9     40.5    112.4     727.1
 IBRO               0.0      0.0      0.0     214.Z
 IFC                0.0      0.0       0.0      1.0
 IDA                0.0      0.      . 0.0     28.0
 1DB               45.5     40.4    112.4     456.9
 A06                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 AFOB               0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 UNUP               0.4      0.1       0.0     21.0
 OTriER-UN          0.0      0.0       0.0      6.0
 EEC                0.0      0.0       0.0  "   0.0
 
 
 50?
