El Salvador
Like last year's account, the State Department report on human rights in El Salvador during 1992 is a marked improvement over the extremely politicized reports published during the 1980s. The State Department acknowledges that during El Salvador's first full year of peace "human rights violations persist. Both the FMLN and the ESAF [Armed Forces of El Salvador] committed human rights violations [sic) in 1992." While the attempt at symmetry -- repeated throughout - is inappropriate, the FMLN guerrilla movement did continue to violate humanitarian law during the period of "armed peace" during which armed combatants on both sides of the conflict were confined to assigned areas. Despite the improved candor, the report remains flawed in several respects.
El Salvador is traversing what United Nations Secretary General Boutros Bou-tros-Ghali has called a "negotiated revolution." In the words of Pedro Nikken, the Independent Expert for El Salvador appointed by the UN Commission on Human Rights, "human rights form a virtual spinal column of the set of the peace agreements. . . ." Human rights violations, that is, abuses committed by government forces, were both a root cause of the 12-year civil war and a byproduct of the conflict. Insurgent forces also violated the rules of engagement as set down in the Geneva Conventions. The system of impunity which long characterized Salva-doran society was further entrenched by the lawlessness of the war years. As such, tackling this system of impunity and replacing it with strong institutions capable of guaranteeing equal rights for
all Salvadorans is a sine qua non for establishing a lasting peace. While the series of peace agreements and implementing legislation worked out under UN auspices over the course of several years provides the framework for Salvadoran society today, these agreements somehow disappear in the State Department account. Instead, the report is a largely generic and bland presentation that could have been presented in many other war years, had candor been allowed.
Particularly lacking in the report are any details or assessment of compliance by the Cristiani government with those provisions of the accords which deal directly with human rights concerns. As Mr. Nikken observed in his November 1992 report, "[cjompliance with the Peace Agreements in letter and spirit provides a real opportunity, perhaps unprecedented in the history of the country, to jettison a structure which allowed the most serious human rights violations to be committed and imposed an unjust system of economic and social control on most of the population." One example of the State Department's neglect appears in the report's second paragraph, which incorrectly states that President Cristiani "had until December 31 to implement" the findings of the Ad Hoc Commission, set up under the accords to recommend the transfer or dismissal of those officers deemed unsuitable to serve in a peacetime Army under civilian rule.
In fact, President Cristiani was to implement the Ad Hoc Commission's findings by late November. The December 31 date represents one of the many
102
EI Salvador
"recalendarizations" of accord deadlines, suggested by Mr. Boutros-Ghali because of government stalling. The State Department says further that "[a]t the end of the year, the Government was discussing implementation of the Ad Hoc Commission recommendations with the FMLN and the U.N." Not so. In fact, the UN made clear it was not prepared to "discuss implementation" by informing the government that the Ad Hoc Commission's findings were not "negotiable." UN mediators refused to enter into any discussions between the government and the FMLN, a faction of which expressed its willingness to allow certain high-rank-ing officers, including Defense Minister Ponce, to remain on duty. Moreover, President Cristiani failed to fulfill the commitment he made to comply by December 31, provoking a reprimand by the Secretary General on January 2, 1993, but no comment from the State Department. Seven months later, the Cristiani government had still not fully implemented the Ad Hoc Commission's findings, which are binding.
The unwillingness -- or inability -- of the Cristiani government to "purge" the Armed Forces of human rights violators is a key indicator of its commitment to the peace process. As Mr. Nikken observed, "a failure to fully observe the prescribed requirements might introduce a degree of skepticism and discouragement regarding the true subordination of the armed forces to civilian authority and the real scope of the Peace Agreements." In his second report, covering the period October-December 1992, Mr. Nikken lamented that this "is exactly what happened." The Independent Expert identified "lingering tendencies in the armed forces to impose
their views on the civilian authorities and that the structural change required by society for full consolidation of an appropriate institutional framework for full safeguards of human rights has not yet been completed." In failing to point out Mr. Cristiani's lack of compliance, the State Department misses an opportunity to encourage a step that is key to the future observance of human rights in the country.
The State Department's oversight on this issue is consistent with another generalized flaw in its reporting. While recent reports have acknowledged the military's culpability in widespread abuses, the State Department does not hold civilian authorities responsible for their systematic failure to identify perpetrators and hold them accountable. The government's duty to actively prevent human rights violations and provide redress once they have occurred is well established in international law.
While admitting crimes by members of the Armed Forces, the report does not make it clear that these forces have fostered a climate propitious to lawlessness, and sheltered those who break the law. One such case is the October 29 death of Roberto Visquez after being shot by National Police detectives who were in a car without license plates. The UN Observer Mission in El Salvador (ONUSAL) said the "shots were fired without warning, apparently in an attempt to make an arrest." The National Police refused to cooperate in the investigation.
In another incident, on April 7, the new "Military Police" -- the old Treasury Police by another name (see below) -
103
EI Salvador
permitted Major José Alfredo Jiménez Moreno, detained since 1986 in connection with a kidnapping-for-profit ring, to escape the day before he was to be sentenced to a 30-year prison term. Through the years, U.S. officials repeatedly labelled this a "test case" for the Salva-doran justice system; the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation had aided the investigation. In August 1988, The Washington Post reported that with "money growing short and their power waning, [death squad members) turned to kidnapping wealthy businessmen to maintain their lifestyles, making it appear to be the work of leftist rebels. ..." Many of the officers implicated in the case were close associates of Roberto D'Aubuisson, though he was not formally accused of participation in the ring. In May 1988, the presiding judge in the case was murdered days before he was to rule on an amnesty petition for the defendants; he had indicated his intention to deny amnesty. Despite having been in Washington's spotlight for years, the State Department report does not mention the end of this longstanding case.
Finally, the State Department is too quick to label certain incidents as "common crime," when other observers such as ONUSAL and the Independent Expert cite evidence to the contrary. One example is the November 17 murder of Juan Arnulfo García Gámez, a security guard of an FMLN commander who had once been in the Air Force. The report says "reliable sources" indicate that he died in a botched robbery attempt, while ONUSAL says the "case is still under investigation, on the reasonable assumption that it was politically motivated." While it is true that the underlying motivation of many
acts of violence in El Salvador today is murkier than was the case during the war years. El Salvador remains a polarized society dominated by a strong military and a small clique of powerful and economically advantaged people, many of whom are heavily armed — precisely a climate in which human rights violations flourish. ONUSAL has noted the tendency to exaggerate the incidence of common crime and guarded "against 'inflating' the situation of violence, since an over-exaggerated perception may lead to security policies that might distort the implementation of the peace agreements and the consolidation of the rule of law."
With regard to changes in the Security Forces resulting from the peace process, the report states simply that the "Treasury Police, National Guard, and Civil Defense Forces were abolished in 1992." While technically true, this statement does not reflect the full story. Two of El Salvador's Security Forces were scheduled for dissolution on March 2. Instead of dissolving the forces, the Crist-iani government recast them as "Military Police" and "National Border Guards"; both remained in their original barracks. ONUSAL mediated the ensuing crisis in the peace process, negotiating a compromise that allowed the "new" "Military Police" to stay put, while obligating the National Guard to move out of its garrison. According to the UN Secretary-General's May 26, 1992 report, "the Government created further misgivings by securing rapid adoption in the Assembly of legislation that did not clearly abolish the Treasury Police and National Guard. ONUSAL made it clear that the law, as adopted, does not comply with the Agreement." On June 24, the Legislative
104
EI Salvador
Assembly finally repealed the law authorizing the Security Forces.
The State Department's brief mention of the National Civilian Police (PNC) in the report's introduction omits the serious delays in establishing this key component of the transition process. The government took five months to appoint the PNC's director and the Academy opened four months behind schedule; by year's end, a deputy director had not been named. Nor does the report mention the government's failure to make available an appropriate building for the new Police Academy. In a September 1992 study, the U.S. General Accounting Office reported that when Academy staff members moved into their temporary quarters, they found that "before the military personnel vacated the site, they stripped it of anything usable, including beds, door jams, windows, lockers and light bulbs." The State Department is also silent concerning the Cristiani government's failure to provide adequate funding for the new police, which has a shortfall in the millions of dollars. The government's unwillingness to provide funding or even to give the police a budget line in the national budget has discouraged donor governments from supporting the project.
Nor does the State Department mention that the old National Police Academy continues to train recruits and that the numbers of National Policemen has in fact grown significantly since the cease-fire. In May, Secretary-General Boutros-Ghali reported to the Security Council that the
Government has transferred large
numbers of personnel from the
two former public security bodies
to the National Police on the grounds that its responsibility for public security gives it no alternative. The Government argues that there is no express prohibition on this in the Agreements. ONUSAL made it clear that in its view this argument is irreconcilable with the whole thrust of the Agreements. . . .
In November, the Secretary-General informed the Security Council that 10 of these Security Force members had been placed in senior positions in the new National Civilian Police. Though ONUSAL objected, the men have remained in the PNC. These appointments were made despite the fact that, according to Mr. Boutros-Ghali, in May the government gave "assurances that it [would] not present former members of the two bodies as candidates in the immediate future." The Independent Expert related that in violation of prior agreements, the first applicants for the new police corps who were former National Policemen were not vetted by ONUSAL or the Commission for the Consolidation of Peace (COPAZ), the body established by the peace accords to monitor their implementation. While Salvadoran officials have assured the U.S. embassy that aid earmarked for the National Civilian Police is not being used for the National Police, the money does represent resources for public security that rightfully belong to the PNC, if the Cristiani government is serious about assigning public security functions exclusively to civilians.
The PNC has reported a serious lack of basic police equipment such as radios, patrol cars and pistols, all items which
105
EI Salvador
were supplied by the United States in abundance to the Salvadoran Armed Forces over the last decade. Foreign diplomats close to the situation express fears that the Salvadoran government is purposely delaying deployment of the new PNC in order to secure the presence of the National Police in as much of the country as possible during the coming electoral period and perhaps to ensure its future existence. Urging that the PNC be established in accordance with both the spirit and letter of the accords, Mr. Nik-ken observed that "emasculation [of the PNC] would mean not only the loss of a necessary instrument for the common good but also the virtual repetition of a past in which public security forces were known within and outside the country to be responsible for grave and systematic violations of human rights." In not dealing with the PNC in a more serious fashion, the report misses an opportunity to urge compliance on a key issue with direct impact on human rights. The oversight is particularly curious -- or perhaps can be explained -- given that the United States has allocated considerable financial and human resources to the PNC, more than any other foreign donor.
The report's tentative assertion that the parties to the conflict "allegedly committed murders that may have had political motives" is a serious understatement. ONUSAL and the Independent Expert reported numerous cases throughout 1992. ONUSAL admitted for investigation 106 summary executions in the last seven months of 1992. In repetition of last year, the State Department seems eager to dismiss as common crime cases that in the view of other observers have clear political overtones. The report lists
seven cases in which the identity of the victim could lead to the conclusion that right-wing forces had committed murder for political reasons. Yet four of these are described by the report as common crime, two of them based upon the report of the discredited Special Investigative Unit (SIU). Other instances are simply baffling. The report says that the January 11 killing of Francisca Chávez, a community organizer, was "labeled . . . the work of death squads" by the Archdi-ocesan monitor, Tutela Legal, and the non-governmental Human Rights Commission of El Salvador. However, elsewhere the report says no death squad killings were recorded during 1992.
The State Department's reporting suffers greatly by comparison with other sources. One grisly crime -- the March 2 machete murder of Nazario de Jesús Gracias, a watchman for the FEASIES trade union -- is dealt with in a cursory fashion which perhaps explains the weak reference to "credible charges that official elements [sic] were responsible for the murder." By contrast, ONUSAL's fourth report devoted an entire page to the crime, focusing on the record of harassment of both the victim and the union and the grossly inadequate steps taken by the court and criminal investigators following the murder. Amnesty International reported that SIU investigators first appeared on the scene 14 hours after the killing. The State Department says Gracias had been previously detained by the military, but unlike the UN account, seems to cast doubt on his charges that he had been threatened.
Since the cease-fire, human rights reports as well as the press have been full
106
EI Salvador
of accounts of violent attacks using heavy weaponry. The peace accords required the FMLN to turn over its entire stockpile to the UN -- which it has failed to do - and for military weapons in the hands of civilians to be collected. The government has not done so, nor has any move been made to reduce the number of weapons in possession of the Army, whose peacetime needs clearly are less. Given that the United States government donated most of these arms, it now bears a particular responsibility to push for a full accounting of military weaponry and that the weapons be deposited in a responsible fashion, not put to illicit use - for either political or criminal ends.
Four cases in the section on political and extrajudicial killings are attributed to the FMLN; only one of them is also covered by the UN. In identifying the victim, José Mauricio Quintana Abrego, as having "ties to ESAF intelligence," the State Department does not accurately present the facts. According to ONUSAL's sixth report, Quintana was a lawyer for over 10 years for C-2, Army Intelligence. "According to his family's testimony, he was privy to a considerable amount of confidential information," said ONUSAL. "Bearing a grudge against the armed forces, he had recently shown a willingness to disclose this information to human rights bodies." According to this account, the SIU arrested three suspects who were "former members of the armed forces, who could have acted 'on instructions.'" ONUSAL concluded that the "murderers' modus operandi was similar to that of the death squads. The evidence . . . points to a politically motivated extrajudicial execution." This is one of three cases in which ONUSAL, while not
stating so directly, suggested that members of military intelligence may have been killed by the army itself.
As noted earlier, the report asserts, rather curiously, that there were "no confirmed cases of death squad killings," something of a contradiction in terms, given the nature of death squad murders. Throughout 1992, UN and non-govern-mental monitors as well as the new Human Rights Ombudsman continued to report killings bearing the characteristics of death squads. IDHUCA, the human rights institute at the Central American University, compiled statistics from several non-governmental monitors and arrived at a total of 49 deaths which bore the characteristics of death squad killings during 1992. The report appropriately mentions - though does not condemn -threats received by several individuals and groups and happily does not repeat last year's facile acceptance that "government investigations failed to determine who produced the communiqués." Both ONUSAL and the Independent Expert (and former UN Special Representative Pastor Ridruejo) have denounced official tolerance of death threats and challenged the government to stop them.
ONUSAL's sixth report showed that "death threats rank first among complaints involving right to life"; 165 such complaints were investigated in the last seven months of 1992. Given the way in which the threats are often delivered, identification of those responsible is possible, yet no progress has been made in stopping this dangerous practice. Mr. Nikken recalled
that the mass media are required
107
EI Salvador
by Salvadoran law to demand that those placing the insert provide proof of their identity, and to reveal that identity if the content of the insert has endangered individuals. The publication of such inserts infringes article 6 (1) of the Constitution, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the American Convention on Human Rights and articles 6 and 9 of the Press Act. However, the authorities appear to have adopted a passive attitude toward them.
During 1992, San Salvador Archbishop Arturo Rivera Damas was threatened twice as was the staff of the SALPRESS news agency, though elsewhere the State Department seems to question whether that threat occurred. On October 22, the "Maximilian Hernández Brigade" threatened to kill the FMLN leadership; members of the ONUSAL mission; and foreign journalists and other foreigners who "invaded the country" and are "collaborating with the terrorists and supporting the peace accords." ONUSAL members were referred to in the communiqué as "pseudo communists of the white pest." The Salvadorans' longstanding failure to identify and expose those issuing death threats calls into question their commitment to stop this reprehensible tradition. On the contrary, the practice spread last year to the afternoon daily El Mundo, which in the past did not accept such advertising.
The section on political and other extrajudicial killing concludes by reporting "some progress in longstanding incidents of human rights abuse," a few of which
warrant comment. This account simply states that the FMLN member convicted in 1991 for killing human rights leader Herbert Anaya Sanabria was sentenced to a 30-year jail term during 1992. This infamous case is presented in an even skimpier fashion than in last year's inadequate discussion. Jorge Alberto Miranda Arévalo was convicted on the basis of a confession extracted under pressure, which he later recanted. The case was characterized by numerous irregularities, unmentioned by the State Department. A judge who dismissed the case on evidentiary grounds was demoted, and ultimately fled the country when a grenade exploded under his car. Incidents such as these call into question whether the action in this case can be termed "progress."
The treatment of the case against defendant Adolfo Aguilar Payés would have benefitted from some additional details which make clear the severity of the miscarriage of justice to which the defendant was subjected. Curiously, it is not until the report's later fair trial discussion that the State Department correctly states that "there are persons [jailed] against whom evidence is spurious (such as Payés ...)." ONUSAL examined the case closely and found that Aguilar Payés was deprived of his liberty for over three years solely on the basis of an extrajudicial confession obtained by the use of force and not substantiated by two independent witnesses, as required by law. In November 1990, the public prosecutor had moved to dismiss charges because of the confession's weaknesses. The State Department incorrectly reports that the Human Rights Ombudsman "gave the judge 3 days to begin the trial process,"
108
EI Salvador
something not within the Ombudsman's power.
The final case in this section illustrates both a noticeable increase in the State Department's candor, as well as the limits of that candor. The 1981 El Mo-zote massacre, in which between 700 and 1,000 people died at the hands of uniformed members of the Salvadoran Armed Forces over the course of several days, received a one-sentence treatment last year: "A judicial investigation continues into the alleged ESAF massacre of several hundred people in and around the town of Mozote in 1981." The notorious case - which received extensive media coverage in El Salvador and abroad during 1992 - receives five sentences this year and the admission that a "mass murder" was "confirmed" by an exhumation by international experts. According to the State Department, the massacre "now appears to have been perpetrated by ESAF units." This is somewhat misleading. Based on available evidence, this massacre has long appeared to be the work of the armed forces, a fact that the State Department is now, belatedly, acknowledging.
Michael Massing, a journalist who was involved in the controversy in 1981-1982, recently called the El Mozote massacre "perhaps the single most controversial story of the entire Salvadoran saga." Correspondents for The New York Times and The Washington Post who visited the murder scene published chilling accounts of cadavers and body parts lying about a month after the killings. Committed to "drawing the line" against leftist forces in Central America, the Reagan administration could not afford to let a massacre
obstruct its developing partnership with the Salvadoran Armed Forces -- particularly not when the killers belonged to the Atlacatl Battalion, the newly trained elite unit on which U.S. advisors were pinning so much hope. The U.S. television program 60 Minutes revealed that a U.S. embassy officer sent to investigate the reports concluded that a massacre had occurred, and reported his findings to the ambassador. Yet what the State Department stated publicly was quite different. In February 1982, Assistant Secretary of State Thomas Enders told Congress that "no evidence could be found to confirm that government forces systematically massacred civilians in the operation zone." U.S. officials also set out to discredit the two journalists; many believe official pressure led to one of them being recalled as The Times' San Salvador bureau chief. Only after publication of the UN Truth Commission report in early 1993, did the State Department finally admit that the reporters' accounts were accurate.
In keeping with the last few years, the report candidly acknowledges the use of torture and other ill-treatment by Salvadoran authorities. Both the Independent Expert and ONUSAL report numerous cases of abuse by National Police when making arrests. ONUSAL's sixth report listed several deaths following severe beatings by National and Municipal Police. Of the six cases examined in that reporting period, ONUSAL found that none of them involved torture. IDHUCA's composite statistics showed six cases of torture during 1992 and 11 incidents of ill-treatment.
The sections of the report devoted to
109
EI Salvador
the failure of El Salvador's justice system to provide due process give a sense of the system's glaring problems. The subject has come to the fore of public debate, which may improve chances for meaningful judicial reform in coming years. Despite the report's assertion of "some progress" in the area and millions of dollars spent by the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), ONU-SAL concluded that the "administration of justice continues to be woefully inadequate and totally incapable of ensuring fulfillment by the State of its duty to guarantee those rights or respect for the right of citizens to due process of law. . . ." The report's statement that habeas corpus is "frequently used" though usually denied, is perhaps a bit of an overstatement. The director of ONUSAL's human rights division, Diego Garcia-Sayàn, has said that "habeas corpus practically does not exist in El Salvador." These petitions are often referred to law students, who are not in a position to aggressively seek a response from arresting authorities. Habeas corpus petitions are widely considered a useless exercise; those filed often lie dormant.
Relating accurately that Salvadoran media now include FMLN points of view, the report lists some disturbing examples of attacks on the press. The Committee to Protect Journalists cited three incidents during 1992, down from 10 in 1991. One incident not mentioned by the State Department was the harassment in early 1992 of José Alfredo Ramirez, a cameraman who filmed the September 1991 Jesuit trial for Court TV. On February 19, soldiers entered and searched Ramirez' home. Members of the Atlacatl Battalion, the unit to which the Jesuit
killers belonged, pressured him to provide a copy of the trial tape. Frightened, Ramirez fled the country.
The report's brief discussion of freedom of assembly and association correctly reports that scores of non-governmental organizations, "including those allied with the FMLN" operate openly, but does not mention that many organizations continue to be denied the "legal personality" needed to operate fully and legally. Since the end of hostilities, many organizations have sought to legalize themselves to take full advantage of increased political openness, only to be caught in a bureaucratic maze. ONUSAL's sixth report says "recognition of legal personality of non-governmental organizations, associations, trade unions and communities is routinely delayed or indefinitely postponed."
Inexplicably, the 1992 report includes an account of the 1991 legislative and municipal elections, reporting that "international observers" deemed them "free and fair." Yet it does not mention that the campaign was marred by considerable violence and attempts to intimidate leftist candidates and their supporters. During 1992, the opposition began to express concern about the government's failure to bring outdated voter registries up to date in time for the March 1994 general elections, arguably the most important in Salvadoran history. Spot checks have revealed a significant number of "voters" who have died or moved away. The opposition estimates that as many as one million eligible voters, or about a third of the voting age population, are not registered. It charges further that the body regulating the elections, the Supreme
110
EI Salvador
Electoral Council, has not simplified registry procedures to facilitate documenting as many new voters as possible for this polling in which the FMLN will participate for the first time.
The State Department accurately observes that the new Human Rights Ombudsman "was slow to begin monitoring cases," but fails to describe some key reasons. The new office, which is to fulfill many of the monitoring and advocacy functions currently fulfilled by ONU-SAL, is the result of a constitutional reform stemming from the peace process. Having failed to get its candidate, Benjamin Cestoni, appointed Ombudsman, the Cristiani government chose not to provide adequate funding to the office. The new Ombudsman, Dr. Carlos Mauricio Molina Fonseca, spent his first months on the job raising funds before operations could even begin. Molina Fonseca has no previous human rights experience, as is the case with much of the staff. One senior staff member who did have human rights experience, attorney Eduardo Pineda Valenzuela, was critically wounded on July 31 when two gunmen entered his home. Pineda Valenzuela, who formerly headed the human rights division at the Attorney General's office where he prosecuted the Jesuit case, died from his wounds in early 1993. The attack had a truly chilling effect on the Ombudsman's fledgling human rights efforts. In a public snub of the Ombudsman, the government appointed Mr. Cestoni, who long headed the USAID-funded governmental Human Rights Commission, as its "Commissioner for Human Rights." The Independent Expert has urged the Cristiani administration to act aggressively to strengthen the Ombudsman's office and provide it with
the necessary physical, technical and human resources. ONUSAL's most recent report said the office was beginning to "show signs of activity which augur well for its ability to fulfill its constitutional mandate and live up to society's legitimate expectation that it will be able to play a substantive role in safeguarding human rights."
In a step backward toward the dangerous name-calling of the past, the report says the non-governmental human rights commission is "viewed by many as linked to the FMLN." This gratuitous comment can only be meant to cast doubt and aspersion on the commission, which regardless of its unstated political sympathies, does legitimate human rights work. The State Department's characterization is material to the discussion only if it means to suggest that the organization's efforts are in some manner influenced or distorted by the sympathies attributed to it. If this is the case the State Department should so state.
The report's lengthy discussion of worker rights accurately and appropriately details El Salvador's outdated labor codes and the bureaucratic and political obstacles posed to union organizing. While the number of cases dropped in 1992, the State Department, quoting ONUSAL, notes that the government failed to "investigate adequately many violent crimes against labor leaders." Despite the peace, trade unionists remain a sector singled out for harassment and violence, and some of these cases should have been included in this section. ONUSAL found in fact that "complaints of violations of trade union freedom and infringement of trade union rights steadily in-
111
EI Salvador
creased" in the last seven months of 1992.
ONUSAL stated succinctly that the "exercise of trade union freedom continues to be restricted" and "secondary legislation is seriously deficient." The Salvadoran government has only ratified six of the 171 Conventions of the International Labor Organization. According to Dr. Gerardo Cárdenas, ILO representative for Central America, "El Salvador is the country in Central America which has approved the fewest ILO conventions."
Not surprisingly, the report fails to mention that USAID itself was singled out last year for promoting unfair labor practices in El Salvador and elsewhere in Central America. The New York-based National Labor Committee in Support of Democracy and Human Rights in El Salvador, in conjunction with 60 Minutes, reported that U.S. development officials were encouraging factories to leave the United States to start production in El Salvador, where they suggested not too subtly that labor activists could be controlled. The office of the U.S. Trade Representative had previously admitted for review petitions alleging serious worker rights violations in El Salvador, which remain pending.
112
