EL SALVADOR
While continuing a recent trend toward a more balanced discussion of human rights in El Salvador, the 1993 report is somewhat disappointmg. It fails to take full advantage of changed circumstances and newly available information to reassess more thoroughly its approach to reporting on El Salvador, which has been among the most skewed of any country for most of the last 12 years. While the report notes the extent to which the relevant parties have implemented the Peace Accords and the UN Truth Commission recommendations, it frequently understates the importance of non-compliance.
One underlying weakness of the report is more subtle than in prior years. While it generally does not misstate facts, its organization, emphasis and level of detail are such as to leave a misleading overall impression of the human rights situation in El Salvador. For example, in its first paragraph, the report states: "Both parties were at times slow to implement some requirements of the accords, most of which applied to the Government, but compliance with most key elements was achieved by year's end." This seriously understates the fact that the Cristiani administration bore the overwhelming share of responsibility for implementing the accords and was primarily responsible for delaying and at times blocking progress. In fact, the UN Observer Mission in El Salvador (ONUSAL) has extended its mandate until the end of the year, partly in response to the government's poor performance regarding complementation. The report attempts to appear balanced or neutral by simply stating findings without giving critical analysis or expressing clear opinions; however, this attempt often has the opposite effect, minimizing the accountability of the government in order to emphasize that of the Farabundo Marti Front for National Liberation (FMLN).
An example of the distorting effect of this neutrality is the reference to a May 20 "confrontation . .. between [National Police] riot police and demonstrators representing the 'war wounded'. . . in San Salvador." In fact, this demonstration was violently repressed by members of the National Police. As a result, one man, Santos Martinez Pérez, died and seven people were arrested. Two detainees later died as a result of beatings. The Salvadoran authorities' claim that Martinez Pérez was killed by a stray bullet was disputed by the non-governmental Human Rights Commission of El Salvador (CDHES). The report does, however, note the government's tepid response to this serious abuse of authority, commenting that, when a policeman was fmally arrested on charges of manslaughter, "the Attorney General's office sou^t to reduce the charge to negligent homicide. Pending resolution of that issue, the PN refused to relinquish the accused to the judge in charge of the case, an example of PN resistance to civilian oversight."
The treatment of tíiis case is exceptional, however; in general, the report reflects a reluctance to hold the Salvadoran government accountable for its acts and
95
CRITIQUE 1993
omissions. At times, this seriously undermines the credibility of the report. For example, in the section on political and other extrajudicial killing, the report states, "Demilitarization of large numbers of ex-combatants, poor morale among the PN, the incomplete transition to the new PNC [National Civilian Police], and the large number of arms in circulation among the citizenry left the Government unable to prevent or control significant criminal activity by private armed individuals or groups, some of whose actions may have been politically motivated." With this passage, the report effectively relieves the government of responsibility for between 15 and 36 murders of FMLN members since the signing of the Peace Accords. Moreover, the second half of 1993 saw a sharp increase in apparently politically motivated murders as the country moved closer to the March 1994 elections.
The report's treatment of the resurgence of death squad activities is especially troubling given the tendency of State Department reporting during the 1980s to minimize the role of these paramilitary groups. The report denies the existence of "confirmed cases of death squad killing in 1993," even though both national and international human rights groups expressed outspoken concern about stepped-up death squad incidents during the year. Further, the appointment of the Joint Group on December 8 to investigate political violence since the peace accords indicates the existence of a serious problem, which the report evades by talking in terms of unconfirmed allegations.
Numerous cases have been documented, such as the murder of Francisco Veliz Castellanos, a member of the National Council of the FMLN and candidate for the National Assembly in the Department of San Salvador. Veliz was assassinated in broad daylight by two unidentified men who shot him in the head and neck at close range. Witnesses stated that several vehicles were involved in the shooting, which appears to have been a carefiilly planned operation. The report mentions the ease with which the assailants were able to flee, but should also have alluded to the presence of a National Police patrol in the vicinity. The report mentions the "high-profile investigation" of the case but omits charges by the investigating panel of the National Commission for the Consolidation of Peace (COPAZ) that the authorities had blocked the investigation.
The report cursorily mentions other cases of "potentially" politically motivated killings. It states that Heleno Hernán Castro Guevara was killed on October 30 on a highway in San Vicente Department and that two other FMLN members were killed on October 27 in Guazapa, in the department of San Salvador, The body of Castro, a leader of the FMLN faction Expresión Renovadora del Pueblo (ERP) and, like Francisco Veliz, a member of the FMLN's National Council, was found near Santa Cruz Porrillo to the east of San Salvador. Two other cases that occurred within days of the Castro murder involved Medardo Brizuela Hernández and Justa Victoria Orellana Cortez, both former FMLN combatants from Guazapa, who were shot dead by unidentified individuals in Cantón San Lucas on
96
EL SALVADOR
the night of October 27, Ballistic evidence indicated that Orellana Cortez was shot at close range as she was breastfeeding her child. The report comments that "the four deaths in 5 days spawned a number of allegations of renewed death squad killings. Investigators concluded, however, that Castro was killed when an argument escalated following a car accident. The ERP concurred in this assessment. Police are looking for the murder suspect." The report does not address the other killings, however, thus creating the erroneous impression of a consensus that they too were not politically motivated.
One instance of this apparent resurgence of death squad activity is not even mentioned in the report. This is the case of Manuel de Jesús Acevedo, a former FMLN combatant and husband of FMLN Electoral Affairs Secretary Doris Elena Hernández. Acevedo and Remberto Antonio López were found shot dead on November 8 in a garbage dump in Colonia Las Margaritas, Soyapango, People from the neighborhood found them with their hands tied behind their backs with barbed wire and with clear signs of torture. The bodies were examined by a Justice of Peace and the Instituto de Medicina Legal, Initial police investigations confirmed that both had been shot twice in the head. Both men had been missing since November 6 and appeared to have been murdered that day.
There was also a disturbing increase in death threats during 1993, and the report would have benefited fi-om some contextual information about these. For instance, an introductory paragraph on death squad activity mentions threats from callers claiming to represent the National Lawyers Association (sic) and a notorious death squad known as the Maximiliano Hernández Martinez Brigade (BMH) against Dr. René Medecadel Perla Jiménez, a professor at the University of El Salvador and a member of the new National Council of the Judiciary,
In fact, Dr, Perla Jiménez received a telephone message on September 14, claiming to be from the Salvadoran Bar Association and threatening that he would be killed if he did not leave the country within 21 days, because of his involvement with the FMLN, On September 16, Dr. Perla Jiménez received another telephone threat from someone identifying himself as a member of the BMH, This death squad has been linked by human rights groups to the National Police. It would have been pertinent to note as well that the National Council of the Judiciary, formed earlier in the year to assist the development of a more independent and efficient judiciary, has been criticized repeatedly by the conservative Salvadoran Bar Association, Without presenting this context, the report's brief mention of the threats makes little sense to the uninitiated reader.
The report also observes that a prominent attorney, José Maria Méndez, and his family received death threats from the BMH, but neglected to say that the threats were to be carried out if Méndez did not persuade Francisco Roberto Lima to withdraw his vice-presidential candidacy on the progressive coalition ticket. The report also omits other death threats that appear to have been politically motivated.
97
CRITIQUE 1993
including those made against members of the Comité de Familiares de Víctimas de las Violaciones a los Derechos Humanos (CODEFAM); politically active members of the community of San Martin and the Municipality of San Salvador; Rubén Zamora, the Vice President of the Legislative Assembly and an opposition presidential candidate; and Héctor Silva, a leader of the opposition Convergencia Democrática.
The report is generally thorough and forthright with respect to the fmdings of the UN Truth Commission and the amnesty that was declared following the release of its report. However, while noting that "hasty passage of this law by the pro-government parties prompted heavy criticism," it conspicuously fails to make clear its own condemnation of the passage of the Amnesty Law. The report also fails to mention that despite the amnesty, which was applied to soldiers convicted of human rights abuses, including the two officCTS imprisoned in the Jesuit murder case, the US government employed private prosecutors in an attempt to halt amnesty for guerrilla combatants held in connection with the extrajudicial killings of two US servicemen after their helicopter was shot down.
The Truth Commission reinforced and went beyond the recommendations of ONUSAL in the six human rights reports published by that body since July 1991. The Truth Commission also suggested that victims of human rights abuses be publicly recognized and that a special ftmd be established for material compensation. It recommended that no less than one percent of all the foreign aid received by El Salvador be directed to such a fund. The report omits discussion of these recommendations and understates the problem of governmental noncompliance with the Truth Commission's fmdings.
In its section on "disappearances," the report asserts that, "There were some unconfirmed allegations of abductions by unspecified government forces, as well as by the FMLN." But it backs up this broad assertion with a single case, that of Gregorio Mejia Espinoza. The Secretary General of a local branch of the left-wing Popular Social Christian Movement, Mejia was abducted by armed civilians on May 23, interrogated, threatened and tortured. Later, one of his captors put a gun to Mejia's head and pulled the trigger. When the gun did not go off, Mejia was forced out of the car. ONUSAL verification concluded that this was a politically motivated case of attempted arbitrary execution.
The section devoted to arbitrary arrest candidly states that during 1993 the National Police frequently conducted illegal warrantless arrests upon only the suspicion of a crime. The report also discusses briefly complaints about the application of the "law of dangerous state," which allows police to arrest people who have committed no crime, but merely "appear dangerous." The discussion would have benefited from a concise statement of the State Department's own view of the legal and practical dangers associated with this law.
98
EL SALVADOR
The report correctly notes that although torture is prohibited by the Constitution, "abuse and mistreatment of detainees continued, even though confirmed reports of torture by public security forces were fewer than in the past." The report goes on to state that, "From January to October, ONUSAL's human rights division confirmed six reports of torture, one by the ESAF, two by the PN, one by an ex-PN member of the PNC, one by Mariona prison guards, and the unknown perpetrators of the Mejia kidnaping case described above."
It would have been worth mentioning, as context for these cases or elsewhere in the report, that in early 1993, pursuant to the Peace Accords, both the Treasury Police and the National Guard, which were known for "disappearing" and torturing people, were formally disbanded. The National Police was to be disbanded in 1994 and its academy was closed on December 31, 1993. However, the report fails to acknowledge the improper incorporation of former PN units into the new PNC, in flagrant violation of the Peace Accords. These included the Special Investigative Unit and the Special Anti-Narcotics Unit, each of which had a reputation for having committed abuses in the past. Moreover, under the original timetable, units of the PNC were to be deployed throughout the country prior to the elections. Delays in training and deployment made it impossible for the PNC units to be deployed in more than seven of El Salvador's fourteen departments by election time. As a result, the heavily populated Western departments of El Salvador were still patrolled by units of the old National Police. Meanwhile, delays in closing the National Police Academy resulted in hundreds of new graduates for a force that was supposed to be disbanded. The report's introduction states that while "[pjrogress on human rights was uneven in 1993 . . . [ijnstitutional improvements continued in areas mandated by the Peace Accords . . ." and lists as an example the training and partial deployment of the PNC. This is misleading; the Salvadoran government should be held responsible for the incomplete deployment of the PNC, as well as its inadequate fimding, and not tacitly lauded for its efforts.
On the other hand, the 1993 report is refreshingly candid with respect to the judiciary in its section dealing with the denial of fair public trial. It states: "People who are well-connected politically, economically, or institutionally, generally enjoy immunity fi"om prosecution. Political affiliation and personal ties, rather than professional capabilities, appear to have been the traditional criteria used to appomt and reappoint judges."
The report's assessment of the legal reforms to the judiciary, however, appears over-optimistic. Contrary to what the report suggests, the Salvadoran Supreme Electoral Tribunal is widely regarded by human rights groups to have been grossly and perhaps wilfully negligent and ineffective in establishing the prerequisites for fair and free elections. The combination of the lack of a civl registry, the politicized composition of the ostensibly neutral Supreme Electoral Tribunal and an unduly burdensome and even byzantine voter registration process
99
CRITIQUE 1993
which required trips to several governmental offices in order to obtain the personal identification documents needed to vote, established a framework in which the elections could not have been truly free and fair by international standards. While the elections occurred well after the report's preparation, it is important to note that some 300,000 eligible voters were still not registered as of election day by the same process which the report characterizes as successful. By election day, several hundred thousand other persons were registered but still had not received voting cards. Moreover, there were thousands of duplicate or deceased names on the electoral rolls, increasing the likelihood of fraud on election day.
US Congressional requests for information on the treatment of often marginalized groups has resulted in an updated and expanded discussion of discrimination. This section appropriately conveys the differences between law and practice, with the exception of some potentially misleading remarks about indigenous people. The report states that, "The civil and political rights of indigenous people and their ability to participate in decisions affecting their lands, traditions, and allocation of natural resources are protected and respected by the Government to the same extent as other Salvadorans of comparable socioeconomic status." This phrasing is disingenuous, to say the least; ttie report should have acknowledged that indigenous people are consistently among the most socially and economically marginalized groups in El Salvador, and hence receive the same treatment which the government offers the poorest segment of society.
In the section on worker rights, when it is expedient to do so, the report departs from its usual emphasis on those legal norms that exist in theory, and pays greater attention to how the laws are disregarded. It states: "Only private sector nonagricultural workers have the right to form unions and strike; employees of nine autonomous public agencies may form unions but not strike. Nevertheless, workers from other sectors, including the public sector, have carried out strikes that, while technically illegal, were treated as legitimate." In practice, however, the bargaining agreements that the government has pointed out to suggest respect for labor rights are routinely violated precisely because they do not have any legal force.
The section on worker rights is the most obviously tailored to political expediency. In 1992, the US Trade Representative stated that El Salvador would be allowed another year in which to pass labor code reform, which would ensure, in accordance with Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) legislation, the right of association and the right to organize and bargain collectively. El Salvador's draft labor law failed to meet those criteria and, in fact, permitted interference by the government in internal union affairs. Perversely, rights granted in one section of the labor code are eliminated by others.
The report also fails to state that during 1993 legislators from President Alfredo Cristiani's ruling ARENA party had introduced legislation to make activities that jeopardize the country's economic interests, such as GSP benefits,
100
EL SALVADOR
acts of treason punishable by up to five years imprisonment. Presumably, this could criminalize human rights investigations and reporting on violations of worker rights. It is noteworthy that, despite the situation in EI Salvador, President Clinton signed an extension of the GSP on August 10, 1993, to last until September 30, 1994.
While the 1993 report on El Salvador took some significant steps toward correcting past omissions and biases, it only timidly holds the Salvadoran government responsible for current abuses and their investigation and prosecution. The report should have given more context with respect to compliance with the Peace Accords and the Truth Commission recommendations. In addition, it would have been improved by a consistent application of internationally recognized standards regarding both legal reforms and practices, so as to avoid the uncritical blandness that often seems to result fi^om the State Department's efforts to appear neutral.
101
CRITIQUE 1993
