 EL SALVADOR
 El Salvador has a freely elected democratic government, with
 an executive branch headed by a president, a unicameral
 legislative assembly, and an independent, but politically
 appointed, judiciary. A new Constitution was adopted in 1983,
 and the first free presidential elections in Salvadoran history
 were held in 1984. Legislative and municipal elections
 followed in 1985 and 1988. Numerous international observers
 agreed these elections were free and fair. Jose Napoleon
 Duarte, Christian Democrat, has been President since 1984.
 The bitterly contested elections in March 1988 resulted in the
 transfer of majority control at the municipal and legislative
 levels from the governing Christian Democratic Party (PDC) to
 the opposition Nationalist Republican Alliance party (ARENA).
 The leaders of two political parties allied with the
 antigovernment insurgents, who had returned to El Salvador in
 1987, announced in 1988 their intention to contest the March
 1989 presidential elections. In October the general secretary
 of the legal political front of the outlawed Communist Party
 of El Salvador (PCES) returned to participate openly in the
 political system.
 El Salvador's efforts to institute democracy, enforce respect
 for human rights, and redress social injustice are complicated
 and severely tested by the existence of a Marxist-Leninist
 guerrilla insurgency supported by Nicaragua, Cuba, and the
 Soviet Union. The five organizations, including the armed wing
 of the PCES, that form the Farabundo Marti Front for National
 Liberation (FMLN) have been engaged in armed conflict against
 the Government since 1980 and are dedicated to the violent
 overthrow of the democratic process. In recent years the FMLN,
 with an estimated 6,000 to 8,000 full-time guerrillas backed by
 a network of front groups consisting of part-time militia,
 clandestine cells, and paramilitary civilian supporters, has
 stepped up its program of urban bombings and assassinations of
 unprotected government officials. The FMLN has embarked on a
 campaign of threatening and assassinating mayors. Since March
 1988, 8 mayors and 1 former mayor were killed by the FMLN and
 over 70 were threatened with death. The FMLN also increasingly
 relied on children for combat and support tasks in 1988.
 Finally, the insurgents continued to seek to destroy the
 economy by attacking infrastructure and production facilities.
 The armed forces total 56,000, including some 11,500 members of
 the three police forces, which are under the control of the
 Defense Ministry. As the insurgency gathered strength in the
 early 1980's, members of the security forces committed numerous
 human rights violations, including killings, disappearances,
 and torture. Up to 1983 members of the security forces
 acquiesced in the operations of several formal paramilitary
 groups operating as rightwing death squads. Some of the
 paramilitary groups are believed to have had members belonging
 at the same time to the police or military. Although
 statistics are unreliable, there are credible estimates that
 these groups summarily executed thousands of persons during
 the 1980-1983 period.
 While the formal paramilitary death squads ceased to exist
 after 1983, rightwing vigilantism has continued, albeit at a
 declining level. Reports in 1988 of efforts to resuscitate
 these formal paramilitary groups have not been substantiated.
 The paramilitary groups themselves have not acknowledged any
 killings since 1984. Commencing in mid-1987, there was an
 
 
 553-
 EL SALVADOR
 increase of killings (press reports show a rise from an average
 of 11 per month in mid-1987 to an average of 20 per month for
 the first 10 months of 1988) in which a political motive was
 possible, though unproven. Some of these killings might have
 been carried out by rightwing vigilantes, the security forces,
 or the FMLN; others may have been committed by common
 criminals.
 El Salvador has a mixed economy, and private property is
 generally respected. The economy has experienced 5 years of
 modest growth, despite losses of over $1.6 billion caused by
 the insurgency. The FMLN follows a strategy of seeking to
 disrupt the operations of the economy: it holds traffic bans,
 which disrupt normal commercial activity; it extorts "war
 taxes" to raise income; and it has increasingly resorted to
 sabotage of economic targets. The group's stated goal is to
 worsen economic conditions in order to turn the workers against
 the democratic system. Droughts, floods, and the 1986
 earthquake also damaged the economy in recent years.
 Although flawed, the security forces' human rights record has
 improved substantially since the early 1980's. However,
 members of the security forces appear to have summarily
 executed at least 14 individuals from January to October
 1988. In September the Army reported that eight civilian
 detainees and two guerrillas were killed and a soldier wounded
 in an FMLN ambush in San Vicente department. Local residents
 contradicted the military's version of events. Five summary
 executions appear to have been committed during the same period
 in 1987. Some human rights monitoring groups' estimates
 are markedly higher but are nevertheless consistent with a
 significant downward trend since the early 1980's.
 The judicial process continues to be hindered by archaic
 procedures, inadequate infrastructure, intimidation by leftist
 and rightist extremists, and corruption. There was little
 progress in several noteworthy human rights cases during 1988.
 There were credible allegations that the military was
 uncooperative in, and in some cases hindered, investigations
 of reported military abuses of human rights.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Statistics on political killings are necessarily inexact, and
 can only be interpreted as indicative of trends in violence
 over time in comparison with past reports using the same
 methodology. Common criminal deaths, for example, are easily
 disguised as political killings by perpetrators wishing to
 confound investigators; by the same token, political motivation
 in other murders may go undetected, causing them to be
 classified as common crimes.
 The number of deaths reported in the Salvadoran press which
 appeared to be politically motivated averaged 18 per month
 through October; this compares with a monthly average of 23 in
 1987, 22 in 1986, 28 in 1985, 64 in 1984, 140 in 1983, 219 in
 1982, 444 in 1981, and 750 in 1980. Given the isolation of
 any rural areas, it is likely that the press underreports the
 total number of civilian deaths.
 
 
 554
 EL SALVADOR
 These statistics on apparently politically motivated deaths
 were compiled by the U.S. Embassy principally from reports in
 the local press, but also from guerrilla media and other
 publicly available sources. Of the 185 killings of
 noncombatants during the first 10 months of 1988, 54 appeared
 clearly to have been perpetrated by, and another 60 possibly
 committed by, the FMLN. In 18 cases there was insufficient
 evidence to designate the likely assailants. Fourteen killings
 were attributed to military personnel. Finally, 34 civilians
 reportedly killed in combat action between the two sides are
 included among the 185 victims. Another 42 died as a result
 of guerrilla mines; one death is attributed to an army mine.
 The Catholic Archbishoprics' human rights and legal aid office
 Tutela Legal, which has acknowledged that in many cases the
 motivations for and perpetrators of killings cannot easily be
 determined, attributes 89 killings from January to November of
 1988 to the security forces, 40 to the FMLN, and 51 to "death
 squads" (not further defined as a category).
 Reports continue of noncombat killings attributed to the
 military and police. The mutilated bodies of two men and a boy
 were discovered on February 1 at Puerta del Diablo, a place
 that had once been a dumping ground for assassination victims.
 The killings were traced to soldiers of the army's First
 Brigade; the investigation has been stalled due to a lack of
 cooperation by the military. On May 24 the bodies of two men,
 who family members said had been detained by elements of the
 Army's Arce Battalion on February 25, were disinterred in El
 Tablon, Morazan department. The bodies showed signs that the
 men had been tortured before they were murdered. A third man
 taken at the same time remains missing. The army reported that
 the unit involved claimed the victims were killed in combat.
 On the basis of this report, the militdry halted further
 investigation, thus hindering the civilian investigation.
 On September 21, an army unit reported that a soldier was
 wounded and eight civilian detainees were killed in an FMLN
 ambush near La Cebadilla Creek in San Sebastian, San Vicente
 department. The unit also reported two guerrillas killed.
 Local residents, however, contradicted the military's version
 of the events and claimed the 10 persons were killed by
 soldiers. Initial evidence from a court investigation and an
 exhumation casts doubt on the military's version. The
 Government's investigation continues, but by year's end no
 results had been announced.
 In 1988 some foreign journalists and Amnesty International
 reported that the formal paramilitary death squads were
 rebuilding their infrastructures. In the early 1980's, the
 death squads often acknowledged their killings; there have
 been no such claims by a formal paramilitary group since 1984.
 While some human rights groups continue to use the phrase
 "death squads" to describe certain political killings outside
 of combat, many of these recent deaths are likely the result of
 less organized rightwing vigilantism rather than the formal
 pre-1983 paramilitary death squads.
 A PDC official in the San Salvador suburb of Soyapango was
 killed in a December 12 altercation with municipal police.
 Some witnesses asserted that the incident was politically
 motivated, but details remained sketchy at year's end.
 A U.S. Embassy study of unexplained murders in which a
 political motive, though not apparent, could not be excluded,
 showed that these deaths increased from an average of 11 per
 
 
 EL SALVADOR
 month during the first half of 1987 to an average of 20 per
 month during the second half. The statistics for the first 10
 months of 1988 did not show as regular a pattern, with 10
 deaths in the low month, March, and 48 in the high month,
 April. The monthly average for January-October was 20.
 Although it is not certain that the increase following mid-
 1987 was politically motivated, the nature of some of the
 killings--signs of torture and execution, and the dumping of
 corpses--suggests the likelihood that they may have been
 politically motivated. It is unclear, however, whether these
 deaths were carried out by rightwing vigilantes, death squads,
 the FMLN, or the security forces; some also were probably the
 work of common criminals..
 The May..11 murder by unknown assailantg of Jorge Serrano, a
 civilian judge known for his high standards of integrity on the
 bench of the First Military Court, dealt a severe blow to the
 judicial system. Judge Serrano was hearing two important
 cases: the trial of four active and former military officers
 and two civilians for kidnaping prominent businessmen for
 ransom (the six accused were also allegedly involved in death
 squads); and the trial of three FMLN members for the June 19,
 1985 massacre of four U.S. Marines, two other U.S. citizens,
 and seven other persons in San Salvador's Zona Rosa district.
 Serrano's assassination is generally thought to be tied to one
 of these cases; he had just announced to the press that he was
 not going to grant amnesty to the four kidnaping case
 defendants.
 Of the killings attributed to the FMLN, many victims were rural
 residents who refused to collaborate with the guerrillas or
 were suspected of being government informers. On October 15,
 individuals claiming to be soldiers from the First Brigade
 summarily executed four men. Tutela Legal's subsequent
 investigation reported that the murders were committed by FMLN
 guerrillas who apparently believed that their victims were
 government informants. Labor groups, church leaders, and
 political figures have condemned the FMLN for the December 6
 assassination of Ismael Diaz, an official of a democratic
 peasant association. Other victims of guerrilla actions were
 passengers of vehicles machine-gunned during one of the fiVe
 "traffic bans" declared by the FMLN in 1988. There are also
 credible reports of civilians being taken from buses and killed
 -by guerrillas and of persons who were kidnaped by guerrillas
 and have never reappeared. FMLN or pro-FMLN persons have also
 been killed'by the FMLN. In January 1988, self-admitted member
 of an FMLN paramilitary group Jorge Miranda confessed to having
 taken part in the October 1987 killing of Herbert Anaya,
 himself a leader of a pro-FMLN human rights group. Although
 Miranda later retracted his confession, the Government argued
 that the retraction was prompted by FMLN threats against
 Miranda's family.
 The FMLN has embarked on an assassination campaign aimed at
 eliminating democratically elected mayors. Eight mayors and
 one former mayor have been assassinated by the FMLN since
 March, including three in 1 week in November. More than 70
 other mayors have been threatened with death during 1988 by
 the FMLN for cooperating with the Government.
 Despite FMLN claims to respect the physical and psychological
 integrity of its captives, they nevertheless occasionally kill
 them. The guerrillas reportedly perform killings in front of
 other kidnap victims as a form of intimidation to persuade the
 captives to be cooperative. The FMLN has formed special groups
 
 
 556
 EL SALVADOR
 which, according to guerrilla radio broadcasts, are intended to
 kill government officials, military officers, businessmen, and
 foreign diplomats, particularly members of the American
 Embassy.
 The guerrillas' use of unmarked, indiscriminately placed
 landmines and booby traps is a major cause of death and
 maiming. Planted along farm roads other economic and
 infrastructure targets these mines killed 36 civilians in
 1987, and 42 in the first 10 months of 1988. From January
 through September, over 160 civilians--many of them children--
 were wounded by guerrilla mines. The Armed Forces of El
 Salvador (ESAF) uses mines on the perimeters of its
 installations. One man was killed in July by what was probably
 an army mine while working near a military training area.
 b. Disappearance
 Law and government policy forbid unacknowledged detention by
 security or armed services. However, there have been credible
 reports of persons who disappeared after having been taken away
 by men in uniform or plain clothes thought to be members of the
 army or security forces. Eliseo Cordova Aguilar, an executive
 of a pro-FMLN labor union, was standing outside his house on
 July 12 with a prosecutor from the Attorney General's office
 and another person when all three were abducted by three hooded
 men. The attorney and the other person were released 3 hours
 later, but Cordova remains missing. The labor union and
 several other organizations blame elements of the Treasury
 Police for the disappearance, and other credible sources concur
 in this assessment.
 According to press reports, 46 civilians disappeared between
 January and August, including nonpolitical disappearances such
 as lost or runaway children aged 10 or over. Persons who
 desert their families, emigrate, or join guerrilla ranks may
 also account for some of the disappearances. Persons reported
 missing by family members often were found later to have been
 legally arrested and properly reported to human rights
 organizations. During the same period, the press reported 163
 persons abducted by the guerrillas and 12 abducted by unknown
 assailants. During 1988 the guerrillas captured and exchanged
 or released several government officials and members of the
 armed forces.
 In 1988 the FMLN increasingly relied on the use of children
 under the age of 15 in battle. Documents captured in 1988
 revealed that both the People's Liberation Forces (FPL) and
 the People's Revolutionary Army (ERP) factions of the FMLN
 have organized children from the ages of 9 to 15 into so-
 called pioneer squads. Credible reports were received of
 children kidnaped by the FMLN for recruitment as "pioneers"
 and of their use as couriers and spotters. During a press
 conference in March, FMLN leader Francisco Mena Sandoval said
 that children are permitted to use weapons because they are
 the future of the revolutionary process. In the same press
 conference, FMLN leader Joaquin Villalobos declared the FMLN
 uses children "only for defensive purposes." According to
 reliable statistics from captured FMLN combatants and
 defectors, the average age of the FMLN fighter continued to
 decline in 1988 as the guerrilla forces increasingly relied on
 kidnaping of children to fill its dwindling ranks. Children
 under 15 were used by the guerrillas on September 22 to
 penetrate a marked minefield surrounding a military post at
 Cerro Aguacate. One 9-year-old child lost both hands. The
 
 
 557
 EL SALVADOR
 bodies of what appeared to be six 14- to 16-year-old boys were
 left behind by FMLN forces that attacked an ESAF position in
 San Miguel department on February 17. The Salvadoran military
 has also been criticized for forced recruitment of minors. 'It
 is government policy to dismiss underaged recruits.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Reports of abuse by arresting forces continue, with most
 involving abuses that leave no marks and thus are extremely
 difficult to prove or disprove. Such abuses include
 deprivation of food and sleep, threats against the detainee or
 his family, prolonged interrogation while blindfolded, being
 forced to stand for long periods of time, forced exercise, and
 blows to the ears. Some prisoners claim to have been forced
 to sign confessions without being permitted to read them.
 Some instances of severe beatings, rape, choking, injection
 with unidentified drugs, and electric shock were reported.
 Jose Angel Alas Gomez, 27, arrested for complicity in an
 extortion scheme, died on January 12 while in Treasury Police
 custody. The police blamed the death on a heart attack brought
 on by a fall while trying to escape, but marks on the body cast
 doubt on this story. When a complaint of mistreatment appears
 credible, the Government's Human Rights Commission (CDH)
 reports the incident to the commander of the unit responsible
 and to the Ministry of Defense. Not all commanders who have
 been presented with such charges have taken action against the
 offenders.
 The Government continued to use disciplinary action to reduce
 the incidence of crimes committed by the ESAF. During 1987
 143 military and police were turned over to the courts for
 trial on charges of murder, rape, assault, robbery, and other
 serious crimes. The figure for the first 7 months of 1988 was
 94, all of whom were enlisted personnel. Most disciplinary
 actions taken in 1988 were related to common crime.
 In recent years, there have-been few allegations of
 mistreatment of prisoners in El Salvador's prisons,
 administered and guarded by justice ministry personnel. No
 verifiable instances of torture occurred in the penitentiaries
 in 1988. The 44 prisoners in pretrial confinement for
 insurgency related offenses as of November 1988 were
 distributed througout the prison system and treated as common
 criminals. In late 1987, the Government released over 480
 political prisoners, the first Esquipulas II signator to
 achieve full compliance with the amnesty provisions of that
 agreement.
 Human rights instruction is now a part of police recruit
 training and officers' classes. The CDH, the International
 Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), and Catholic clergy offer
 courses on human rights for police, military, and civil defense
 personnel.
 The Salvadoran security and armed forces are required to
 register detainees and have them examined by a doctor or nurse
 upon their entry into police facilities. In insurgency-
 related arrests, they are also required to notify promptly the
 family of the detainee, Tutela Legal, the CDH, and the ICRC.
 The registration, notification, and arraignment procedures,
 together with the official prohibition on mistreatment of
 prisoners, continued to be enforced in an effort to eliminate
 mistreatment by government authorities.
 
 
 558
 EL SALVADOR
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The criminal code contains articles prohibiting terrorism,
 insurgency, and other actions against the stability of the
 State, and persons arrested under them have the same legal
 protection as common criminals. Salvadoran law permits judges
 and nonjudicial authorities, most often security force
 officers, to issue arrest warrants, which must be in writing.
 The Constitution requires that all persons arrested by the
 police be freed or turned over to the courts within 72 hours,
 and this right has been applicable since the state of emergency
 was abrogated in 1987. Arrests without apparent sufficient
 cause do occur, but incommunicado detention beyond 3 days is no
 longer common. When it has occurred, it usually has been the
 result of a detention in the field by an operating military
 unit.
 The courts have held that membership in a front organization
 controlled by the insurgents is not in itself sufficient reason
 for holding an arrestee, although membership in one of the
 guerrilla groups or advocating violence is. For example, Mario
 Aguinada, secretary general of the Nationalist Democratic Union
 (UDN), the political arm of the PCES, returned to El Salvador
 in October after a self-imposed, 8-year exile. The UDN and
 Aguinada hold that insurgency is a legitimate means of
 addressing El Salvador's problems, and the PCES has a military
 arm in the field. Despite this background, Aguinada
 participates freely in politics.
 From January to September 1988, the security forces detained
 2,861 persons, including 130 foreigners, on suspicion of
 insurgency-related offenses. Of that number, 2,410 were
 subsequently released, 397 were consigned to the courts, and
 54 were hospitalized, deported, or sent to the juvenile
 facility.
 During the arraignment proceedings, the judge may order the
 accused detained further for up to 72 hours to determine if the
 evidence warrants holding the accused for trial. This time
 limit is normally adhered to in practice. The judge then is
 constrained legally to a time limit of 120 days for
 investigating serious crimes, and 45 days for lesser offenses,
 before bringing the accused to trial or dismissing the case.
 In practice, however, these limitations are not followed. The
 backlog of cases is one major reason for delay. All persons
 held in the prison system are under judicial order. Anyone can
 request that an appeals court or the Supreme Court review the
 legal merit of a detention, from the time it appears a court
 will issue an arrest warrant until the trial is completed and
 a sentence is carried out. Such an appeal freezes action on
 the case until the higher court renders its decision.
 The Government does not recognize the FMLN as a belligerent
 power and thus does not accord prisoner of war status to
 captured guerrillas. The armed forces are required to turn
 captured guerrillas over to the civilian court system for
 criminal prosecution.
 The state of exception, which suspended some constitutional
 protections for certain accused criminals and instituted a
 parallel military judicial structure for prosecuting such
 individuals, was terminated in January 1987. The law
 detailing procedures for judicial processing of suspects in
 terrorism-related cases, Legislative Decree 618, was renewed
 
 
 559
 EL SALVADOR
 in December 1987 to permit continuation of the two such trials
 remaining in the military court system following the Esquipulas
 II amnesty: the Zona Rosa massacre and kidnaping for ransom of'
 prominent businessmen. The kidnaping case was subsequently
 moved to a common criminal court. No new arrests can be made
 under Decree 618 unless the state of emergency is renewed.
 There are no provisions for exile in the law. Naturalized
 citizenship can be revoked for extended residence outside the
 country or, in some cases, criminal convictions. Some leaders
 of the FMLN and the political group with which it is formally
 allied, the Revolutionary Democratic Front (FDR) claim to be
 in exile, but it is self-imposed. However, some could be
 subject to arrest in El Salvador for membership in guerrilla
 combatant organizations should they return. Nevertheless, FDR
 political leaders Guillermo Ungo and Reuben Zamora returned to
 El Salvador to participate in the democratic system without
 being arrested, as did Aguinada and several other political
 leaders of the UDN.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Constitution provides that the judiciary, the Attorney
 General's office, and the Solicitor General's office (public
 defenders) are independent of the Government and each other.
 The Legislative Assembly chooses the Supreme Court justices for
 5-year terms, and the Attorney General and Solicitor General*
 for 3-year terms. The Constitution establishes the regular
 court system and provides for a special system should the
 Legislative Assembly enact a state of exception.
 The Constitution provides that a person accused of a crime may
 have a lawyer present upon being arraigned, but the right is
 seldom used, probably because few arrestees can afford to hire
 a private attorney. At present, court-appointed attorneys are
 not available to.a defendant until the investigative phase is
 over, and the judge determines there is sufficient evidence to
 enter the final, or plenary, stage of the trial. The defendant
 has a right to be present in court and to confront the
 witnesses against him. All court records of trials of adults
 are open to the public unless the judge rules the case is to be
 kept confidential. An appeal process exists and is used
 regularly.
 Most major crimes in El Salvador are tried publicly before a
 5-person jury. Jury trials resulted in a 41 percent conviction
 rate in the first 7 months of 1988, a significant increase
 over the 22 percent rate recorded in 1987. Absences of
 attorneys, the destruction of many court buildings in the
 October 1986 earthquake, and a practically nonfunctional jury
 identification and notification system hinder the judicial
 system from expeditiously processing cases. Corruption and
 intimidation by leftwing and rightwing extremists are also
 factors. As a result, only 15 percent of the 4,390 prison
 inmates in September were serving sentences; the rest were
 awaiting adjudication of their cases. Bail is available for
 some minor offenses but is seldom used. Prisoners are usually
 incarcerated for 6 to 18 months from the time they are charged
 until they are brought to trial, and even longer waits are
 common.
 Historically, civilian judicial authority has not extended to
 the military officer corps. Although low-ranking miltary and
 
 
 560
 EL SALVADOR
 police officers have been discharged and turned over to the
 civilian courts for trial of criminal offenses, the officers of
 the armed and security forces are treated differently from
 other citizens before the law. Judges are frequently reluctant
 to bring charges against them, and colleagues often fail to
 cooperate in the prosecution of crimes imputed to a fellow
 officer.
 No military officer has been convicted of human rights
 violations or any other crime in recent years. The attempt to
 reopen the trial against one of the former military officers
 who ordered the January 1981 murders of a Salvadoran and two
 American land reform experts failed on March 9 when the Supreme
 Court rejected an appeal by the prosecution to overturn a
 December 10, 1987 lower court ruling that the Government's
 amnesty applied to the case. (The amnesty was decreed in
 accordance with the Government's international obligations
 under the October 1987 Esquipulas agreement.) The Supreme
 Court on July 21 also upheld a controversial lower court
 decision to grant amnesty to the defendants, including several
 active duty officers, in the notorious Las Hojas massacre case.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Government generally does not interfere arbitrarily in the
 personal lives of citizens, although it reserves the right to
 intervene when it believes national security is threatened.
 Both the Government and the guerrillas use networks of
 informants. According to the Constitution, before entering a
 private dwelling, the security forces must have the
 inhabitant's consent, a judicial warrant, or reasonable belief
 that a crime is being or will be committed. In practice, the
 security forces often use forced entry to carry out arrests
 and investigations. Government forces often intercept mail
 deliveries in zones of conflict. Wiretapping of telephone
 communications by the Government, the FMLN, private
 individuals, and political parties reportedly is widespread.
 The guerrillas arbitrarily interfere widely in the lives of
 the inhabitants of the conflictive zones. They extract "war
 taxes' (consumables such as food, clothing, and medical
 supplies), intercept mail, and engage regularly in wiretapping.
 The guerrillas often force villagers to attend political
 meetings, and they engage in forced recruitment of combatants,
 laborers, and porters. FMLN committees control the villages
 set up by refugees who returned from camps in Honduras, just
 as they controlled the camps. The people usually comply with
 the FMLN demands, because the guerrillas regularly back up
 their threats by assassinating those who fail to cooperate.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 There are no governmental restrictions on freedom of speech
 and the press. San Salvador, a city of 1 million, has five
 daily papers, five television stations, and numerous radio
 stations. All of the press and most of the broadcasting media
 are in private hands. Television and print journalism in El
 Salvador is flourishing; interviews feature a full range of
 political figures from all political viewpoints, including
 labor leaders, human rights activists, private sector
 representatives, government officials, and guerrilla
 commanders.
 
 
 561
 EL SALVADOR
 Of the leading daily newspapers, three are editorially
 conservative and the other two are more moderate. One of the
 more moderate newspapers presents a range of views from
 conservative to far left; it has published unedited articles
 from the FMLN/FDR press agencies Salpress and Notisal (which
 recently established a joint office in San Salvador), press
 releases from both liberal and pro-FMLN organizations, and a
 weekly supplement from the Jesuit-run University of Central
 America. The views of the left are also available in a variety
 of journals, newsletters, periodicals, bulletins, and paid
 advertisements in the daily press. While an 8-year-old decree
 forbidding publication of anonymous paid advertisements or
 communiques remains in effect, recent examples of such
 propaganda show this law to be essentially unenforced.
 Television stations sell broadcast time to political and labor
 organizations. These paid spots are uncensored and usually
 broadcast live. Commercial radio stations broadcast news and
 propaganda reports recorded from the clandestine guerrilla
 radio stations or supplied by the guerrillas on cassette.
 Academic freedom is protected by the Constitution and
 respected by'the Government.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Any association not formed for criminal purposes is legal and
 permitted in El Salvador. Political, professional, religious,
 labor, and social organizations operate remarkably openly and
 freely, given the fact that the country is fighting a communist
 insurgency. Various groups from both the left and the right
 criticize the Government, and hold marches and demonstrations
 without official interference.
 The FMLN seeks to manipulate labor organizations and use labor
 organizations as paramilitary shock troops. Marches by labor,
 displaced persons, and human rights organizations known to be
 fronts of the FMLN are freqaent. Violence erupted during one
 such march on July 21, prompting the security forces to have
 large numbers of riot control police accompany subsequent
 demonstrations. The police did not interfere with the
 demonstrators, and the marches remained peaceful.
 On September 13, FMLN-controlled organizations conducted
 marches in San Salvador and Santa Ana in coordination with a
 guerrilla military offensive. Government forces broke up both
 marches after demonstrators opened fire on the riot control
 troops. Demonstrators killed one policeman and wounded four
 in the San Salvador incident. Following the shootings,
 government forces detained over 200 demonstrators, collecting
 firearms, molotov cocktails, hand grenades, and homemade bombs
 from them. All but 14 of the detainees were released by the
 police within 72 hours; the remaining 14 were released by court
 order within another 72 hours.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is provided for by the Constitution and is
 respected in practice. Although the country is predominantly
 Roman Catholic, an estimated 20 percent of the population
 subscribe to other faiths. Foreign and Salvadoran missionaries
 
 
 562
 EL SALVADOR
 generally operate freely and without harassment. Arrests of
 church members and employees, both Catholic and Protestant, are
 unrelated to religious beliefs. Several times during the year
 the military interfered with church-related assistance to the
 needy in zones of conflict, claiming it was intended for the
 guerrillas.
 The Catholic Church continues to be one of the most influential
 institutions in the country. The Archbishop's Sunday homily is
 broadcast live from the Metropolitan Cathedral on one of the
 government's television stations and radio. The Archbishop
 on September 3 and 4 sought to sponsor a national debate on the
 political causes and solutions to the conflict. Many invitees
 declined to participate, but the session was attended by
 representatives of 57 organizations, most of which were
 critical of the Government or allied with the FMLN. Catholic
 Church publications disseminate the Church's position on human
 rights and the war. Church statements have become increasingly
 critical of the leftist insurgency, but the Church does not
 hesitate to criticize the Government.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Constitution establishes the right of free movement.
 Nevertheless, local military commanders often restrict entry
 to areas where military operations are under way and require
 that foreigners receive permission before entering combat
 zones. On occasion the Government has ordered foreigners out
 of the country when it considered they involved themselves in
 internal political affairs.
 An estimated 155,000 persons are still displaced within El
 Salvador by the conflict, down from a peak of about 525,000 in
 1985. Approximately 130,000 of them still receive government
 assistance, and another 25,000 who are not registered with the
 Government receive assistance from private relief organizations
 such as World Relief and the International Rescue Committee.
 Another 168,100 Salvadorans are refugees in other Central
 American countries and in Mexico, and more than 500,000 are
 estimated to be illegal immigrants in the United States.
 As the level of violence falls, an increasing number of
 refugees are returning from abroad. More than 6,800 refugees
 returned from other Central American countries between 1984 and
 August 1986, according to the U.N. High Commissioner for
 Refugees (UNHCR). Since then, another 2,100 chose to leave-the
 Mesa Grande refugee camp in Honduras, where some had been
 living since the beginning of the war, to return to their homes
 in El Salvador.
 There is no evidence of a Government policy of harassment of
 individuals returning to El Salvador from abroad. The
 Intergovernmental Committee for Migration interviewed some
 12,028 returnees from the United States between December 1984
 and December 1987 and found no evidence of a policy of
 harassment. There have been no reports of comparable studies
 regarding returnees coming from other areas. The Government
 imposes no control on emigration and cooperates with
 international organizations that arrange Salvadorans'
 emigration to other countries.
 The Government, with assistance from the UNHCR and the ICRC,
 has registered some 400 Nicaraguan refugees, although officials
 estimate as many as 1,500 are residing in the far southeastern
 
 
 563
 EL SALVADOR
 part of the country. Those refugees who are registered are
 free to travel within El Salvador.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 El Salvador's 1983 Constitution provides for rights and
 procedures by which citizens can change their government:
 There have been three national-level elections since 1983. On
 March 20, 1988, nine political parties participated in
 municipal and Legislative Assembly elections throughout the
 country. In these elections, the governing PDC lost its
 assembly majority to ARENA, marking the first peaceful
 transition of power in the Assembly from the ruling to an
 opposition party. The Supreme Court resolved a dispute over
 the allocation of one deputy's seat. ARENA won 32-seats in the
 60-seat Assembly, the PDC received 22 seats, and the National
 Conciliation Party (PCN) won 6. None of the smaller parties
 that participated won enough votes to be eligible for a
 seat.
 The FMLN refuses to participate in the electoral process, and
 through armed actions and threats consistently works to hinder
 and disrupt electoral activity. The FMLN instead calls for
 powersharing, whereby as an institution it would assume an
 unspecified degree of governmental authority and power without
 ever having had to participate in the electoral process.
 Voting is by secret ballot. In preparation for the March 1988
 elections, the Central Elections Council (CCE) distributed
 1,650,000 computerized voter identification cards as a
 safeguard against fraud. Following the elections, the CCE
 resumed the registration process for those who will turn 18
 years of age before the March 1989 presidential elections and
 for those of voting age not yet registered.
 The Constitution allows all political parties that do not
 advocate armed opposition to the democratic system to
 participate in the electoral process. It establishes the
 right of a citizen to join any legally recognized party. In
 practice, even parties still linked to the FMLN have been
 permitted to reenter the political arena. In late 1987,
 leaders of the FDR (claiming that the party was not a member of
 the FMLN but only an ally) returned to El Salvador and formed a
 political coalition, the Democratic Convergence (CD), with the
 Social Democratic Party (PSD). The CD chose not to participate
 in the 1988 legislative elections, but it did announce its
 intention to run in the March 1989 presidential elections. In
 addition, self-exiled members of the UDN--the political front
 for the outlawed PCES--returned and successfully petitioned to
 reactivate its status as a legal political party. The PCES
 remains a member of the FMLN through its armed wing, the Armed
 Forces of Liberation.
 Although women represent only a small minority of the upper
 ranks of' the Government, they do fill several key elected and
 appointed positions: 7 of the 60 Legislative Assembly deputies
 are women; 2 of them are on the Assembly Board of Directors.
 Three vice-ministers in the Duarte administration are women.
 Five of the governors of El Salvador's 14 departments are
 women. The highest office held by a woman in recent years was
 president of the Legislative Assembly (Maria Julia Castillo -
 1983 to 1984).
 
 
 564
 EL SALVADOR
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government continues to be receptive to visiting groups
 interested in human rights. High-ranking government officials
 and military officers regularly meet with U.S. Congressmen,
 human rights organizations, church and labor groups, and
 others. Americas Watch and the-Lawyers Committee for Human
 Rights maintain an office in San Salvador. The ICRC has an
 agreement with the Government that permits it to work in the
 areas of conflict to assist noncombatants, to visit prisoners
 and detainees accused of guerrilla activity, and to make
 confidential reports to the Government on human rights
 issues. Tutela Legal and the CDH also have access to the
 prisons. The U.N. Special Rapporteur on Human Rights in El
 Salvador made his eighth annual visit to the country in October
 1988.
 Domestic human rights organizations active in El Salvador
 include the Government's CDH, an agency which investigates
 complaints of human rights abuses by all parties, and Tutela
 Legal of the Catholic Archdiocese of San Salvador. The CDH
 receives testimony about human rights violations, conducts
 investigations, visits arrested persons, and reports to the
 local commanding officer and the Ministry of Defense when it
 discovers a case of abuse. Its doctors examine detainees to
 determine the validity of complaints-of torture. The CDH keeps
 a register of persons injured by landmine explosions and is
 working in conjunction with aid organizations on a project to
 register civilian amputees and.provide them with prosthetic
 devices.
 Tutela Legal's staff visits persons detained by the security
 forces, carries out some on-site investigations, and receives
 testimony about human rights violations. Seldom using its
 findings to assist government authorities in prosecuting human
 rights offenders, Tutela Legal often declares that government-
 connected death squads committed a murder when the only
 evidence available is the body of the victim. Disputing
 government claims that the FMLN had murdered the FMLN human
 rights organization (CDHES) chief Herbert Anaya Sanabria in
 October 1987, for example, it claimed it had evidence that
 death squads were responsible but never made public its proof.
 Guerrilla defectors and captured documents have demonstrated
 that the FMLN controls several groups that ostensibly are
 independent human rights organizations. These include the
 nongovernmental Human Rights Commission of El Salvador
 (CDHES), the Federation of Committees of Mothers and Families
 (FECMAFAM), the Committee of Mothers of Political Prisoners,
 Disappeared and Assassinated of El Salvador (Co-Madres), and
 the Christian Committee for the Displaced (CRIPDES). These
 groups report only on perceived abuses by government forces
 and refuse to investigate, acknowledge, or even record human
 rights abuses committed by the FMLN. Many of their reports
 about alleged government abuses, moreover, are highly
 distorted versions of the facts or, on occasion, are
 fabrications. They continue to operate freely. Although some
 individual members were arrested during 1988 and charged with
 guerrilla membership or activities, all were subsequently
 released by the security services or the courts.
 
 
 565
 EL SALVADOR
 The Salvadoran Association for Human Rights (ASPRODERH),
 founded by a group of'FMLN defectors who had worked in the
 CDHES and Co-Madres on behalf of the FMLN, was, formed in
 1987. It has not been particularly active in 1988. The
 Lutheran Church, the National Association of Indigenous
 Persons (ANIS), the National Union of Workers and Peasants
 (UNOC), and other nongovernmental organizations also have
 human rights and legal assistance offices.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 El Salvador is ethnically homogeneous, though a small segment
 of the population claims to have descended solely from the
 region's indigenous Indians. There is no official
 discrimination against these Indians, but there have been
 disputes over Indian land ownership.
 Under the Constitution, women enjoy the same legal rights as
 men. Women are represented in limited numbers in all three
 branches of government, in business, and in the professions.
 In the Armed Forces, women serve as nurses and in
 administration and intelligence; the security services have a
 limited number of policewomen. A high proportion of women in
 the lower economic strata are heads of single parent
 households, often providing for large families. In general,
 women tend to occupy jobs at the lower end of the economic
 scale, and, outside the Government, women's wages tend to be
 lower than those of men for equivalent work.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Article 47 of the Constitution prohibits tne Government from
 using nationality, sex, race, creed, or political philosophy to
 prevent workers or employers from organizing themselves into
 unions or associations. This Constitutional provision was
 intended to provide the legal framework for secondary
 legislation, including a revised labor code. Legislative
 action has been stymied, however, because of a lack of
 consensus between government, the private sector, and labor.
 Five separate proposals for revising the code have been
 drafted since 1985, and none of these have been formally
 submitted to the Legislative Assembly. Thus, there remains in
 place a confusing and sometimes conflicting set of laws
 governing labor relations. Despite the inconsistencies in law,
 existing statutes do provide protections which are enforceable
 under the Constitution.
 Legally, only private sector workers have the right to form
 unions and to strike. Employees of the nine autonomous
 government entities may form unions but are barred from
 striking. Finally, the labor code bars agricultural workers
 and employees of government ministries and departments from
 forming unions or striking. These employees are instead
 represented by associations whose function is similar to that
 of unions.
 There are approximately 150 trade unions, employees
 associations, and peasant organizations currently active, with
 a combined membership of just over 400,000--roughly 20 percent
 of the work force. As noted by the International Labor
 Organizations's (ILO) Committee on Freedom of Association
 during its Direct Contacts Mission to El Salvador in January
 
 
 566
 EL SALVADOR
 1986, these organizations span the political spectrum and play
 an active role in El Salvador. The Ministry of Labor counts
 100 actual trade unions, representing approximately 100,000
 workers; the balance of the organized work force belongs to
 farmworker or government employee associations. These
 organizations freely elect their officers in accordance with
 their individual constitutions and bylaws. Leaders of worker
 organizations appear regularly on television, publicize their
 views in the country's major newspapers, and conduct seminars
 on various issues without government interference.
 Since 1980, there has been only one instance where recognition
 of a union or association was withdrawn "for cause." This was
 in the case of the Union of Workers for the Rio Lempa
 Hydroelectric Project (STECEL) which, acting in concert with
 the FMLN, cut off electricity to most parts of El Salvador,
 causing several deaths and significant economic damage.
 Twice since 1986 the Salvadoran Supreme Court has reaffirmed
 constitutional safeguards protecting trade unions, worker
 associations, peasant organizations and their leaders from
 arbitrary and capricious behavior by management and/or the
 Government. In March 1986, the court ruled unconstitutional a
 July 1985 decision by the Labor Ministry which had stripped 11
 leaders of the Sewer and Waterworks Union (SETA) of their
 positions because they disobeyed a labor judge's order to end a
 strike. The Court held that union leaders cannot be deprived
 of their leadership status because such status derives from
 union elections. In August 1987, the Supreme Court similarly
 overturned an order of the Ministry of Interior which had
 divested leaders of the ANIS, a peasant association, of their
 positions. The Court voided the Ministry's order, reinstated
 the leaders, and ruled that the Minister of Interior was
 liable for civil damages for having exceeded his authority.
 The right to strike for the private sector is provided for by
 law and is freely exercised in practice. There were 33 private
 sector strikes during the period June 1, 1987 to May 31, 1988,
 affecting 4,000 workers. TheMinistry of Labor intervened, as
 set forth in legislation, and the strikes were resolved. The
 absence of specific laws granting workers in autonomous
 government institutions as well as public employees the right
 to strike has not deterred strike activity. For example, more
 than 8,000 public employees affiliated with the Salvadoran
 Worker's Central (CTS) walked off their jobs at the Ministries
 of Public Works and Agriculture in May 1988, demanding a pay
 increase and other benefits. The CTS members remained off
 their jobs until the Government agreed to reopen negotiations
 on their demands.
 The ILO's Committee of Freedom of Association has reviewed
 allegations of the murder, detention, and intimidation of some
 trade unionists and other antiunion actions over the past few
 years. The ILO regards the climate of violence and insecurity
 engendered by the existence of a guerrilla insurgency as an
 obstacle to the exercise of trade union rights. In 1988 the
 committee reached interim conclusions regarding some of these
 cases, and asked the Government to take appropriate steps.
 FMLN-linked labor organizations seek to use ostensibly
 peaceful dissent to provoke government actions, then level
 charges of workers' rights violations when the Government
 maintains order. The FMLN seeks to disrupt and subvert
 democratic labor groups that refuse to collaborate, and it uses
 occasional traffic stoppages to shut down the economy and force
 
 
 567
 EL SALVADOR
 workers to stay away from their places of employment. These
 actions constitute a perversion of legitimate trade union
 activity which harms both organized and unorganized labor.
 Labor unions are not restricted from affiliations with
 international labor organizations, and Salvadoran unions freely
 affiliate with such groups. The Secretary General of the
 General Confederation of Workers (CGT), the major affiliate of
 the democratic labor umbrella organization UNOC, represented
 Salvadoran Democratic Labor at the ILO's 1987 and 1988
 conferences.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The right of collective bargaining is granted in Article 39 of
 the Constitution and Article 269 of the labor code. Under the
 labor code, only private sector workers can exercise this
 right, but the Constitution is interpreted broadly to provide
 all workers the right to bargain collectively.
 Private sector unions use the mechanism of collective
 bargaining extensively. Approximately 53 collective-
 bargaining agreements covering private sector employees were
 certified by the Ministry of Labor between June 1, 1987, and
 May 31, 1988. According to ministry statistics, these 53
 contracts covered approximately 44,250 workers. Nearly 60
 percent of the collective bargaining agreements certified
 since June 1984 were contracts for unions affiliated to
 antigovernment labor organizations. A similar collective
 bargaining practice is also followed, albeit in a more
 informal manner, between public employees and the Government.
 The Director-General's office (DGT) of the Ministry of Labor is
 responsible for overseeing the implementation of collective
 bargaining agreements and acting an conciliator in labor-
 related disputes in the private sector and in autonomous
 goverment institutions. According to the Ministry's latest
 report, covering the period from June 1, 1987, to May 31, 1988,
 the DGT participated directly in 403 labor-management
 conflicts, including 33 strikes. Approximately 250 were
 resolved through direct conciliation.
 Article 47 of the Constitution states that union officials at
 the time of their election, throughout their term, and for one
 year following their term shall not be fired, suspended for
 disciplinary reasons, removed, or debased in their work
 conditions except for legal cause. This provision is generally
 observed in practice.
 The relationship between the business community and the labor
 movement has gradually improved over the last few years, but a
 large reservoir of mistrust remains. Businessmen frequently
 take measures to prevent unions from being formed. The DGT
 took steps against such offenders in 1988, and 7 new unions as
 well as 22 union locals were given legal recognition, some of
 them in enterprises where management had fought to keep them
 out.
 El Salvador has one export processing zone. There are no
 differences in labor regulations in this area and those which
 prevail in general. However, there are no labor unions
 represented at present in any of the firms in this zone, and
 the firms discourage labor organizing.
 
 
 568
 EL SALVADOR
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 The Constitution prohibits forced or compulsory labor except
 in cases of public calamity and other instances specifically
 determined by law.
 The ILO's Committee of Experts on the Application of
 Conventions has for a number of years reviewing the provisions
 in the penal code that allow the imposition of sentences
 involving compulsory labor. In 1988 it provided the Government
 with suggestions on how to improve existing legislation and
 practice. The FMLN continues to force civilians, including
 minors, to serve as porters, spotters, and couriers for the
 guerrilla army.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The Constitution prohibits the employment of children under the
 age of 14. The labor code states that exceptions can be made
 only in cases where it can be demonstrated that such employment
 is absolutely indispensable to the sustenance of the minor and
 his family. This is most often the case with children of
 peasant families who traditionally work with their families
 during planting and harvesting seasons.
 The Constitution also prohibits the employment of persons
 under 18 and all women in occupations considered dangerous.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The Government's National Minimum Wage Council recommended an
 average 25 percent wage increase for commercial, industrial,
 service, and agroindustrial employees in May 1988. On May 21,
 1988, President Duarte signed a decree raising the minimum
 wage. Commercial as well as industrial and service workers in
 San Salvador were paid $3.60 daily, while their counterparts in
 other areas of the country received $3.40. Agroindustrial
 workers employed in the cotton and sugar industries received
 $2.20, while those employed in the coffee industry earned
 $3.40. The increase in the daily minimum wage was intended to
 offset higher food prices, which rose sharply due to supply
 shortages stemming from prolonged drought. Wage rates for most
 categories of workers are higher than the legal minimums,
 especially in the private sector. For the most part, minimum
 wages are inadequate to meet the Ministry of Economy's standard
 of basic necessity, in which a family unit of five persons
 requires a monthly income of $282.
 The law limits hours of work for minors between 14 and 18 years
 of age to a maximum of 6 per day, while for adults it is 8.
 Premium pay is mandated for longer hours.
 The Constitution and the labor code spell out the rights of
 workeis to a healthy and safe working environment. These
 statutes require employers, including the Government, to take
 steps to ensure that employees are not placed at risk in their
 workplaces. Despite limited budgetary resources, the Ministry
 of Labor attempted to enforce the applicable regulations.
 According to ministry figures, the inspector general's office
 conducted approximately 29,000 inspections and reinspections
 between June 1, 1987, and May 31, 1988. Roughly 27,000 of
 these occurred in commercial, industrial, and service
 istablishments. The total number of employees covered by
 these inspections and reinspections was nearly 550,000. The
 
 
 569
 EL SALVADOR
 inspector-general's corps cited employers for almost 8,000
 infractions and assessed fines totaling $45,000. Employers
 were also ordered to pay approximately $195,000 to employees
 as compensation for injuries sustained on their jobs.
 
 
 570
