 EL SALVADOR
 With the March 31, 1985 election of legislative deputies and
 town mayors, the people of El Salvador completed the structure
 of popularly elected government which was initiated with the
 election of a Constitutional Assembly in 1982 and continued
 with the writing of a new Constitution in 1983 and
 presidential elections in 1984. Nine political parties
 contested the March elections, which were pronounced open and
 honest by international observers who witnessed the voting.
 The military safeguarded the electoral process and remained
 neutral throughout the campaign.
 For six years El Salvador has faced a Communist-backed
 insurgency which has ties to, and obtains material support
 from Cuba and the Soviet Union through Nicaragua. In addition
 it suffers from a weak economy, a history of violence, and
 weakness in public administration and in the administration of
 justice. Two rounds of discussions between the Government and
 the insurgent forces were held in late 1984 to seek a
 negotiated solution to the conflict, but the guerrillas'
 intransigence prevented a third round in 1985. In a pastoral
 letter issued by El Salvador's bishops on August 8, the Church
 called for a negotiated resolution of the war and stressed the
 legitimacy which the Government had gained through the
 electoral process. Despite the country's ongoing conflict and
 the state of emergency, political and economic life continue,
 unions organize and strike, demonstrations by students and
 others opposed to policies of the Government are unhindered,
 and views critical of the Government are openly and freely
 published and broadcast over radio and television.
 El Salvador's economy is mixed. Banking and marketing of
 major crops are nationalized and the price of food grains is
 subsidized. The land reform program begun in 1980 continues.
 There are few regulations on other economic activities, and
 individuals are free to open and conduct business both within
 the country and in trade with other nations. The declining
 value of the national currency against the dollar has raised
 the price of imports and contributed to inflation, an
 additional burden on an economy strained by war and sabotage
 by the guerrilla forces.
 Some five to seven thousand armed guerrillas of the Farabundo
 Marti National Liberation Front (FMLN) are attempting to
 overthrow the elected Government by force of arms. The
 guerrillas, having suffered reverses on the battlefield, have
 increasingly resorted to terrprist tactics, including economic
 sabotage, traffic stoppages, use of land mines, assassination,
 and kidnapping. The most spectacular cases of guerrilla
 kidnaping were the seizures of 27 elected mayors and Presfdent
 Duarte's daughter.
 Respect for human rights by the Government of El Salvador
 during 1985 continued to be strongly influenced by the
 nation's civil conflict. The establishment of a stable public
 order able to protect individual rights continues to be
 disrupted by military operations of both guerrilla and
 Government forces, acts of revenge, fear, and a prevailing
 
 
 516
 EL SALVADOR
 uncertainty caused by violence. Civil liberties have been
 restricted by a state of emergency legal regime. The civil
 conflict contributes to the ineffectiveness of the judicial
 system; efforts are underway to strengthen the judicial
 system.
 In line with President Duarte's policy, the Armed Forces have
 endeavored to conduct their operations in a more humane
 manner. However, loss of civilian life as a result of
 military action by Government forces continues and there are
 still credible reports of prisoners being subjected to abuse
 by Government officials. The policy of the Government is
 clearly opposed to such acts. Complaints of human rights
 abuses by the Security Forces have been reduced by unifying
 command of the three police services, National Police,
 Treasury Police, and National Guard, under a single Vice
 Minister for Public Security, by issuance of standard
 operating procedures for arrest and detention to safeguard
 arrestees, and by human rights instruction for police agents
 and Armed Forces personnel.
 The Armed Forces continue to be accused of human rights
 violations, but the number of such allegations is lower,
 civilian deaths during military operations are fewer, and
 there were no allegations of massacres by the Armed Forces.
 During 1985 the army evacuated groups of civilians from zones
 of military operations and turned them over to the
 International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).
 Accusations of indiscriminate bombing continue, but no
 convincing evidence to substantiate them has been offered.
 Many of the accusations come from the guerrilla radio stations
 or from guerrilla supporters. The bombing restrictions
 ordered by President Duarte in August 1984 remain in force and
 appear to be generally observed. The Special Representative
 of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights, Professor
 Pastor Ridruejo, concluded in his November 1985 report on
 human rights conditions in El Salvador that "the Salvadoran
 Army is endeavoring to conduct the war in a more humanitarian
 manner than in the past and is therefore not pursuing a policy
 of indiscriminate bombing, although in a few cases air and
 mortar attacks are causing civilian casualties."
 The brutal phenomenon known as "death squad" assassination has
 declined dramatically, along with the general level of civil
 violence. In contrast to previous years when right-wing
 vigilante groups were active, no rightist group has claimed
 responsibility for any murder during the entire year. Some
 unexplained deaths may still be the work of extreme rightist
 killers but the number directly attributable to them has
 declined sharply. Assassinations for which the perpetrators
 advertise their responsibility are now usually the work of the
 leftist groups. Guerrillas have claimed responsibility for
 many murders during 1985.
 
 
 517
 EL SALVADOR
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 The number of politically-motivated killings continues to
 decline from the levels of previous years. In 1983, according
 to reports in the San Salvador press, there was an average of
 140 politically motivated deaths a month; in 1984 the average
 was 64; from January to November of 1985 it was 29 per month.
 One legacy of El Salvador's history of political killing is
 that criminal deaths are often disguised to appear politically
 motivated in order to avoid correct attribution. Often it is
 impossible to determine the real motive. While many
 unexplained deaths are undoubtedly politically motivated,
 others are the result of criminal or personal motivations.
 By some estimates, the FMLN-FDR was responsible for
 approximately 55 percent of the political killings from
 January through November. Figures for the 318 political
 deaths during this period, as taken from the local press and
 other sources, show 145 deaths (45.6 percent) by guerrillas
 and another 31 possibly by guerrillas, 12 possibly by the
 extreme right, three by the civil defense, nine by security
 forces/army, 77 by unknown assailants, and 41 civilians killed
 in action.
 During 1985, FMLN-affiliated terrorist groups stepped up
 individual and collective assassinations, especially in urban
 areas. For example, the Clara Elizabeth Ramirez Front (CERF),
 a dissident group of the FMLN, publicly claimed responsibility
 for four murders in the first two weeks of January. On
 February 28, guerrillas attacked the residence of the
 President of the Central Elections Council, killing two of his
 bodyguards, a street vendor, and a passerby.  In March, the
 Popular Revolutionary Army (ERP) of the FMLN claimed
 responsibility for a rocket attack on National Police
 Headquarters in San Salvador which killed one civilian and
 wounded eight others. The CERF assassinated the Armed Forces
 press spokesman on March 7. On April 8, 20 residents of Santa
 Cruz Loma, La Paz department were killed by guerrillas. The
 victims included six members of one family, three of them
 children, who burned to death when the attackers doused their
 house with kerosene and set it afire. Thirteen unarmed
 members of the Civil Defense forces were assassinated during
 this raid. Leaflets left at the scene claimed responsibility
 for the massacre on behalf of the Popular Liberation Forces
 (FPL) of the FMLN.
 In May, the FMLN killed the Mayor of San Jorge, San Miguel,
 while attempting to kidnap him. On May 16, the FMLN also
 assassinated the military judge handling the cases of those
 accused of subversion, sabotage, and attempting to overthrow
 the Government. On June 19, the Revolutionary Workers' Party
 of Central America (PRTC) of the FMLN opened fire on a crowded
 sidewalk restaurant in San Salvador, killing 13 and wounding
 12. Among those killed were four unarmed U.S. Embassy Marine
 
 
 518
 EL SALVADOR
 Security Guards and two visiting American businessmen. In
 Chinameca, San Miguel, in the early morning of July 19,
 guerrillas kidnaped and murdered four men. In early
 September, three members of a family who tried to prevent the
 kidnaping of a 15 year-old female relative were killed by
 guerrillas, according to neighbors in Dulce Nombre de Maria,
 Chalatenango.
 Guerrilla-placed mines resulted in the deaths of at least 29
 civilians and in injuries to more than 92 others between
 January and August. Many persons have been killed and wounded
 by guerrilla machinegun fire during the numerous national
 traffic stoppages declared by the guerrillas. For example, on
 October 13 a Salvadoran Red Cross volunteer was seriously
 wounded in an attack by guerrillas on a clearly marked
 ambulance.
 President Jose Napoleon Duarte has continued his efforts to
 eliminate human rights abuses committed by the security
 services. The Vice Minister of Defense for Public Security
 issued human rights regulations mandating humane treatment of
 prisoners. These regulations were provided to agents of the
 security services and are enforced; detentions of members of
 the Armed Forces for violations of the law or human rights
 rose from three in 1979 to 271 in 1984.
 No previously known right-wing extremist group claimed
 responsibility for any assassination during 1985. A group
 calling itself the "Central Anti-Communist Organization"
 called a San Salvador daily in May, threatening to "punish
 those who take orders from communists;" nothing further was
 heard from this group. In December, persons who identified
 themselves the "Protective Army of Santa Ana" (EPSA) killed
 three persons they claimed were thieves allegedly because
 local judges had failed to punish such criminals.
 The only time the name of a previously known right-wing
 extremist group was used during 1985 was in July, when a
 communique ostensibly issued by the "Secret Anti-Communist
 Army" (ESA) threatened 11 persons associated with the National
 University. The Government condemned this action and ran
 frequent radio advertisements calling for anyone with
 knowledge of the ESA to notify the National Police. Later
 information strongly suggested that the communique was planted
 by a group of leftist students at the university to frighten
 rival groups. Some of those threatened did leave the country
 but those who remained have not been harmed.
 Tutela Legal, the legal assistance office of the Archbishopric
 of San Salvador, attributed 82 murders to the extreme right
 through the end of June 1985. Salvadoran press reports from
 January to November 1985 listed a total of 12 persons who were
 killed "possibly by the extreme right" and 77 others by
 unknown assailant." Tutela Legal frequently attributes
 murders to the extreme right which other observers believe to
 be criminal, not political, in nature, or in which the victim
 is not identified and for which Tutela Legal gives no reason
 for its classification.
 
 
 519
 EL SALVADOR
 Untrained and undisciplined local Civil Defense members have
 been cited for human rights abuses, including the killing of a
 civilian in May. A CiVil Defense commander was arrested in
 July in San Vicente Department for threatening residents if
 they did not enlist in the Civil Defense program. The
 Government is addressing the problem by offering both military
 and human rights training. There are credible reports that
 regular Armed Forces troops, in some instances, have meted out
 harsh treatment to masas, the guerrillas' civilian supporters
 who provide much of the logistical infrastructure necessary to
 maintain their operations in the field. A group of 13
 priests, as well as the official Human Rights Commission
 (CDH), meet regularly with military units to lecture about
 human rights and discuss problems which soldiers may confront
 in the field.
 Charges made by guerrillas that the Salvadoran Air Force
 practices indiscriminate bombing are not supported by hard
 evidence. Most of these reports originate in
 guerrilla-controlled media or in testimony taken from
 guerrilla masas. These regularly employ fabricated
 accusations of Government abuses for their political impact.
 Salvadoran pilots generally follow the strict government
 bombing regulations designed to prevent civilian casualties.
 In a few instances, however, civilians have been injured or
 killed by bombing as the result of error. In San Jose
 Guayabal, on April 15, three members of a family were killed
 while hiding in a granary, apparently by a rocket fired from a
 helicopter in support of National Guardsmen who were under
 attack by the guerrillas. In August, a woman and two of her
 children were killed in El Ocotal, when an Air Force plane
 bombed a marking round that had mistakenly identified the
 small settlement as the target. The Air Force acknowledged
 the mistake and paid compensation to the survivors. In
 neither case were civilians the intended targets.
 b. Disappearance
 The number of press-reported civilian disappearances through
 November 1985 was 129, including non-political disappearances
 such as runaway children and criminal cases. There were also
 303 persons abducted by guerrillas. By comparison, Tutela
 Legal reported 23 cases of disappearance after detention,
 presumably by government forces, and 24 cases of abduction by
 the guerrillas, from January-October 1985. Newspaper and
 eyewitness accounts often describe "heavily armed men in
 civilian clothing" as perpetrators of the seizures.
 Some of the "disappeared" are found to have been held in
 unacknowledged detention by Armed or Security Forces, only to
 reappear in the criminal justice system. This problem has
 declined with the implementation of detention procedures
 requiring prompt notification of the arrest to the family, the
 ICRC, Tutela Legal, and the CDH. Disappearances are
 particularly difficult to track as many cases are not reported
 to the press. Also, it is impossible to tell how many
 disappearances are actually desertions of family, emigration,
 or enlistment into guerrilla ranks.
 
 
 520
 EL SALVADOR
 The Government has recently recognized the problem of
 trafficking in children, some kidnaped for virtual sale to
 adoptive parents abroad. Common criminal gangs and guerrillas
 frequently stage kidnapings for ransom. Because the families
 of such kidnap victims generally try to avoid publicity in
 order to negotiate the captives' release, these kidnapings
 receive little public notice.
 The most spectacular cases of kidnapings carried out by the
 .guerrillas in 1985 were the kidnapings of 27 elected town
 mayors and a number of other town officials and the September
 10 kidnaping of President Duarte's daughter. The guerrillas
 held the President's daughter for 44 days; some of the mayors
 were captive for as long as six months. The guerrillas
 finally turned them over to the Government on October 24 in
 exchange for 25 captured guerrillas in government prisons and
 the departure from the country of 101 wounded guerrillas. One
 mayor and eight other town officials were not released in the
 exchange.- On December 30, the FMLN clandestine radio station
 announced that the mayor and an unspecified number of other
 officials from Cacaopera had been executed on the day of their
 abduction in July 1984 for cooperating with the Government and
 that a town official from Uluazapa had been killed in December
 1983. Although the FMLN pledged not to kidnap family members
 of government and military officials in the future, government
 officials remain targets. The Civil Aviation Director, an Air
 Force colonel serving in a civilian post, was abducted in
 early November.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment
 or Punishment
 The effort to enforce the code of procedures of the Armed
 and Security forces has had a positive effect. The timely
 notification of arrests to family and the ICRC, Tutela Legal,
 and CDH has decreased the number of abuses. The procedures
 state that physical abuse or intimidation are prohibited. All
 prisoners must be examined by a physician immediately upon
 entrance into a jail to determine whether they have been
 abused or are in need of medical treatment for any reason.
 These procedures were strengthened when the Minister of
 Defense and-Public Security, General Vides Casanova, issued a
 document on March 27 which reemphasized the illegality of
 inhumane treatment of prisoners and their right to read the
 confessions they sign. The CDH and the military chaplains
 under Father F. Delgado now give human rights classes to the
 Armed Forces and police on a regular basis. A widely
 disseminated "Handbook on Human Rights," issued in June is
 another positive effort to educate the military and police on
 human rights values.
 The CDH, ICRC, and Tutela Legal, who work directly with
 prisoners, say that complaints of torture and other forms of
 abuse continue, although at a lower level than in past years.
 Most abuses are reported to occur during the initial hours of
 capture and range from threats of death to physical torture.
 The most common complaints are of prolonged and continuous
 interrogation; being forced to stand for long periods, often
 while blindfolded; and sleep deprivation. There are reports
 that forced confessions still
 
 
 521
 EL SALVADOR
 occur and that prisoners are sometimes not permitted to read
 their confessions before signing them.
 According to government figures, 215 guerrilla combatants and
 an additional 453 guerrilla supporters voluntarily turned
 themselves in between January and October 25. After
 debriefing, such persons are transported by the CDH to the
 destination of their choice. Captured guerrillas have, in
 general, received adequate treatment. For example, foreign
 doctors were permitted to perform surgery on captured
 guerrilla leader Nidia Diaz to improve movement in her injured
 hand.
 There were no complaints of torture in the penitentiaries in
 1985. The guards are not abusive and prisoners receive family
 and conjugal visits. Although problems at the larger penal
 institutions include meager food rations, scarcity of potable
 water, and overcrowding, there are some opportunities for
 gainful employment by the prisoners. Inmates charged with
 subversion are permitted their own internal organization and
 give political classes which they organize and teach
 themselves. Punishment cells are primitive, but reportedly
 are rarely used.
 The FMLN claims that it respects the "physical and
 psychological integrity" of its captives. However, there are
 many credible reports of civilians being kidnaped and later
 killed by guerrillas and of soldiers being executed after
 surrendering to the guerrillas. Fifteen members of the Armed
 Forces and one member of the Civil Defense were kidnaped and
 killed by guerrillas between January 1 and October 25, 1985.
 The guerrillas denied medical treatment to Antonio Hernandez,
 town administrator of San Simon, Morazan, who had been injured
 in an accident prior to his kidnaping in late April. The
 guerrillas abandoned him on the bank of the Torola River in
 Morazan, where soldiers found him on September 26, unconscious
 and near death.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Constitution provides for the suspension of civil
 guarantees in times of emergency. Special legislation (Decree
 50) provides for separate procedures and judicial handling of
 politically-motivated crimes such as treason, sabotage,
 rebellion, and participation in organized groups dedicated to
 the overthrow of the Government by force. Holding political
 views opposed to the Government, without actively supporting
 political violence against the Government, is not a basis for
 arrest.
 Under present state of emergency legislation, arrests can be
 made by the Security Forces without a warrant and can be made
 upon denunciation by an accuser who remains anonymous. The
 disposition of arrested persons is determined by an
 instructional magistrate who, like trial magistrates at
 various levels of the judicial process, may decide on the
 release or continued detention of a suspect for additional
 
 
 522
 EL SALVADOR
 investigation before charges are brought or trial begins. In
 practice, it is-impossible to say how many arrests are not
 based on reasonable cause, as even dismissal of charges at the
 investigative level often reflects ineffective investigation
 or is a matter of convenience in an overburdened judicial
 system.
 Salvadoran arrest procedures require prisoners to be taken
 directly to the brigade or police headquarters and
 registered. For the most part, the police and Armed Forces
 have complied with this regulation. However, there continue
 to be some charges of prisoners being taken to unofficial
 interrogation sites before entering a penal institution. Once
 registered in a detention center, arrestees can be held for
 eight days before they can be visited by the ICRC, CDH, and
 Tutela Legal.
 Under Decree 50, arrestees must be released or consigned to
 a military "investigative" judge within 15 days of arrest.
 Many prisoners are released during this initial phase, after
 preliminary interrogation and investigation. If consigned to
 a judge, arrestees must be informed of the charges against
 them within 15 days of consignment. Once they are so informed
 they have a right to legal counsel. The investigative judge
 must reach a decision within 60 days of receiving the case.
 If the case has merit, he sends it to the military judge of
 the First Instance (the actual trial judge). Decree 50
 requires the First Instance judge to hand down a decision
 within 43 days of receiving the case. In practice, few cases
 are handled so quickly; Decree 50 cases usually stay on
 schedule until they reach the First Instance court, and remain
 at that stage for an indefinite period.
 Processing of Decree 50 cases was halted in May 1985, when
 guerrillas assassinated the sole First Instance Judge handling
 those cases. The judge was replaced in July and adjudication
 of cases resumed. As of the end of September, about 500
 persons held under Decree 50 were awaiting trial, about the
 same number as a year previously. Between January and
 November of 1985, 30 persons were convicted under Decree 50
 and seven were acquitted. Charges were dismissed in 113 other
 cases.
 In cases of common crime, police may detain a suspect up to 72
 hours before presenting him to an investigative judge for
 release or detention for further investigation. In theory,
 the investigational phase may not last more than 87 days,
 subject to extension for investigation. In practice, these
 time limitations are not always followed; the backlog of cases
 in the system is the major reason for delay.
 There are no legal provisions for exile, or for the revocation
 of citizenship.
 The Government prohibits forced labor. However, leftist
 guerrillas have subjected kidnaped Salvadoran peasants to
 forced labor. Victims state that they were forced to travel
 with the guerrillas and cook, do laundry, and perform other
 chores.
 
 
 523
 EL SALVADOR
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 In El Salvador, common crimes are tried publicly; Decree 50
 offenses are adjudicated in the judge's office, without
 spectators. The inadequacy and inefficiency of the judicial
 system often cause long delays in bringing cases to trial.
 Incarcerated persons normally wait 6 to 18 months between the
 formal placement of charges and the adjudication of their
 cases. Only 10 to 15 percent of the prison population are
 actually serving sentences; the others are awaiting trial.
 When finally tried, most can expect to have the charges
 dismissed or to be acquitted, often due simply to the poor
 investigative capacity of the police and magistrates. Over
 the past 10 years, the overall conviction rate has never
 exceeded 20 percent; in 1984 it was 15.4 percent.
 Aside from a lack of resources for carrying out
 investigations, the courts are hampered by the susceptibility
 of judges and juries to intimidation or bribery. A Judicial.
 Protection Unit (JPU) was proposed to provide protection to
 judges, juries, and officers of the courts in sensitive cases
 in which intimidation might come into play. The JPU was
 temporarily activated to provide protection in the 1984 trial
 of the murderers of four U.S. churchwomen, but the prison
 guards who composed it returned to their regular duties after
 the trial. The executive decree to establish the JPU
 permanently has been approved, and the Government is drafting
 the implementing regulations.
 Recognizing substantial problems within the judicial system,
 the Government has committed itself to a judicial reform
 program with four primary components: the JPU, described
 above; the Judicial Revisory Commission; improved judicial
 administration and training; and the Commission for
 Investigation. The Revisory Commission will examine the
 entire legal system in order to suggest modifications to the
 penal code to make it fully consistent with the 1983
 Constitution, and will also review existing legislation
 governing arrest and detention procedures. The Commission for
 Investigation will obtain equipment and train personnel for
 forensic investigation.
 The Salvadoran judiciary is independent from the rest of the
 Government. Supreme Court magistrates and the Attorney
 General are chosen by the Legislative Assembly after
 nomination by political parties. In May, the legislature
 removed the Attorney General from office. His appeal to the
 Supreme Court of his removal was decided in his favor in
 December and he was returned to office.
 Judicial authority has historically not been applied to the
 military. Although lower-ranking military and police
 personnel are regularly discharged from their duties and
 arrested for criminal offenses, in practice the officers of
 the Armed Forces are treated differently from other citizens
 before the law. Magistrates are usually reluctant to bring
 charges against military officers or members of the Security
 Forces. Colleagues of the accused often cannot be relied upon
 to testify or otherwise cooperate in prosecuting crimes
 
 
 524
 EL SALVADOR
 against other officers. Also, intimidation of judges and
 juries by members of the Armed Forces frequently overcomes
 prosecution efforts made by the Attorney General's Office.
 No military officer has been successfully prosecuted for human
 rights violations in recent years. An ongoing prosecution,
 however, is that of Captain Eduardo Avila in connection with
 the murder of a Salvadoran labor leader and two U.S. advisors
 in January 1981. The Attorney General plans to present
 additional evidence implicating Avila before the courts to
 supplement that which was presented in June 1985. A lower
 court and an appeals court determined that the initial
 evidence was insufficient to warrant prosecution of Avila.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home,
 or Correspondence
 The Government does not arbitrarily interfere in the personal
 lives of Salvadoran citizens except in matters it considers
 related to the armed conflict. Both the Government and the
 guerrillas use networks of informers. Phone numbers for
 making accusations to the Armed Forces have been publicized
 (although little used), and the police rely on informers and
 anonymous tips about alleged criminal and subversive
 activities. There is no effort to coerce the public into
 acting as informants.
 Members of the Security Forces use forced entry to carry out
 arrests and investigations. Government troops have compelled
 civilians to leave conflictive areas. In April the Army
 removed over 200 civilian supporters of the guerrillas from
 around the Guazapa volcano, a guerrilla stronghold.
 The constitutional provision protecting the inviolability of
 correspondence is suspended under the state of emergency.
 Postal officials have the legal authority to inspect
 correspondence, but there is no government policy to do so,
 and it is not believed to occur frequently.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and the press is respected by the Government
 even though these rights are technically suspended under state
 of emergency .decrees. The only instance during 1985 when the
 Government formally asked the mass media not to publish
 information was during the negotiations for the release of the
 President's daughter, kidnaped by the FMLN. Print and
 broadcast media did not universally honor the request, but the
 Government imposed no sanctions against media coverage during
 the negotiations. Self-censorship, sometimes out of fear of
 violent reprisal from the extremes of the political spectrum,
 is the primary constraint on free expression in El Salvador.
 Newspapers have published "communiques" from extremist groups
 out of fear of reprisal.
 The leading daily newspapers in the capital are conservative,
 and frequently and vigorously criticize the Government. The
 only response from the.Government has been to reduce paid
 
 
 525'
 EL SALVADOR
 advertising by government agencies in one of the papers. The
 views of the radical left continue to be expressed in paid
 advertisements, which appear regularly in at least three of
 the four Salvadoran dailies and in articles published in the
 University of Central America's bimonthly journal "Estudios
 Centroamericanos" (ECA) and its biweekly newspaper "Proceso."
 Radio news usually covers a wider variety of stories than the
 printed media and is more broadly diffused in Salvadoran
 society than either newspapers or television news. FDR
 leaders are regularly interviewed on local radio news programs
 and at least one local station offers air time to those FMLN
 front organizations which are operating openly in San
 Salvador. Local radio stations frequently repeat information
 broadcast by clandestine guerrilla radio stations.
 The Government owns no newspapers. It owns one radio station
 and two television stations, one educational and one
 informational. There are four privately owned television
 stations.
 A six-year old decree forbidding publication of anonymous
 communiques and statements remains in effect and is largely
 observed by the media. When it has been violated, the
 Government has taken no action against the reporting media.
 Academic freedom is guaranteed by the Constitution and is
 broadly interpreted. As in many Latin American countries,
 university authorities routinely assert that local police have
 no jurisdiction on campus. The main campus of the National
 University of El Salvador, closed for four years following
 violent clashes between students and the army, reopened in
 early 1984. Though students are not immune from arrest,
 arrests do not appear to be made on the basis of student
 status or for violations of limits on freedom of speech and
 press. Two instructors were shot on two university campuses
 in October 1985; the killings remain unsolved, but political
 motives are not evident in either case.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 El Salvador permits any association not formed for criminal
 purposes. Social, labor, professional, religious, and
 political associations operate freely, including leftist
 groups critical of the Government. The groups place paid
 advertisements in the newspapers and hold marches and
 demonstrations free of government interference. Even the
 "Committee of the Political Prisoners of El Salvador"
 (COPPES), an association of those inmates being held for
 subversion against the state, is permitted to operate in the
 prisons of the country and to publish political
 advertisements. The Information Secretary of the
 non-governmental Human Rights Commission (CDHES) was arrested
 in November and charged with membership in a guerrilla
 organization, the Armed Forces of National Liberation (FARN).
 The National Police have stated that his employment by CDHES
 was unrelated to his arrest; Mr. Caceres had worked for CDHES
 for six years prior to his arrest.
 
 
 526
 EL SALVADOR
 Employees of private businesses or autonomous government
 institutions have a constitutional right to form professional
 associations or labor unions to defend employee interests, to
 bargain collectively, and to strike. Although employees of
 non-autonomous public institutions are barred by law from
 joining unions, these employees in fact have legally
 recognized associations which act as unions, bargain
 collectively, and strike. The Government is studying a
 proposal which would extend collective bargaining rights to
 peasant labor associations. Salvadoran labor groups draw up
 their own statutes and elect their own officers. Government
 recognition of these groups is not based on political
 considerations. There is no government-sponsored labor
 group. Unions are independent of political parties, though
 some unions have worked on behalf of parties in political
 campaigns.
 Unions may join national and international federations. The
 International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU) and
 the World Confederation of Labor (WCL) have Salvadoran
 affiliates. Some Salvadoran unions have loose links with the
 Communist-dominated World Federation of Trade Unions (WFTU).
 The Government and unions maintain ties with the International
 Labor Organization (ILO).
 The Labor Ministry routinely mediates labor disputes at the
 request of the interested parties. In 1985 there were three
 instances in which labor and management voluntarily submitted
 to binding arbitration by the Labor Ministry. Groups across
 the political spectrum demonstrate openly and freely. In
 spite of an Armed Forces ban on a June 4 labor demonstration
 for which its organizers had not obtained a permit, the
 demonstration took place without incident.
 Only one complaint has been made to the ILO since President
 Duarte's June 1984 inauguration, arising from the illegal
 occupation by strikers of the central Social Security
 Institute (ISSS) Hospital in May 1985. During the occupation,
 many non-striking Salvadoran workers were unable to obtain the
 social security medical treatment to which they were
 entitled. Also, the number of hospital patients who died
 during the strike was greater than normal though the number of
 patients being treated was smaller than usual. The strike's
 leaders made no attempt to disavow support they received from
 guerrilla radio stations, nor to separate themselves from
 death threats made against the ISSS Director General.
 On May 27, a labor judge ruled the ISSS strike illegal because
 procedures prescribed by the labor code had not been followed
 by the union prior to calling the strike. The strikers
 ignored the judge's order to return to work. On June 2,
 police entered the hospital, arrested two union leaders for
 directing the illegal occupation of a public building, and
 then withdrew from the hospital. The police mistakenly shot
 and killed four policemen during the operation, but there were
 no deaths or injuries of hospital workers or patients because
 of the security forces' actions. The two arrested labor
 leaders were released June 5; they publicly stated they
 had been treated well while in police custody. Labor and
 management finally reached agreement and the strike ended
 June 6.
 
 
 527
 EL SALVADOR
 C. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is guaranteed by the Constitution and is
 respected in practice. Although the country is historically
 Roman Catholic, numerous Protestant denominations have gained
 adherents, often through the efforts of foreign missionaries.
 These missionaries and members of the non-Catholic
 denominations operate freely and without harassment. Although
 church members and workers (of both Catholic and Protestant
 denominations) have on occasion been arrested, these arrests
 were unrelated to the individual's religious beliefs or
 activites.
 The Catholic Church continues to be one of the most respected
 and influential institutions in the country. The Sunday
 homily from the National Cathedral is broadcast live on the
 Government's television and radio stations and is a regular
 news item in the press and radio the following day. Clergy
 and church publications speak forcefully on human rights and
 on the need for an end to the war. Church statements have
 become increasingly critical of the leftist insurgency, but
 the Church has not hesitated to criticize the Government.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Although the state of emergency decree formally suspends the
 constitutional right to free movement, this suspension is not
 enforced in practice. Local military commanders have on
 occasion denied entry for short periods of time from areas
 where military operations were underway. The continuing armed
 conflict has displaced an estimated 525,000 persons within El
 Salvador, primarily from the northern and eastern
 departments. The United Nations High Commissioner for
 Refugees lists another 35,654 Salvadorans as refugees outside
 El Salvador in Central America, with 20,000 in Honduras. An
 estimated 200,000 may be living in Mexico, and as many as
 750,000 undocumented Salvadorans are in the United States.
 The Government, international organizations, and private
 voluntary organizations assist the internally displaced. The
 Government has imposed no control on emigration and has
 assisted amnesty beneficiaries who wish to emigrate after
 release. It also assists displaced persons and others wishing
 to return to El Salvador to reintegrate into society.
 Movement in the eastern part of the country has been limited
 by traffic stoppages declared by the guerrillas and enforced
 with roadblocks, land mines, and the machinegunning and
 burning of vehicles traveling during the stoppages. The
 guerrillas declared nine such stoppages in the course of the
 year.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of
 Citizens to Change Their Government
 El Salvador moved further in its transition to an open,
 democratic system in 1985 as it held its fourth national
 election in three years. The president is directly elected
 and serves for a period of five years. He cannot
 constitutionally succeed himself. The next presidential
 
 
 528
 EL SALVADOR
 elections will take place in 1989. The legislature is
 unicameral and is made of 60 deputies who serve for three year
 terms. Like the president, they are directly elected.
 Nine political parties, ranging from the moderate left to the
 conservative right, participated in the March 31, 1985
 legislative and municipal council elections. Five political
 parties gained representation in the legislature. The
 Christian Democratic Party (PDC) of President Jose Napoleon
 Duarte won 52 percent of the vote and captured 33 of the 60
 seats in the Legislative Assembly. The National Republican
 Alliance (ARENA) and the National Conciliation Party (PCN)
 captured 30 percent and 8 percent of the vote, respectively,
 and earned 13 seats and 12 seats in the assembly, divided
 according to a coalition agreement between them. The
 remaining two seats in the assembly were won by two smaller
 parties. The PDC won in 153 of the 262 municipalities; the
 ARENA-PCN coalition in all but one of the others. Mayors and
 municipal councils were also elected directly in the March
 elections for the first time since 1977.
 Though the PDC has a plurality in the Legislative Assembly,
 debate in the Assembly is vigorous. The Assembly has altered
 bills submitted by the President before passing them, and the
 President has vetoed bills passed with the support of his
 party's deputies.
 The Constitution requires the legal recognition of all
 political parties that do not advocate armed opposition,
 provided they are able to meet the required minimum membership
 standards of 3,000 followers. Several small political
 .parties, while not represented in the legislature or municipal
 councils, do have legal status and freely organize and publish
 their views. The right to membership in any legally
 recognized political party is unrestricted. Two opposition
 parties of the left, the National Revolutionary Movement (MNR)
 led by Guillermo Ungo and the communist National Democratic
 Union (UDN), are legally recognized but have chosen not to
 participate in legitimate political activity. The MNR and
 UDN, together with the Popular Social Christian Movement
 (MPSC), make up the Democratic Revolutionary Front (FDR), the
 political front which, in alliance with the FMLN, is waging
 the insurgency. The Government and the majority of the
 constitutional opposition have expressed support for the
 integration of the armed leftist groups into the system as
 peaceful, legal political parties.
 As in previous years, the guerrillas sought to disrupt the
 vote during the elections held in 1985. In the weeks prior to
 the elections, the guerrillas burned more than 25 municipal
 buildings. They proclaimed.a national traffic stoppage three
 days before the elections in an attempt to prevent citizens
 from traveling to vote. On election eve, they mined several
 rural roads in Chalatenango Department, killing or injuring
 several civilians on their way to the polls. In spite of
 these efforts, approximately 1.2 million voters went to the
 polls, representing more than 65 percent of the electorate.
 Elections were carried out on site in all but 20 of the 262
 municipalities in El Salvador. Elections in those 20
 
 
 529
 EL SALVADOR
 municipalities, representing less than six percent of the
 electorate, were held in neighboring towns. In El Salvador
 voting is no longer obligatory.
 The Government invited representatives of more than 50 nations
 and international organizations to observe the March 31
 elections. Almost universally, the 130 international
 observers declared the elections to be open, honest, and a
 valid demonstration of the popular will. A pastoral letter
 issued by the Salvadoran bishops on August 8 described the
 Government as "a constitutional government, the fruit of a
 democratic process, sanctioned by the massive turnout at the
 polls in four successive elections."
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights:
 The Government maintains an open door policy toward human
 rights delegations. Key members of the Government, including
 high-ranking members of the military, have demonstrated their
 willingness to brief human rights groups and to be interviewed
 by them. Among those groups which have sent delegations to El
 Salvador are: Americas Watch, the Faculty for Human Rights in
 El Salvador - Central America (FHRES), the Lawyers' Committee
 for Human Rights, U.S. congressional delegations, and various
 church and labor groups. Physicians from "Medical Aid for El
 Salvador" were given access to guerrilla leader Maria
 Valladares de Lemus (Nidia Diaz), to evaluate her condition
 and performed an operation on her injured arm. In March,
 Americas Watch assigned a representative to El Salvador who
 does not permanently reside in the country but does make
 extended visits. The Government has welcomed the frequent
 visits of the representatives of the ICRC and human rights
 groups to prisoners at brigade headquarters and penal
 institutions.
 The U.N. General Assembly's Special Rapporteur on Human Rights
 in El Salvador made his fifth annual visit to the country in
 September and received from each ministry and autonomous
 agency of the Governent a report on human rights within its
 area of responsiblitity. During his visit, the rapporteur
 interviewed government officials, visited prisoners held by
 the Government on charges of subversion, and spoke with
 representatives of official and nonofficial human rights
 organizations. In his report to the U.N. General Assembly on
 Novermber 5, 1985, the rapporteur noted that, "As in previous
 years the cooperation.. .by the Government of El Salvador was
 and full and open."
 There are several domestic human rights organizations which
 are active in El Salvador. The official Human Rights
 Commission (CDH) is an autonomous government agency which
 investigates complaints of human rights abuse. Tutela Legal
 is the legal assistance office of the Archdiocese. Other
 organizations which report on violence include Christian Legal
 Aid (Socorro Juridico Cristiano), and the non-official Human
 Rights Commission of El Salvador (CDHES).
 
 
 530
 EL SALVADOR
 The CDH receives complaints of human rights violations by both
 the government forces and the FMLN. CDH representativet. visit
 jails and prisons to look for persons reported missing/, and
 its staff physicians examine arrestees to determine the
 validity of complaints of human rights abuse. To make itself
 more accessible to the public, the CDH has opened field
 offices in the departmental capitals of San Vicente, Santa
 Ana, and San Miguel. The CDH has been successful in
 representing individual interests before military and civilian
 governmental institutions.
 Tutela Legal's small staff carries out some on-site
 investigations, takes testimony from individuals, and uses
 the press as a major source. The other organizations rely
 primarily on newspaper reporting, supplemented by other
 sources such as announcements by guerrilla groups and personal
 testimony. Socorro Juridico refuses to name its sources.
 CDHES and some other groups consistently and vocally criticize
 the Government and echo allegations of human rights violations
 broadcast on guerrilla radio. They have also justified the
 kidnaping of mayors as legitimate military targets and have
 repeated false guerrilla claims that some of the victims of
 the PRTC murder of 13 people in June were killed in a
 "cross-fire." However, no member of such groups has been
 harmed. One was briefly taken into custody on charges
 unrelated to her activity in these groups. The Government has
 arrested and charged two other members of these organizations
 with membership in and active support for guerrilla groups.
 Their cases are before the Decree 50 courts.
 Amnesty International Report 1985, which covers events during
 1984, expressed continued concern about arbitrary arrest and
 prolonged detention without trial, torture, disappearances,
 and extrajudicial executions. Freedom House rates El Salvador
 "partly free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 El Salvador had an estimated population of 5 million in
 mid-1985 with a growth rate of 2.5 percent annually, excluding
 emigration. The estimated per capita GDP for 1985 is about
 $650. The GDP grew by 1.5 percent in real terms in 1984,
 following a cumulative decline of 25 percent between 1979 and
 1983. Adjusted for population growth, the decline probably
 has not yet been arrested. In 1984, agriculture accounted for
 about 25 percent and industry for 17 percent of GDP. Coffee,
 cotton, sugar, and shrimp comprise the bulk of El Salvador's
 exports.
 Adding to the adverse economic effects of six years of
 internal violence, El Salvador's economy has suffered from the
 world recession, declining prices for the country's main
 exports, and sharply reduced demand from its trading partners
 in the Central American Common Market (CACM). The violence
 prompted large-scale capital flight, precipitous reduction in
 private investment, and increased unemployment. Although this
 decline appears to have been largely halted, investment has
 been slow to resume and the economy remains troubled by a
 large balance-of-payments deficit, external debt, rising
 inflation, and an unbalanced budget.
 A dramatic shift in the ownership of nearly 25 percent of El
 Salvador's agricultural land brought about under the agrarian
 reform program has affected El Salvador's social structure.
 The sweeping social and economic reform is designed in part to
 transfer ownership of farmlands from the small number of large
 landholders to those who worked the land.
 
 
 531
 EL SALVADOR
 Under Phase I of the program, all farms of more than 500
 hectares (1,235 acres) were converted into worker
 cooperatives. Of the 317 cooperatives formed, 37 are in
 conflictive zones and not operating. The rest are generally
 able to support their members, but the majority are unable to
 make payments on their land debt or 1980-1981 emergency credit
 debts.
 The 1983 Constitution clarified Phase II of the reform by
 establishing a ceiling of 245 hectares (605 acres) that an
 individual may own and by giving affected owners three years
 to sell property in excess of that limit to peasants, small
 farmers, or peasant organizations. The state can expropriate
 any excess land not disposed of by December 1986. Twelve to
 15,000 hectares of land are affected by Phase II and the
 Ministry of Agriculture is beginning to develop necessary
 implementing legislation.
 Under Phase III of the reform, farms previously rented or
 sharecropped could be claimed in parcels of up to seven
 hectares (17.3 acres) by the former renters or sharecroppers,
 including family members. Under Phase III more than 300,000
 Salvadorans have been moving towards ownership of the land
 they work. Many landowners affected by Phase III resisted
 strongly, some with violence, and forced eviction of
 beneficiaries. Many others filed legal protests with the
 Government; and at one point in 1984 about 20 percent of the
 legal challenges to Phase III claims were being decided in
 favor of the original landowner on the basis that the
 applicant for the land did not qualify under Phase III rules.
 Currently, there is less legal activity, and peasant
 organizations report that forced eviction is no longer a
 significant problem.
 In 1984 the infant mortality rate was 67 per 1,000 live
 births, and life expectancy was 64.5 years. The per capita
 caloric intake was 92 percent of nutritional requirements.
 The Government conducted a vaccination campaign in early 1985
 to immunize young children against polio and other diseases,
 and followed it with an oral rehydration therapy education
 campaign to reduce the number of deaths from diarrhea. Most
 of the rural population does not have regular access to
 medical care.
 Historically, El Salvador has had a shortage of low income
 housing because of heavy rural to urban migration, exacerbated
 in recent years by persons displaced from conflictive areas.
 The Government has initiated a major program to extend public
 services into squatter communities surrounding the major urban
 centers, install drainage works, sidewalks, and paving, and
 provide self-help housing.
 Approximately 62 percent of El Salvador's adult population is
 literate. Some 15 percent of the primary school age
 population are not attending school. Since 1978, the
 country's internal conflict has contributed to the abandonment
 of over 800 primary schools and the closing of 2,140 more. In
 April 1985 the Government initiated a $150 million, three-year
 program to renovate primary school classrooms and purchase
 textbooks and other school supplies.
 
 
 532
 EL SALVADOR
 The Constitution permits employment of children less than 14
 years old only in those cases where their employment is
 necessary to provide for their subsistence or the subsistence
 of their families. Children less than 18 years old are
 prohibited from legally working at night or in dangerous
 occupations. The reality, however, is that teenage and even
 younger children work long hours.
 The minimum wage for workers in the industrial and service
 sectors is about US$3.10 per day. In practice, the salaries
 of most workers in these sectors is above the minimum wage.
 These workers are paid overtime for working more than 44 hours
 in a week and are entitled to 15 days of annual paid
 vacation. The minimum wage for farm workers is about US$1.08
 plus about US$.31 worth of food per day. Farm workers are
 paid more during harvest times. The national commission on
 minimum salaries has proposed an increase for farm workers
 over 16 years old and an additional increase for those
 partially incapacitated or under 16. The proposal has not
 been acted on. The piece rates paid at harvest times net
 workers triple or quadruple the minimum wage.
 The Government requires that work sites be safe, and that
 drinking water, toilets, and adequate ventilation be provided
 workers. Major industrial enterprises generally meet these
 requirements. Between June 1984 and May 1985, the labor
 ministry made 467 inspections and studies of working
 conditions, initiated four campaigns aimed at preventing work
 related accidents, held four seminars on occupational safety
 and hygiene, and investigated 319 work-related accidents. The
 Labor Ministry carries out inspections either at its own
 initiative or on the basis of a complaint. However, the Labor
 Ministry complains that budgetary restrictions and guerrilla
 activities, such as the destruction of Labor Ministry
 vehicles, impede full enforcement of worker laws.
 Under the Constitution women enjoy the same legal rights as
 men. Three women serve as deputies in the 60-member assembly,
 and about ten percent of the mayors elected in March 1985 are
 women. Women hold positions as vice ministers of culture,
 economics, education, interior, foreign commerce, and
 justice. Most elementary school teachers, nurses, and
 secretaries are women, as well as about 50 percent of the
 teachers on the high school level and between 30 to 40 percent
 of university professors. Women also play a role in private
 industry, especially as owners of small enterprises. Several
 major companies are owned and operated by women. Women serve
 on the boards of directors of several banks. Women are also
 well represented in the professions: about 30 percent of the
 physicians, 50 percent of the dentists and more than 30
 percent of the attorneys are women. They are members of the
 Armed Forces as nurses, in administrative areas, and in
 intelligence. The National Police is training women as
 detectives and has a corps of policewomen.
 A high proportion of women in the lower economic strata are
 heads of single parent households, often providing for large
 families. Seventy percent of the children in El Salvador are
 born out of wedlock, and most of these are not legally
 recognized by their fathers even when occupying the same
 domicile.
 
 
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: EL SALVADOR
 1983     1984     1985
 I.ECON. ASSIST-TOTAL,,,       245.6    215.9   433.9
 LOANS ..............    ... 86.6    81.2     70.0
 GRANTS ................. 159.0     134.7   363.9
 A.AID ....................   198.8    161.4   376.1
 LOANS ..............   ... 47.6     32.2     21.0
 GRANTS ............. ....  151.2   129.2   355.1
 (SECSUPP ASSIST.),,,     140.0    120.2    285.0
 B.FOOO FOR PEACE .......       46.8     54.5     57.8
 LOANS ..............    ... 39.0    49.0     49.0
 GRANTS ................     7.8      5.5     8.8
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ..........  .  39.0     49.0     49.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....       39.0     49.0    49.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0      0.0     0.0
 TITLE  II-TOTAL ..........      7.8      5.5     8.8
 E.RELIEF.EC.'DEV  &  WFP.      6.2      3.7     7.2
 VOL.RELIEF  AGENCY .....       1.6      1.8     1.6
 C.OTMER ECON. ASSIST...         0.0      0.0     0.0
 LOANS .................     0.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS ................     0.0      0.0     0.0
 PEACE  CORPS ......       0.0      0.0     0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0     0.0
 OTHER ..............     0.0      0.0     0.0
 II.MIL.  ASSIST.-TOTAL..       81.3   196.6    136.3
 LOANS ..............    ... 46.5    18.5     10.0
 GRANTS ................   34.8    178.1    126.3
 A.MAP  GRANTS ..........      33.5    176.8   124.8
 B.CREOIT FINANCING ....       46.5     18.5    10.0
 C.INTL  MIL.ED.TRNG ....       1.3      1.3     1.5
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0      0.0     0.0
 E.OTHER  GRANTS ........       0.0     0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. 9 MIL...       326.9    412.5   570.2
 LOANS ..............  .... 133.1    99.7     80.0
 GRANTS ................. 193.8     312.8   490.2
 ----------------------------------------------------------
 OTHER US LOANS ..........        0.0      0.0     0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......        0.0     0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER .................    0.0     0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1983     1984     1985     1946-85
 TOTAL ........    53.3    115.2     21.9   905.7
 IBRO               0.0      0.0     0.0    215.1
 IFC                0.0      0.0     0.0      1.0
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0    25.6
 108               52.9    114.0     21.0   634.2
 ADB                0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 AFDB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNOP               0.4      0.9      0.0     22.6
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.3      0.9     7.2
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0
 
 
 534
