 EL SALVADOR
 Since the brief and ill-fated peasant uprising in 1932,
 political life in El Salvador has until recently been domi-
 nated by the military, backed by the wealthy elite. The
 country has long been plagued by the problems of inequitable
 distribution of wealth and income, a high rate of population
 density, high unemployment and unsatisfactory social-economic
 development.
 In the years following the apparently fraudulent 1972 Presi-
 dential election, political violence and polarization grew,
 and had reached a peak in early 1979. The leftist "popular"
 organizations became bolder. Confrontations between these
 groups and the Government resulted in the May mass shootings
 at the National Cathedral and the Venezuelan Embassy in
 which excessive and indiscriminate force was used by security
 forces. Because of the increase of violence and demonstrations
 accompanying these incidents, the Government imposed a
 state of siege on May 24 that lasted 60 days.
 In 1979 political violence hit a peak in the countryside;
 there were numerous reports of "disappearances" of persons
 and frequent appearances of corpses, sometimes in groups
 and often showing signs of torture. Human rights groups
 and opposition parties attributed responsibility for a
 large portion of these victims to security forces. Leftist
 terrorist groups claimed responsibility for political assas-
 sinations, kidnappings and other violent acts. Rightist
 terrorist groups authored similar acts against the left.
 Under the government of Carlos Humberto Romero (1977-1979)
 a government-sponsored para-military organization, ORDEN,
 committed human rights violations, including beatings and
 torture, on a widespread basis.
 Because of the continuing inability of the Romero regime
 to deal -7ith accelerating political disintegration, its
 record of human rights abuses and widespread skepticism
 about its efforts to democratize the political process,
 a coup by moderate elements within the military deposed
 that government on October 15. The successor government,
 a five man military/civilian Junta, immediately announced
 moderate and democratic goals including the observance
 of human rights. Elements of the democratic opposition
 to Romero either supported the new Government or participated
 in it. The extreme left initially reacted to the change
 with a violent challenge.
 The new Junta announced an amnesty for political prisoners
 and exiles, disbanded ORDEN and moved to significantly
 raise wages for agricultural workers. Despite efforts
 to make a clean break with the pattern of human rights
 abuses of previous governments, there were some incidents
 of excessive-violence by the security forces.
 
 
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 There were numerous credible allegations of torture by
 security forces during the Romero Government. Accusations
 against the National Guard and other security forces included
 denial of food and water, electric shock and sexual violation.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 During the Romero period, there is no doubt that the security
 forces subjected prisoners to degrading treatment and punish-
 ment at stages of the judicial process from arrest to prison
 sentence. There were numerous accounts of persons being
 beaten at the time of arrest. The March 4 death due to
 burns of Apolinario Baires, after being detained by the
 National Guard, was considered by many as a particularly
 notorious instance of treatment meted out by security forces.
 It generated unfavorable publicity for the Government because
 of the relative prominence of his family.
 Detention facilities are overcrowded and inadequate but
 appear to reflect El Salvador's low standard of living
 rather than a deliberate policy on the part of the Government
 to keep them that way. Ordinary prisoners are allowed
 visits from family members and their attorneys. Persons
 sentenced under the former Law of Defense and Guarantee
 of Public Order (derogated 2/27/79) were sent to the same
 detention facilities as common criminals.
 During the Romero Government the security forces' use of
 excessive force resulted in needless deaths and injuries.
 The shooting of demonstrators in front of the National
 Cathedral on May 8 left twenty-three dead, and fourteen
 demonstrators were killed near the Venezuelan Embassy on
 May 22.
 There were numerous reports of people being found dead
 after being arrested by the security forces under the Romero
 Government. Right-wing terrorist groups such as the White
 Warriors' Union (UGB) reappeared in May and claimed respon-
 sibility for assassinations of teachers, union members,
 and persons thought to be members of opposition groups.
 In 1979 extreme leftist terrorist organizations engaged
 in a campaign of assassination of government and ORDEN
 officials while also continuing kidnappings of business
 executives.
 The new Junta quickly moved to dissolve ORDEN, the Government-
 sponsored para-military organization that had been responsible
 for many human rights violations.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 On February 27, the Legislative Assembly repealed the Law
 of Defense and Guarantee of Public Order, which was enacted
 in November 1977 and was the focus of much domestic and
 international criticism. Except for persons arrested under
 that law for homicide and kidnapping, the repeal discontinued
 legal actions and provided amnesty for those already sentenced.
 
 
 316
 The Archdiocese of San Salvador, Amnesty International
 and other groups maintain lists of political prisoners
 and disappeared persons. The actual number of persons in
 these categories is unknown, but most estimates range between
 one hundred and two hundred. The new government claimed
 that it found no political prisoners. Some persons arrested
 in incidents after the October 15 coup were released with
 an admonishment. A special committee formed by the new
 government to investigate the prisoner question filed only
 one preliminary, partial report prior to resigning in a
 government crisis at the end of 1979. It is not known
 if any further committee report will be made public.
 Persons can be arrested and legally held without charge
 up to seventy-two hours. However, during the Romero Govern-
 ment, there were numerous reports of considerably longer
 lapses of time between arrest and arraignment.
 Habeus corpus is recognized in Article 164 of the Salvadoran
 Constitution, but it was often not honored in practice
 by the security forces during the Romero Government.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 While the right to a fair public trial is provided by the
 Salvadoran Constitution, the judiciary is slow and overbur-
 dened. After arraignment, long delays usually occur.
 Civilians are not tried by military courts and since the
 derogation of the Law of Defense and Guarantee of Public
 Order, there have been no courts with specific jurisdiction
 over security and political offenses. Trials have been
 public and courts appear to have operated fairly and inde-
 pendently, even in some cases involving security suspects
 where the Government's prestige has been at stake.
 In some cases involving those suspected of having ties
 to terrorist groups, both judges and witnesses may have
 been hampered from exercising independent judgment by threats
 of terrorist retaliation.
 Defendants are entitled to counsel but groups such as the
 Salvadoran Commission on Human Rights and the Archdiocese-
 affiliated Socorro Juridico that can offer legal aid to
 indigent defendants are very few in-number. Counsel appear
 to have free access to defendants, but privacy of consul-
 tations is often inhibited. There have been no reported
 incidents of harassment by the Government'of attorneys
 handling cases with political significance.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 There are credible allegations that persons were illegally
 taken from their homes by members of the security forces
 or ORDEN without a warrant or specific charge during the
 Romero Government. Members of the security forces often
 reportedly did not wear uniforms or otherwise identify
 themselves when they made arrests. There have also been
 reports that, despite a constitutional provision protecting
 the inviolability of correspondence, letters and other
 documents sent through the mail were subject to search
 and seizure during previous governments.
 
 
 317
 2. Government Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education:
 El Salvador's economic orientation is strongly capitalistic.
 Wealth is concentrated primarily in a conservative landed
 elite, and to a lesser but growing degree in an industrial
 and commercial elite. The economy is still basically rural
 with 60 percent of the population living in rural areas.
 The poorest 40 percent of the population receives 2 percent
 of the personal income, while the wealthiest 5 percent
 receives 21 percent of the personal income. Land ownership
 is concentrated, with 10 percent of all farms accounting
 for 78 percent of private lands. However, concentration
 in ownership of land of all sizes has been decreasing slowly.
 The tax system is relatively progressive. Income taxes
 and the coffee export tax fall on upper income groups and
 account for 45 percent to 55 percent of all taxes. Corruption,
 although a problem, has not appeared to be a significant
 factor in public administration.
 Major economic and social structural problems persist which
 include: high rates of unemployment and underemployment,
 highly skewed income distribution patterns, concentration
 of land in the hands of a small minority, low generation
 of economic opportunities for a rapidly expanding population,
 and a limited, and in some respects diminishing, material
 resource base.
 Some policies and pronouncements of the Romero Government
 indicated a growing awareness of these problems. However,
 direct government interventions to change the nation's
 basic socio-economic structure were limited by the strong
 conservative orientation of the state, its relations to
 the economic elite, and a relatively small government budget.
 Even so, government policies have been increasingly oriented
 to meeting basic human needs. Succeeding governments'
 expenditures as a percent of GNP have increased from 10
 percent to 13 percent in the 1960's to 19 percent at present.
 Education and health account for 35 percent of government
 expenditures.
 The Junta announced reformist economic, social and taxation
 goals, but has not yet had significant time for implementation.
 The government traditionally sets the wages of harvest
 workers year by year. Wage increases have not kept up
 with inflation. However, the new Junta on November 18
 announced dramatic increases (between 23 percent and 64
 percent) that provided significant jumps in real income.
 The new government also acted quickly to impose price con-
 trols on basic commodities.
 Health facilities have been constantly but slowly expanded.
 Since 1976 the government has strengthened rural health
 services by training new personnel for assignment to rural
 clinics. Consultations in Government health facilities
 rose 29 percent between 1976 and 1978, a measure of substan-
 tial expansion in health care. The population program,
 based on an integrated population policy, is progressive.
 Impact in the rural areas, however, has been disappointing
 to date. A revised and expanded program, based on a careful
 evaluation, is scheduled for the next two years. In education,
 enrollment in grades one through nine increased by 86 percent
 
 
 318
 between 1965 and 1978, while the comparable school age
 population only increased 53 percent. Two-thirds of all
 children are now enrolled in school.
 Policies aimed at stabilizing the price and flow of basic
 grains have contributed to providing good market outlets
 for small producers and keeping prices of staples down,
 especially important for lower income families. The Govern-
 ment is currently expanding its storage facilities by 40
 percent so that it will have buying capacity equal to 20
 percent of basic grain production. The Government has
 developed moderately successful programs to provide low
 interest credit and subsidized fertilizer to small farmers.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Includ-
 ing:
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion, and
 Assembly
 These freedoms, while guaranteed by law, had been restricted
 under previous regimes by'custom and practice. An effective
 self-censorship was practiced by most of the media prior
 to the October 15 coup. Since that date there has been
 an increasing relaxation of voluntary self-censorship to
 the point that at year's end it was possible for leftist
 extremist organizations to air their programs in paid press
 insertions and radio and TV broadcast time, as well as
 frequently having their views presented as news items.
 The opposition newspaper, La Cronica, aestroyed by unidentified
 arsonists on July 14, following the right-wing threats
 against the life of its editor, had recovered as a daily
 by year's end. The radical leftist-oriented Independiente
 began to offer competition to La Cronica at the end of
 the year. Other radio stations joined the Archdiocese's
 station in offering access for opposition views. Unorthodox
 political messages also had begun to be permitted on com-
 mercial TV.
 Most protests of infringements of freedom of religion have
 come from the activist wing of the Catholic Church. There
 are frequent allegations of open or-disguised government
 harassment and persecution of lay leaders, nuns and priests.
 Three priests were killed in 1979, one in front of the
 altar of his church, presumably by right-wing terrorists.
 Several foreign-born nuns and priests were expelled during
 the year by the Romero Government. Smaller religions and
 sects have apparently not been the target of similar treat-
 ment.
 During the state of siege (May 24 to July 23) the right
 to assembly was legally restricted. In practice, however,
 the restiction was largely unenforced. Public demonstratons,
 legal or otherwise, took place throughout the year. With
 a few notably violent and bloody exceptions, they were
 generally permitted to proceed despite disturbances of
 public order and damage to private property.
 The only legal restrictions on freedom of association are
 proscriptions of international political organizations
 except under specific qualifications. In practice this
 
 
 319
 has applied to the Communist Party. A distinction must
 be made between those organizations that are legally recog-
 nized, such as registered political parties and industrial
 labor unions, and entities that although not legally recog-
 nized are not proscribed organizations, such as rural worker
 unions and the "popular organizations," e.g., the Popular
 Revolutionary Bloc (BPR). The Romero Government imposed
 restraints on the organization of these extra-legal bodies,
 but they were still able to function.
 In practice, freedom of association has been somewhat inhibited
 by excessively technical or otherwise inadequate legislation.
 The activist wing of the Catholic Church made frequent
 allegations of open or disguised government harassment.
 The new government pledged freedom of organization for
 labor and political parties across the spectrum.
 b. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration.
 These freedoms are based in law and are generally observed.
 These are large numbers of road blocks and road checks
 in domestic travel in response to terrorism, that have
 given rise to numerous charges of harassment, arbitrary
 arrests, and disappearances. Foreign travel is only inhi-
 bited by bureaucratic delays in obtaining passports and
 by financial controls. Of political exiles, only a rela-
 tively small number have had their right to return restricted.
 President Romero had ordered that political exiles be allowed
 to return, and the new government has given exiles an amnesty.
 The most prominent returnees during 1979 were Christian
 Democrat leaders Jose Antonio Morales Ehrlich, under the
 Romero Government, and Napoleon Duarte under the Junta.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Authoritarian military governments allied with a wealthy
 elite have been the trademarks of Salvadoran politics.
 A democratic facade has been maintained over the years
 through regularly scheduled elections resulting in the
 periodic changing of Presidents, Legislative Assembly mem-
 bers, and municipal administrations. Since the early 1970s,
 the results of the elections inevitably have been challenged
 as fraudulent, and although personnel have changed, the
 character of the governing coalition and its modus operandi
 have not. As a result, the Government party controlled
 all but four of the fifty-four Legislative Assembly seats
 and all two hundred sixty-one mayoralties at the time of
 the October 15 coup.
 Legally, participation in the political system is open
 to all citizens. However, the functioning of the opposition
 political parties allegedly had been inhibited through
 repression, harassment, and collusion that have prevented
 effective recruitment, organization, and campaigning, including
 denial of access to the media. The new government has
 pledged to open the political process.
 Women have legal equality with men, but social restraints
 often limit their practical possibilities. They do hold
 some important positions in the professions, polftical
 parties, and in the Government. In general, however, they
 tend to remainz in the more traditional roles.
 
 
 320
 Urban labor unions are authorized by law, but only about
 ten percent of El Salvador's non-agricultural workers are
 unionized. Those labor federations and organizations with
 a political ideology opposed to that of the government
 were harassed under the Romero regime, while those concen-
 trating on economic issues (wages, fringe benefits) were
 able to operate more freely. While collective bargaining
 is recognized under the labor code, the right to strike
 is so encumbered by legal and administrative requirements
 as to be virtually nonexistent. The right of workers to
 organize, while legally recognized, is similarly circums-
 cribed. The Junta stated its intention to liberalize organ-
 izing and the legal grounds for strikes.
 Rural workers' organizations are extra-legal, but not pro-
 scribed. The only large peasant oganization recognized
 and given a measure of support by the Government is the
 Union Comunal Salvadorena (UCS). The Government during
 the latter part of 1979 permitted the re-entry into El
 Salvador of the American Institute for Free Labor Development
 (AIFLD) to render assistance to the UCS.
 Labor discontent has facilitated penetration of the labor
 movement by leftist popular organizations (Popular Revolutionary
 Bloc and United Popular Action Front), which since last
 January have engaged in a series of factory takeovers and
 holding of hostages. Some of these takeovers have subsequently
 resulted in companies closing down their operations, with
 a loss of jobs for workers. Thirteen people were killed
 in labor related disturbances during the first six months
 of 1979, seven of them in a single incident.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and non-Governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights:
 There were no major international investigations of alleged
 violations of human rights in El Salvador during 1979.
 However, early in the year a report by three British par-
 liamentarians based on their December, 1978, visit was
 highly critical. To a limited extent the Romero Government
 cooperated with individual and media visitors interested
 in the subject, but its efforts were almost exclusively
 directed toward denying the existence of any violations.
 Reports of violations appearing in the international press
 were characterized by government officials as an international
 socialist or communist conspiracy to defame El Salvador
 and weaken its institutions.
 Several domestic, non-governmental groups have been active
 in the human rights field. The best known is the Salvadoran
 Commission on Human Rights which has investigated numerous
 cases, extensively publicized its findings, provided legal
 counsel, and in some cases even acted as an intermediary
 with the Government for human rights complaints. Socorro
 Juridico, affiliated with the Archdiocese, has also inves-
 tigated many cases and offered free legal assistance to
 alleged victims and their families. It has compiled statis-
 tics on violations. The opposition political parties,
 labor unions, and various affiliates of the popular organiza-
 tions, particularly the teachers' union, ANDES 21 de Junio,
 and the Committee of Mothers and Relatives of Political
 Prisoners and Disappeared Persons, have also been active.
 The OAS endorsed the critical Inter-American Human Rights
 Commission (IAHRC) report (resulting from its 1977 visit)
 at the October 1979 OAS General Assembly in La Paz. The
 Salvadoran Foreign Minister, appointed by the Junta immedi-
 ately after the change of government, accepted the OAS
 decision and invited the IAHRC to make another visit to
 see the changes effected by the new government. The Junta
 cooperated with domestic human rights organizations.
 The Government of El Salvador ratified the American Conven-
 tion on Human Rights in June 1978.
 
 
 321
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: EL SALVADOR
 1977     1978     1979
 
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...
 LOANS.......... ,,
 GRANTS.............
 A.AID ..................
 LOANS..............
 GRANTS.........
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.) ...
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE.......
 LOANS..............
 GRANTS.............
 TITLE I-TOTAL..........
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS.....
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR.....
 TITLE 1I-TOTAL....,
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY.,,
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...
 LOANS.....o.........
 GRANTS.... .......
 CONTR. TO IFI....
 PEACE CORPS,..
 OTHER............
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...
 LOANS............
 GRANTS.............
 A.NAP GRANTS..........
 B.CPEDIT SALES-FUS....
 C.INTL NIL.ED.TRNG....
 D.TRAN-EXcESS STOCK...
 E.OTHER GRANTS .....
 III.TOTAL ECON. & NIL...
 LOANS..............
 GRANTSe............
 OTHER US LOANS..........
 EX-IM BANK LOANS.......
 ALL OTHER..............
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL
 
 6.8     10.9
 0.0      S.7
 6.8      5.2
 2.7      8.0
 0.0      5.7
 2.7      2.3
 0.0      0.0
 2.7      1.7
 0.0      0.0
 2.7      1.7
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 2.7      1.7
 1.3      0.6
 1.4      1.1
 1.4      1.2
 0.0      0.0
 1.4      1.2
 0.0      0.0
 1.4      1.2
 0.0      0.0
 0.5      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.5      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.5      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 7.3     10.9
 0.0      5.7
 7.3      5.2
 1.5      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 1.5      0.0
 AGENCIES-COMMITMENTS
 
 1977     1978     1979     1946-79
 
 TOTAL........
 IBRD
 IFC
 IDA
 IDB
 ADB
 AFOB
 UNDP
 OTHER-UN
 EEC
 
 101.9
 32.2
 0.0
 0.0
 69.6
 0.0
 0.0
 0.1
 0.0
 0.0
 
 60.0
 23.5
 0.0
 0.0
 29.5
 0.0
 0.0
 5.6
 1.4
 0.0
 
 541.0
 215.6
 0.9
 25.6
 272.4
 0.0
 0.0
 20.5
 6.0
 0.0
 
 10.6
 4.2
 6.4
 6.9
 4.2
 2.7
 0.0
 2.9
 0.0
 2.9
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 2.9
 1.3
 1.6
 0.8
 0.0
 0.8
 0.0
 0.8
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 10.6
 4.2
 6.4
 6.4
 6.4
 0.0
 
 
