 EL SALVADOR
 El Salvador is a recently established and developing democracy.
 The Constitution of 1983 was written by an elected assembly;
 the President, Legislative Assembly, and mayors were chosen in
 elections which were pronounced open and fair by observers from
 some 40 countries.
 The economy is mixed. Banking and marketing of major export
 crops are nationalized, and the price of food grains is
 subsidized. The agrarian reform program begun in 1980
 continues. The national currency was devalued, and an economic
 stabilization program was instituted in January 1986 in
 response to economic problems caused in great part by guerrilla
 war and sabotage. These problems were exacerbated by a major
 earthquake on October 10. Mainly affecting the capital area,
 it killed over 1,000 people, left 300,000 homeless, and heavily
 damaged or destroyed many hospitals, schools, and government
 and commercial buildings.
 For 7 years, El Salvador has fought a Marxist insurgency
 supported by the Soviet Union and Cuba through Nicaragua.
 The Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front (FMLN), whose
 numbers have been halved to under 6,000 combatants, has
 increasingly resorted to indiscriminate use of land mines,
 machine-gunning and burning of vehicles on the nation's roads,
 and generalized economic sabotage. The conflict is a major
 cause of the displacement of approximately 400,000 Salvadorans
 from their homes. As the Government has been able to restore
 its authority in contested areas, some of the displaced are
 returning home.
 Despite the internal conflict and the resulting state of
 emergency which nominally restricts a number of civil
 liberties, the rights of free speech, press, association, and
 assembly are respected by the Government. A military court
 system separate from civil courts handles cases related to the
 insurgency. Due to a large backlog of cases, prolonged
 incarceration before trial is common to both civil and
 military systems.
 The conduct of the military and security forces has improved
 steadily. The Government does not condone abuses and is
 actively seeking to inculcate respect for human rights at all
 levels of the military. The Government's Human Rights
 Commission has expanded its role in improving respect for
 human rights. Credible accusations of abuses and of
 indiscriminate bombing were sharply reduced in 1986.
 Investigation of guerrilla claims of indiscriminate bombings
 proved them false. The number of politically motivated
 killings continued to decline, and the bulk of such killings
 appeared to be committed by FMLN guerrillas.
 The infamous death squads, which used to advertise their
 murders, made no claims of any killings during 1986, and there
 was no indication they are still operating. Some unexplained
 deaths may still be the work of extreme rightist elements, but
 there is no evidence that the Government is linked to or
 condones these killings.
 To overcome serious weaknesses in the judicial system, the
 Government has launched a comprehensive reform to revamp court
 procedures, update laws, improve the investigative capacity and
 training of judges, and protect witnesses and court personnel
 from intimidation. The arrests in 1986 of police and military
 
 
 490
 EL SALVADOR
 personnel for crimes and human rights abuses are steps toward
 equality before the law for all Salvadoran citizens.
 A third round of dialog to end the war was proposed by
 President Duarte and scheduled for September, but the
 guerrillas failed to attend after unilaterally imposing
 conditions the Government felt were unacceptable. The
 Government continues to seek productive discussions with the
 FMLN. In his October 1986 report, the United Nations Special
 Rapporteur for Human Rights stated that dialog "should not be
 converted into a means of gaining tactical political
 advantages, but should be considered as a means of obtaining
 peace, or, at a minimum, humanization of the conflict."
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Most apparent political killings in 1986 were attributable to
 guerrilla insurgents. The number of deaths reported in the
 Salvadoran press which appeared to be politically motivated
 averaged 21 per month through October; this compares with a
 monthly average of 28 in 1985, 64 in 1984, and 140 in 1983.
 The 206 deaths ascribed to political motives during the first
 10 months of 1986, as taken from the local press and other
 sources, may be classified as follows: perpetrated by the
 guerrillas, 57; possibly by the guerrillas, 70; possibly by
 the extreme right, 7; by unknown assailants, 37. An
 additional 6 were killed by civil defense members, and 12
 others died as a result of abuse of authority. Seventeen
 civilians killed in military action by both sides are included
 in the 1986 toll. Of the killings attributed to the FMLN,
 most victims were rural residents who refused to collaborate
 with the guerrillas or were suspected of being government
 informers. Other victims were drivers or passengers of
 vehicles machine-gunned by the guerrillas during one of the
 seven "traffic bans" declared by the FMLN in the course of the
 year.
 The methodology for collection and classification of
 information on political murders necessarily is inexact, and
 these numbers can only be interpreted as indicative of trends.
 Common criminal deaths, for example, are easily disguised as
 political killings by perpetrators wishing to confound
 investigators; political motivation in other murders may go
 undetected, causing them to be classified as common crimes.
 The primary cause of death and maiming outside combat is the
 intensified use of pressure-detonated land mines and booby
 traps by the guerrillas. Planted around farm roads and paths,
 guerrilla-downed electric poles, under railroad tracks, near
 water sources, in farmlands, and on coffee plantations to
 impede the harvest, these "revolutionary mines" (as the
 guerrillas call them on their clandestine radio stations)
 killed some 31 civilians in 1984, 55 in 1985, and 53 in the
 first 7 months of 1986. From January through July of 1986,
 172 civilians, many of them children, lost limbs to guerrilla
 mines. Hundreds more were seriously injured. The Catholic
 Archbishop of El Salvador has expressed grave concern over the
 number of civilians now being killed or wounded by mine
 warfare.
 
 
 491
 EL SALVADOR
 The Government continued to reduce abuses of authority by the
 military and police forces. Human rights form part of police
 recruit training and officers' classes; the governmental Human
 Rights Commission (CDH), the International Committee of the
 Red Cross (ICRC), and Catholic clergy give lectures and courses
 on human rights to the police, military, and civil defense
 personnel; the entire National Police force attended a 2-day
 intensive training course on human rights in late 1986. The
 National Guard and Treasury Police are scheduled to take the
 same course in early 1987. The Government's Normal Operating
 Procedures (PON) require humane treatment of prisoners by the
 police and the military; these ground rules are a fundamental
 part of training and are enforced: 126 members of the armed
 and security forces were expelled from service and handed over
 to the civilian courts between September 1985 and June 1986 for
 violations of laws and regulations.
 Occasional noncombat killings attributed to members of the
 armed or security services are a continuing concern. A civil
 defense commander and three of his men were arrested for the
 January murders of three brothers in the capital, San Salvador.
 In the same month, the Arce Battalion was accused of executing
 the former mayor of Nueva Esparta; the unit reported that he
 rode into a predawn ambush. Common crime is a problem within
 the military, and several officers are fugitives with warrants
 against them for kidnaping.
 A number of anonymous death threats were publicized. The
 Archdiocese of San Salvador received a telephoned threat
 against several of its employees in June, and a Lutheran
 minister received similar threats in May, following public
 accusations by guerrilla defectors that churchworkers were
 diverting humanitarian aid to the guerrillas. The Government
 denounced these reported threats. At midyear, students and
 faculty members of the National University of El Salvador
 reported anonymous threats; the rector attributed the reports
 to infighting among leftist groups on campus. No one claimed
 responsibility, and no one attributed the threats to a specific
 group. Leaders of the Popular Democratic Unity (UPD) labor
 group reported death threats following the announcement of
 their withdrawal from the FMLN labor front, the National Union
 of Salvadoran Workers (UNTS).
 Death squads which formerly publicized their murders did not
 publish threats or claim responsibility for any killing during
 1986, and there is no indication they are still operating.
 Tutela Legal, the Catholic Church's legal aid and human rights
 office, attributed 42 killings to death squads in 1986, as
 compared with 136 in 1985. Tutela Legal frequently classifies
 as "death squad killings" murders that other observers view as
 criminal in nature, rather than political, and occasionally
 gives no reason for attributing a murder to death squads.
 Congressional hearings in May addressed allegations that the
 Salvadoran air force engages in "indiscriminate bombing."
 These allegations proved to be unfounded. The charges
 themselves appear to be part of the FMLN's strategy to
 manipulate human rights issues and organizations for tactical
 military and political purposes. In one case, the Catholic
 Archbishop reported receiving a letter from the village of San
 Jose Las Flores, Chalatenango Department, claiming that a
 civilian was killed by aerial bombing on October 10. An
 onsite investigation showed that the village had not been
 bombed. Elsewhere, on at least two occasions, the air force
 acknowledged accidently wounding civilians in an aerial attack.
 
 
 492
 EL SALVADOR
 The air force has refrained from attacking guerrilla
 concentrations and installations due to the proximity of
 civilians.
 b. Disappearance
 According to press reports, 145 civilians disappeared between
 January and October 1986, including nonpolitical disappearances
 such as lost or runaway children aged 10 or over. There have
 been repeated instances of kidnaping of children, apparently
 for sale to adoptive parents abroad. During the same period,
 the press reported 98 persons abducted by the guerrillas and
 103 abducted by unknown assailants. The assailants were
 frequently described as "heavily armed men in civilian
 clothing;" on other occasions, especially in the countryside,
 the perpetrators were believed to be guerrillas.
 Many persons reported missing were found to have been legally
 arrested and duly entered in a security force's register of
 detained persons. Government policy forbids unacknowledged
 detention by security or armed services, and it seldom occurs.
 In one case, however, a guerrilla defector was not properly
 registered. In this instance, Nelson Guerra, a member of the
 People's Revolutionary Army (ERP), was arrested by the Second
 Brigade in Santa Ana in January and defected to the Government.
 His detention and subsequent defection were not acknowledged
 until May, when he appeared on television. Some persons who
 desert their families, emigrate, or join guerrilla ranks, are
 also reported as missing. There have been occasional credible
 reports of persons taken away by men thought to be members of
 the army or security forces, although positive proof has not
 been available.
 In March and April, the National Police arrested three suspects
 in a major kidnaping-for-ransom ring and issued arrest orders
 for six others. Accused members of the ring had previously
 been identified with right-wing death squads, and some of the
 accused were implicated in other human rights cases now before
 the courts. Other purely criminal kidnapings for ransom
 received little public notice because the families and the
 victims were directed by the kidnapers not to involve the
 police.
 The FMLN engages in kidnaping for a variety of motives: for
 ransom; as a form of recruitment of new combatants, including
 children as young as 10 years of age; to obtain workers to grow
 and cook food, obtain supplies, transport smuggled war
 material, and perform other tasks. Col. Omar Napoleon Avalos,
 the Director of Civil Aviation, was kidnaped by the FMLN in
 October 1985 and is still being held. The ICRC has been denied
 regular access to Colonel Avalos. The guerrillas have at
 different times demanded the release of varying numbers of
 detained guerrillas and collaborators held by the Government
 in return for his release.
 As part of the October 1985 agreement freeing President
 Duarte's daughter and 23 mayors who had been kidnaped by the
 FMLN, the guerrillas agreed not to kidnap relatives of
 government and military officials in return for the
 government's pledge not to detain family members of
 guerrillas. In February the FMLN repudiated the agreement,
 citifig government "kidnaping" of several people; some of those
 indentified had been arrested and charged with membership in
 the FMLN, as was the case of defector Nelson Guerra. The
 others were never reported missing to any human rights
 
 
 493
 EL SALVADOR
 organization inside the country. The FMLN declared itself
 ready to resume kidnaping noncombatants for political purposes,
 but has not done so to date.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 In accordance with arrest regulations, the Salvadoran security
 forces register detainees and have them examined by a doctor
 or nurse upon entry into police facilities. They are required
 promptly to notify the family of the detainee, Tutela Legal,
 the CDH, and the ICRC of the arrest. The notification
 procedures, together with the official prohibition on
 mistreatment of prisoners, have reduced the claims of torture
 by government forces. Detainees suspected of subversive or
 terrorist activity are permitted private interviews by the CDH,
 ICRC, and Tutela Legal after a maximum of 8 days in custody.
 Persons suspected of common crimes must be freed or turned
 over to the courts within 3 days.
 While the number and severity of reported cases of torture have
 declined, allegations of abuse by the arresting forces
 continue. Most allegations involve abuses that leave no marks
 and so are extremely difficult to prove or disprove:
 deprivation of food and sleep, threats against the detainee or
 his family, prolonged interrogation while blindfolded, being
 forced to stand for long periods of time, forced exercise, and
 blows to the ears. Some prisoners claim to have been forced
 to sign confessions without being permitted to read them.
 Isolated instances of severe beatings, rape, choking, electric
 shock, and near-suffocation with a plastic bag over the head
 were reported. When a complaint of mistreatment appears valid,
 the CDH reports the incident to the commander of the unit
 responsible and to the Ministry of Defense. Physical
 mistreatment is not systematically practiced nor condoned by
 government authorities. The ICRC reports claims of abuse to
 the unit commander and the Office of the President.
 There were no known complaints of torture occurring in the
 penitentiaries in 1986. Punishment cells are reportedly rarely
 used. The food budget is inadequate, some institutions have
 insufficient water supplies, and some are severely overcrowded.
 Prisoners receive family and conjugal visits and have access
 to primary education and religious services. Some
 opportunities for gainful employment are available. Inmates
 charged with terrorist or subversive activities have their own
 internal organization, give political classes, place political
 advertisements in the local papers, and hold demonstrations
 inside the prisons.
 The FMLN claims to respect the physical and psychological
 integrity of its captives. However, there are eyewitness
 reports of soldiers on leave being pulled off buses and
 executed by guerrillas, and of persons kidnaped by guerrillas
 who have never reappeared. There have also been credible
 reports that guerrillas have tortured suspected government
 informers before killing them.
 The Government reported that 598 guerrilla combatants and
 civilian supporters voluntarily turned themselves in between
 January 1 and October 27. Those who did so were interrogated,
 and most were turned over to their families or the ICRC; some
 suspected of surrendering in order to continue their insurgent
 activities in the cities were placed under the jurisdiction of
 the courts and sent to prison. Captured guerrillas were
 
 
 494
 EL SALVADOR
 likewise imprisoned. Wounded guerrillas were cared for, and
 some were later released. Seven wounded guerrilla combatants
 and two paramedics attending them were discovered in an
 underground shelter in northern Chalatenango Department in
 March. The guerrillas were immediately turned over to the
 ICRC and, after hospital treatment, were permitted to leave
 the country. The paramedics were released to their families.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Constitution provides for the suspension of some civil
 guarantees in times of emergency. State of emergency
 legislation has been renewed monthly by the Legislative
 Assembly. Special legislation (Legislative Decree 50)
 establishes a system of separate judicial handling of crimes
 such as terrorism, sabotage, subversion, and participation in
 organized groups attempting to overthrow the Government.
 Holding political views opposed to the Government is not a
 basis for arrest when violent action is not advocated.
 Under the state of emergency, the security forces may make
 arrests without a warrant and upon the denunciation of a single
 accuser, who can be anonymous. Categoric judgments of which
 arrests are justified are not possible; persons often are
 released or have charges against them dismissed as a result of
 ineffective investigation or a desire to reduce the backlog of
 cases in an overcrowded court system.
 Under Decree 50, the security forces may hold an arrested
 person for up to 15 days for investigation. The person must
 either be released or turned over to a military investigative
 judge, who in turn must decide within 72 hours whether to
 continue detention. The judge must inform the person of the
 charges against him within 15 days of receiving the case.
 Once so informed, the person has the right to legal counsel.
 The investigative judge must then decide within 60 days of
 receiving the case whether it has merit; if his decision is
 affirmative, he sends the case to the military First Instance
 (trial) judge. The military judge has 15 days to decide
 whether to confirm or revoke the person's detention. Once the
 judge raises the case to trial, he must hand down a decision
 within 30 days. That decision is reviewed by a military court.
 An appeal of the legality of the detention at any point during
 this process freezes the timetable until the Supreme Court
 decides the appeal. The system is cumbersome, but it mandates
 more rapid processing of cases than the legislation in effect
 prior to February 1984.
 As the insurgency has lost ground militarily and moved to a
 strategy of political organizing and infiltration, the number
 of prisoners held under Decree 50 has been increasing rapidly.
 The number of female prisoners in Ilopango prison under Decree
 50 increased from 44 to 76 in 1986, and male prisoners
 increased from 462 to 971. Because of the increasing number
 of arrests under Decree 50, observance of the time limits at
 the investigative level slipped further in 1986. A single,
 overburdened first instance judge had accumulated a backlog of
 approximately 1,000 Decree 50 cases before two new first
 instance judges were appointed in August 1986. They had just
 started work when the October 10 earthquake badly damaged the
 judicial facilities and brought the whole system to a
 standstill. It resumed functioning in November.
 
 
 495
 EL SALVADOR
 In cases of common crime, the police must free a suspect or
 turn him over to the courts within 72 hours of arrest. The
 judge theoretically is constrained by legal time limits on his
 investigation, but in practice these limitations are not always
 followed. The backlog of cases is one major reason for delay.
 The processing of common criminal cases in the capital was also
 halted in the wake of the earthquake.
 There are no provisions in Salvadoran law for exile or for the
 revocation of citizenship.
 The Government prohibits forced labor. The guerrillas,
 however, have kidnaped peasants and forced them to cook, do
 laundry, and perform other tasks, as well as to become
 combatants.
 Clear evidence emerged in 1986 of use by the FMLN of children
 under the age of 15 in combat. Following one military
 operation, the Government rescued children, one of whom was
 14 years old and had been fighting with the FMLN for 4 years.
 Other information emerged about the existence of units composed
 of children receiving military training for integration into
 combat units. Still other credible reports were received of
 children being kidnaped for forced recruitment into the FMLN
 and of their use as couriers and spotters, practices clearly
 contrary to Geneva Convention prohibitions against the
 recruiting of children into armed groups or their
 participation in hostilities.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Decree 50 offenses are tried by the judge in his office,
 without spectators. Common crimes in El Salvador are tried
 publicly with a five-person jury. Low response to calls for
 jury duty, absences of attorneys, and the general inefficiency
 of the judicial system often cause long delays; people are
 usually incarcerated for 6 to 18 months between the placing of
 charges and coming to trial. Even longer waits are common.
 About 9 percent of the people in prison are serving sentences:
 the rest are awaiting adjudication of their cases. Bail is
 available for some offenses but is little used. When cases do
 come to trial, the charges are frequently dismissed, often due
 to the poor investigative capacity of the police and judges.
 Over the past 10 years, the overall conviction rate has never
 exceeded 20 percent.
 Aside from the lack of resources to carry out their duties,
 both judges and juries are subject to bribery and intimidation.
 A Judicial Protection Unit (JPU) to provide security for
 witnesses, juries, and court personnel in sensitive cases was
 activated briefly for the 1984 trial of the murderers of four
 U.S. churchwomen, but the prison guards who formed it returned
 to their regular duties after the trial. The concept is being
 revised, and there are plans to recreate the unit as a
 permanent organization.
 The Government has embarked upon a judicial reform program
 with four major components: reestablishment of the JPU; the
 judicial Revisory Commission; the Commission for
 Investigations; and judicial training and administration. The
 Revisory Commission is reviewing the penal code in order to
 recommend changes to bring it into line with the Constitution.
 It is also working over the longer term to overhaul and update
 the entire system of laws and procedures in order to produce a
 modern and efficient judicial system. The Revisory Commission
 
 
 496
 EL SALVADOR
 is drafting a package of revisions to the law which it plans
 to submit to the legislature early in 1987. The Commission
 for Investigations is operational and includes a special unit
 which has received forensic investigative training and is
 investigating a number of highly publicized cases. Among these
 is the Armenia well case, into which the local civil defense
 unit is alleged to have thrown the bodies of its victims
 between 1980 and 1982. The unit excavated the well in May,
 found the remains of four persons, and made arrests in the
 case in September.
 The judicial administration and training program has already
 sent judges and prosecutors to other countries in the region
 for conferences and 2- to 4-week courses in criminal
 jurisprudence. The program, which includes construction of
 physical plant as well as the training of judges, was
 seriously disrupted by the October 10 earthquake.
 The Salvadoran judiciary is independent of the rest of the
 government. Supreme Court justices and the Attorney General
 are chosen by the Legislative Assembly after nomination by
 political parties. The judicial branch determines its own
 budget, which must be approved by the legislature. Judicial
 authority historically has not extended to the military.
 Although low ranking military and police are discharged and
 turned over to the civilian courts for trial of criminal
 offenses, in practice the officers of the armed and security
 forces are treated differently from other citizens before the
 law. Judges are frequently reluctant to bring charges against
 them, and colleagues often cannot be relied upon to cooperate
 in the prosecution of crimes imputed to a fellow officer.
 Also, real or perceived intimidation of judges and juries by
 members of the armed forces occasionally will overcome the
 prosecutorial efforts of the Attorney General's office.
 No military officer has been convicted of human rights
 violations in recent years. Nevertheless, in the course of
 the investigation of the kidnaping ring early in 1986, the
 police arrested an active duty army major and a former
 lieutenant of the National Guard, and issued arrest warrants
 for six other men including an army lieutenant colonel and a
 lieutenant, who fled the country. The case is before a
 military judge. In December 1986, the courts reopened the
 case against an army captain suspected of participating in the
 1981 murders of the president of the Salvadoran Land Reform
 Institute and two American land reform advisers.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Government does not arbitrarily interfere in the personal
 lives of citizens except in matters it considers related to
 the armed conflict. Both the Government and the guerrillas
 use networks of informers. The Government runs antiterrorist
 advertisements urging the people to report guerrilla activity,
 and the police rely on informers in criminal cases and
 investigations of subversion. The security forces use forced
 entry to carry out arrests and investigations and need no
 warrant to do so. The constitutional provision protecting the
 inviolability of correspondence is suspended under the state
 of emergency. Postal officials have the legal authority to
 inspect correspondence, but there is no government policy to
 do so, and it is not believed to be a frequent occurrence.
 
 
 497
 EL SALVADOR
 Government troops have removed civilians when considered
 necessary for their own security or because of the requirements
 of a military operation. These civilians were reunited with
 their families in nonconflictive areas; the others were turned
 over to the ICRC or the Catholic Church or were sent to
 displaced persons camps. During a major military operation
 which started in January, the military removed some 500
 civilians from the guerrilla stronghold on Guazapa Volcano.
 All feasible measures were taken to ensure the shelter,
 hygiene, health care, safety, and nutrition of the displaced
 population. Simflar removals of smaller numbers of civilians
 occurred elsewhere in the country during 1986. In August, for
 example, 81 civilians moved onto land not belonging to them in
 San Vicente Department. They were removed by the army and
 later accepted in a church-run displaced persons camp.
 The FMLN and others claimed that these displacements
 constituted human rights violations. The Government maintained
 that they were necessary because of both security and human
 rights considerations. The Government maintains that such
 displacements have reduced civilian casualties, are a
 legitimate means of protecting civilians, and are in conformity
 with international law and the Geneva Conventions.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The power to restrict freedom of speech and the press under
 state of emergency decrees was ended in May and has not been
 reinstated. Prior to that, there was at least one case in
 which books being shipped into the country were stopped in
 customs. Self-censorship growing out of fear of violent
 reprisal from political extremists is the primary constraint
 on free expression in El Salvador.
 The leading daily newspapers in the capital are conservative,
 and they vigorously criticize the Government. Paid advertising
 by government agencies in one of the papers was reduced. The
 views of the radical left continue to be expressed in a variety
 of journals, periodicals, newsletters, bulletins, and paid
 advertisements in the daily press.
 Radio news covers a wider variety of stories than the printed
 media and is more broadly diffused in Salvadoran society than
 news from the papers or television. Insurgent leaders are
 interviewed on local radio programs and commercial stations
 frequently repeat reports broadcast by clandestine guerrilla
 radio stations.
 The Government owns no newspapers, although the recent change
 in ownership of one daily is widely attributed to purchase by
 interests of the governing Christian Democratic Party. The
 Government owns one radio station and two television stations.
 There are four privately owned television stations. The
 Salvadoran Army operates one radio station.
 A 7-year-old decree forbidding publication of anonymous
 communiques remains in effect and is largely observed by the
 media. When it has been violated, the Government has taken no
 action against the reporting media.
 Academic freedom is guaranteed by the Constitution and is
 broadly interpreted by university authorities to mean that
 local police have no authority on campus. In 1986 there were
 
 
 498
 EL SALVADOR
 isolated instances of armed forces entry on university grounds,
 but most appeared to be the inadvertent result of hot pursuit
 of criminals. Since the reopening of the main campus of the
 National University in 1984, the university has sponsored major
 antigovernment political conferences and many protest marches
 without interference. Students are not arrested because of
 academic or free speech issues; a small number, however, were
 detained on unrelated charges of subversion.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Any association not formed for criminal purposes is legal in
 El Salvador. Political, professional, religious, labor, and
 social organizations operate openly and freely. Various groups
 criticize the Government from both the left and the right,
 holding marches and demonstrations without interference from
 the Government. The Government was severely criticized from
 abroad for the May arrests of 10 members of the nongovernmental
 Human Rights Commission (CDHES) and the Committee of Mothers
 (Co-Madres). The Government claimed they were arrested on
 suspicion of membership in guerrilla groups. Within days of
 their arrest, 3 of the 10 confessed to membership in the
 National Resistance (RN), the political arm of the Armed Forces
 of National Resistance (FARN), one of the 5 constituent groups
 of the FMLN. They publicly detailed the manner in which the
 CDHES and the Co-Madres were infiltrated and manipulated by
 the FMLN. The other arrested members of the two groups were
 charged with membership in various guerrilla organizations and
 were incarcerated. One of them, Maria Teresa Tula de Canales,
 was released by President Duarte in September as a goodwill
 gesture.
 The Constitution guarantees the right of private sector and
 autonomous public institution employees to organize unions,
 bargain collectively, and strike. Government employees of
 nonautonomous public institutions are prohibited by the
 Constitution from forming unions and striking, but most of
 these employees are represented by associations which, in
 fact, act as unions by bargaining collectively and calling
 work stoppages. Salvadoran unions draw up their own statutes
 and elect their own officers. The Government has not acted
 upon a proposal which would extend collective bargaining
 rights to peasant organizations.
 The labor code requires that labor disputes go through stages
 of direct bargaining, conciliation, and arbitration before a
 strike or lockout can be declared. The law states that strikes
 may be called only to demand the implementation or review of
 the collective bargaining agreement, or in the defense of the
 common interests of the workers. Fifty-one percent of the
 workers must agree before a strike is called. Unions often
 ignore these requirements, and many strikes are declared
 illegal. The Labor Ministry oversees the implementation of
 collective bargaining agreements and serves as conciliator in
 labor disputes in the private sector and in autonomous
 institutions. The Ministry reported that between June 1985
 and May 1986, it participated directly in 553 labor-management
 conflicts, including 54 strikes.
 Unions may join national and international federations. Some
 unions are affiliated with the World Federation of Labor;
 others are affiliated with the Communist-dominated World
 Federation of Trade Unions.
 
 
 499
 EL SALVADOR
 Labor unions participated in numerous marches and
 demonstrations, both for and against the Government throughout
 1986, often in cooperation with other nongovernmental
 organizations.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is guaranteed by the Constitution and is
 respected in practice. Although the country is predominantly
 Roman Catholic, an estimated 20 percent of the population
 subscribe to other faiths, mainly Protestant. Foreign and
 Salvadoran missionaries operate freely and without harassment.
 Church members and employees, both Catholic and Protestant,
 have on occasion been arrested, but these arrests were
 unrelated to the individual's religious beliefs or activities.
 The Catholic Church continues to be one of the most influential
 institutions in the country. The Archbishop's Sunday homily is
 broadcast live from the Metropolitan Cathedral on one of the
 Government's television stations and on radio. Church
 publications disseminate the Church's position on human rights
 and the war. Church statements have become increasingly
 critical of the leftist insurgency, but the Church has not
 hesitated to criticize the Government.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Although the state of emergency decree formally suspends the
 constitutional right to free movement, this suspension is not
 strictly enforced. Local military commanders have denied
 entry for short periods of time to areas where military
 operations are under way, and require that foreign visitors
 receive permission from the Armed Forces Chief of Staff's
 office before entering combat zones. The Government has
 deported some foreigners who failed or refused to seek
 permission before entering areas of frequent military clashes.
 An estimated 400,000 people (down from a previous level of
 500,000) are displaced within El Salvador by the conflict,
 primarily from the northern and eastern zones. As the level
 of violence falls, an increasing number of-refugees are
 returning from abroad. More than 4,000 have returned from
 other Central American countries during the past 4 years,
 according to the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees. Even
 larger numbers of internally displaced persons appear to be
 moving back to their homes with government assistance.
 Eastern departmental commanders reported that former residents
 who had gone to live in the capital returned to their homes in
 the countryside by the hundreds after the October 10 earthquake
 destroyed squatter communities in San Salvador. The
 Intergovernmental Committee for Migration (ICM) reports no
 government harassment of individuals returning to El Salvador
 from abroad, either from the United States or elsewhere. The
 Government imposes no control on emigration and cooperates
 with international organizations that arrange Salvadorans'
 emigration to other countries.
 Land transportation has been limited by traffic stoppages
 declared by the guerrillas and enforced with roadblocks, land
 mines, and attacks on vehicles moving during the stoppages.
 The guerrillas declared seven such stoppages in the course of
 the year. The last occurred from December 8 to 14, when
 guerrillas machine-gunned a passenger bus, killing 2 civilians
 and wounding 11; machine-gunned another smaller bus, killing
 
 
 500
 EL SALVADOR
 1 civihian and wounding 2; and wounded 6 civilians in a
 similar attack on another bus. The total for the week was 4
 civilians killed and 34 wounded, one of the highest tolls in a
 traffic stoppage in 1986.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 El Salvador is a representative democracy. The President's
 Christian Democratic Party (PDC) enjoys a 33-seat majority in
 the 60-member Legislative Assembly elected March 31, 1985, but
 there is vigorous debate among the 5 parties represented in
 the Assembly; opposition members are represented on all
 committees. Legislators are elected for 3-year terms.
 In preparation for the 1988 legislative/municipal elections
 and the 1989 presidential election, the Central Elections
 Council (CCE) is creating a new voter registry with safeguards
 against fraud. The CCE, composed of one representative of each
 of the three major parties--the PDC, the National Republican
 Alliance (ARENA), and the National Conciliation Party (PCN)--
 is also drafting a streamlined electoral law to present to the
 Assembly.
 The Constitution allows the participation in the electoral
 process of all political parties that do not advocate armed
 opposition to the Government, and the right to membership in
 any legally recognized party is guaranteed. Although the
 National Revolutionary Movement (MNR) is a member of the
 insurgent Democratic Revolutionary Front (FDR) allied with the
 FMLN, the MNR remains a legally recognized party. The Popular
 Social Christian Movement, though never inscribed as a legal
 party, has resumed political activity inside El Salvador.
 In 1986 the Social Democrats sought inscription as a party but
 did not present the required 3,000 signatures on its
 inscription petitions. The conservative Patria Libre party,
 representing elements formerly incorporated in the ARENA
 party, presented more than the required number of signatures,
 but two of the three CCE commissioners blocked a vote on the
 party's inscription for months. After a change in the law to
 require a rapid decision on applications for inscription, the
 CCE advised Patria Libre (since renamed Partido Liberacion) in
 December that it would be inscribed.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government continues to be receptive to visiting groups
 interested in human rights. High-ranking government officials
 and military officers have briefed and been interviewed by
 U.S. congressmen, church and labor groups, and others. The
 Inter-American Human Rights Commission of the Organization of
 American States sent an investigative group in August which met
 with government representatives, including President Duarte.
 Americas Watch maintains an office and a part-time
 representative in San Salvador. The ICRC and local and foreign
 human rights groups regularly visit prison inmates.
 The U.N. Special Rapporteur on Human Rights in El Salvador
 made his sixth annual visit to the country from September 21
 to 27. He met with government representatives, including
 President Duarte and the military high.command; visited prison
 inmates; made an onsite investigation of the condition of a
 
 
</pre>
<pre>
 501
 EL SALVADOR
 group of displaced persons in Zacatelocula; spoke with
 representatives of the Catholic Church and official and
 nonofficial human rights organizations; and personally
 interviewed 22 persons put forward by the Catholic Church and
 the guerrilla-affiliated human rights groups.
 Domestic human rights organizations active in El Salvador
 include the governmental Human Rights Commission (CDH), an
 agency which investigates complaints of human rights abuse by
 the Government and the FMLN, and Tutela Legal, of the Catholic
 Archdiocese of San Salvador. The nongovernmental Human Rights
 Commission of El Salvador (CDHES) was exposed in 1986 as a
 political front of the FMLN. It continues to operate freely,
 although individual members charged with guerrilla membership
 are imprisoned awaiting trial.
 The Government's Human Rights Commission (CDH) receives
 testimony from individuals about human rights violations,
 conducts investigations, visits arrested persons, and reports
 to the local commanding officer and the Ministry of Defense
 when it discovers a case of abuse. Its doctors examine
 detainees to determine the validity of complaints. The CDH
 keeps a register of persons injured by land mine explosions
 and acts as liaison for groups wishing to assist amputees with
 prosthetic devices. To enhance its accessibility to the
 public, the CDH opened two additional field offices in the
 departmental capitals of Morazan and Usulutan in August and
 September.
 Tutela Legal's staff visits persons detained by the security
 forces, carries out some onsite investigations, receives
 testimony from individuals about human rights violations, and
 uses the press as a major source for its monthly reports. In
 his report on the human rights situation in El Salvador, the
 U.N. Special Rapporteur questioned Tutela Legal's methodology,
 saying that, where convenient, Tutela Legal counts victims as
 civilians even when they may be guerrillas. He said he was
 "obliged to point out that part of these (figures) are
 combatants and the indication that the majority (of victims)
 belong to the civilian population constitutes a presumption,
 which the source (Tutela Legal) clearly acknowledges." The
 Rapporteur concluded that Tutela Legal's methodology is based
 on presumptions, not facts.
 For their reports, the other groups rely on newspapers,
 announcements by guerrilla groups, and personal testimony.
 According to the statements of former members of the CDHES and
 the Co-Madres, these groups fabricate stories of human rights
 abuses and attribute the abuses to the Government. A
 voluminous CDHES presentation to the U.N. Special Rapporteur,
 including statements made to a U.S. lawyer collaborating with
 the group, has been circulated in the United States. This
 report was dismissed by the Special Rapporteur as lacking
 credibility.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Under the Constitution, women enjoy the same legal rights as
 men. Women are represented in all three branches of
 government, in business, and in the professions. In the armed
 forces, women serve as nurses and in administration and
 intelligence; the security services have a limited number of
 policewomen. In January, as part of a larger economic package,
 the Legislative Assembly passed a law requiring equal pay for
 
 
 502
 EL SALVADOR
 female and male agricultural workers. A high proportion of
 women in the lower economic strata are heads of single parent
 households, often providing for large families.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 The Constitution permits employment of children under 14 years
 of age only when their employment is necessary to provide for
 their own or their families' subsistence. Children under
 age 18 are prohibited from working at night or in dangerous
 occupations. In reality, however, teenage and even younger
 children work long hours.
 The minimum wage applies to persons working at least 5 hours a
 day and is equivalent to about US$3 per day. In practice, most
 of these workers are paid more than the minimum wage. The law
 entitles them to 15 days of annual paid vacation and extra pay
 for working at night or for more than 44 hours a week. Persons
 working less than 5 hours per day receive a proportion of the
 minimum daily wage equivalent to the hours worked. The law
 also requires that those paid by piecework or commission
 receive a salary at least equivalent to the minimum wage.
 The minimum wage for farm workers is equivalent to about
 US$1.60 per day plus food. Most farm workers receive only the
 minimum, but piece rates paid at harvest time net workers
 triple or quadruple the minimum wage.
 The Government requires that work sites be safe, and that
 drinking water, toilets, and adequate ventilation be provided
 workers. Industrial enterprises generally meet these
 requirements. The Labor Ministry made 28,041 work site
 inspections in 1985-86 and issued fines equivalent to US$12,270
 to employers who did not meet the law's safety requirements.
 
 
 503
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COJNTRY: EL SALVADOR
 1984     1985     1986
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        215.9    433.9    268.2
 LOANS ..............    ... 81.2     70.0      8.0
 GRANTS ................. 134.7      363.9    260.2
 A.AIO ....................   161.4     376.1    268.2
 LOANS ..............    ... 32.2     21.0      8.0
 GRANTS .............   ... 129.2    355.1    260.2
 (SEC.SUOP.ASSST.)...       120.2    285.0     181.9
 B.FOOO FOR PEACE .......       54.5      57.8      0.0
 LOANS ..............    ... 49.0     49.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     5.5      8.8      0.0
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ..........      49.0      49.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS.....        49.0      49.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0       0.0      0.0
 TITLE  II-TOTAL .........        5.5      8.8      0.0
 F.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.         3.7       7.2      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF  AGENCY .....       1.8       1.6      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...         0.0       0.0      0.0
 LOANS .................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.0       0.0      0.0
 PEACE  CORPS ......       0.0       0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0       0.0      0.0
 OTHER ..............      0&0       0.0      0.0
 II.MXL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...       196.6     136.3    121.8
 LOANS ..............    ... 18.5     10.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................. 178.1      126.3    121.8
 A.MAP  GRANTS ..........     176.8     124.8    120.4
 3.CREDIT FINANCING ....       18.5      10.0      0.0
 C.INTL  MIL.E.TRNG ....       1.3       1.5      1.4
 0.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0       0.0      0.0
 -.OTHER 0RANTS                 0.0       0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL..        412.5     570.2    390.0
 LOANS ..............    ... 99.7     80.0      8.0
 GRANTS ............. ...... 312.8   490.2    382.0
 OTIER  US  LOANS ..........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......        0.0       0.0      0.0
 ALL  OTHER ..............        0.3      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1984     1985     1986     1946-86
 TuTAL ........   115.2     23.1       00    906.9
 ISRO               0.0      0.0       0.0    215.1
 IFC                0.0      0.0       0.0      1.0
 IDA                3.0      0.0       0.0     25,6
 IDS              114.0     21.0       0.0    634.2
 A03                0.0      0.3       0.0      0.0
 AFOS               0.0      0.0      .0.0      0.0
 UNOP               0.9      1.2       0.0     23.8
 OTAER-UN           0.3      0.9       0.0      7.2
 EEC                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 
 
 504
