 EL SALVADOR
 El Salvador is a constitutional, multiparty democracy with an executive branch
 headed by a President, a unicameral National Assembly, and a separate but politi-
 cally appointed judiciary. Alfredo Cristiani of the Nationalist Republican Alliance
 (ARENA) was inaugurated President for a 5-year term on June 1, 1989. On January
 16, 1992, the Government and the Frente Farabundo Marti para Ia Liberacion
 Nacional (FMLN) signed peace accords ending 11 years of civil war and providing
 
 
 for the reintegration of government and FMLN ex-combatants into national life. The
 ensuing peace process suffered some serious delays. Both parties were at times slow
 to implement some requirements of the accords, most of which applied to the Gov-
 ernment, but compliance with most key elements was achieved by year's end.
 The Truth Commission, mandated by the peace accords to investigate serious
 human rights violations in the past decade, reported its findings on March 15. It
 recommended removal from government and military posts of those identified as
 human rights violators, as well as reforms of the Salvadoran armed forces (ESAF)
 and the judiciary. On March 20 however, the National Assembly approved amnesty
 from criminal prosecution for all those implicated in the Truth Commission report.
 Among those freed were the ESAF officers convicted in the 1989 Jesuit murders and
 the FM LN ex-comatants who were being held for the 1991 killings of two U.S.
 servicemen. In October the U.N. Secretary General reported that while some action
 had been taken to implement Truth Commission recommendations, much remained
 to be done.
 The peace accords also established an Ad Hoc Commission to evaluate the human
 rights record, professional competence, and commitment to democracy of the ESAF
 officer corps. On June 30, the last of 103 officers identified by this commission as
 responsible for human rights violations were removed from active duty in the ESAF,
 and they were formally retired at the end of December. In July the U.N. Observer
 Mission in El Salvador (ONUSAL) declared the Government in compliance with the
 Ad Hoc commission recommendations. Although ONUSAL certified the complete de-
 mobilization of the FMLN on December 14, 1992, large undeclared FM LN arms
 caches were discovered in El Salvador and neighboring countries during 1993. On
 June 11, the U.N. Security Council called the maintenance of these caches the most
 serious violation to date of the peace accords. A new inventory was conducted, and
 destruction of arms caches was completed on August 18, after which ONUSAL de-
 ,cared the FMLN military structure completely dismantled. Substantial progress
 was made on electoral registration in preparation for the March 1994 general elec-
 tion.
 The ESAF includes the army, air force and navy. In February the ESAF com-
 pleted its downsizing as required under the peace accords, reducing its manpower
 fom 62,000 to 31,000, and dismantling the last of its five elite rapid reaction battal-
 ions. Human rights training is now conducted annually for all enlisted soldiers and
 is an integral part of the curriculum at all prfessional development schools for offi-
 cers. In March the new National Civilian Police (PNC) began replacing the old Na-
 tional Police (PN) on a department-by-department schedule. At the enw of the year,
 the new PNC was deployed in 7 of El Salvador's 14 departments, as well as in parts
 of the capital. In the fall, the National Assembly passed legislation integrating per-
 sonnel of the Special Investigative Unit (SIU) and the Executive Anti-Narcotics Unit
 (UEA) into the PNC, although concerns over the qualifications of some UEAperson-
 nel caused ONUSAL to withhold its approval pending further review. The PN will
 be abolished once the PNC is fully deployed. PNC personnel received human rights
 training at the new U.S.-suppcrted police academy.
 El Salvador has a mixed economy largely based upon agriculture and light manu-
 facturing. The Government maintained its commitment to free market reforms, in-
 cluding privatizing additional banks and hotels. People are reee to pursue eonomic
 interests, and private property is respected. The 1993 rate of real economic growth
 was 5 percent.
 Progress on human rights was uneven in 1993. The greatest number of human
 rights complaints filed with ONUSAL were accusations against members of the PN;
 a much smaller number were filed against the ESAF. Institutional improvements
 continued in areas mandated by the peace accords, such as the training and partial
 deployment of the PNC, expansion of the Office of the Human Rights Ombudsman
 (PDDH), and the implementation of some judicial reforms. However, there remained
 an extremely high level of violence, particularly murder, assaults, and robberies, in-
 cluding crimes against children. The judicial system continued to be subject to polit-
 ical influence. The new amnesty law granted immunity to those who violated human
 rights during the years of civil strife.
 The number of murders, which had declined early in the year, started to climb
 in the summer. Allegations of politically motivated assassinations by death squads
 continued. ONUSAL and the SI investigated murders that might have been politi-
 cally motivated. While there were no confirmed cases of politically motivated
 killings, investigations of a number of eases continued at the end of the year. Con-
 cern was sufficient, however, that, on December 8, the Government, in conjunction
 with the United Nations, formed a Joint Group with a 6-month mandate to inves-
 tigate illegal armed groups and their possible involvement with political violence
 
 
 during the 2-year period since the signing of the peace accords. There was wide-
 spread abuse of women and children.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-The end of hostilities in El Salvador
 led to an immediate and significant reduction in extrajudicial killings, though there
 were a few unsubstantiated murder allegations directed against unspecified govern-
 ment forces and the FMLN. The Ministry of the Presidency's oversight of the PN
 and the progressive deployment of the PNC substantially increased government con-
 trol over the public security forces; however, there was some resistance to civilian
 control among elements of the PN. Demilitarization of large numbers of ex-combat-
 ants, poor morale among the PN, the incomplete transition to the new PNC, and
 the large number of arms in circulation among the citizenry left the Government
 unable to prevent or control significant criminal activity by private armed individ-
 uals or groups, some of whose actions may have been politically motivated.
 On May 20, a confrontation developed between PN riot police and demonstrators
 representing the "war wounded," including former ESAF and FMLN combatants, in
 San Salvador. Five policemen fired shots in the direction of the crowd and one of
 the protesters, Santos Martinez Perez, an FMLN ex-combatant, was killed in the
 only fatal government-FMLN incident since the formal cease-fire period began in
 February 1992. The judge investigating the case ordered the policeman who fired
 the fatal shot detained on a charge of manslaughter, which the Attorney General's
 office sought to reduce to negligent homicide. Pending resolution of that issue, the
 PN refused to relinquish the accused to the judge in charge of the case, an example
 of PN resistance to civilian oversight.
 There were no confirmed cases of death squad killings in 1993, but some observ-
 ers continued to ascribe certain suspicious deaths to death squads. ONUSAL stated
 that some of the criminal armed groups active in 1993 used methods similar to
 those of the 1980's death squads, but stopped short of declaring that death squads
 still existed. Death threats remained a method of intimidation. PNC Academy Direc-
 tor Mario Bolanos received numerous anonymous death threats and had a bomb
 placed outside his office, which may have been the work of rejected academy appli-
 cants. A group called "Angels of Death" was described by the press as administering
 "street justice" to delinquents. In September a group called the "Guardian Angels
 threatened to assassinate judges and PN members who did not administer justice
 to criminals. Also in September, callers claiming to represent the National Lawyers
 Association and the Maximiliano Hernandez Martinez Brigade made death threats
 against Dr. Rene Madecadel Perla Jimenez, a professor at the University of El Sal-
 vador and a member of the new National Council of the Judiciary (see Section i.e.).
 The Maximiliano Hernandez Martinez Brigade threatened the family of Jose
 Maria Mendez, a prominent lawyer, in October and November. Others threatened
 included Dr. Juan Mateu LIort, Director of the Institute of Forensic Medicine; Unity
 Movement political candidates in Usulutan; and several prominent businessmen ac-
 cused of financing death squads. Unknown persons threw an incendiary device in
 October and a grenade in December at Christian Democratic Party leader Arturo
 Argumedo's home.
 On October 25, Francisco Velis Castellanos, a leader of the Central American
 Workers' Revolutionary Party (PRTC) faction of the FMLN, was killed in San Sal-
 vador as he was delivering his 2-year-old daughter to a day-care center. Velis was
 shot in the head, and the assailants escaped in a waiting vehicle. The audacity of
 the crime, committed on a crowded downtown street, and the clean getaway,
 prompted speculation of a political motivation. A high-profile investigation, led by
 the SIU which was assisted by observers from the Federal Bureau of Investigation,
 Scotland Yard, and the Spanish Police, continued at year's end.
 On October 30, a leader of the Renewed Expression of the People (ERP) faction
 of the FMLN, Heleno Hernan Castro Guevara, was killed on a highway in San
 Vicente department. Two other FMLN members were killed on October 27 in
 Guazapa, San Salvador department. The four deaths in 5 days spawned a number
 of allegations of renewed death squad killings. Investigators concluded, however,
 that Castro was killed when an argument escalated following a car accident. The
 ERP concurred in this assessment. Police are looking for the murder suspect.
 On December 9, another FMLN/PRTC leader, Jose Mario Lopez, died from a gun-
 shot wound in the leg in San Salvador. Eyewitnesses stated that he was shot by
 thugs when he attempted to stop a robbery. His bodyguard, however, who was also
 shot, later alleged that the assailants were really waiting for Lopez and that the
 attempted street robbery was a ruse.
 
 
 435
 On December 10, Jose Guillermo Ventura, the brother of an FMLN local con-
 didate, was killed when three gunmen attacked his brothers house. The SIU,
 ONUSAL, and the PDHH initiated investigations. On December 11, six Santa Ana
 area peasants who were walking to an Alcoholics Anonymous meeting were attacked
 and murdered by three assailants. Within hours, the PN had arrested two ESAF
 members and a third person for the killings. The victims had no apparent political
 affiliations.
 Earlier in the year, on February 13, Juan Carlos Garcia Panameno and Manuel
 de Jesus Panameno Garcia were murdered in Usulutan department. The two young
 men were associated with the FMLN-linked Monsignor Oscar Romero Committee of
 Mothers and Relatives of Political Prisoners, Disappeared, and Assassinated of El
 Salvador (COMADRES). Reports of death threats against one of the victims and his
 relatives lent initial credibility to COMADRES' allegations of military death squad
 involvement. A thorough investigation by the SIU, aided by cooperation from the
 victims' relatives in COMADRES, concluded that the murders were connected with
 a common robbery and not politically motivated. ONUSAL agreed with the SIU con-
 clusion. A suspect was apprehended.
 On February 21, Freddy Fernando Torres Portillo, an FMLN municipal leader,
 was found dead in San Salvador from a gunshot wound to the head. Torres had ear-
 lier reported death threats to ONUSAL and was the fourth member of a labor or
 leftwing organization murdered in an 8-day span. For these reasons, ONUSAL and
 the PDDH expressed initial concern over possible political motives in all four
 killings. Later evidence indicated, however, that the Torres murder may have been
 the result of a common crime. An ex-PN member who was an acquaintance of the
 victim was apprehended and questioned but released.
 On Augst 19, a pair of gunmen killed a logistical operative, Oscar Grimaldi, from
 the Popular Forces of Liberation (FPL) faction of the FMLN. He was the second FPL
 logistical operative murdered within 2 months, which prompted accusations of death
 squad responsibility or both the Grimaldi and earlier killings. Others suggested
 that elements inside the FMLN had reason to silence both men for their knowledge
 about the FPL arms caches discovered in Nicaragua. The SIU identified both sus-
 pects and issued arrr..t warrants, but the alleged triggerman, Salvador Guzman
 Perez, was killed the day after his arrest warrant was issued. The SIU is investigat-
 ing the Guzman killing. The other suspect in the Grimaldi case was apprehended,
 and the SIU concluded that the murder was not political. ONUSAL, however, still
 considered a political motive possible.
 On December 29, a group of four assailants killed Ruben Eduardo Vanegas
 Escobar and his grandparents in Ochupse, Santa Ana department. The killers came
 to his house and asked for him by name. Vanegas was a member of the ERP and
 a local FMLN leader. The nature of the attack and the fact that nothing was taken
 from the house led ONUSAL to investigate the crime as a possible political killing.
 Earlier in the year, on January 5, the badly beaten body of Supreme Court em-
 ployee Adelmo Lemus was found in San Salvador. Lemus had worked for former Su-
 rem~e Court president Francisco "Chachi" Guerrero, who was murdered in 1989.
 ONUSAL initiated an investigation to determine whether Lemus was killed in a
 common crime arising from an unresolved financial transaction or because he may
 have spoken to the Truth Commission about Guerrero's assassination. The case had
 not been resolved at year's end.
 There were sever-I murders of persons with ties to the ARENA party that govern-
 ment investigators concluded were the result of common crime. These include the
 murders of Sebastian Araniva in San Miguel, Celestino Antonio Cerna Linares and
 Elisandro Eusebio Cerritos Duarte in Santa Ana department, and Melvin Alexis
 Garcia Urbina in Morazan department. PN agents Jose Luis Chicas and Jose
 Alfredo Bonilla Cruz and ESAF Lieutenant Jose Francisco Rodriguez Melendez were
 brutally murdered in San Salvador, but government investigators concludedthat
 common crime was the motive.
 On December 10, PN agent Pedro Vasquez Ramos and his brother, Rudy Oswaldo
 Vasquez Ramos, were kidnaped in Cuscatlan department. Their bodies were later
 found in a ravine with hands and feet bound and shot in the head. Bodily bruises
 and broken bones suggested the possibility of torture. The PN, ONUSAL, and the
 PDDH initiated investigations.
 A previously unknown group, the Salvadoran Revolutionary Front (FRS), threat-
 ened retaliation for the May 20 war wounded shootings by the government riot po-
 lice, and claimed responsibility for the murders of an ESAF captain and two PN po-
 licemen the following day. Most observers believe that the FRS simply claimed ;e-
 ponsibility for the murders to enhance its credibility. The FRS issued sporadic
 threats throughout the remainder of the year, including those against U.S. military
 
 
 civic action deployment and against high-ranking ESAF officers, but none was car-
 ried out.
 On May 21 the day following the war wounded demonstration ESAF Captain
 Juan Hernandez Mejia was killed on a highway near Guazapa by tour armed men,
 dressed as members of the PN, who stopped his vehicle. When Hernandez called for
 help, two legitimate policemen who responded were also killed. Despite the FRS
 claim of responsibility for the murders, ONUSAL determined that the killings were
 the result of a highway robbe  committed by a band of heavily armed renegade ex-
 FMLN and former ESAF members operating near Guazapa.
 There was some progress in resolving outstanding incidents of human rights
 abuse from earlier years. In January the report of an international forensic team
 investigating the 1981 El Mozote massacre confirmed that a mass murder had oc-
 curred. The team identified the skeletal remains of 143 people, including 136 chil-
 dren and adolescents, and found that at least 24 individual firearms had been used
 in the massacre. The evidence clearly showed that the ESAF was responsible.
 Three persons were arrested for the 1992 murder of Dr. Jose Mauricio Quintana
 Abrego, an ex-FMLN supporter who had become an ARENA party member.
 ONUSAL considered this a possible political crime.
 The Truth Commission, in its report issued March 15, identified the Government
 or its agents as responsible for extrajudicial killings in the cases of Monsignor Ro-
 mero (1980), the Rio Sumpul massacre (1980), the leaders of the Revolutionary
 Democratic Front (1980), the American nuns (1980), the El Mozote massacre (1981),
 the Dutch journalists (1982), the San Sebastian massacre (1988), the Jesuit priests
 (1989), and 14 other cases that were examined in detail. The Commission charged
 the ESAF, National Guard, and other security forces of the Government with direct
 responsibility for the great majority of the 817 instances of alleged death squad
 kidnapings,disappearances, and killings it investigated that occurred from 1980 to
 1991.
 The Truth Commission found the FMLN responsible for the assassinations of 11
 mayors and numerous judges from 1985 to 1988. It also found the FMLN respon-
 sible for extrajudicial killings in the cases of the Zona Rosa massacre (1985), Anaya
 Sanabria (1987), Romero Garcia also known as "Miguel Castellanos" (1989),
 Peccorini Lettona (1989), Garcia Aivarado (1989), Guerrero (1989), and the two U.S.
 servicemen killed in 1991 after their helicopter was downed by the FMLN. In the
 last case, on May 24 a judge ruled that the accused, Ferman Hernandez Arevalo
 and Severiano Fuentes Fuentes, were covered by the general amnesty law. The San
 Miguel appeals court upheld that decision, but both rulings were appealed to the
 Supreme Court on the grounds that the crimes were common crimes not covered by
 the amnesty law.
 The Truth Commission recommended that all persons named in its report as
 human rights violators be removed from their positionsin the security forces or the
 Government and be barred from public office for 10 years. However, the National
 Commission for the Consolidation of Peace (COPAZ), composed of representatives
 from across the political spectrum, opposed the ban on public office as an unconsti-
 tutional deprivation of citizens' rights and as antithetical to national reconcili-
 ation,and requested the U.N. Secretary General not to support it. The Truth Com-
 mission sharply criticized the judicial system for complicity in covering up or ignor-
 ing human rights abuses and called for the resignation of all the Supreme Court
 magistrates,most notably the Supreme Court president, Mauricio Gutierrez Castro,
 for unprofessional conduct. The magistrates refused to resign before the June 1994
 expiration of their current terms.
 The Truth Commission also recommended significant reforms of the ESAF and
 the judiciary. In September the United Nations expressed satisfaction with the Gov-
 ernment's progress in complying with the reforms of the ESAF. Many of the key ju-
 dicial reforms recommended by the Commission are in some stage of implementa-
 tion. Others, however, conflict with the Constitution; amendments require approval
 by two successive National Assemblies. The President sent some of the rec-
 ommended constitutional reforms without endorsement to the National Assembly,
 which did not act on them in 1993.
 The 1993 amnesty law was passed by the National Assembly on March 20, only
 5 days following release of the Truth Commission report. It granted amnesty to
 those convicted or accused of political and related common crimes during the con.
 flict, including those named in the Truth Commission report, and effectively ended
 further investigation into most human rights abuses committed during the war
 years. The governing ARENA party and its allies, the National Conciliation Party
 (PCN) and the Authentic Christian Movement (MAC), pushed the amnesty law
 through the National Assembly in a 47 to 8 vote with 13 abstentions. Hasty passage
 of this law by the progovernment parties prompted heavy criticism from local
 
 
 437
 
 human rights and opposition groups as well as from international organizations and
 foreign governments.
 The Ad Hoc Commission established to evaluate the human rights record, profes-
 sional competence, and commitment to democracy of the ESAF officer corps pre-
 sented its confidential findings identifying 103 officers as responsible for human
 rights violations, to President 5ristiani and U.N. Secretary General Boutros Ghali
 on September 22, 1992. The Government failed to meet the initial November 1992
 deadline for implementing the commission's recommendations, but the last of the of-
 ficers were removed from active duty on June 30, 1993, and all were officially sepa-
 rated by December 31. In July ONUSAL declared the Government in compliance
 with the Ad Hoc Commission's recommendations.
 b. Disappearance.-The Constitution forbids unacknowledged detention by the se-
 curity forces or the military. There were some unconfirmed allegations of abductions
 by unspecified gvernment forces, as well as by the FMLN, during 1993. A signifi-
 cant number of disappearances during the war years remained unresolved, and the
 new amnesty law meant that none of them was likely to be reopened.
 On May 22, Gregorio Mejia Espinosa, a minor official in one of the parties belong-
 ing to the Democratic Convergence coalition, was kidnaped as he went to catch a
 bus in San Salvador. The armed kidnapers bound him and covered his head, trans-
 ported him to a secured room, and questioned him about his party's activities and
 about student unrest following the May 20 war wounded shootings. During the
 questioning, Mejia was burned numerous times on his chest, perhaps with a solder-
 ing device. He and another captive were then taken to an isolatedarea where one
 of the kidnaprs held a pistol to Mejia's head. When the gun failed to discharge,
 Mejia made his esape down a nearby ravine in a heavy rain. Mejia had been
 threatened previously by a group called N-ESA (New Salvadoran Anti-Communist
 Army). Both ONUSAL and the PDDH considered this kidnaping to have a possible
 political motive. No suspects have been identified in the case.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Torture is prohibited by the Constitution, but abuse and mistreatment of detainees
 continued, even though confirmed reports of torture by the public security forces
 were fewer than in the past. From January to Otober, ON USAL's human rights
 division confirmed six reports of torture, onebythe ESAF, two by the PN, one by
 an ex-PN member of the PNC, one by Mariona prison guards, and the unknown per-
 peitrators of the Mejia kidnaping case described above.
 Pson conditions remained bleak, with overrowding the most significant prob-
 lem. The largest prison, built 20 years ago to hold 800 prisoners, holds 2,200. At
 the beginning of the civil war in 1980, 3,000 prisoners were distributed in 30 penal
 centers; 14 facilities now hold 5,500 prisoners. Most cells are 15 by 20 feet, and
 some hold as many as 24 prisoners. Because of the overcrowding, some prisoners
 must sleep on the floor or "buy" a bed when one b ecomes available. Prisoners are
 fed, but most find it necessary to supplement their rations with help from family.
 On November 17, 27 prisoners dicdin a riot at the San Francisootera high-se-
 curity prison. The most violent inmates in the national prison system are con-
 centrated in this prison which, though built to house 160 inmates, actually holds
 over 300. The riot was reportedly the result of cell block rivalries and all the deaths
 were caused by actions of the prisoners, including a fire that was set during the riot.
 The security forces and the ESAF gained control of the situation in about 5 hours
 but were contczed for not acting faster.
 In January a penitentiary training school was established to provide 1 month of
 training to all prison guards and officers on an annual basis, and ards must now
 have a ninth-grade education. These steps and thc introduction of a case-tracking
 system resulted in some improvement in the treatment of prisoners. Some training
 and work opprtunities are available, Spartan health care is provided, and conjugal
 visits are allowed. The women's prison and the juvenile deention center are less
 crowded, and conditions are somewhat better.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Arbitrary arrest and detention is prohib-
 ited by the Constitution, and its incidence declined, due largely to enactment of the
 1992 Public Defender Law. ONUSAL received 275 complaints of arbitrary or unlaw-
 ful detention by the security forces from January through October, a reduction from
 previous years. The PN frequently arrested people illegally without a warrant when
 police had only a suspicion of a crime. In September the President of the Supreme
 Court publicly suggested that, to control rising criminal activity, the police should
 enforce a previously unused "law of dangerous state," under which they may detain
 anyone who appeared dangerous, even though no crime had been committed. In the
 wake of this announcement, ONUSAL's police division received some complaints in-
 dicating that the law was being sporadically implemented.
 
 
 438
 The police may hold a person for 72 hours before presenting him to court. The
 practice of obtaining forced confessions during this 72-hour period was reduced
 through enforcement of the Public Defender Law which guarantees counsel to indi-
 gent defendants from the moment of detention. Nublic defenders are now regularly
 called by the police to provide representation to detained suspects. From March
 1992 to February 1993, public defenders freed from incarceration approximately 50
 percent of their clients. There is still a large backlog of detainees in the prison sys-
 tem, however, and approximately 88 percent of all inmates were awaiting trial or
 sentencing.
 The public defender's office tripled in size over the last 2 years, but there still
 was an inadequate number of public defenders. The courts have generally enforced
 a ruling that nighttime questioning without the presence of a public defender is con-
 sidered coercion and any evidence so obtained is inadmissible. Questioning now is
 routinely delayed until morning and the arrival of the public defender.
 When the detainee is delivered to the court, the judge may order detention for
 an additional 72 hours to determine if the evidence warrants holding the accused
 for further investigation. The judge is then allowed 120 days to investigate serious
 crimes, or 45 days for lesser offenses, before bringing the accused to trial or dismiss-
 ing the case. In practice, these time limits were rarely observed, but a new law to
 become effective in 1994 would impose fines against lower court judges who fail to
 comply with time restrictions as a result of negligence.
 Although the law permits release pending trial for crimes in which the maximum
 penalty does not exceed 3 years, many common crimes (against property, homicide,
 murder, manslaughter, and rape) carry penalties in excess of 3 years, thereby pre-
 cluding release pending trial. Because defendants are imprisoned from the moment
 they are apprehended, and the judicial process can take several years, some have
 been incarcerated longer than the maximum possible sentence. Any detained person
 may request a review (habeas corpus) by the Supreme Court, but the request must
 be in writing, and the petitioner has neither access to the court nor any guarantee
 that the petition will be reviewed. The overwhelming majority of such requests are
 denied.
 Salvadoran law does not allow compulsory exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public TriaL-The judiciary is only nominally independent and
 has been severely weakened by political pressures. People who are well-connected
 politically, economically, or institutionally, generally enjoy immunity from prosecu-
 tion. Political affiliation and personal ties, rather than professional capabilities, ap-
 pear to have been the traditional criteria used to appoint and reappoint judges.
 The court structure is divided into four levels: justices of the peace, courts of the
 first instance, courts of the second instance (appeals courts), and the Supreme
 Court. Civilian courts exercise jurisdiction over military personnel who commit com-
 mon (nonmilitary) crimes. Jury verdicts can be neither overruled by a judge nor ap-
 pealed to a higher court. Sentences,however, may be appealed up to the Supreme
 Court. Under the Constitution, defendants have the right to a presumption of inno-
 cence; protection from self-incrimination; legal counsel; freedom from coercion; be
 present in court; the opportunity to confront witnesses; and compensation for dam-
 ages due to judicial error. Most of these rights, however, are frequently ignored in
 practice.
 Some progress was made in addressing problems in the judiciary improving tne
 administrative functions ol' the courts, updating the legal codes, and improving the
 overall professionalism or the system. The 11 members of the National Council of
 the Judiciary (NCJ), the newly independent body that screens and nominates judi-
 cial candidates, are now appointed by the National Assembly rather than by the Su-
 preme Court. Four are selected from a list of nominations made by the Supreme
 Court. In August the NCJ began screening and nominating judicial candidates, as
 well as evaluating sitting judges. The N3  also has responsibility for the judicial
 training school, formerly under the Supreme Court. Nevertheless, there was still a
 troublesome overconcentration of administrative power in the Supreme Court, which
 controls the licensing of all attorneys, disciplinary action against attorneys and
 judges, and the removal of judges.
 Two reforms were enacted that should eliminate significant delays and grant
 greater autonomy to the lower courts. One repealed the requirement that all lower
 court decisions concerning offenses with a potential sentence of more than 3 years
 (80 percent of all cases) be approved by a higher level court. The other provided that
 the judge responsible for investigating whether there is sufficient evidence to bring
 the accused to trial will no longer be the same judge who presides over the trial.
 All available evidence indicates that the Government holds no political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Accord-
 ing to the Constitution, the police must have the resident's consent, a warrant, or
 
 
 439
 a reasonable belief that a crime is being or is about to be committed, before entering
 a private dwelling. In practice, forced entry without a warrant was frequently used
 to carry out arrests and investigations. Wiretapping of telephone communications by
 the Government., private persons, and political parties is illegal but commonly oc-
 curred.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Freedom of the press is provided for by the Con-
 stitution, and respected in practice. There was only one reported incident of violence
 directed at the press in 1993, a significant improvement over previous years. On No-
 vember 1, 30 FMLN members staged a half-hour demonstration outside the conserv-
 ative Diario de Hoy newspaper, protesting an editorial that suggested the murders
 of FMLN leaders were the product of internal purges. The demonstrators burned
 tires and an effigy of the paper's owner. During the year, the FRS threatened some
 radio and television stations with retaliation i they did not broadcast its commu-
 niques, but despite the refusal of some stations to comply, the threats were not car-
 ried out.
 El Salvador has 5 daily newspapers, 8 television stations, approximately 150 radio
 stations, and 3 cable television systems. The Government operates one television
 station and one radio station; the FMLN was allocated a VHF television frequency
 in September. Both the Catholic Church and the ESAF have radio stations; the
 FMLN operates two broadband and several shortwave radio stations. Print and
 broadcast journalists from across a wide political spectrum regularly criticize the
 Government and report opposition views, although reporting by the predominantly
 conservative media tends to support the Government. The Government did not use
 direct or indirect means to control the media. However, most media owners are
 highly successful businessmen, and the reported news often reflects market pres-
 sures and advertisers' interests.
 Academic freedom is provided for by the Constitution and is respected in practice.
 University autonomy prohibits law enforcement officials from entering public cam-
 puses, and this also was respected in 1993.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Any association not formed for
 criminal purposes is legal and permitted. Numerous political, professional, religious,
 labor, and social organizations, including those allied with the FMLN, operate with-
 out legal restriction. Organizations in general encounter bureaucratic delays when
 applying for legal recognition, but this did not appear directed at any one group.
 Since the signing of the peace accords, FMLN members and others on the left held
 or freely participated in open forums and political rallies throughout the country.
 Contentious political issues were regularly the subject of seminars, conferences, and
 media discussions.
 c. Freedom of Religion. -Freedom of religion is guaranteed by the Constitution
 and is respected. Roman Catholicism is the official religion and practiced by ap-
 proximately 75 percent of the population, but other faiths, mostly evangelical Prot-
 estantism, have grown rapidly in popularity. These groups practice without hin-
 drance.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution establishes the right of free movement. Article 97
 states that foreigners may not involve themselves in the internal political affairs of
 the count   an the Government reserves the right to deny entry to, or deport, for-
 eigners believed to violate that section of the law. Freedom of movement throughout
 the country is permitted by the Government. There are no restrictions on citizens
 changing their residence or workplace. A major effort by the Government to issue
 or replace citizen documentation in the 115 municipalities affected by the armed
 conflict continued in 1993.
 The Government has provisions for granting asylum and refugee status. Since the
 end of the regional conflicts in Central America, the number of refugees in El Sal-
 vador has declined to very few. The Government imposes no control on emigration
 and cooperates with international organizations that arrange Salvadoran emigration
 to other countries.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Salvadoran people exercise the right to change their government peacefully
 through regularly scheduled elections. Past elections have been judged free and fair,
 notwithstanding the climate of fear and violence perpetrated byboth government
 and rebel forces during the civil war. The President and Vice President are elected
 every 5 years. Legislative and municipal elections are held every 3 years. Elections
 for all national and local offices will be held in March 1994, and OUSAL has been
 
 
 440
 invited to certify them. It established an electoral division in June to oversee the
 electoral process. Various other nongovernmental organizations (NGO's) are also ex-
 pected to observe the elections. The President is constitutionally barred from reelec-
 tion to a second consecutive term. Voting is by secret ballot, and there is universal
 Thetast 11 mayors elected in 1991, whom the FMLN had prevented from assum-
 ing their offices in the former conflict areas, returned to their municipalities by Feb-
 ruary, and local governmental functions in these areas began to return to normal.
 The field of political parties continued to expand in 1993. The FMLN, inscribed
 as a political party in December 1992, announced its political candidates and began
 campaigning for the 1994 general elections. The Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE)
 approved the Unity Movement and the Free People's Party as new political parties,
 bringing to 10 the total number of duly registered parties. The TSE organized a
 massive campaign to reach the 750,000 eligible voters without voter cards by No-
 vember, focusing on the underrepresented, primarily youth and women; the latter
 totaled 60 percent of citizens without voter cards, according to the TSE. To encour-
 age registration further, the National Assembly passed a law in September making
 the voter registration card a required document for identification purposes as of
 March 1, 1994. The registration drive, completed November 20, was successful,
 though applications were still being processed at the end of the year. It is estimated
 that at least 85 percent of eligible voters will be able to vote in the March election.
 The number of women in politics is small but growing. A Vice President of the
 National Assembly is a woman, as are 7 other Assembly Deputies, out of 84. Three
 Cabinet Ministers are female, as are 33 of 262 mayors.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A number of nongovernmental human rights organizations, including the Catholic
 Church's Tutela Legal and the Human Rights Commission (CDHES), operated ac-
 tively without government interference. Frequently echoing FMLN positions, the
 CDHES focuses primarily on alleged abuses by the Government. The CDHES also
 follows cases through the investigation and trial stages, provides free legal assist-
 ance, and publishes monthly reports. Tutela Legal, the human rights o ice of the
 Archdiocese of San Salvador, also focuses on allegations of government abuses, fol-
 lows cases, and publishes periodic reports. Numerous other church, labor, and uni-
 versity groups and NGO's have human rights offices that operate without legal re-
 striction. In addition, various international human rights groups visit or operate
 without government restrictions.
 The first Human Rights Ombudsman was elected by the National Assembly in
 1992. As the only human rights organization specifically established by the Con-
 stitution, the Ombudsman's Office (PDDH) is charged with receiving allegations of
 human rights abuses committed by government officials, investigating them and, if
 warranted, lodging official complaints against specific officials. The PDDH sup-
 planted the Human Rights Commission (CDH) as the officially mandated human
 rits monitoring organization.
 We United Nations Observer Mission (ONUSAL) is mandated to verify and mon-
 itor implementation of agreements between the Government and the FMLN, to in-
 vestigate alleged human rights violations, and to conduct educational and public
 awareness campaigns promoting human rights. It makes recommendations to the
 Government and the FMLN andalso reports directly to the U.N. Secretary General.
 In its July report. ONUSAL found that the overall human rights situation continued
 to improve, but noted continued human rights abuses and a serious problem with
 common crime. Its October report noted concern over a serious regression in the
 human rights situation, most notably the increase in extrajudicial killings of politi-
 cal leaders and the generally rising crime rate. On the positive side, ONUSAL
 praised the continuing progress in implementing institutional changes to protect
 human rights, and the absence of any verifiable cases of disappearances in 1993.
 The PDDH began investigating reports of human rights abuses in July 1992. As
 of June 1993, the PDDH had received over 2,000 reports, and it opened regional of-
 fices in Santa Ana, San Miguel, and San Vicente. The number of reports received
 monthly jumped to 300 in July and over 400 in August. The PDDH budget for 1994,
 approximately $2.5 million, is double 1993's budget but still inadequate to duplicate
 ONUSAL's human rights monitoring operation when it terminates its mission in
 1994. ONUSAL has praised the progress made by the PDDH since its inception, but
 some human rights groups have expressed concerns about the PDDH's capabilities.
 The PDDH should gain both experience and stature in 1994 through the involve-
 ment of its director as part of the Joint Group established on December 8 to inves-
 tigate possible political violence since the peace accords.
 
 
 The PDDH lodged public complaints of human rights abuses against various gov-
 ernment agencies, most frequently the PN and the judiciary, and in numerous cases
 made specific recommendations for improvements in procedures and even for indem-
 nification of victims. Some of the PDDH's complaints and recommendations were ig-
 nored. The PDDH publicly criticized the chief of the PN Fifth Command in San
 Miguel for refusing to cooperate with judicial investigations of human rights abuses.
 The PDDH said, however, that a number of institutions did act on its recommenda-
 tions in a satisfactory manner. The Executive Anti-Narcotics Unit, for example
 agreed to obtain judicial search warrants prior to entry. The PN antiriot unit agreed
 not to use war weapons to control demonstrations. Other institutions, including the
 San Salvador municipal police and the ESAF 2nd infantry brigade, took corrective
 actions following violations of administrative due process.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution states that all people are equal before the law and prohibits dis-
 crimination based on nationality, race, sex, or religion.
 Women.-Women are granted the same legal rights as men under the Constitu-
 tion, but suffer discrimination in practice. To improve the situation of women and
 children, the National Assembly passed a new Family Code in October. The new
 Code updates some laws that discriminated against women and children, most nota-
 bly those living in informal unions. Spousal rights are granted to those who can
 prove that they lived together as a couple for at least 3 years, a status similar to
 common law marriage, significant because a large percentage of couples never offi-
 cially marry.
 Women also suffer from economic discrimination and do not have equal access to
 credit and land ownership. Wages paid to professional women remain lower than
 thosepaid to men in the same profession, and women in nonprofessional jobs are
 generally also paid les than similarly qualified men. Sixty-five percent of the eco-
 nomically active female population work in the informal economy. Training geared
 to females tends to focus on areas where they are already employed and on gen-
 erally low-income occupations: teaching, nursing, home industries, or small busi-
 nesses.
 Violence against women, including domestic violence, is widespread. The Isidro
 Menendez Judicial Center received 564 reports of sexuaf violence against women in
 1992, and it estimates that only 5 percent of total cases were reported. Hospitals
 reported a monthly average of 56 rapes in the capital city of San Salvador from Jan-
 uary to September, while the police received only three reports p-.r month in the
 same period. To increase reporting of rapes, victims have been encouraged, through
 a regular newspaper campaign by the Attorney General's office, to come forward and
 press charges immediater aer the assault has occurred. Since 1991 a public pros-
 ecutor has been on duty 24 hours a day at the San Salvador children's hospital to
 assist rape victims and their families in taking legal action. Nevertheless, prosecu-
 tion of rape cases is difficult because of pervasive cultural attitudes.
 There are over 100 women's organizations to assist low-income women, and wom-
 ens issues have been raised in the 1994 election campaign. Major concerns for wom-
 en's ghts groups are equal rights, unemployment, access to credit and skills train-
 inas, illiteracy, health services, family planning, child care, and violence against
 women.
 Children.-The Government recognizes its responsibility for children's rights and
 welfare, though this is reflected more in its efforts to reduce poverty and promote
 family stability through economic growth than in direct expenditure on children.
 The 1994 government bugt for the Institute for the Protection of Children is $4.6
 million, a 57-percent increase over 1993. Given the magnitude of children's health
 and welfare problems, the increased spending levels are still insufficient. In the con-
 text of total resources available to the Government, however, expenditures are sub-
 stantial. In addition, $41 million in Salvadoran debt payments over the next 20
 years will be placed in an account to fund child survival and environmental pro-
 grams.
 The new Family Code updatesws is dealing with children, gives equal rights to
 children brn out of wedlock, and tightens adoption procedures. Sexual abuse of
 children is another problem reeiving ugwing attention. The San Salvador chil-
 dren's hospital treated between four and five cases per day of sexually abused chil-
 dren in 1993. Child malnutrition and the large numbers of orphans are also signifi-
 cant problems.
 Indigenous People.-El Salvador is an ethnically homogeneous ountry, though a
 small segment of the population claims to have descended solely from indigenous
 peoples. The last census of Indians in El Salvador showed 80,000 in 1930, or 5.6
 
 
 442
 ercent of the population. In 1932 approximately 30,000 were killed by government
 ores following an abortive uprising. In the face of such repression, most remaining
 indigenous people adopted local customs and successfully assimilated into the gen-
 ation. There remain a few ver small communities of indigenous people
 wh ilweartraditional dress, speak their native language, and maintain tradi-
 tional customs without repression or interferene. The Salvadoran National Indige-
 nous Association (ANIS), headquartered in Sonsonate, promotes indigenous culture
 and language. The civil and political rights of indigenous people and their ability
 to participate in decisions affecting their lands, traditions, and allocation of natural
 resources are protected and respected by the Government to the same extent as
 other Salvadorans of comparable socioeconomic status.
 People with Disabilities.-Except for the war wounded, who have secured both
 t vernment and international funding for rehabilitation and retraining programs,
 e Government has noprogram to combat discrimination against the disabled, nor
 are there any laws mandating provision of access for people with disabilities.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The 1983 Constitution prohibits the Government
 from using nationality, race, sex, creed, or political philosophy to prevent workers
 or employers from organizing themselves into unions or associations. Full realiza-
 tion of the freedom of association called for in the Constitution has been impeded
 by numerous and sometimes conflicting laws governing labor relations; the current
 Labor Code prohibits partisan political activity by unions. This prohibition is rou-
 tinely ignored; eight labor leaders currently serve in the National Assembly, and
 labor continued to play an important role in partisan activities.
 In the 1992 peace accords, the Government committed itself to seek consensus on
 revised labor legislation through a socioeconomic forum with equal representation
 from labor (including groups aligned with the FMLN), government, and the private
 sector. During 1993, labor, the private sector, and the Government moved haltingly
 toward producing a revised Labor Code. In August the forum sectors signed a tri-
 partite agreement on approval of certain International Labor Organization (ILO)
 conventions, granting legal status to labor unions and associations and establishing
 a framework to govern labor relations. ILO technical experts informally assisted the
 parties to review international labor conventions, and the forum submitted 11 to the
 Assembly for ratification. The ILO also reviewed and made recommendations for re-
 forming the existing Labor Code and other labor legislation, including the Organic
 Law for the Ministry of Labor.
 The ILO recommended 49 changes to the Labor Code. Although the socioeconomic
 forum discussed these recommendations through early December, it was unable to
 agree on a draft to submit to the Assembly. The Government then submitted its own
 version of the ILO recommendations to the Assembly, based on what it believed to
 be fair compromises between positions held by labor and business in the forum
 talks. The ILO reviewed the Government's version and reported that there were no
 significantchanges from its original recommendations. The legislation is scheduled
 to be debated and voted on in early 1994. Most importantly, the proposed changes
 would streamline the process required to form a union; extend union rights to agri-
 cultural, independent, and small-business workers; and extend the right to stinke
 to union federations (at the present time only unions, not union federations, have
 the right to call a strike). The Government has not sought ratification of ILO con-
 ventions on freedom of association because this would require changes in the Con-
 stitution.
 There are approximately 150 active unions, public employee associations, and
 peasant organizations, which represent over 300,000 Salvadorans, approximately 20
 p ercent of the total work force. Unions are not under pressure to affiliate with the
 Government or other political forces; nevertheless, many labor organizations have
 close ties to various political groups. Labor alliances change frequently, but the
 Intergremial, an umbrella organization including most major labor organizations,
 continued to enjoy the prominence it gained with the 1991 presentation of a draft
 labor code and iabor's participation in the forum. The current Labor Code forbids
 foreigners from holding leadership positions in unions, but unions freely affiliate
 with international labor organizations.
 Only private sector nonagricultural workers have the right to form unions and
 strike; employees of nine autonomous public agencies may form unions but not
 strike. Nevertheless, workers from other sectors, including the public sector, have
 carried out strikes that, while technically illegal, were treated as legitimate. Even
 in sectors where the right to strike exists, strikes are sometimes technically illegal
 as labor and management often ignore the onerous and time-consuming legal re-
 quirements to settle labor disputes. Public sector strikes, though illegal, are fre-
 
 
 quent and are generally settled through negotiations between public employee asso-
 ciations and the Government. Mandatory arbitration of public sector disputes is pro-
 vided for under the Labor Code. Proposed changes to the Labor Code would give
 the right to form unions and strike to all private sector workers and streamline
 legal requirements.
 In August members of the public health workers' union began a strike to demand
 a salary increase, a designited hospital for their use and that of their family mem-
 bers, and improved hospital conditions. Pointing to the public sector status of the
 union's members, the Government refused to meet the strikers' demands and fired
 a number of them. After nearly a month, the Government and most of the organiza-
 tions backing the strike reached a compromise agreement; the Government agreed
 to reinstate ired workers, drop legal proceedings against them, and consider a sal-
 ary raise. There were credible reports, however, that the Government failed to rein-
 state all fired workers to their previously held poitions and pay, that some strikinj
 employees lost their seniority, and that legal proceedings continued against some o
 the union officials.
 Antiunion actions before a union is legally registered are prohibited; however, in
 practice, there are credible charges that the Government impeded union registration
 through e.acting reviews of union documentation and strict interpretation of the
 Constitution, Labor Code, and union statutes. Under the Febrary "Agreement on
 Principles and Commitments," signed by government, labor, and private sector rep-
 resentatives, the Government agreed to review previously denied applications for
 legal status among both private sector unions and agricultural and public sector as-
 sociations. The Minister of Labor, whom labor had accused in 1992 of conspiring
 with management to frustrate union registration by informing management of po-
 tential legal challenges to a registration application, was replaced in 1993.
 The International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU) alleged in 1993
 that sig.'ng the peace accords had not succeeded in checking the abuse of trade
 union rights, citing reports from its affiliate, FENASTRAS, of the killing of 20 trade
 unionists in 1992, many by death squads; other instances of death threats against
 trade union leaders and instances of abductions; continued denial by the Govern-
 ment of the registration of a union at the ADOC shoe factory; and other incidents
 involving antiunion discrimination and the firing of workers for trade union activi-
 ties. In a report released in November, however, an ILO direct contact mission stat-
 ed that no persons were being detained for trade union activities, that there had
 been no further searches of trade union premises, and that violence against trade
 unionists had declined substantiallyin the previous year.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectiuely.-The right of collective bar-
 gaining is granted in both the Constitution and the existing Labor Code, but public
 sector employees are not covered in either. The Labor Code grants this right only
 to employees in the private sector and in autonomous agencies of the Government,
 such as utilities and the p3rt authority. However, both private sector unions (by
 law) and public sector employee associations (in practice) use the mechanism of col-
 lective bargaining extensively. Labor Code protection fo: agricultural workers, now
 inadequate, would be expanded by proposed Labor Code reforms.
 The Ministry of Labor is responsib'e for overseeing the implementation of collec-
 tive bargaining agreements and acting as conciliator in labor disputes in the private
 sector and autonomous government institutions. In practice, government ministers
 and the heads of autonomous government institutions often negotiate with labor or-
 ganizations directly, relying on the Labor Ministry only for such duties as officially
 certifying unions. The Ministry of Labor often seeks to conciliate labor disputes
 through informal channels rather than attempting strictly to enforce regulations,
 leading to charges of bias against labor. Corruption continues to be another serious
 problem affecting labor courts.
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination against unions. It provides that union
 officials at the time of their election, throughout their term, and for 1 year following
 their term shall not be fired, suspended or disciplinary reasons, removed, or de-
 moted except for legal cause. This provision is generally observed in practice, but
 in some cases those attempting to form unions have     en fired before receiving
 union credentials. Employers are required to rehire employees fired for any type of
 union activity, though this requirement is sometimes not enforced.
 There are four functioning export processing zones (EPZ's) and two more under
 construction. Labor regulations in these zones are identical to those throughout the
 country. Companies operating in the EPZ's, whileproviding higher salaries and ben-
 efits than companies outside the EPZ's, strongly dscourage organizing and in some
 cases have fired workers attempting to organize. The ICFTU s allegation that "all
 attempts to form trade unions in free trade zones have led to the dismissal of the
 
 
 workers concerned," is too broad, but the point that unionization efforts encounter
 strong resistance in the EPZ's is valid.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor except in the case of calamity and other instances specified by
 law. This provision is followed in practice. The ILO Committee of Experts continued
 to criticize provisions in the Penal Code which allow the imposition of penalties in-
 volving compulsory labor against companies for activities related to the expression
 of political opinion.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Constitution prohibits the em-
 ployment of children under the age of 14. Exceptions may be made only where such
 employment is absolutely indispensable to the sustenance of the minor and his fam-
 ily, most often the case with children of peasant families who traditionally work
 with their families during planting and harvesting seasons. Children also frequently
 work as vendors and general laborers in small businesses, especially in the informal
 sector. Parents of children in circumstances such as these often do not allow their
 children to complete schooling through the ninth grade as the law requires, since
 the labor which the children perform is considered vital to the family. Child labor
 is not a problem in the industrial sector. The Ministry of Labor is responsible for
 enforcing child labor laws.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-In January the Government passed legislation
 raising the minimum wages for commercial, industrial, service, and agroindustrial
 employees; over the course of the year the Government increased the minimum
 wage on two occasions by a total of 22 percent. The new rate for industrial and serv-
 ice workers was about $3.50 (31 colones) per day; agricultural workers must be paid
 about $2.35 (20 colones) in wages, including a food allowance, per day. Despite these
 increases, minimum wages are generally inadequate to meet the Ministry of Econo-
 my's standard of basic necessity. An estimated 40 percent of the population lives
 below the poverty level. The Labor Ministry is responsible for enforcing minimum
 wage laws and does so effectively in the formal sector. Accurate statistics are not
 available for the large informal sector.
 The law limits the workday to 6 hours for minors between 14 and 18 years of age
 and 8 hours for adults. Premium pay is mandated for longer hours. The Labor Code
 sets a maximum normal workweek of 44 hours, requiring overtime pay for addi-
 tional work and limiting the workweek to no more than 6 days.
 The Constitution and the Labor Code require employers, includingthe Govern-
 ment, to take steps to ensure that employees are not placed at risk in their work-
 places, and prohibit the employment of persons under 18 years of age and all
 women in occupations considered hazardous. Nevertheless, Salvadoran health and
 safety regulations are outdated, and inadequate enforcement remains a problem.
 The Ministry of Labor attempts to enforce the applicable regulations and conducts
 investigations which sometimes lead to fines or other findings favoring workers. The
 Ministry has very limited powers to enforce compliance, however, and has suffered
 severe cutbacks in human resources to carry out certification and inspection duties,
 which severely limited its effectiveness.
