EL SALVADOR
The Report on El Salvador is not a serious attempt to assess the human rights situation in that country. Rather, it is an attempt to defend the government against charges of abuse and to make it appear that virtually all violations of human rights that take place in El Salvador are the work of the guerrillas. To the extent that it discusses reports of abuses by the government of El Salvador, it attempts to discredit these by attributing them to the guerrillas themselves, "guerrilla-controlled media" or "testimony taken from guerrilla masas."
The section on Political Killing is representative. This consists of eleven paragraphs: four discuss killing by the guerrillas; one discusses efforts by President Duarte to eliminate abuses, though not acknowledging that abuses are practiced; one argues "that criminal deaths are often disguised to appear politically motivated;" one discounts the continuation of death squad activity; one airs suspicions that a death squad communique was actually the work "of leftist students at the university to frighten rival groups;" one attempts to discredit the reporting by the human rights office of the Catholic Church, Tutela Legal; one attributes abuses to "Untrained and undisciplined local Civil Defense members," but argues that, "The Government is addressing the problem by offering both military and human rights training;" and the final paragraph attempts to discredit reports of indiscriminate bombing by asserting that, "Most of these reports originate in guerrilla controlled media or in testimony taken from guerrilla masas. These regularly employ fabricated accusations of Government abuses for their political impact."
In the entire section on Political Killing, there is only one sentence that could be said to be critical of the Salvadoran government, or that appears to acknowledge that criticism could be warranted. It appears in the middle of the paragraph that begins with a discussion of the Civil Defense and it is unconnected to the
24
material that precedes it or to the material that follows it. The sentence reads:
There are credible reports that regular Armed Forces troops, in some instances, have meted out harsh treatment to masas, the guerrillas* civilian supporters who provide much of the logistical infrastructure necessary to maintain their operations in the field.
Translated into English, this sentence says that troops destroy homes, burn crops and murder unarmed peasants in areas of El Salvador where the guerrillas are active.
In this sentence — the least objectionable in the entire section — as throughout the Report, the State Department persists in its effort to dehumanize the victims. It refers to them as "masas" or "guerrilla masas" and, lest anyone forget, accuses them at every opportunity (and in some places where one would not have thought there was an opportunity) of providing a "logistical infrastructure" for the guerrillas. (Translated into English "logistical infrastructure" means that these peasants continue to try to grow the crops they require to survive and that the guerrillas purchase or otherwise obtain food from them.) The Salvadoran Armed Forces attempt to destroy the logistical infrastructure of the guerrillas. (In English, this means that they kill the peasants, or destroy their crops, or terrorize them so that they flee their land and their homes.)*
* In a famous essay written forty years ago on "Politics and the English Language, George Orwell discussed just such an effort to mask reality. He wrote:
Defenseless villagers are bombarded from the air, the inhabitants driven out into the countryside, the cattle machine-gunned, the huts set on Are with incendiary bullets; this is called pacification. Millions of peasants are robbed of their farms and sent trudging along the roads with no more than they can carry: this is called transfer of population or rectification of frontiers.
25
In a more or less typical episode, the village of La Tejera, Morazan, which is largely populated by displaced persons who had fled from other locations, was bombed on October 13, 1985. To the best of our knowledge, there was no legitimate military target in the village. Three civilians were killed; eight were wounded; and several houses were destroyed. Many residents fled and joined with columns of refugees fleeing other communities to cross the border into Honduras where a group of 134 arrived at Colomoncagua refugee camp on November 5. Two representatives of Americas Watch happened to be in Colomoncagua at the time and took testimony from many of the refugees from La Tejera. The testimony was furnished to the Department of State in November. No account of this episode, or of any of the many similar episodes, appears in the Report. Indeed, there are only two cases of abuses by the government that are described in the entire Report: in one, the rocketing of a granary, in which three members of a family were killed, is attributed to an "error;" in the other, the killing of a woman and two children took place, according to the Report, because an Air Force plane "mistakenly identified the small settlement as the target."
In contrast to the failure to describe specific cases of government abuses — other than the two attributed to mistakes — the Report provides details on some fifteen cases of abuses by the guerrillas. None of these abuses is portrayed as a mistake; in each instance, the Report portrays guerrilla abuses as outright savagery.
As in the past, the State Department's main source of information in 1985 was the Salvadoran press -- which is either supportive of the government or critical of it from the right. The two newspapers that were critical of the government from the left were violently closed by the government more than five years ago. The information on political violence that is published in the Salvadoran press is largely derived from the Armed Forces. Aside from the Salvadoran press, the Armed Forces themselves are the principal source of the Department of State. In effect, therefore, the Department of State disseminates data that it has obtained from the
26
Armed Forces in two ways: directly, or slightly filtered through the Salvadoran press.
In contrast, human rights organizations such as Americas Watch and Tutela Legal obtained most of their information during 1985 from testimony from family members and witnesses to abuses. Where possible, the testimonies were supplemented by site visits. The findings of human rights groups are consistent with the findings of U.S. journalists who have attempted to cover the political violence.
During 1985, journalists from The New York Times, The Washington Post, The Miami Herald^ United Press International, Time, The Los Angeles Times, Pacific News Service, and The Dallas Morning News all visited conflict zones and all reported on indiscriminate attacks on civilians by government forces. In early January 1986, a month before the State Department published its Report, the Archbishop of San Salvador visited such a zone and, in a homily read for him in the national Cathedral, voiced the urgent plea of the area's residents for an end to indiscriminate attacks. Yet there is no mention of U.S. press accounts in the Report; no mention of the Archbishop's homily; and the main references to the findings of human rights organizations are efforts to discredit those findings by labelling those who provided testimony as guerrilla masas.
Though all figures on political violence in El Salvador have shortcomings, we believe that the figures on 1985 compiled by Tutela Legal are far more reliable than those obtained by the State Department from the Salvadoran press. Tutela Legal's figures for 1985 show: 240 targeted murders and 81 disappearances by the security forces, the army, the civil defense and death squads linked to the armed forces; 66 targeted murders, and 45 kidnappings* by
* These are kidnappings in which the victims had not been released by year's end. In many such cases, the victims will ultimately be released, either on payment of ransom, or in exchange for prisoners captured by the government. On the other hand, victims of "disappearances" almost never reappear.
27
the guerrillas; 371 civilian victims of indiscriminate attacks by the armed forces and another 1,045 victims where Tutela Legal believes the majority are civilians but has not been able to conduct site visits to verify reports it obtained on these cases; and 62 civilian victims of indiscriminate attacks or landmines of the guerrillas. These figures make it clear that the guerrillas warrant condemnation for their abuses of human rights. They also show, however, that the Report's attempt to portray the armed forces as almost entirely praiseworthy in their conduct is a grave distortion.
There are other faults in the Report: it suggests that freedom of the press prevails even though the newspapers that were critical of the government from the left were forcibly closed years ago and it remains unthinkable to try to revive them; it suggests that unions are free to organize and act as unions even though the unions have been particularly hard hit by political violence; and it asserts that "El Salvador moved further in its transition to an open, democratic system in 1985," basing this on periodic elections, but ignoring the fact that "an open, democratic system" also implies that the rule of law prevails.
The frankest criticism of the Salvadoran government appears in its discussion of the punishment of military personnel for human rights violations. The Report states that "No military officer has been successfully prosecuted for human rights violations in recent years." Among the reasons for this, according to the Report are that, "Colleagues of the accused often cannot be relied upon to testify or otherwise cooperate in prosecuting crimes against other officers." In addition, the Report points out that "intimidation of judges and juries by members of the Armed Forces frequently overcomes prosecution efforts made by the Attorney General's Office." Even these comments are deficient. References to the reluctance of "colleagues of the accused" to testify should be supplemented by a recognition that it is the responsibility of the high command to make it clear that it is the duty of military officers to testify; and the reference to "prosecution efforts by the Attorney General's Office" should be supplemented by a recognition that such efforts have not
28
been strenuous.
If anything, the 1985 Report on El Salvador is worse than the State Department has compiled in the past — most of all for implying support for the view that the peasants it labels as "guerrilla masas" deserve what they get, and for attempting to discredit the testimony of such peasants.
29
