 EL SALVADOR
 El Salvador has long been dominated by powerful elites
 who ruled through the security forces. The elites' power
 rested in large landholdings and in the control of banking
 and the export of staple crops for their benefit. Faced
 with increasing demands for social change in the 1970s,
 traditional ruling groups continued their dominance by
 employing electoral fraud and repression. In the 1970's
 some political forces which were previously moderate,
 joined the radical left. The late 70's witnessed the
 emergence of an armed radical left. On October 15, 1979,
 a group of progressive military officers overthrew the
 regime of General Humberto Romero and created a civilian-
 military governing coalition called the Revolutionary
 Governing Junta (JRG). That Junta faced a highly polarized
 society in which the political process was discredited
 and a sizeable minority on both left and right employed
 violence to achieve their political ends. On the right,
 the Broad Nationalist Front (FAN) became the main force,
 and its supporters soon spawned death squads, most notably
 the Maximilliano Hernandez Martinez Brigade. The major
 leftist armed groups were wedded into first the United
 Revolutionaty Directorate (DRU), and then the Farabundo
 Marti National Liberation Front (FMLN), while their political
 front groups together with some more democratically oriented
 organizations, formed the Democratic Revolutionary Front
 (FDR). The Marxist-oriented FMLN/DRU, however, controls
 the FDR.
 Unable to act effectively and frustruated by their own
 inability to agree on promised reforms and to control
 the security forces, the civilian members of the first
 post-October 15 government resigned after ten weeks.
 The military members of the Junta then reached an agreement
 with the Christian Democratic Party to form a new government.
 In spite of coup attempts from the extreme right, guerrilla
 warfare from the radical left, and terrorism from all
 sides, this second Junta undertook a far-reaching socio-
 economic reform program in March. Those reforms nationalized
 large estates, the export of staple crops, and the financial
 institutions.
 Alarmed by reforms which attack the very basis of their
 domination, the armed extreme right has declared its
 intention to bring down the government and re-establish
 the old order through violence perpetrated by its support-
 ers, some of whom are members of the security forces
 only nominally under the control of the Junta. The armed
 left has rejected the reforms and also declared its intention
 to bring down the revolutionary government through violence
 in order to establish a Marxist state in El Salvador.
 The result of these contending forces has been a vicious
 cycle of provocation, outrage, and revenge which leaves
 a daily toll of murdered and often mutilated bodies on
 El Salvador's streets and highways. The Church has con-
 demned the violence of left, right, and the security
 forces, affirming that the nation has reached the point
 where respect for human life no longer exists. Church
 institutions have been attacked and several clergy murdered,
 including the Archbishop of El Salvador, Oscar Romero,
 who many suspect to be a victim of the extreme right.
 An offer to mediate made by the Salvadoran Bishop's Council
 has been accepted by the Junta in principle, but refused
 by the FDR and FMLN.
 
 
 428
 About 9000 persons have been killed in 1980. Killings
 and terrorist acts are the work of both leftist "Democratic
 Front" forces who often claims responsibility for them,
 and of rightist elements with whom some members of the
 official security organizations are associated. Sometimes
 the extreme right claim responsibility as was the case
 in the murders of the five leaders of the FDR. Both right
 and left wing violence is reported to have increased
 in the last months of the year, during which time four
 American Churchwomen were brutally murdered. Many persons
 are also murdered by non-political groups or individuals.
 Death squads and other rightist terrorist groups which
 include present or retired members of the military or
 police have claimed that they have murdered suspected
 delinquents and leftist subversives. The government
 has been unable to end such abuses. About 1400 enlisted
 men reportedly have been cashiered from the military
 for various abuses over the past year, but there are
 indications that some of these men have been recruited
 subsequently into rightist terrorist squads. Government
 forces have broken up few right-wing groups, mostly because
 the right does not attack the security forces. Terrorist
 activity and army sweeps into areas of guerrilla concentra-
 tions have produced roughly 62,000 internal refugees.
 The government's efforts to control violence have included
 the invocation in March of a constitutional provision
 suspending the rights of free entry and exit from El
 Salvador, the right to inviolability of communications
 and the right freely to express and circulate opinions.
 The latter restriction has been limited to prohibiting
 political advertising by extremist groups to perpetrate
 kidnapping or ransom demands. Following a politically-
 inspired strike which blacked out much of the country
 for twenty-four hours in August 1980, the government
 declared a state of emergency which placed the workers
 of four semi-public companies (the electrical, water,
 and telephone companies and the port authority) under
 military control. These provisions remain in effect.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a.   Torture
 Article 165, paragraph 2 of the 1952 Constitution prohibits
 "all kinds of torture." However, terrorists of both
 the right and left have used torture to gain information
 and to intimidate their opponents. Bodies bearing burns
 or numerous wounds frequently appear along the highways.
 Despite governmental policy against using torture, the
 history of the security forces suggests the involvement
 of some of its members in unsolved crimes of murder with
 torture. Some members of leftist groups who have been
 captured by government forces have alleged after their
 release that they were beaten, scarred with acid, or
 subjected to electric shock during interrogations.
 b.   Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punish-
 ment
 Complaints of physical punishments or brutal treatment
 in prisons are not commonly made against the government.
 Detention facilities are overcrowded and inadequate,
 reflecting El Salvador's low standard of living. Prisoners
 are allowed visits from family members and their attorneys.
 Delegates from the International Committee of the Red
 Cross (ICRC) visit detainees held in security detention
 
 
 429
 centers, military facilities or civilian jails. The
 ICRC also provides assistance to displaced persons.
 Summary executions are common. Confrontations between
 the military/security forces and guerrilla bands rarely
 result in the taking of prisoners by either side. There
 are reports of military/security forces arriving in villages
 with lists of suspected terrorists and guerrillas and
 shooting those named on the spot. The radical left regularly
 publishes communiques claiming credit for similar executions
 of suspected enemies. The far left claimed that government
 forces were responsible for the massacres of hundreds
 of peasants at Rio Sumpul near the Honduran border.
 This allegation has been refuted by impartial observers.
 Armed leftists are responsible for a large number of
 kidnappings for ransom and murders of government officials,
 diplomats, land-owners, members of a now proscribed rightist
 para-military group and suspected informers. The guerrilla
 bands' tactics of join-us-or-die have caused tens of
 thousands of persons to flee their homes in rural areas,
 as have the armed rightists' efforts to disrupt the agrarian
 reform program or exact vengeance on leftists. Security
 forces have at times supported such rightist actions.
 Members of the clergy, students, teachers, businessmen,
 and political leaders have been victims of extreme right
 violence.
 Estimates of the number of political killings in El Sal-
 vador vary widely. In early October the Apostolic Adminis-
 trator stated that 4,730 persons had died in incidents
 of political violence during the first nine months of
 1980. This figure appeared to be accurate, but by year's
 end the more accepted figure was 9,000, along with claims
 that violence from the right and security forces was
 increasing in November and December.
 c.   Disappearances
 The Apostolic Administrator also estimated that 269 persons
 had disappeared after last being seen in the custody
 of the security forces. No other figures on disappearances
 are available. The government has denied any connection
 with these disappearances.
 d.   Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 El Salvador's judicial system does not function effectively
 when politically-motivated crimes are brought before
 it, and no serious attempts have been made to use the
 judiciary to control the political violence. No matter
 how strong the evidence against them, those of the right
 and left charged with crimes of violence, including leaders
 of terrorist groups, are regularly released by intimidated
 courts. The irrelevance of the judicial system has encouraged
 elements of the security forces to ignore it and to dispense
 their own brand of justice.
 Under Salvadoran law, a person can be arrested and legally
 held without charge for up to seventy-two hours. There
 are now about fifty cases of persons who have been charged,
 but have spent months awaiting trial. Most are members
 of armed leftist groups arrested during raids or routine
 searches for arms or propaganda.
 e.   Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The judiciary is slow and overburdened. After arraignment,
 long delays usually occur before trial. Trials are public
 
 
 430
 and courts are believed to operate fairly and independently
 in non-political cases.
 F.   Invasion of the Home
 Forced entry is regularly practiced by terrorist groups
 of the right and left and by the security forces.
 2.   Government Policy Relating to Fulfillment of Such
 Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care, Employment
 and Education
 El Salvador is a largely agricultural nation. It has
 a population of roughly 4.5 million living in an area
 8,300 sq. miles. It faces the problems of a large semi-
 skilled workforce, a population density of nearly 330
 persons per square kilometer of arable land, and a negative
 growth rate of its gross domestic product. That negative
 growth rate, which may reach from six to nine percent
 this year, spells economic hard times for a population
 which had a per capita GDP of only $565 in 1979 (in 1976
 dollars), and is directly attributable to the political
 strife which has engulfed the nation since 1978. Balance
 of payments problems have seriously reduced the nation's
 international reserves. Unemployment and under-employment
 affect roughly 50 percent of the workforce. As the government
 has continued to repay old loans and found it difficult
 to obtain new ones, its foreign exchange position has
 also deteriorated -- in spite of its low level of public
 external debt (only 10.9 percent of GDP) and external
 debt service (only 3.8 percent of exports).
 Historically, wealth has been concentrated in the hands
 of a few. Although 57 percent of El Salvador's labor
 force works in agriculture, until March 1980, 20 percent
 of the country's farmland was concentrated in 276 farms,
 and only 5 percent of the arable land was in the smallest
 50 percent of farms. The same families which dominated
 agriculture also dominated banking, agricultural processing
 plants, insurance companies, and export concerns. The
 new revolutionary government attacked its economic problems
 and its political problems at once with a massive reform
 program which has undertaken to redistribute land and
 has nationalized the banking industry and the exporting
 of staple crops.
 Income distribution in El Salvador has been significantly
 skewed toward the rich; the wealthiest 5 percent of the
 population accounts for 21.4 percent of national income,
 while the poorest half of the population receives 17.9
 percent (1976 figures). Most Salvadorans live within
 ten kilometers of a health clinic and are relatively
 unthreatened by such diseases as measles, tuberculosis,
 and diptheria. However, health care remains a problem.
 Infant mortality in rural areas exceeds one in ten.
 Life expectancy in rural areas at birth is 54 years compared
 to 59 for the country as a whole. Nearly 20 percent
 of medically certified deaths are due to dysentary and
 respiratory illnesses. Approximately 25 percent of the
 rural populace has access to safe water, and only 17
 percent has adequate means of waste disposal. Existing
 Ministry of Health services generally are overcrowded
 and poorly administered. About 67 percent of the adult
 population is literate, with about the same percentage
 of 9-15 year-olds attending schools. Current net growth
 rate of the population is probably around 2.6 percent
 (compared with a natural growth rate of 3.3 percent)
 due to violent deaths and increased emigration. Patterns_
 
 
 431
 of migration inside the country have been dramatically
 altered by the violence -- with roughly 62,000 refugees
 displaced from their homes. The re-distribution of land
 by the agrarian reform might slow the movement from country-
 side to city slightly.
 Traditionally, El Salvador has strongly supported property
 rights, and the agrarian reform recognizes those rights
 in its proposals to repay former owners and to provide
 titles to the beneficiaries of redistribution. Some of
 the larger farms are held cooperatively. The first phase
 of the agrarian reform has converted almost all farms
 of over 500 hectares into cooperatives made up of the
 families which worked them. Another phase grants ownership
 of up to 17 acres of land to each farmer who cultivated
 it as a tenant farmer or sharecropper. These two phases
 of agrarian reform are benefiting about 225,000 rural
 families. Due to bureaucratic delays, and the magnitude
 of the task, the government has been slow to issue titles
 to the new owners. Lack of titles is causing problems
 as many families do not live on the land they farm. A
 third and controversial phase of the agrarian reform,
 dealing with the redistribution of 125 to 500 hectare
 farms, was to have been implemented in 1980. This phase
 involves the most difficult divisions of land, and is
 still under consideration. The reform program faces
 continuing problems of economic support as well as attacks
 from right and left. Compensation of former owners has
 also been slow, with the government only beginning to
 distribute the thirty-year bonds with which it will pay
 for the land.
 The government entered the foreign commerce and banking
 sectors to lessen elitist control of the nation's credit
 institutions, provide sufficient local credit to fund
 the reforms, and to prevent massive capital flight.
 Although most management officials have retained their
 positions, the banking system is now administered by
 the Central Bank. Credit is rationed and concessionary
 credits are awarded to projects according to government
 objectives, Similarly, the foreign commerce sector was
 nationalized in order to limit imports, prevent massive
 manipulation of exports earnings by individuals, and
 control capital flows during this crucial period of reform.
 The government has adopted some emergency measures to
 smooth the transition period and maintain employment
 levels. These include: public works projects, housing
 and construction projects, and assistance to marginal
 communities. Political and economic turbulence, plus
 an already skyrocketing government budget, has forced
 reductions in these program goals.
 3.   Respect for Civil and Political Freedoms, Including:
 a.   Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 The government invoked a constitutional provision in
 March which allows it to limit the free expression and
 circulation of opinions, but has applied the limitation
 specifically to prohibit ads placed by extremist groups
 that seek to inflame public opinion or issue terrorist
 demands. In practice, freedom of speech and the press
 are limited, not by governmental action, but by fear
 of retribution from rightist and leftist terrorists.
 The Catholic hierarchy's radio station "YSAXI has twice
 been destroyed by bombs. Two leftist newspapers have
 been bombed, and employees of each have been murdered
 by right wing terrorists. One was driven out of business,
 
 
 432
 but the other continues to publish in a reduced format.
 An editor of a rightist newspaper was badly wounded during
 an assassination attempt for which the left claimed credit.
 The activities and pronouncements of the leftist opposition
 groups are covered in the major newspapers as news stories.
 Freedom of assembly is guaranteed by the constitution
 and limited only by fear of terrorism. Freedom of religion
 also is guaranteed and no complaints of its abridgement
 have been raised. Politically activist Catholic priests
 -- including Archbishop Oscar Romero -- and a number
 of protestant pastors have been assassinated by extrem-
 ists. In December, four American Catholic women, three
 of them nuns, were murdered in El Salvador. A special
 Salvadoran commission is currently investigating these
 murders. A U.S. mission reported circumstantial evidence
 of possible security force involvement.
 Although the government's expressed attitude toward labor
 unions is positive, trade unions have difficulty in operat-
 ing in the midst of the violence. A number of trade
 union leaders were killed. Some of these were involved
 in leftist political activities; others were centrists
 or tried to remain politically neutral. Both rightists
 and radical leftists have been accused in these incidents.
 Some union leaders who have attempted to withdraw from
 leftist groups have been killed and others threatened,
 presumably by their erstwhile collaborators. A reform
 of the labor code which will facilitate strikes and strength-
 en   workers' rights is under discussion. Duting 1980,
 workers concentrated more on preserving jobs in a declining
 economy than on expanding economic benefits. The union
 of workers in the state-owned electric power generation
 company was dissolved and its leaders arrested in August
 after they had blacked out most of the country for twenty-
 four hours in a politically motivated strike, and had
 staged an armed occupation of power plants.
 B. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 The constitutional provision which guarantees the rights
 freely to enter and leave El Salvador and to reside where
 one wishes, and prohibitions against expatriation, has
 been formally suspended, but with no discernible effects.
 In theory, freedom of movement within the country is
 not restricted; in practice, it is restricted by the
 fighting. Foreign travel and emigration are limited
 only by bureaucratic delays and the expense involved.
 A number of opposition political leaders are currently
 residing outside El Salvador, but they appear to be doing
 so for fear of their lives, rather than the government's
 unwillingness to let them return. Fear of violence has
 also caused large numbers of Salvadorans to emigrate.
 There are no refugee groups from other countries currently
 in El Salvador. Those who have sought asylum in embassies
 within El Salvador-- often by force of arms-- have been
 allowed to depart the country freely.
 c.   Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 It is government policy to open the political process
 and to encourage the formation of political parties and
 groups willing to participate in it. On October 15,
 1980, the government offered amnesty to its opponents
 and scheduled elections for a constituent assembly in
 1982, and pledged to hand over power to a popularly elected
 government by no later than mid-1983. However, the government's
 
 
 433
 radical right and left opponents have to date refused
 to consider participation in a political process -- prefer-
 ring to try to overwhelm the government by force.
 Women have legal equality with men, but social restraints
 often limit their practical possibilities. They do hold
 some important positions in the professions, political
 parties, and in the government, as well as in more tradi-
 tional jobs in factories, offices, schools, and homes.
 4.   Government Attitude and Record Regarding International.
 and Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Viola-
 tions of Human Rights
 The issue of human rights investigations in El Salvador
 is complicated by the participation of the local human
 rights organization in political activities. The Salvadoran
 Human Rights Commission (CDHES) has several members who
 represent extreme leftist groups. Its publications call
 for the overthrow of the present government. The political
 organization (FDR) which serves as public front for the
 leftist guerrilla groups holds press conferences at CDHES
 headquarters. A member of the Commission was kidnapped
 and assassinated by unidentified assailants in October.
 The government has invited the Inter-American Commission
 on Human Rights to make a second visit to El Salvador.
 The visit is expected some time in February or March
 of 1981. Many representatives of human rights groups
 visited El Salvador during the past year and made extensive
 reports.
 
 
 434
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: EL SALVADOR
 1978     1979      1980
 -----      -------------------------------------------------
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTALo.           10.9     11.4     58.3
 LOANS..............          5.7       4.2    .40.4
 GRANTS,..........          5.2       7.2     17.9
 A.AID ........* ...              8.0      6.9     52.3
 LOANS*.......*...*           5.7       4.2     37.4
 GRANTS...........          2.3       2.7     14.9
 (SECSUPPeASSIST,).**          0.0       0.0      9.1
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE  E. .           1.7      2.9      5,5
 LOANS............           0.0      0.0      3.0
 GRANTS     NT...........      1.7      2.9      2.5
 TITLE I-TOTAL    TAL.......       0.0      0.0      3.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS,..            0.0      0.0      3.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR,,,.*           0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE II-TOTAL ........1.7                 2.9      2.5
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.           0.6      1.3      0.5
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY,..             1.1      1.6.     2.0
 C.OTHER ECON. SSIST**.           1.2      1.6       0.5
 LOANS....;.........           0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS'........               1.2      1.6      0.5
 CONTR. TO 1F71.,.          0.0       0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS*.....          1.2       1.6      0.5
 OTHER.............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...           0.0      0.0      5.9
 LOANS..............           0.0      0.0      5.7
 GRANTS     NT...........     0.0       0.0      0.2
 A.MAP GRANTS*...,*....           0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT SALES-FS....           0.0      0.0      5.7
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG..           0.0      0.0      0.2
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK*..           0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS.........          0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & NIL..           10.9     11.4     64.2
 LOANS..............          5.7       4.2     46.1
 GRANTS..............         5.2       7.2     18.1
 --- - -------------------------------------------------
 OTHER US LOANS..                   0.0      0.1       0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS::::::           0.0      0.1       0.0
 ALL OTHER..............           0.0      0.0      0.0
 ;;Is;z----------O----A-----I-----------------------
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1978      1979     1980     1946-80
 -----      ------------------------------------------------
 TOTAL..........   101.9     60.0      48.9    569.4
 IBRO               32.2     23.5       0.0    214.2
 IFC                 0.0      0.0       0.0      1.0
 IDA                 0.0      0.0       0.0     25.6
 IDB                69.6     29.5      48.5    301.7
 ADS                 0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 AFOB                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 UNDP                0.1      5.6       0.4     20.9
 OTHER-UN            0.0      1.4       0.0      6.0
 EEC                 0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 
 
 435
