 EL SALVADOR
 El Salvador has a freely elected democratic government, with
 an executive branch headed by a president, a unicameral
 legislative assembly, and an independent, but politically
 appointed, judiciary. On June 1, for the first time in
 Salvadoran history, civilian control of the government passed
 from one political party to another following free and fair
 elections. Alfredo Cristiani of the Nationalist Republican
 Alliance (ARENA) party assumed the Presidency from the
 incumbent, Jose Napoleon Duarte of the Christian Democrats
 (PDC).
 The Armed Forces of El Salvador (ESAF) total 56,000, including
 some 11,500 members of the police forces. There are three
 national police entities, usually referred to as the security
 forces: the National Police, the National Guard, and the
 Treasury Police. The security forces are considered part of
 the armed forces. The National Police, National Guard, and
 Treasury Police report to the Vice Minister of Defense for
 Public Security.
 El Salvador has a mixed economy, and private property is
 generally respected. The country's economy is predominantly
 agricultural. Coffee accounts for 65 percent of foreign
 exchange earnings. The economy has experienced 6 years of
 modest growth, despite losses of nearly $2 billion caused by
 an armed insurgency. The Farabundo Marti Front for National
 Liberation (FMLN) follows a strategy of seeking to disrupt the
 operations of the economy: it holds traffic bans which
 disrupt normal commercial activity; it extorts "war taxes" to
 raise income; and it has increasingly resorted to sabotage of
 economic targets. The group's stated goal is to worsen
 economic conditions in order to turn the population against
 the elected government. The FMLN's November 1989 offensive,
 during which attacks were focused on San Salvador and other
 urban areas, caused nearly $20 million worth of damage to
 economic enterprises and infrastructure.
 The FMLN has been engaged in an armed insurgency since 1980,
 dedicated to the violent overthrow of governments now
 regularly established through democratic processes. The FMLN
 has an estimated 6,000 full-time combatants backed by a
 network of front groups, part-time militia, and urban commando
 cells. During much of 1989 the FMLN pursued a public policy
 of attempting to make the country "ungovernable" through
 increased urban bombings and assassinations of intellectuals,
 newspaper columnists, civilian employees of the military,
 former FMLN members, mayors, and government ministers and
 their families. The FMLN sought to thwart the democratic
 elections in March by threatening the lives of those who
 administered the election process and those who transported
 voters to the polling places, and rejected a government
 cease-fire during the election period. On the political
 front, the FMLN offered in January and in September two
 proposals to negotiate an end to the conflict. For the first
 time the FMLN dropped demands for power sharing and
 acknowledged the validity of elections as a means to power; it
 specifically called for postponement of the March elections.
 FMLN insistence on an unconstitutional delay in the elections
 and its refusal to accept the Government's cease-fire proposal
 made agreement on a proposal impossible. In September the
 FMLN made a new proposal; shortly thereafter the Government
 and the FMLN agreed to permanent monthly meetings in an
 attempt to reach an end to the conf-lict and the FMLN's
 incorporation into political life. Meetings were held in
 
 
 570
 EL SALVADOR
 September and in October. On November 11, the FMLN launched a
 nationwide offensive which left over 3,000 guerrillas,
 soldiers, and civilians dead and thousands more wounded.
 Nevertheless, the'government delegation went to Caracas for
 the scheduled November 20 negotiating session, but the FMLN
 did not show up.
 As the insurgency gathered strength in the early 1980's,
 members of the security forces repeatedly violated the human
 rights of their fellow citizens and were unquestionably
 involved in widespread death squad activities. Although
 abuses continue, successful investigation and prosecution
 efforts now mean that military personnel, including officers,
 cannot count themselves immune to prosecution.   In March
 1989 the military turned over two officers, three
 noncommissioned officers, and six soldiers to civilian
 authorities for prosecution resulting from the September 1988
 massacre of 10 civilians in San Sebastian. In May an active
 duty officer in the armed forces was found guilty and
 sentenced for the 1987 murder of three men. In January 1990,
 Colonel Guillermo Alfredo Benavides Moreno, Commandant of the
 Military Academy and Overall Commander of units providing
 security to the Academy area, along with two lieutenants, a
 sub-lieutenant, and five other soldiers, was held in custody
 and charged with the slayings of six Jesuit priests, a
 housekeeper, and her daughter on the campus of the University
 of Central America on November 16.
 Statistics kept by the American Embassy, aggregated for only
 the first 8 months of the year, do not show an increase in
 civilian political killings. Nevertheless, rightwing
 vigilantism continued to be a serious human rights concern.
 While intense investigation of some notable cases has produced
 information useful to the prosecution, in many cases it was
 unclear who the perpetrators were--rightwing vigilantes, the
 security forces, the FMLN, or common criminals taking
 advantage of the violent environment that has characterized
 the country in recent years.
 The judicial process continued to be hindered by archaic
 procedures, inadequate facilities, intimidation of judges, and
 corruption. The FMLN's assassination of the Attorney General
 in April was an additional blow. Unfortunately, there was
 little progress in the prosecution of some key human rights
 cases during 1989. Although the military leadership showed
 somewhat greater cooperation in investigations of reported
 human rights abuses by members of the military, this attitude
 was not reflected in the lower ranks of the ESAF, where
 cooperation with civilian investigators is, at best, erratic
 or problematic.
 RESPECT FOR HU4AN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 The assassinations of the Jesuits, the Attorney General, and
 the Minister of the Presidency were among the numerous
 political and extrajudicial killings occurring during the
 year. Discerning a trend or pattern in the level of such
 violence is always difficult, the more so in 1989 with a
 guerrilla offensive beginning in November. The collection and
 classification of information on politically motivated
 
 
 571
 EL SALVADOR
 killings is inexact, and general numbers can only indicate
 trends in violence over time in comparison with past reports
 using a consistent methodology. Common criminal murders, for
 example, can easily be disguised as political killings by
 perpetrators wishing to confound investigators; at the same
 time, a political motive in other murders may go undetected,
 causing them to be classified as common crimes.
 The November F14LN offensive precluded a satisfactory count of
 political killings through the end of the year. Through
 August, the number of deaths reported in the Salvadoran press
 which may have been politically motivated averaged 17 per
 month; this compares with a monthly average of 19 in 1988, 23
 in 1987, 22 in 1986, 28 in 1985, 64 in 1984, 140 in 1983, 219
 in 1982, 444 in 1981, and 750 in 1980. Given the isolation of
 some rural areas, it is likely that the press does not report
 the full number of civilian deaths.
 Of the 138 apparently politically motivated killings of
 noncombatants during the first 8 months of the year, 64 appear
 clearly to have been perpetrated by the FMLN, with another 16
 probably attributed to them; 14 killings were attributed to
 military personnel; and in 2 cases there was insufficient
 evidence to designate the likely assailants. Included among
 the 138 victims were 42 civilians reportedly killed in combat
 action between the FMLN and the El Salvador military.
 In statistics maintained by the U.S. Embassy on unexplained
 murders in which a political motive, though not apparent could
 not be excluded, these deaths decreased from an average of 21
 per month during 1988 to an average of 16 per month during the
 first 8 months of 1989. A breakdown of these statistics
 showed that in the period after the March election the monthly
 average was 13, compared to 21 in January through March.
 There continued to be reports of noncombat killings attributed
 to the military and police. On July 24 the ESAF announced the
 deaths of two young men, Hector Miranda Marroquin and Lucio
 Parada, who were in the custody of the Atlacatl Battalion
 beyond the legally allowed 72-hour detention period. The
 military high command ordered an investigation into the deaths
 and two soldiers were charged with the murders; the first is
 in custody and the other fled to avoid arrest. The second
 suspect charged, in a statement given when he was outside of
 the country, that his actions were directed by a death squad
 which operated out of the Armed Forces' First Brigade. The
 First Brigade denied the charges, and the case remained under
 investigation at year's end.
 On August 22, a member of the Atlacatl Battalion killed a 17-
 year-old high school student in an apparent accident. The
 ESAF apologized to the family and charged the soldier
 responsible. In another case in August, members of the
 military detachment in Sonsonate killed one student and
 wounded seven. The Chief of the Joint Staff apologized to the
 parents and promised to bring the guilty soldiers (who claimed
 to believe that the students were FMLN members setting up a
 roadblock) to justice. Although an investigation was under
 way, by year's end no soldiers had been detained.
 On November 16, 1989, six Jesuits, their housekeeper, and her
 daughter were murdered on the Central American University
 campus (UCA). The victims were Father Ignacio Ellacuria, the
 UCA's Rector; Father Segundo Montes, Director of the UCA's
 Human Rights Institute; Father Ignacio Martin Baro; Father
 
 
 572
 EL SALVADOR
 Amando Lopez; Father Joaquin Lopez y Lopez; Father Juan Ramon
 Moreno Pardo; and Mrs. Elba Julia Ramos and her daughter,
 Celina Ramos. The Government initiated a thoroughgoing
 investigation employing the forensic expertise of the
 U.S.-supported Special Invtstigative Unit. President
 Cristiani offered a $250,000 reward for information leading to
 the arrest of those involved and asked for assistance from the
 United States, Great Britain, Spain, and Canada in the
 investigation. Autopsies were conducted and a full range of
 ballistics tests were run on the recovered bullets and
 shells. Testimony was taken from military personnel and
 civilians who were polygraphed to evaluate the veracity of
 their information. At the beginning of 1990, nine soldiers of
 the Atlacatl Battalion, including a colonel and two
 lieutenants, were in legal custody for the killings.
 President Cristiani expressed the determination of the
 Government to take the case beyond investigation to
 prosecution and conviction of the wrongdoers.
 On election day, three journalists died in unrelated
 incidents. Dutch cameraman Corneil Lagreuw died while filming
 a firefight between the military and the guerrillas. He was
 struck by stray bullets. Lagreuw's film shows him to be
 directly behind a guerrilla position. During the subsequent
 attempt by fellow journalists to get him to emergency medical
 care, a military helicopter repeatedly fired at the vehicle he
 was being transported in, hitting no one but impeding the
 vehicle's progress. The ESAF acknowledged its actions but
 explained that the pilots thought the vehicle was transporting
 fleeing combatants. Another journalist was killed by Air
 Force soldiers manning a roadblock near the Ilopango air
 base. The soldiers in this case have been charged with murder
 and were awaiting trial at year's end. A third journalist
 died in the eastern city of San Miguel; apparently his vehicle
 ran a roadblock before dawn on election day. The Minister of
 Defense and the Chief of the Joint Staff initiated a thorough
 review of the military's procedures for dealing with the press
 in the field and issued new guidance to the military on these
 procedures.
 A special military honor board headed by the Minister of
 Defense in March found evidence that 11 ESAF members,
 including two officers, were culpable in the September 1988
 killings of 10 civilians at San'Sebastian. The soldiers and
 officers were turned over to civilian authorities for
 prosecution. At year's end, the investigative phase of the
 prosecution was nearly complete, and the ESAF members remained
 in detention awaiting trial.
 In 1989 various groups charged that formal paramilitary death
 squads were operating again. Not since 1984, however, have
 there been any publicly acknowledged death squad killings by
 ultra-rightwing groups, as there were in earlier years. While
 some human rights groups continue to attribute certain
 political killings to "death squads," many of these deaths are
 likely the result of individual acts of rightwing vigilantism
 rather than of organized paramilitary death squads as existed
 before 1984. One case drew special attention and grave
 concern. On April 5 Maria Cristina Gomez, a school teacher
 and member of the National Teacher's Union (ANDES), was
 kidnaped by unidentified persons in a Jeep Cherokee wagon as
 she was leaving her school in Ilopango. Later that day, her
 body was discovered near a cemetery. An autopsy showed she
 had been severely tortured and raped before being shot four
 times. Her murder bore many of the characteristics of the
 
 
 573
 EL SALVADOR
 death squad killings of the early 1980's. Members of her
 union charged the Air Force (which had security
 responsibilities in the area) with responsibility, which it
 denied. By year's end there had been no progress in
 identifying her assailants or the motive for her abduction and
 death.
 Ten persons were killed and 30 wounded in the October 31
 bombing of the labor union FENASTRAS's headquarters. The
 Secretary General of the union, Febe Elizabeth Velasquez, was
 among the dead (see Section 2.b.).
 Killings by the FM4LN, especially of prominent figures,
 escalated during the last 9 months of the year. The April 9
 assassination of Attorney General Roberto Garcia Alvarao dealt
 a severe blow to the legal system, as the Attorney General is
 the chief prosecutor of human rights cases in the country. By
 year's end, there had been no progress made in the
 investigation of his murder. The June 9 assassination of the
 Minister of the Presidency, Jose Antonio Rodriguez Porth,
 raised additional concern in the Government and country. He
 and his butler, both unarmed, were killed in the driveway of
 his private residence. The home of then Vice President-elect
 Francisco Merino was bombed on April 14. The FMLN took
 responsibility for the April bombing and the killing of the
 Attorney General, and is widely believed to be responsible for
 the murder of Rodriguez Porth. The FMLN took credit for or is
 believed to be responsible for the June 26 killing of National
 Fire Chief Roberto Armando Rivera, the October 10 killings of
 the wife and son of a conservative newspaper editor, the
 October 17 murder of the 21-year-old daughter of an army
 colonel, and the November 28 assassination of Francisco
 "Chachi" Guerrero, the immediate past president of the Supreme
 Court of Justice and a former foreign minister.
 During the year, the FMbLN threatened to kill 214 of the 262
 mayors in El Salvador. As part of its preelection campaign of
 intimidation, the FMLN killed 1 governor and 10 mayors, and
 forced the resignation of more than 90 other mayors. On March
 15 Francisco Peccorini, a 75-year-old American citizen and
 former Jesuit priest, was murdered by the FMLN because of his
 criticism of guerrilla infiltration of the National
 University. Miguel Castellanos, a former guerrilla who
 renounced violence in 1985, was assassinated by the F14LN in
 February. Edgar Chacon, a conservative political columnist,
 was killed on June 30. Guerillmo Payes, a member of Chacon's
 conservative research institution, was also assassinated in
 July. Carlos Ernesto Mendoza, the editor of a journal
 critical of the FNLN, lost his arm but survived an April bomb
 attack. The FMLN may also have assassinated the five
 Salvadoran journalists who died at the National Information
 Center during the November offensive.
 In other killings attributed to the FMLN, many victims were
 rural residents who refused to collaborate with the guerrillas
 or were suspected of being government informers. On May 22,
 the FMLN killed eight civilians by blowing up a van near
 Tacachico. There are also credible reports of civilians being
 taken from buses and killed by guerrillas. In addition the
 FMLN's use of car-bombs and homemade mortars in urban areas
 caused at least three civilian deaths.
 b. Disappearance
 The Constitution and government policy forbids unacknowledged
 
 
 574
 EL SALVADOR
 detention by the security or military services. However,
 there continue to be credible charges of persons who
 disappeared after having been taken away by members of the
 army or security forces. In relatively few cases are
 "disappeared" persons never accounted for; most of the time
 their detention is eventually acknowledged or family members
 find them in some other way.
 On August 19, Sara Cristina Chan Chan and Juan Francisco Massi
 disappeared from in front of a factory near the Ilopango Air
 Force base and have not been seen or heard from since. Family
 members say that many witnesses identified members of the Air
 Force as having abducted the two. The Air Force denies ever
 having detained them.
 On June 3, Marta Guzman disappeared after leaving the offices
 of the NationalUnion of Displaced Earthquake Victims. She
 was a leader in the organization. There were no witnesses to
 her disappearance. She has never reappeared, nor has her body
 been discovered. Members of her organization believe that the
 armed forces may have been involved.
 A series of disappearances were reported in July and August in
 the department of Santa Ana. Four persons connected with the
 National University campus in Santa Ana disappeared in that
 period. Cecilia del Carmen Rodriguez, a professor, was
 abducted on July 11 by unknown armed individuals; she was
 freed on August 29.- David Antonio Guevara Toledo, a student,
 was kidnaped on August 6 and reappeared on August 31. Jose
 Adolfo Lima and Santiago Martinez Centeno, also students at
 the University in Santa Ana, disappeared on August 11. They
 reappeared on August 31. Lima and Martinez claimed they had
 been tortured and threatened with death. All accused the
 army's Second Brigade, based in Santa Ana, of kidnaping and
 holding them against their will. The commanding officer
 denied responsibility for their disappearances. Their
 kidnapers have not been apprehended, nor was there any
 evidence of an activeinvestigation in the case as of the
 year's end.
 According to press reports, a total of 56 civilians
 disappeared between January and August, but this figure
 includes nonpolitical disappearances such as lost or runaway
 children aged 10 or over. Persons who desert their families,
 emigrate, or join guerrilla ranks may account for some of the
 disappearances. In addition, many persons reported missing by
 family members often were found later to have been legally
 arrested and appropriately reported to human rights
 organizations, particularly to the Government's Human Rights
 Commission (CDH). During the same period, the press reported
 that 153 persons were abducted by the guerrillas, and 17
 others by unknown assailants.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 There were many charges and reports of abuse by the security
 services, with most asserting both physical and psychological
 torture. Alleged abuses include deprivation of food and
 sleep, threats against the detainee or his family, prolonged
 interrogation while blindfolded, being forced to stand for
 long periods of time, forced exercise, and blows to the ears.
 Almost all prisoners arrested for membership in the FMLN claim
 to have been forced to sign confessions without being
 permitted to read them. Instances of severe beatings, rape,
 
 
 575
 EL SALVADOR
 choking, use of a hood to asphyxiate, injection with
 unidentified drugs, and electric shock were also reported.
 While there are confirmed cases of torture and mistreatment of
 prisoners by members of the security services, it is not
 believed that there is a government policy that permits or
 condones torture or mistreatment of prisoners. When a
 complaint of mistreatment appears credible,"the CDH reports
 the incident to the commander of the unit responsible and to
 the Ministry of Defense. The International Committee of the
 Red Cross (ICRC) also reports its findings, based on
 interviews with prisoners and ex-prisoners or on information
 from other confidential sources, to the President and Minister
 of Defense. The absence ot a military justice system means
 that those offenders whom the military will not publicly
 identify are seldom, if ever, subject to the civilian courts.
 Notably, in March a lieutenant was convicted for the August
 1987 killing of three men in Santa Ana, and in September he
 was sentenced to 30 years in jail. Charges against two
 enlisted men implicated in the case had been dismissed in 1988.
 On June 12 the Treasury Police arrested Jose Tomas Mazariego,
 a labor activist. He was released on June 15 before the legal
 72-hour detention period expired. He immediately alleged that
 he had been tortured by the police while in custody, claiming
 that acid was poured on his knees and ankles. A CDH doctor
 who examined him when he was released determined that he had
 not been tortured with acid, though his knees did reveal
 lacerations that may have been caused by repeated bruising or
 scraping.
 In recent years, there have been few allegations of
 mistreatment of prisoners in El Salvador's prisons, which are
 administered and staffed by Justice Ministry personnel. No
 verifiable instances of torture occurred in the penitentiaries
 in 1989. Guerrilla prisoners, a total of 89 at the end of
 September, are distributed throughout the prison system and
 are treated as common criminals.
 Human rights instruction is a formal and regular part of
 police recruit training and officers' classes. The CDH, the
 ICRC, and Catholic clergy give regularly scheduled courses on
 human rights for police, military, and civil defense personnel.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The criminal code prohibits terrorism, insurgency, and other
 actions against the stability of the State, but persons
 arrested for those offenses are afforded the same legal
 protection as common criminals. Judges and nonjudicial
 authorities, most often security force officers, are empowered
 to issue arrest warrants, which must be in writing. The
 Constitution requires that all persons detained by the police
 be turned over to the courts within 72 hours or be freed.
 This guarantee has been applicable since the state of
 emergency was ended in 1987. Following the initiation of the
 November FMLN offensive, however, the National Assembly
 enacted a state of siege which authorizes the extension from
 72 hours to 15 days the period of allowable detention before
 an initial judicial determination is made. Arrests without
 apparent sufficient cause do occur, but incommunicado
 detention beyond the permitted period is not common and, when
 it has occurred, it has usually been the result of a detention
 in the field by an operating military unit.
 
 
 576
 EL SALVADOR
 Holding political views opposed to those of the Government is
 not justification for arrest unless the suspect advocates
 violence. The courts have held that membership in a front
 organization controlled by the guErrillas is not in itself
 sufficient teason for holding an arrestee, although membership
 in one of the guerrilla groups is.
 The Salvadoran security and armed forces are required to
 register detainees and have them examined by a doctor or nurse
 upon entry into police facilities. In insurgency-related
 arrests, they are required to notify promptly'the family of
 the detainee, Tutela Legal, CDH, and the ICRC. The
 registration, notification, and arraignment procedures,
 together with the official prohibition on mistreatment of
 prisoners, continued to be generally enforced in an effort to
 eliminate mistreatment by government authorities.
 From January to August 1989, the security forces detained
 3,113 persons, including 168 foreigners, on suspicion of
 subversive offenses. Of that number, close to two-thirds were
 subsequently released by the police and never formally
 charged; 578 were consigned to the courts; and the remainder
 were hospitalized, deported, sent to the juvenile facility, or
 had their cases disposed of in another manner.
 In the days following the start of the FMLN November
 offensive, the ESAF searched the facilities of several
 independent organizations, including churches and other
 humanitarian organizations. Twenty-five incidents involving
 the facilities of church groups occurred during the first 2
 weeks of the offensive, when ESAF units were investigating
 leads relating to arms caches or other indications of support
 for the F14LN. Several dozen church workers, mostly Catholics,
 Lutherans, and Episcopalians, were arrested during this
 period. The overwhelming majority of religious institutions
 and facilities were not affected. Responding to domestic and
 international concerns that the searches and arrests were
 being carried out in an arbitrary manner, President Cristiani
 ordered the ESAF to prohibit field units from searching the
 offices of any religious, political, labor, or other
 humanitarian group without the specific authorization of the*
 military high command. After that order in late November, one
 church facility was searched.
 During the arraignment proceedings, the judge may order the
 accused further detained for up to 72 hours (or 15 days under
 the state of emergency) to determine if the evidence warrants
 holding the accused for trial. This time limit is normally,
 but not without exception, adhered to in practice. The judge
 is then legally constrained to a time limit of 120 days for
 investigating serious crimes, and 45 days for lesser offenses,
 before-bringing the accused to trial or dismissing the case.
 In practice, however, these limitations are rarely followed,
 primarily due to the backlog of cases. All persons held in
 the prison system, however, are incarcerated by judicial
 order, if iot by sentence.
 As a recourse against illegal detention, anyone can, from the
 time it appears a court will issue an arrest warrant until the
 trial is completed and a sentence is carried out, request that
 an appeals court or the Supreme Court review the legal basis
 for the detention. Such an appeal freezes action on the case
 until the higher court has rendered its decision.
 
 
 577
 EL SALVADOR
 The Government does not recognize the FMLN as a belligerent
 power and so does not accord prisoner-of-war status to
 captured guerrillas; captured guerrillas are turned over to
 the civilian court system for criminal prosecution. In the
 case of a group of war-wounded and handicapped FMLN
 ex-combatants who occupied the National Cathedral and later
 the Mexican Embassy, the Salvadoran Government allowed them to
 leave the country to take advantage of offers of free medical
 care by passing an amnesty in the National Assembly.
 Forty-six of them departed for Cuba in October.
 There are no provisions in the law for exile. Many leaders of
 the FMLN claim to be in exile, but it is self-imposed. Some
 of them could, however, be subject to arrest in El Salvador
 for participation in guerrilla operations if they were to
 return. Revolutionary Democratic Front (FDR a formal
 political ally of the FMLN) leader Reuben Zamora, who returned
 in 1988 from such an exile, left again in late 1989, alleging
 that the Government's vigorous counter-offensive against the
 FMLN placed him in jeopardy. He had earlier in the year been
 an active campaigner for his party in the March presidential
 election. Mr. Zamora returned to El Salvador in early 1990.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Constitution stipulates that the judiciary, the Attorney
 General's office, and the Solicitor General's office (public
 defenders) are independent of the rest of the Government and
 each other. The Legislative Assembly chooses the Supreme
 Court justices for 5-year terms, the Attorney General for a
 3-year term, and the Solicitor General for a 3-year term. The
 Constitution establishes the regular court system and provides
 for a special system should the Legislative Assembly enact a
 state of exception. The Assembly enacted legislation to
 invoke an indefinite state of exception on November 13,
 following the initiation of the FMLN offensive; under its
 terms, security forces are allowed to detain FMLN suspects for
 15 days for interrogation before consigning them to the
 courts. The state of exception remained in effect as of
 year's end.
 The Constitution provides that a person accused of a crime may
 have a lawyer present upon being arraigned, but the right is
 seldom used, probably because few arrestees can afford to hire
 a private attorney. Court-appointed attorneys are not
 generally available to a defendant until the investigative
 phase is over and the judge determines there is sufficient
 evidence to enter the final, or plenary, stage of the trial.
 The defendant has a right to be present in court and to
 confront the witnesses that testify against him. All trial
 records of adults are open to the public unless the judge
 rules that the case be kept confidential. An appeal process
 exists and is used regularly.
 Most major crimes in El Salvador are tried publicly before a
 five-person jury. Absences of attorneys, the destruction of
 many court buildings in the October 1986 earthquake, and a
 practically nonfunctioning jury identification and
 notification system hinder the ability of the judicial system
 to process cases expeditiously. Corruption and intimidation
 by political extremists are also factors. As a result, only
 10 percent of the 2,058 prison inmates in September were
 serving sentences; the rest were awaiting adjudication of
 
 
 578
 EL SALVADOR
 their cases. Bail is available for some minor offenses, but
 is seldom used. Prisoners are usually incarcerated for 6 to
 18 months from the time they are charged until they are
 brought to trial, and even longer Wiaits are common.
 Historically, civilian judicial authority has not extended to
 the military officer corps. Many low-ranking members of the
 military and police have been discharged and turned over to
 the civilian courts for trial on criminal charges, but,
 traditionally, officers of the armed and security forces have
 been treated differently from other citizens before the law.
 Judges are frequently.reluctant to bring charges against them,
 and colleagues often fail to cooperate in the prosecution of
 crimes imputed to a fellow officer. This pattern began to
 change in 1989 with efforts to prosecute a major and a
 lieutenant accused of the 1988 San Sebastian killings and the
 conviction and sentencing of Lieutenant Rivas in the murders
 in Santa Ana (Section l.a.).
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Government generally does not interfere arbitrarily in the
 personal lives of citizens, although the Constitution allows
 it the right to intervene when it believes national security
 is threatened. Both the Government and the guerrillas use
 networks of informants. According to the Constitution, before
 enteringoa private dwelling the security forces must have the
 inhabitant's consent, a judicial warrant, or reasonable belief
 that a crime is being or will be committed. In practice, the
 security forces often use forced entry to carry out arrests
 and investigations. Government forces often intercept mail
 deliveries in the conflictive zones. Wiretapping of telephone
 communications by the Government, the FMLN, private
 individuals, and political parties is widespread. The
 Government was accused in late November of indiscriminately
 entering the premises of religious and humanitarian
 organizations, conducting mass arrests, and seizing property
 found on the premises. Government officials asserted that
 military forces were acting on intelligence reports,
 indicating that either such premises or some of the
 individuals therein were acting on behalf of the FMLN.
 The guerrillas arbitrarily interfere with the lives of
 inhabitants in the conflictive zones, expropriating food and
 medical supplies, intercepting mail, and often forcing
 villagers to attend indoctrination sessions. They engage in
 forced recruitment either to fill their ranks or to obtain
 laborers and porters. FM4LN committees exercise a high degree
 of control over the villages set up by refugees who return
 from camps in Honduras, an extension of their control inside
 those camps. The people usually comply with the FZ4LN demands,
 because the guerrillas regularly back up their threats by
 killing those who fail to cooperate.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian
 Law in Internal Conflicts
 There were new claims in 1989 of improper Air Force bombings
 near civilian populations that caused civilian deaths.
 Following President Duarte's 1984 guidelines, the Air Force
 claims to refrain from attacking guerrilla concentrations and
 installations when civilians are nearby. However, there are
 credible charges from people in the countryside which
 contradict this claim, especially in Chalatenango, Cabanas,
 
 
 579
 EL SALVADOR
 and Morazan departments, where there have been military ground
 operations which received close air support from the Air
 Force. There were no reported civilian casualties as a result
 of this activity in rural areas during 1989.
 During the November FMLN offensive, the guerrillas took
 positions in the working class neighborhoods north and east of
 San Salvador, using innocent civilians as shields against Army
 and Air Force counterattacks. The FMLN set up fortified
 positions in civilian housing complexes and used private homes
 as command headquarters or sniper posts. In many instances,
 confirmed by diplomatic officials and the international media,
 the guerrillas did not allow the civilian residents to
 evacuate these areas. This tactic was designed to provide a
 shield and maximize the number of civilian casualties in order
 to blame the ESAF for those casualties.
 The Embassy estimates, based on death reports and visits to
 hospital and emergency organizations, that there were between
 200 and 400 civilian deaths in the capital during the fighting
 and between 1,500 and 3,000 civilians wounded. Most of the
 wounded received minor injuries and only 600 to 700 required
 hospitalization. Most casualties were the result of heavy
 street fighting and the use of infantry weapons such as small
 arms, machine guns, grenades, and mortars; few casualties seem
 to have been caused by aerial bombardment.
 Charges of indiscriminate bombing by the Air Force during the
 FMLN urban offensive were not borne out. An Americas Watch
 (AW) report noted that in three San Salvador neighborhoods
 visited "the civilians had the impression that helicopter
 strafing and bombing were aimed principally at guerrilla
 emplacements." The ESAF followed its existing Rules of
 Engagement (ROE) regarding close air support during the
 offensive. The ROE allows for air support in populated areas
 only when the mission is to "retard or dissuade" terrorist
 activities. According to Embassy reports and eyewitness
 civilian accounts, the Air Force made efforts to target
 helicopter strafing, rocketing, and bombings at guerrilla
 emplacements, which resulted in few civilian casualties.
 However, despite initial ESAF denials, the ESAF did drop
 several bombs on guerrilla positions in San Salvador and San
 Miguel. Both 500 and 250 pound bombs were employed. These
 attacks caused some civilian casualties.
 The guerrillas' use of unmarked, indiscriminately placed
 landmines and booby traps is a major cause of death and
 maiming among peasants. Planted along farm roads and paths,
 around guerrilla-downed electric poles, under railroad tracks,
 near water sources, in farmlands, and on coffee plantations,
 these mines killed 52 civilians in 1988 and 36 in the first 8
 months of 1989.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 There are no governmental restrictions on freedom of speech
 and the press. El Salvador has a vigorous local press which
 regularly prints strongly antigovernment commentary. In the
 aftermath of the assassination of the Minister of the
 Presidency, a series of strict antiterrorist law reforms were
 proposed in the National Assembly, some of which might have
 impinged on freedom of speech and the press. After reviewing
 the proposed law, President Cristiani returned the bill to the
 
 
 580
 EL SALVADOR
 National Assembly for redrafting and reaffirmed his
 Government's commitment to freedom of expression and the
 press. In November, following the initiation of the F14LN
 offensive, the Assembly passed the bill. President Cristiani
 again refused to sign the bill and returned it to the
 Assembly, noting his concern about the constitutionality of
 specific provisions of the legislation. He indicated to the
 Assembly that it should draft a bill which could be accepted
 by the broadest possible group in the Assembly and the nation.
 San Salvador, a city of 1 million, has five daily papers, five
 television stations, and numerous radio stations. There are
 also two cable television systems that broadcast news programs
 from oyerseas. Television journalism in El Salvador is
 flourishing. Press agencies have reported that in El Salvador
 a wider range of opinion is permitted and heard than in many
 other Western democratic countries. Interviews feature a full
 range of political figures representing all political
 viewpoints, including politicians, labor leaders, human rights
 activists, private sector representatives, and government
 officials. Of the leading daily newspapers, three are
 conservative and the other two are more centrist in their
 views. One of the latter, while editorially conservative,
 presents a full range of views from conservative to far left,
 including unedited articles from the FMLN press agencies
 SALPRESS and NOTISAL, press releases from both liberal and
 pro-FMLN organizations, and a weekly supplement from the
 Jesuit-operated University of Central America. Furthermore,
 the views of the left are expressed in a variety of journals,
 newsletters,, periodicals, bulletins, and paid advertisements
 in the daily press. A 1981 decree forbidding publication of
 anonymous paid advertisements or communiques remains in
 effect, but recent examples of such propaganda show this law
 to be essentially unenforced.
 Television stations sell broadcast time to political and labor
 organizations of all political viewpoints. These are
 uncensored and are often broadcast live. During the 1989
 election campaign, the Government was targeted with bitter
 media attacks by the opposition without interference.
 Commercial radio stations use news and propaganda reports
 recorded from the clandestine guerrilla radio stations or
 supplied by the guerrillas on cassettes. The Government owns
 two television channels with identical programming and one
 radio station. The Armed Forces operate a radio station.
 Academic freedom is protected by the Constitution and
 respected by the Government.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Any association not formed for criminal purposes is legal and
 permitted in El Salvador. Political, professional, religious,
 labor, and social organizations operate without legal
 restriction. The Interior Ministry questioned the legal basis
 of a number of leftist groups in June, but did not pursue the
 issue. Groups from the left and the right criticize the
 Government and hold marches and demonstrations without
 interference from the Government. Those labor, displaced
 persons, and human rights organizations which have been
 credibly identified as FMLN fronts frequently stage marches.
 During the preelection period the Democratic Convergence (CD)
 party (see SectiQn 3) charged.the military with intimidation
 at its rallies. Some CD members were arrested in rural
 departments but were subsequently released.
 
 
 581
 EL SALVADOR
 In 1989 there were several large, violent demonstrations
 during which protestors burned cars and buses and looted
 stores. The response of the police was measured, and, though
 many demonstrators were frequently detained following
 confrontations with the authorities, no deaths connected with
 security control of demonstrations were reported during this
 year. The police did not interfere with nonviolent
 demonstrations.
 Following the killing of the wife and son of a conservative
 newspaper editor on October 10, the killing of Colonel
 Casanova's daughter October 17, and the October 30 mortar
 attack on Army headquarters, the offices of the leftist
 FENASTRAS union were bombed by unknown assailants on
 October 31. Ten were killed in the blast, including FENASTRAS
 secretary general Febe Elizabeth Velasquez, and 30 wounded.
 FENASTRAS, UNTS, and the FMLN all blamed the Armed Forces and
 the Government for the bombing. Some members of the military
 and the ruling ARENA party accused the FMLN or FENASTRAS of
 rigging the incident in order to promote antigovernment
 agitation.
 President Cristiani called for an investigatory commission to
 look into the crime, but FENASTRAS initially refused to permit
 the Special Investigative Unit (SIU) to conduct a physical
 examination of the site or the bodies. An FBI explosives
 incidents expert was made available and along with SIU
 personnel visited the site on November 8 after it had been
 cleaned up and much evidence destroyed.
 The day of the FENASTRAS bombing, offices of the Committee of
 Mothers of Political Prisoners, Disappeared and Assassinated
 of El Salvador (CO-MADRES) in northern San Salvador were
 bombed, resulting in injuries to three persons, including a
 U.S. citizen. CO-MADRES blamed the military but there was no
 evidence to establish culpability.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is provided for by the Constitution and is
 respected in practice. Although the country is predominantly
 Roman Catholic, an estimated 20 percent of the population
 subscribe to other faiths. Arrests of church members and
 employees, both Catholic and Protestant, are unrelated to
 religious beliefs. Such arrests usually were related to
 essentially secular activities, involving humanitarian relief
 work for the poor and others dispossessed by the war;
 authorities have voiced suspicions that such work often
 provides a cover for guerrilla recruitment or provision of
 support for the insurgency.
 During the first two weeks of the November FMLN offensive, the
 ESAF searched the facilities of at least 25 church groups
 which it had reason to believe were sympathizing with or
 supporting the FMLN. (See Section l.d.)
 The Catholic Church is one of the most influential
 institutions in the country. The Archbishop's Sunday homily
 is broadcast live from the Metropolitan Cathedral on one of
 the Government's television stations and on radio. Catholic
 Church publications disseminate the-Church's position on human
 rights and the war. Catholic Church statements have become
 
 
 582
 EL SALVADOR
 increasingly  critical of the leftist insurgency, but the
 Church does not hesitate to criticize the Government as well.
 Some foreign missionaries and clerics encountered difficulty
 in applying for residence status and/or extending their visas,
 and concern was expressed that immigration officials were
 discriminating against them by reviewing their immigration
 status. It is believed that these incidents resulted from
 politically motivated harassment by lower level officials, but
 there was no evidence that any of the cases arose from
 official objections to individual religious beliefs or
 practices.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Constitution establishes the right of free movement.
 However, Article 97 specifically states that foreigners may
 not involve themselves in the internal political affairs of
 the country, and this article is used by the Government to
 deny entry to or deport foreigners who might violate that
 section of the law. Local military commanders require that
 foreigners receive permission before entering conflictive
 zones; they often restrict entry when military operations are
 under way in those areas. Some internal movements by
 Salvadorans. are similarly restricted. The country is mired in
 a 10-year-old conflict with some well-defined geographic areas
 of military operations in which travel is restricted during
 periods of combat. The state of exception that was in effect
 for most of the decade ended in 1987, although a state of
 siege was enacted in November in response to the FMLN
 offensive. However, other than the restrictions on travel
 within conflictive zones noted above, there are no limits on
 constitutional freedom of movement.
 In 1985 there were an estimated 525,000 persons displaced
 within El Salvador by the conflict. Today approximately
 140,000 persons are still in need of Government resettlement
 assistance. There may be another 7,000 who are not registered
 with the Government and receive assistance from private relief
 organizations. An additional 55,000 are refugees in other
 Central American countries and in Mexico, and more than
 550,000 are estimated to be illegal immigrants in the United
 States.
 An increasing number of refugees are returning from abroad.
 The Government is actively involved in discussions with
 members of refugee camps in Honduras to facilitate their
 return to their homes in El Salvador. Through September 1989
 the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) repatriated
 some 300 persons in 1989. Approximately 1,180 refugees from
 the Mesa Grande camp in Honduras were repatriated to El
 Salvador in October under the auspices of the Governments of
 El Salvador and Honduras and the UNHCR. About 1,700 refugees
 from the Colomoncagua camp in Honduras walked back to El
 Salvador ifi two large groups during November and December
 without authorization from the UNHCR or the concerned
 Governments. None of these entities were prepared to assist
 or receive the refugees, who entered El Salvador without
 protection, documentation, or guarantees of future help.
 In some cases local military commanders have blocked the
 shipment pf food, medicines, and other materials to the
 communities where the refugees now reside, claiming that
 supplies were'being diverted to the guerrillas. For the most
 
 
 583
 EL SALVADOR
 part, however, there is no government harassment of persons
 returning to El Salvador from abroad. The Government imposes
 no control on emigration and cooperates with international
 organizations that arrange Salvadoran emigration to other
 countries.
 The Government, with assistance from the UNHCR and the ICRC,
 has registered some 400 Nicaraguan refugees, although
 officials estimate as many as 3,000 are residing in the far
 southeastern part of the country. Registered refugees are
 free to travel within El Salvador.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The Constitution provides for rights and procedures by which
 its citizens can change their government by peaceful means.
 There have been six national elections since 1982. In the
 most recent, on March 19, 1989, six political parties
 participated in the presidential elections in which the
 governing PDC lost the presidency to the ARENA, marking the
 first democratic transfer of control of the Government from
 the ruling party to the opposition. Although a leftist party
 allied to the FMLN participated in the elections, receiving
 less than 4 percent of the vote, the FMLN itself refused to
 participate in the electoral process and through attacks and
 threats sought to disrupt the elections. The elections were
 contested by a wide range of parties that represented views
 across the entire political spectrum, and marked the return to
 the political arena of Guillermo Ungo as the presidential
 candidate for the Democratic Convergence (CD), a coalition of
 three leftist parties allied to the FMLN guerrillas. The CD
 united Reuben Zamora's Social Christian Movement Party (MPSC),
 Ungo's National Revolutionary Movement (MNR), and Reni
 Roldan's Social Democratic Party (PSD). The CD's
 participation was a milestone in recent Salvadoran history
 because it demonstrated that political toleration in the
 country existed to the point where the self-proclaimed allies
 of the FMLN could freely compete in national elections.
 Voting is by secret ballot. In preparation for the March
 elections, the Central Elections Council (CCE) distributed
 1,850,000 computerized voter identification cards (carnets) as
 a safeguard against fraud; 55.6 percent of those with carnets
 voted.
 The Constitution allows all political parties that do not
 advocate armed opposition to the democratic system to
 participate in the electoral process. It.establishes a
 citizen's right to membership in any legally recognized
 party. In practice, even parties still linked to the FMLN
 were permitted to participate. The Nationalist Democratic
 Union (UDN)--the political front for the Communist Party of El
 Salvador (PCES)--did not participate despite its status as a
 legal political party.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government continued to be receptive to official groups
 interested in human rights. High-ranking government officials
 and military officers regularly meet with visiting legislators
 from different countries, human rights organizations, church
 and labor groups, and others. AW and the Lawyers Committee
 
 
 584
 EL SALVADOR
 for Human Rights maintain a joint office in San Salvador. The
 ICRC has an agreement with the Government that permits it to
 work in the conflictive areas to assist noncombatants, to
 visit prisoners and detainees accused of guerrilla activity,
 and to make confidential reports to the Government on human
 rights issues. Tutela Legal and the CDH also have access to
 the prisons. The UN Special Rapporteur on Human Rights in El
 Salvador made his ninth annual visit to the country in October.
 Domestic human rights organizations active in El Salvador
 include the CDH and the Catholic Archbishopic's Human Rights
 and Legal Aid Office, Tutela Legal. The CDH receives
 testimony about human rights violations, conducts
 investigations, visits arrested persons, and reports to the
 local donaanding officer and the Ministry of Defense when it
 discovers a case of abuse. Its doctors examine detainees to
 determine the validity of complaints of torture. The CDH
 keeps a register of persons injured by landmines and is
 working in conjunction with international assistance
 organizations on a project to register civilian amputees and
 provide them with prosthetic devices. The CDH also maintains
 a roster showing the status of those detained by security
 forces.
 Tutela Legal's staff often conducts its own investigations,
 visiting persons detained by the security forces, carrying out
 some on-site investigations, and receiving testimony about
 human rights violations. Tutela files its findings on human
 rights cases with government authorities. Though its
 marshaling of data is usually comprehensive, Tutela has on
 occasion asserted that, based on circumstantial evidence only,
 the perpetrators of certain killings are death squads linked
 to the Government. Such assertions are typically made when
 the body of a victim is found in an area or zone to which
 access has been under the control of the security forces.
 Tutela Legal, while not providing figures, expressed concern
 about what it termed an increase in human rights abuses by the
 military.
 Guerrilla defectors and captured documents provide evidence to
 show that .the FMLN controls several groups that are ostensibly
 independent human rights organizations. These include the
 Human Rights Commission of El Salvador (nongovernmental)
 (CDHES), the Federation of Committees of Mothers and Families
 (FECMAFAM), the Committee of Mothers of Political Prisoners,
 Disappeared and Assassinated of El Salvador (CO-MADRES), and
 the Christian Committee for the Displaced (CRIPDES).
 Notwithstanding this link, they operate without government
 interference and regularly publicize their views in the local
 media. These groups consistently report only on alleged
 abuses by government forces and do not investigate,
 acknowledge, or even record human rights abuses committed by
 the FMLN. Although some individual members of these groups
 were arrested during 1989 and charged with guerrilla
 membership or activities, all were subsequently released by
 the security services or the courts. The Lutheran Church, the
 National Association of Indigenous Persons (ANIS), many labor
 unions, universities, and other nongovernmental organizations
 also have human rights and legal assistance offices.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 El Salvador is ethnically homogeneous, though a small segment
 of the population claims to have descended solely from the
 region's indigenous Indians. There is no official
 
 
 585
 EL SALVADOR
 discrimination against these Indians. There does not appear
 to be any discrimination in housing, jobs, and education. The
 Government neither permits nor condones de jure or de facto
 discrimination. Under the Constitution, women enjoy the same
 legal rights as men, and are represented in all three branches
 of government, in business, and in the professions.
 Violence against women, including domestic violence such as
 wife beating, is undoubtedly widespread, but the lack of
 adequate reliable statistics makes it impossible to gauge its
 true extent. Charges of rape are frequent and there is no
 specific governmental policy to address the problem. In
 September seven female labor activists alleged they were raped
 while in the custody of the National Police. Only one of the
 seven filed a formal complaint and submitted to a physical
 examination; the examination substantiated the allegation.
 Both the National Police and the Special Investigative Unit
 were investigating the case in October.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Article 47 of the Constitution prohibits the Government from
 using nationality, sex, race, creed, or political philosophy
 to prevent workers or employers from organizing themselves
 into unions or associations. This provision was intended to
 provide the legal framework for secondary legislation,
 including a revised labor code. Legislative action on such a
 code has been stymied, however, because of a lack of consensus
 between the government, the private sector, and labor.
 Several separate proposals for revising the code have been
 drafted since 1985, but none of these have been formally
 submitted to the Legislative Assembly. The Cristiani
 Administration has indicated interest in reform of labor laws,
 but has not yet developed any firm proposals nor taken a
 position on any of the proposals previously prepared. A
 confusing and sometimes conflicting set of laws dating from
 1963 which govern labor relations remains in place. While
 existing statutes provide protections which are enforceable
 under the Constitution, their inconsistencies often result in
 cumbersome procedures and significant delays.
 Legally, only private sector workers have the right to form
 unions and to strike. Employees of the nine autonomous public
 institutions may form unions but are barred from striking.
 Finally, existing law bars agricultural workers and employees
 of government ministries and departments from forming unions
 or striking (although in practice, public sector strikes do
 occur). These employees are instead represented by
 associations whose function, in practice, is similar to that
 of unions.
 There are approximately 150 currently active trade unions,
 employee associations, and peasant organizations, with a
 combined membership of just over 400,000--roughly 20 percent
 of the work force. These organizations freely elect their
 officers in accordance with their individual constitutions and
 bylaws. Leaders of worker organizations appear regularly on
 television, publicize their views in the country's major
 newspapers, and conduct seminars on various issues without
 government interference. Unions have also been able to
 organize or participate in public demonstrations without
 government interference as long as the demonstrations remained
 peaceful. On several occasions during the year,
 
 
 586
 EL SALVADOR
 demonstrations sponsored by pro-FI.LN labor organizations
 became violent, resulting in the intervention of security
 forces to restore order, and occasionally resulting in several
 demonstrators being detained.
 While the law allows the recognition of a union to be
 withdrawn "for cause," since 1980 this has occurred in only
 one instance. The Government acted in the case of the union
 of workers for the Rio Lempa Hydroelectric Project (STECEL)
 after the union, working in concert with the FILN, cut off
 electricity to most parts of El Salvador, causing several
 deaths and significant economic damage.
 Twice since 1986 the Salvadoran Supreme Court has reaffirmed
 constitutional safeguards protecting trade unions, worker
 associations, peasant organizations and their leaders from
 arbitrary and capricious behavior by management and/or the
 Government. In March 1986, the Court ruled unconstitutional a
 July 1985 decision by the Labor Ministry which had stripped 11
 leaders of the Sewer and Waterworks Union (SETA) of their
 positions because they had disobeyed a labor judge's order to
 end a strike. The court held that union leaders cannot be
 deprived of their leadership status because such status
 derives from union elections. In August 1987, the Supreme
 Court similarly overturned an order of the Ministry of
 Interior which had divested leaders of the ANIS of their
 positions. The Court voided the Ministry's order, reinstated
 the leaders, and ruled that the Minister of Interiox was
 liable for civil damages for having exceeded his authority.
 The right to strike for the private sector is provided for by
 law and is freely exercised in practice, despite cumbersome,
 time-consuming legal procedures. As unions routinely fail to
 fulfill these requirements, almost all strikes are declared
 illegal. In several instances workers have occupied factory
 premises as part of a strike or work stoppage. In cases where
 such activity is part of an illegal strike, security forces
 have intervened to remove workers and protect factory premises.
 There were 19 private-sector strikes during the period
 January 1-September 30, 1989, affecting approximately 3,000
 workers. The Ministry of Labor intervened as provided for by
 law in an effort to resolve the disputes, even in cases
 involving illegal strikes. The absence of specific laws
 granting workers in autonomous government institutions or
 public employees the right to strike has not deterred such
 strike activity.
 In 1989 the Committee on Freedom of Association (CFA) of the
 International Labor Organization (ILO) considered four cases
 based on complaints filed by several international and
 Salvadoran labor organization alleging violations of ILO
 Convention 87 on Freedom of Association by the Government.
 The complaints, some of which date back to 1981, allege, inter
 alia, that: the Government was implicated in the murder,
 harassment, intimidation, and disappearance of trade
 unionists, and the destruction of trade union property; and
 that certain public employees were denied the right to
 organize and bargain, and were not protected from antiunion
 discrimination. The Government, in its various responses to
 the complaints, has contended, among other things, that the
 complaints were part of a pattern of propaganda and
 provocation designed to discredit the Government and
 frequently resulted from subversive acts perpetrated by the
 guerrillas and unions allied with them. The CFA has
 
 
 587
 EL SALVADOR
 repeatedly deplored the violence that has prevailed in the
 country which, according to the Committee, has prevented the
 full exercise of the rights guaranteed by the Convention. The
 Committee considered it unacceptable that the Government had
 not provided detailed and complete answers when the lives and
 freedom of trade union leaders were at stake, and urged the
 Government to bring detainees to trial without delay and to
 initiate independent judicial inquiry into the murder and
 disappearances of numerous trade unionists named in the
 complaints. El Salvador has not ratified ILO Convention 87 or
 Convention 98 on Collective Bargaining.
 FMLN-linked labor organizations regularly use ostensibly
 peaceful dissent to provoke government actions, then level
 charges of worker rights violations when the Government
 responds to street violence and occupations. For example, in
 September the FMLN-linked FENASTRAS union demonstrated in San
 Salvador, burning several buses and automobiles, and causing
 thousands of dollars in damage to other private property. The
 subsequent arrests of 60 demonstrators were characterized as a
 violation of worker rights. The same tactic is applied when
 members of these organizations are detained by government
 authorities for suspected involvement in terrorist
 activities. While security forces detained numerous union
 members during 1989, these detentions seldom resulted from
 legitimate union activities. The FMLN also seeks to disrupt
 and subvert democratic labor groups that refuse to collaborate
 with it.
 Labor unions are not restricted from affiliation with
 international organizations, and Salvadoran unions freely
 affiliate with such groups, including the International
 Confederation of Free Trade Unions, the World Confederation of
 Labor, and the Communist-controlled World Federation of Trade
 Unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The right of collective bargaining is granted in Article 39 of
 the Constitution, and Article 269 of the labor code. Under
 the labor code, only private sector workers can exercise this
 right, but the Constitution is interpreted broadly to provide
 all workers the right to bargain collectively.
 Private sector unions use the mechanism of collective
 bargaining extensively. Approximately 28 collective
 bargaining agreements covering private sector employees were
 certified by the Ministry of Labor between January 1 and
 September 30, 1989. According to Ministry statistics, these
 contracts covered approximately 44,000 workers. Nearly 60
 percent of the collective bargaining agreements certified
 since June 1984 were contracts for unions affiliated to
 antigovernment labor organizations. A similar collective
 bargaining practice is also followed, albeit in a more
 informal manner, between public employees and the Government.
 The Director General's office (DGT) of the Ministry of Labor
 is responsible for overseeing the implementation of collective
 bargaining agreements and acting as conciliator in
 labor-related disputes in the private sector and auton6mous
 government institutions. According to the Ministry, during
 the period January 1 through September 30, 1989, the DGT
 participated directly in 41 labor-management conflicts.
 Approximately 35 were resolved through its participation.
 
 
 588
 EL SALVADOR
 Article 47 of the Constitution states that union officials at
 the time of their election, throughout their term and for one
 year following their term shall not be fired, suspended for
 disciplinary reasons, removed or debased in their work
 conditions except for legal cause. This provision is
 generally observed in practice.
 The relationship between the business community and the labor
 movement improved somewhat during the last years of the Duarte
 regime, but a large reservoir of distrust still remains.
 Labor leaders perceive the Cristiani Government as being
 antilabor, but in the first few months of the regime the labor
 code continued to be enforced as in the past. As before,
 however, businessmen frequently take measures to prevent
 unions from being formed. Union leaders have also complained
 about lengthy and complex procedures required to register new
 unions.
 El Salvador has one export processing zone. There are no
 differences in labor regulations in this area and those which
 prevail in general. However, there are no labor unions
 represented in any of the firms in this zone, and the firms
 discourage labor organizing by preventing organizers from
 entering the zone and intimidating workers who attempt to
 organize.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 The Constitution prohibits forced or compulsory labor except
 in cases of public calamity and other instances specified by
 law.
 The ILO's Committee of Experts on the Application of
 Conventions has for a number of years noted with concern the
 provisions in the penal code that allow the imposition of
 sentences involving compulsory labor and has made suggestions
 on how to improve existing legislation and practice. Reform
 of the penal code is being considered by the Legislative
 Assembly. The FMLN continues to force civilians, including
 minors, to serve as porters, spotters, and couriers for the
 guerrilla army. Reports frbm family members of those
 impressed indicate that the FMLN increased its use of this
 practice before and during the November offensive.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The Constitution prohibits the employment of children under
 the age of 14. The labor code states that exceptions can be
 made only in cases where it can be demonstrated that such
 employment is absolutely indispensable to the sustenance of
 the minor and his family. This is most often the case with
 children of peasant families who traditionally work with their
 families during planting and harvesting seasons.
 The Constitution also prohibits the employment of persons
 under 18 afid all women in occupations considered hazardous.
 The law is enforced through inspections undertaken by the
 Ministry of Labor. There are credible reports that in at
 least some cases these inspections have revealed violations
 which have been corrected.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The Government's National Minimum Wage Council recommends
 increases in the minimum wages for commercial, industrial,
 
 
 589
 EL SALVADOR
 service, and agro-industrial employees. Over the past several
 years, wages have not kept pace with inflation. From 1983 to
 1988 real wages in the private sector have declined by an
 estimated 40 percent. Commercial as well as industrial and
 service workers in San Salvador were paid $2.80 daily, while
 their counterparts in other areas of the country received
 $2.65. Agro-industrial workers employed in the cotton and
 sugar industries received $1.71 daily, while those employed in
 the coffee industry earned $2.65. Wage rates for most
 categories of workers are higher than the legal minimums,
 especially in the private sector. For the most part, minimum
 wages are inadequate to meet the Ministry of Economy's
 standard of basic necessity.
 The law limits the workday for minors between 14 and 18 years
 of age to a maximum of 6 hours, while for adults it is 8
 hours. Premium pay is mandated for longer hours.
 The Constitution and the labor code spell out the rights of
 workers to a healthy and safe working environment. These
 statutes require employers, including the Government, to take
 steps to ensure that employees are not placed at risk in their
 workplaces. Despite extremely limited budgetary resources,
 the Ministry of Labor attempts to enforce the applicable
 regulations. According to Ministry figures, the Inspector
 General's office conducted approximately 12,500 inspections
 and reinspections between January 1 and September 30, 1989.
 Most of these-occurred in commercial, industrial and service
 establishments. Nearly 183,000 employees were covered by
 these inspections and reinspections. The Inspector General's
 corps cited employers for almost 350 infractions and assessed
 fines totalling $1,250. Employers were also ordered to pay
 approximately $1,300 to employees as compensation for unjust
 dismissal.
 
 
 590
