 EL SALVADOR
 El Salvador has a freely elected democratic Government, with
 an executive branch headed by a president, a unicameral
 Legislative Assembly, and a separate but politically appointed
 judiciary. Alfredo Cristiani of the Nationalist Republican
 Alliance (ARENA) party was inaugurated President on June 1,
 1989.
 The Armed Forces of El Salvador (ESAF) include the public
 security forces and the civil defense forces (CDF). The
 security forces, composed of the National Police, National
 Guard, and Treasury Police, share law enforcement
 responsibilities and report to the Vice Minister of Defense.
 El Salvador does not yet have a civilian police force.
 El Salvador has a mixed economy, and private property is
 generally respected. In mid-1989 the Cristiani administration
 implemented an economic adjustment program to reduce the role
 and size of the public sector in the economy. In so doing,
 the Government relinquished much of its economic planning and
 price-setting authority to market forces. Agriculture, the
 backbone of the economy (coffee accounts for 65 percent of
 foreign exchange earnings), responded particularly well during
 1990 to the new incentives. However, further economic
 progress was hindered by guerrillas of the Farabundo Marti
 Front for National Liberation (FMLN), whose continued attacks
 on the electrical grid and other economic targets cost the
 country approximately $100 million in 1990. The FMLN, with
 the assistance of civilian support groups, has been at war
 with the governments of El Salvador since 1979.
 In 1990 both the FMLN and the ESAF committed serious human
 rights violations, including political and other extrajudicial
 killings and disappearances. The FMLN also engaged In forced
 recruitment and caused civilian casualties:by the   -
 indiscriminate use of land mines and attacks launched on and
 in residential areas. The ESAF engaged-in the torture of
 detainees, arbitrary arrest and detention, and intimidation
 and abuse of noncombatants perceived as sympathetic to the
 FMLN. The possibility of a resurgence of rightwing death
 squad activity remained-a serious concern.
 With some notable exceptions, the justice system was unable to
 prosecute most of those responsible for human rights
 violations. The ESAF and the FMLN continued to avoid or
 resist legal accountability for such violations. The
 efficiency of the judiciary is also severely limited by
 political manipulation, corruption, and intimidation. In the
 Jesuit case, which arose from the massacre of six priests,"
 their housekeeper, and her daughter by members of the elite
 Atlacatl Battalion in November 1989, members of the military
 have been charged with perjury and with destroying evidence,
 and others have failed to cooperate in the judicial
 proceedings. Nevertheless, the case moved to the trial stage
 in December. Eight suspects, including Col. Guillermo
 Benavides, former director of the military academy, have been
 arrested and are in custody.
 Judges dropped most charges in two key human rights cases, the
 San Sebastian murders and the operation of a kidnaping ring.
 Some soldiers and CDF members were sentenced to prison in 1990
 for various crimes, including the 1982 murder of U.S. citizen
 Michael Kline. However, military officers, people with
 influence, and FMLN guerrillas enjoy virtual immunity
 
 
 EL SALVADOR
 from prosecution for the numerous and grave human rights
 violations they have committed over the past decade.
 Virtually all human rights monitors, including the United
 Nations Human Rights Commission (UNHRC) Special Rapporteur for
 El Salvador, agreed that there were fewer human rights
 violations by both the ESAF and the FMLN during 1990 than in
 1989. The Special Rapporteur also noted that both sides were
 making conscientious efforts to improve their human rights
 performance. However, increased FMLN attacks late in the year
 led to additional human rights violations. Meanwhile, peace
 negotiations between the Government and the FMLN continued in
 1990 under U.N. auspices. On July 26, the Government and the
 FMLN signed a human rights agreement in Costa Rica, callins on
 both sides to respect homan rights and providing for a human
 rights verification agreement once a cease-fire takes effect.
 In September the Interparty Dialog Comm-issiof (IPDC), created
 ta give political parties a voice in the negotiations, agreed
 on an electoral reform package for the March 199n legislative
 and municipal elections.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section I Respect for the Integrity of the Person, IncludiDg
 Freedom froma
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Kill-ing
 Discerning a trend or pattern in. the level of political
 violence in E1 Salvador- is difficult, and.the collection and
 classification'of information on politically motivated
 killings is inexact. Common criminal murders may be disguised
 as political killings while political mur ers may be wrongly
 classified as common arimes.           /
 /
 Political and other killings by the FMLN continued in 1990.
 Credible sources cite the FMLN as responsible for the March 23
 machine gun attack which killed Otto Valdemar Sorto, the
 son-in-law of air force commander General Rafael Villamariona
 the June 18 killing of Berta F-lores Beltran and Maria Elena
 Romero in Mejicanos, San Salvador; the July 9 killing of
 off-duty army Major Carlos Alonso Figueroa in San Salvador;
 the July 29 torture and murder of Victor Manuel Reyes, a CDF
 member; and the August 23 attack on a military ambulance,
 killing two and seriously injuring several others. The FMLN
 admitted that it murdered two American servicemen on January
 2, 1991.
 Credible reports of civilians killed for political reasons by
 the military-and security forces persist. On March 10, Efrain
 and Cristina Cabrera were killed in La Hachadura, Ahuachapan.
 According to the government Human Rights Commission (CDH),
 armed and uniformed men broke into the Cabrera home, abused
 family members, and took money and electronic equipment.
 Efrain Cabrera was fatally shot in the head and his wife
 wounded. No serious investigation of the crime was being
 conducted as of year's end. The U.N. Special Rapporteur's
 report noted that Julian Rosales Lopez died from torture after
 being detained on February 2 by soldiers of the Atlacatl
 Battalion in-San Salvador department, and that Begona Garcia
 Arandigoyen, an FMLN medical worker, was apparently captured
 and murdered by soldiers on September 10. The Catholic
 Archbishopric's office of legal aid, Tutela Legal, charged
 that on March 11 a member of the CDF in Rosario de Cuscatlan,
 
 
 610
 EL SALVADOR
 Cuscatlan, murdered Osmin Escobar on the suspicion that he was
 a guerrilla.
 In 1990 various sources charged that rightwing death squads
 were operating. In an October report, Amnesty International
 (AI) charged that from January to August 1990 death squads had
 killed at least 45 people. The U.N. Special Rapporteur
 concluded that the ESAF's involvement or acquiescence in death
 squad activity was credible but difficult to verify.
 Guatemalan authorities and others claimed that a Salvadoran
 death squad killed Hector Oqueli, the Deputy Secretary General
 of El Salvador's National Revolutionary Movement, and Gilda
 Flores, a Guatemalan lawyer, on Janaury 11, in Guatemala.
 However, the Guatemalan Government offered no evidence of
 Salvadoran involvement in the murders. There is no
 investigation in progress in El Salvador. President Cristiani
 offered his cooperation to then-President Vinicio Cerezo, but
 his offer was never taken up.
 b. Disappearance
 The Constitution and government policy forbid unacknowledged
 detention by the security forces or the military. According
 to press reports, a total of 133 civilians disappeared between
 January and October.. This figure included nonpolitical
 disappearances such as lost or runaway children aged 10 and
 over. Persons who desert their families, emigrate, or join
 guerrilla ranks may also account for some of the
 disappearances. Many persons reported missing by family
 members were later found to have been legally arrested and
 reported to human rights organizations, such as the CDH.
 Others reappear but are never removed from the lists of the
 disappeared.
 There continued to be credible charges that persons
 disappeared after being seized by the ESAF during 1990. On
 December 5, 1989, brothers Juan Antonio and Julio Cesar
 Vasquez, of the San Cayetano agricultural cooperative, were
 apparently arrested by soldiers from the 7th military
 detachment (DM-7). On December 29, just after passing a
 police road block, four more cooperative members were
 apparently detained by soldiers from DM-7 and later taken away
 by armed men in civilian clothes. Two of the victims were
 reportedly seen by another member of the cooperative as they
 were being driven blindfolded toward Santa Ana by uniformed
 personnel. The ESAF deny knowing anything about the
 incidents, and judicial authorities have not conducted an
 in-depth investigation. On December 31, 1989, members of the
 FEDECOOPADES peasant organization stated that Angel Maria
 Flores and Julia Del Carmen Ponce, of the La Reforma
 cooperative, were taken away by heavily armed men in civilian
 clothes in Chalchuapa, Santa Ana. No word was received of
 their whereabouts until January 24, when a body which had been
 found by the side of a Santa Ana roadway in early January was
 identified as that of Flores; on January 29, a second body was
 identified as that of Ponce. FEDECOOPADES members charged
 that personnel from DM-7 were involved in the crime, but
 neither judicial nor police authorities conducted any
 investigation of the case. On January 9, 1990, Nelson
 Chinchilla, a foreman on a project in Ahuachapan funded by the
 U.S. Agency for International Development was taken away from
 a project site by a group of heavily armed men in civilian
 clothes. On January 31, a body which earlier had been found
 by the side of a road in Chalchuapa, Santa Aria, was exhumed
 and identified as that of Chinchilla. Because Chinchilla's
 
 
 611
 EL SALVADOR
 father refused to file a complaint, there was no formal
 investigation.
 Between January and July, the press reported that 49 persons
 were abducted by the guerrillas, and 9 others were abducted by
 unknown assailants. Without knowing the motive, the identity
 of the abductors, or the personal history- of the 9 victims, it
 is- impossible to say whether any of these might have been
 politically motivated abductions.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 In 199Q there continued to be credible reports of torture and
 abuse of some detainees by the public security forces and the
 military. Reliable human rights monitors reported-that
 detainees were threatened, deprived of food and sleep,
 subjected to prolonged interrogation while blindfolded, forced
 to stand for long periods of time, and beaten. Instances of
 severe beatings, rape, choking, use of a hood to asphyxiate,
 injection with unidentified drugs, and electric-shock were
 also reported. Almost all detainees arrested. for alleged FMLN
 membership claim to have been forced to sign confessions'
 without being permittedto read them. Most reports charge
 that human rights violations. occur-during the 72-hour period
 of administrative detention, prior to- the presentation of a
 prisoner before a judge. Despite new orders issued by the
 High Command on July 31 prohibiting such mistreatment, these
 abuses have continued.
 The CDH reports complaints of mistreatment ta the commanding
 officer of the unit implicated in the abuse and- to the
 Ministry of Defense. The International Committee of the Red
 Cross (ICRC) also reports its- findings, based on interviews
 with prisoners and ex-prisoners or on information gathered
 from other sources, to the President and Minister of Defense.
 The CDH reported that the High Command is responsive ta its
 complaints, although it is not clear what corrective action,
 if any, was taken. There were no prosecutions in 1990 of ESAF
 personnel for abuse of prisoners or detainees.
 During 1990 government forces frequently resorted to abusive
 tactics to intimidate noncombatants perceived as sympathizing
 with the FMLN. On December 13, soldiers in La Libertad
 department detained and tortured Roberto Cambara, a political
 organizer and a member of the Popular Christian Socialist
 Movement's (MPSC) National Council. Opposition leaders
 accused civil defense units of abuses, including harassment of
 their campaign workers. In July the CDH charged that civil
 defense members were committing violent crimes and abuses of
 authority with alarming frequency, and that these actions were
 provoking fear and insecurity among civilians. The U.N.
 Special Rapporteur also noted the use of intimidation and
 threats, including the circulation of death lists, by
 government forces against certain groups such as labor unions,
 cooperatives, and peasant movements which are perceived as
 sympathetic to the FMLN. The U.N. Special Rapporteur noted
 incidents in 199a of continuing intimidation by the ESAF
 against some members of religious groups. In a 1990 report,
 the Inter-American Human Rights Commission (IAHRC) cited the
 ESAF's harsh treatment of civilians living in war zones.
 Among other offenses, the IAHRC cited searches, threats,
 arbitrary prohibitions, and excessive control of the entry of
 food and medical supplies. A February 1990 report by
 
 
 EL SALVADOR
 Physicians for Human Rights (PHR) asserts that medical and
 other humanitarian workers confront similar problems.
 An August 21 transfer of prisoners from La Esperanza
 penitentiary, near San Salvador, to other penal institutions
 touched off intense controversy. The nongovernmental Human
 Rights Commission of El Salvador (CDHES) charged that 52
 political prisoners had disappeared and been beaten by First
 Brigade soldiers. The ICRC and other human rights groups
 later confirmed that none of the prisoners were kidnaped or
 disappeared, nor did First Brigade soldiers participate in the
 transfer other than to provide security. The Human Rights
 office of the Lutheran Church lodged a formal complaint with
 the Attorney General alleging that prisoners were violently
 routed out of their cells, beaten, and threatened with death.
 Prison authorities denied charges of mistreatment. However,
 it is probable that excessive force was used to effect the
 transfer, although reports of death threats are probably
 exaggerated.
 On August 20, Jesuit priests Jon Cortina and P. Nicolas
 Alvarenga were shot at in Guarjila, Chalatenango. Both
 priests charged that they were the targets of an army sniper
 attack. The ESAF denied the charge. At year's end, the ESAF
 and the CDH had yet to release the results of their
 investigations.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.
 The Constitution prohibits arbitrary arrest. However, during
 the first half of 1990, there were numerous cases of arbitrary
 arrest and detention, particularly when subversive activity
 was suspected. From January to August, according to Ministry
 of Defense statistics, the security forces detained 881
 persons, including 53 foreigners, on suspicion of subversive
 offenses. Of those detained, 433 were subsequently released
 and never formally charged, while the remainder were consigned
 to the courts, deported, or sent to juvenile facilities. The
 IAHRC reported incidents in which government forces, when
 unable to locate the persons they were looking for, arrested
 members of the detainees' immediate families.
 The Constitution requires that all persons detained by the
 ESAF be turned over to the courts within 72 hours of arrest
 (or 15 days during a state of exception) or be freed, but this
 requirement is frequently ignored. Although it is a crime for
 the public security forces or the military to hold a suspect
 longer than 72 hours, violators are rarely prosecuted for this
 crime. The ESAF routinely fail to notify the courts during
 the 72-hour period of administrative detention, and the
 accused are seldom provided legal counsel during this period.
 Regulations require that security and military forces register
 detainees and have them examined by a doctor or a nurse upon
 entry into a detention facility. In arrests related to the
 insurgency, the ESAF is required to notify promptly the family
 of the detainee, Tutela Legal, the CDH, and the ICRC.
 During the arraignment proceedings, the judge may order the
 accused detained for up to an additional 72 hours (or 15 days
 under the state of emergency) to determine if the evidence
 warrants holding the accused for further investigation. This
 time limit is normally, but not without exception, adhered to
 in practice. The judge is then allowed 120 days to
 investigate serious crimes or 45 days for lesser offenses,
 before bringing the accused to trial or dismissing the case.
 
 
 613
 EL SALVADOR
 In practice, however, these requirements are rarely observed,
 primarily due to the backlog of cases. All persons held in
 the prison system, however, are incarcerated by judicial
 order, if not by sentence.
 As a recourse against illegal detention, any accused person
 may, from the time it appears that a court will issue an
 arrest warrant until the trial is completed and a sentence
 imposed, request a review from an appeals court or the Supreme
 Court on the legal basis for the detention. Such an appeal
 freezes action on the case until the higher court has rendered
 its decision.
 On July 31, the High Command sent a-general order ta the ESAF
 establishing a new standard operating procedure (SOP) on
 arrests and treatment of prisoners. The- new procedure was
 promulgated to bring government practice into line with the
 human rights accords- signed in San Jose on July- 26- The SOP
 prohibits arrests without a-written order from a judge unless
 a person is caught in the act of committin a crime (-in the
 act" was defined as immediately before, during-, or up to 24:
 hours after a crime is committed); or if someone denounces a
 suspected criminal to the authorities; or if a person is in
 possession of some instrument used in the crime. In all other
 cases, the SOP directs that arrests be made only by members of
 the public security forces (not the militaryY pursuant to a
 written order from a competent authority. Except for arrests
 made "in the act," officers must wear uniforms, carry public
 security force identification cards, and make all arrests
 between 6 a.m. and 6 p-m. The SOP also requires that officers
 inform detainees, in- easily understood language, of the reason
 fortheir arrest and the charges against them at the time of
 arrest. It also directs security forces to allow detainees
 immediately tQ contact and consult privately with legal
 counsel or anyone else they wish. It requires military units
 and the security forces to place special- emphasis on
 cooperation with writs of habeas corpus.
 Various nongovernmental sources indicate that the public
 security forces and the military have made an effort to comply
 with the requirements of the new SOP. Complaints of arbitrary
 arrest and detention have decreased substantially since July
 31, and the rate of arrests was reportedly a quarter of what
 it was prior to that date.
 In an attempt to improve public accounting for detainees, the
 Supreme Court opened an information office on August 1. The
 office is supposed to receive timely reports from the courts,
 the military, and the public security forces on arrests and
 the status of detainees. In practice, the courts routinely
 provide timely information on detainees under their
 jurisdiction, but there are credible reports that the ESAF
 sometimes report detentions late or not at all.
 Bail is available for some minor offenses but is seldom used.
 There are no provisions in the law for exile. Many FMLN
 leaders claim to be in "self-imposed" exile and might be
 subject to arrest for participation in guerrilla operations if
 they were to return to El Salvador.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Legislative Assembly appoints the 14 magistrates of the
 Supreme Court for 5-year terms. The Supreme Court appoints
 all lower court magistrates, judges, and justices of the
 
 
 614
 EL SALVADOR
 peace. The court structure is divided into five levels:
 justices of the peace, courts of the first instance (trial
 courts), chambers of the second instance (appeals courts),
 chambers of the Supreme Court, and the Supreme Court. The
 Supreme Court hears appeals from appellate courts, decides
 writs of habeas corpus and constitutional questions, and
 settles disputes between the legislative and executive
 branches. Jury verdicts can be neither overruled by a judge
 nor appealed to a higher court. However, the septence may be
 appealed successively up to the Supreme Court. Appeals are
 rare.
 Although a public defender can be made available to the
 defendant in the investigative stage, their number is still
 insufficient to ensure that due process is given to more than
 a small percentage of indigent detainees. Defendants must be
 represented by counsel at the trial, and counsel is appointed
 by the court if none has been selected by the defendant. In
 theory, defendants have the right to the presumption of
 innocence; protection from self-incrimination; legal counsel;
 freedom from coercion; to be present in court; the opportunity
 to confront witnesses; and compensation for damages due to
 judicial error. In practice, almost all of these rights are
 restricted to various degrees.
 Although nominally independent of the executive and
 legislative branches, in practice the judiciary is strongly
 influenced through the appointments process. Political
 affiliation or family ties, rather than professional
 capabilities, are often the most important criteria in
 appointing judges. Reappointment is based more on a judge's
 political loyalty than on integrity or professional
 qualifications. Ten years of war have added to the pressures
 on judicial personnel, who have always been vulnerable to
 political influence, bribes, and threats. Judges are often
 afraid to investigate or prosecute members of the armed forces
 or the FMLN; death threats are also common in cases which
 involve organized crime. The'absence of a military justice
 system means that those offenders whom the military will not
 publicly identify are seldom, if ever, subject to the civilian
 courts. Although judicial reform programs have helped effect
 technical improvements since 1984, the weak and inefficient
 judiciary continues to be a serious impediment to improving
 the country's human rights record.
 Historically, civilian judicial authority has not extended to
 the military officer corps. Some low-ranking members of the
 military and police have been discharged and turned over to
 the civilian courts for trial on criminal charges, but
 traditionally officers of the armed and security forces have
 been treated differently from other citizens before the law.
 Judges are frequently reluctant to bring charges against them,
 and colleagues often fail to cooperate in the prosecution of
 crimes imputed to a fellow officer. There have been
 exceptions. Col. Benavides, three lieutenants, and four
 enlisted men were arrested on January 16, 1990, on murder
 charges in connection with the Jesuit case. President
 Cristiani and several senior military officers waived certain
 priviliges and gave testimony in person, and the case moved to
 the trial stage in December. In May 26 members of the civil
 defense forces were sentenced to 30 years in prison for the
 1982 rape and murder of 23 peasants in San Pedro Perulapan,
 Cuscatlan. Also in May, seven CDF members were sentenced to
 30 years in prison for murder and robbery in two separate
 incidents in Armenia, Sonsonate, in 1984. Army private Hector
 
 
 615
 EL SALVADOR
 Rubina Reyes was convicted of the 1982 murder of U.S. citizen
 Michael Kline (two other defendents were acquitted) and
 sentenced to 15 years. Also in June an army sergeant was
 sentenced to 30 years in prison for the 1988 murder of two
 Guatemalan businessmen. In addition, the military turned over
 an Atlacatl Battalion soldier to the civilian courts for trial
 in the August 1989 death of 17-year-old Miguel Ernesto Miranda
 Reina.
 On the other hand, elements of the military continue to resist
 a full investigation of the Jesuit case. Evidence has been
 fabricated and destroyed, some witnesses have provided false
 testfmony, and members of the military have generally failed
 to cooperate in the judicial proceedings. In June Lieutenant
 Colonel Carlos Camilo Hernandez (Deputy Director. of the
 Military Academy at the time of the murdersX, was indicted -for
 obstruction of justice. In August and September, three
 Atlacatl Battalion enlisted men were arnested on perjury
 charges relating to testimony they gave in the case.
 The case against 12 soldiers held for the 1988 murders of 10
 peasants in San Sebastian virtually collapsed in 190.  In
 April the Saii Vicente appeals court ordered t rial proceedings
 to be initiated against Mal. Mauricio-de Jesus Bieltran
 Granados, but also dec-ided on questionable grounds to release
 the other 11 defendants because of insufficient evidence. On
 June 4, a jury found a, soldier innocent of the election day
 19B9 killing of journalist Mauricio Pineda de Leon; media
 reports claimed that several soldiers attended the 1-day
 trial, possibly intimidating the jury. The case against
 military officers (both active-duty and retiredY and rightwing
 civilians who ran a kidnaping and auto theft ring in the early
 1980's also virtually collapsed in 1990. In May, a new judge
 in the case suddenly dropped arrest orders against five of the
 six fugitives. Of the remaining three defendants, only two
 (Major Jose Alfredo Jimenez and Lieutenant Rodolfo Lopez
 Sibrian) remained in custody at year's end.
 In September prison authorities reported there were 167
 political prisoners (CDHES puts the figure at 194) detained
 for terrorist activities and another 58 detained for related
 offenses.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence.
 The Government generally does not interfere arbitrarily in the
 personal lives of citizens, although the Constitution gives
 the Government the right to intervene when national security
 is threatened. The military draft is applied arbitrarily; the
 sons of the wealthy or the well-connected are almost never
 required to serve.
 According to the Constitution, before entering a private
 dwelling the security forces must have the resident's consent,
 a warrant, or a reasonable belief that a crime is being or is
 about to be committed. In practice, the ESAF often uses
 forced entry without a warrant to carry out arrests and
 investigations. The ESAF also frequently intercepts mail
 deliveries in war zones. Wiretapping of telephone
 communications by the Government, the FMLN, private persons,
 and political parties is widespread.
 The guerrillas arbitrarily interfere with the lives of
 inhabitants in war zones by, among other things, setting up
 
 
 616
 EL SALVADOR
 roadblocks, expropriating food and medical supplies,
 intercepting mail, and forcing villagers to attend
 indoctrination sessions. They engage in forced recruitment to
 fill their ranks or to obtain laborers and porters. FMLN
 committees often exercise a high degree of coercive control
 over refugee camps. The guerrillas have often demonstrated
 their willingness to use intimidation, including murder, to
 enforce obedience.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian
 Law in Internal Conflicts
 Credible charges of improper air force bombings near civilian
 populations resulting in civilian deaths continued in 1990,
 especially in areas of intense guerrilla activity such as
 Chalatenango, Cabanas, and Morazan where military operations
 received close air support. The air force accepted
 responsibility for the deaths of 5 civilians and the injury of
 15 others during a February 11 engagement between the military
 and the FMLN in Chalatenango. The High Command ordered the
 air force to pay compensation to the families of the victims,
 but none had been paid by the end of 1990.
 The ESAF controls the flow of supplies and access of
 humanitarian organizations to villages (including refugee
 communities) in areas of combat or heavy guerrilla presence.
 There have been credible reports supporting the ESAF's
 assertion that supplies are being diverted to the guerrillas.
 Groups that work with repatriated communities in war zones
 have admitted that they barter or sell goods to the
 guerrillas. U.S. media reports, as well as numerous local
 sources, maintain that uniformed FMLN guerrillas routinely use
 resettlement camps as support bases.
 The FMLN often forcibly occupies civilian homes for use as
 shelters and bases to attack government targets. This tactic
 was used when the FMLN attacked Ilopango Air Base in October,
 and again during their "limited offensive" in November. The
 guerrillas' use of unmarked, indiscriminately placed mines and
 booby traps is also a major cause of death and maiming among
 peasants. However, the use of these mines may be declining:
 they killed 40 civilians in 1989 and 8 in the first 7 months
 of 1990.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 During 1990, there were no governmental restrictions on
 freedom of speech and the press. El Salvador has a vigorous
 local press which regularly prints commentary strongly
 critical of the Government. There are five daily newspapers,
 five television stations, and numerous radio stations, all of
 which provide nationwide coverage. There are also two cable
 television systems that broadcast news programs from abroad.
 The Government owns two television channels and one radio
 station. The ESAF also operate a radio station, as does the
 Catholic Church. Television interviews feature a full range
 of political figures, labor leaders, human rights activists,
 private sector representatives, and government officials. One
 television station aired an exclusive 30-minute interview with
 FMLN commander Shafik Handal in September. Three of the
 leading daily newspapers are conservative, one is centrist,
 and one is leftist in editorial orientation. Leftist views
 are also expressed in a variety of journals, newsletters,
 
 
 617
 EL SALVADOR
 periodicals, bulletins, and paid advertisements in the daily
 press.
 Academic freedom is provided for by the Constitution and
 generally respected by the Government. There is no government
 interference with university curriculums. However, the
 Government forced the University of El Salvador to close
 during the November 1989 FMLN offensive but allowed it to
 reopen 7 months later. FMLN elements exploit the University's
 autonomy, which prohibits law enforcement authorities from
 entering the campus, by using the facilities as a safe haven
 and staging center for urban operations.
 b. .Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Any association not formed for criminal purposes is legal and
 permitted in EI Salvador- Numerous political, professional,
 religious, labor, and social organizations, including some
 allied with. the FMLN, operate withoqt legal restriction.
 Groups from the left and the right criticize-the Gevernment
 and hold marches and demonstrations without government
 interference. In 1990 there were large, uneventful
 demonstrations on May Day and on September 15 by groups
 strongly criticalof the Government and its policies.
 However, the U.N.. Special Rapporteur noted ESAE. harrassment
 and abuse of the members of certain groups-, such as labor
 unions and peasant organizations (see Section 1.-c.l.
 In contrast to 1989, there were no violent demonstrations in
 1990. There were no- reports of politically motivated violence
 against the offices of nongovernmental organizations in 1990.
 Due largely to the destruction of evidence by FENASTRAS
 activists and the noncooperation of witnesses, there has been
 no further investigation and no charges brought in the October
 31, 1989, bombings of the offices of the FENASTRAS labor
 federation and the Committee of Mothers of Political
 Prisoners, Disappeared and Assassinated of El Salvador
 (CO-MADRES). In September 1990, FENASTRAS leaders offered to
 present new evidence regarding the bombing and asked the U.S.
 Embassy for assistance. By year's end, however, FENASTRAS had
 provided no new information nor produced the witnesses it
 claimed to have.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is provided for by the Constitution and is
 Kespected in practice. The country is predominantly Roman
 Catholic, but an estimated 20 percent of the population
 practices other faiths, mostly Protestant.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Constitution establishes the right of free movement.
 Article 97 specifically states that foreigners may not involve
 themselves in the internal political affairs of the country.
 This Article has been used on occasion by the Government to
 deny entry or to deport foreigners it believes might violate
 that section of the law. Local military commanders require
 that foreigners apply for permission to enter war zones and
 often restrict entry when military operations are under way in
 those areas. Movements by Salvadorans within El Salvador are
 occasionally restricted for similar reasons. There are no
 other limits on freedom of movement in the country. However,
 
 
 618
 EL SALVADOR
 those without proper identification documents are subject to
 arrest and detention.
 In 1985 there were an estimated 525,000 displaced persons in
 El Salvador. By October 1990, about 125,000 still required
 government assistance. There may be another 7,000 persons who
 were not registered with the Government and receive assistance
 from private relief organizations. An additional 22,000
 Salvadorans are refugees in other Central American countries
 and in Mexico, and more than 550,000 are estimated to be
 undocumented immigrants in the United States.
 In July the Government established a repatriation assistance
 office to facilitate full reintegration of repatriated persons
 into Salvadoran society. The office is supposed to coordinate
 assistance to repatriates, help them obtain identification
 documents, and coordinate the introduction of basic services,
 such as health, education, and sanitation, into repatriated
 communities. In early 1990, the Ministry of Public Works
 responded to the request of the Segundo Montes repatriated
 community (near Meanguera, Morazan) and constructed a bridge
 across the Torola River. Although there have been reports of
 the FMLN collecting tolls on it, the bridge has opened markets
 and better communication between northern and southern Morazan
 for the first time in 4 years.
 The Government, with assistance from the U.N. High
 Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the ICRC, has registered
 some 400 Nicaraguan refugees, although officials estimate as
 many as 3,000 are residing in the far southeastern part of the
 country. Registered refugees are free-to travel within El
 Salvador.
 The Government imposes no control on emigration and cooperates
 with international organizations that arrange Salvadoran
 emigration to other countries.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The Constitution provides the rights and procedures by which
 citizens can change their government by peaceful means. The
 Constitution allows all political parties that do not advocate
 armed opposition to the democratic system to participate in
 the electoral process. It establishes the right to membership
 in any legally recognized party, and even parties with links
 to the FMLN are permitted to participate in elections. Voting
 is by secret balIot.
 There have been six national elections since 1982. On March
 19, 1989, six parties, representing a wide spectrum of
 political views, participated in the presidential election in
 which the incumbent Christian Democratic Party (PDC) lost the
 presidency to the Nationalist Republican Alliance (ARENA). It
 marked the nation's first democratic transfer of power from a
 ruling party to the opposition.
 The FMLN refused to participate in the 1989 elections and
 sought to disrupt the process through attacks and threats.
 Nevertheless, the elections saw the participation of political
 groups previously allied to the FMLN and the return to the
 political scene of leftist leaders Guillermo Ungo and Ruben
 Zamora. Their Democratic Convergence (CD), an alliance of
 three leftist parties, ran candidates in 1989 and announced
 
 
 619
 EL SALVADOR
 plans to field candidates in the national legislative and
 municipal elections scheduled for March 1991.
 The IPDC agreed on an electoral reform package for the March
 1991 legislative and municipal elections. The agreement
 brought together for the first time nine political parties,
 including the Nationalist Democratic Union (UDN--the electoral
 arm of the Communist Party of El Salvador). The UDN, which
 did not participate in the 1989 elections, stated that it will
 participate in the 1991 elections whether or not a cease-fire
 is in place-
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights.
 The Government continued to be receptive to groups interested
 in human rights. High-ranking government officials and
 military officers met regularly during 1990 with visiting
 legislators from different countries- and with members of human
 rights organizations- church and labor groups- and others.
 Americas Watch and the Lawyers Committee foz Human Rights
 maintain a joint office in San Salvador. The ICRC has an
 agreement with the Government that permits it to work in-the
 war zones- to assist noncombatants, to visit prisoners and
 detainees- accused of guerrilla activity, and to make
 confidential reports to the Government on-human rights
 issues. Tutela Legal and the CDH also have access to the
 prisons. The U.N. Special Rapporteur made his tenth annual
 visit to the country in October. The Lutheran Church, the
 National Association of Indigenous Persons (ANIS), many labor
 unions, universities, and other nongovernmental organizations
 also have human rights and legal assistance offices which
 operate without legal restriction.
 Domestic human rights organizations active in, EI Salvador
 include the CDH and Tutela Legal. The CDH receives testimony
 about human rights violations, conducts investigations' and
 reports to local commanding officers and the Ministry of
 Defense when it discovers a case of abuse. However, neither
 former President Duarte nor President Cristiani ever appointed
 the five-member executive board that is supposed to guide the
 CDH's work and give it necessary political support. National
 and international human rights organizations view it as a
 public relations branch of the Government with no real role in
 monitoring or reporting on the human rights situation.
 Nonetheless, the CDH remains the best source of information
 regarding detainees and a good source on the condition of
 those released from custody.
 Tutela Legal often conducts its own investigations by visiting
 persons detained by the security forces, doing some on-site
 investigations, and reporting its findings to government
 authorities. Although it is the main human rights
 investigative agency in El Salvador and is well respected
 internationally, Tutela Legal's methodology has sometimes been
 criticized. Tutela Legal has occasionally asserted, based on
 circumstantial evidence alone, that certain killings were
 perpetrated by the Government when such was not the case.
 Human rights instruction is a formal and regular part of
 police recruit training and officers' classes. The CDH, the
 ICRC, and Catholic clergy give regularly scheduled courses on
 human rights for police, military, and civil defense personnel.
 
 
 620
 EL SALVADOR
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status.
 El Salvador is an ethnically homogeneous country, though a
 small segment of the population claims to have descended
 solely from indigenous peoples. There is no official
 discrimination against them. Discrimination in housing, jobs,
 and education is not a major problem. The Government neither
 permits nor condones discrimination.
 Under the Constitution, women enjoy the same legal rights as
 men. In practice, however, women are faced with various forms
 of de facto discrimination. Salaries for women are generally
 lower than those for men, and employers are often reluctant to
 hire women, alleging that they are regarded as less reliable
 than men.
 Violence against women, including domestic-violence, is
 widespread, but the lack of reliable statistics makes it
 impossible to gauge its precise extent. There are credible
 reports that judges often dismiss rape charges on the pretext
 that the victim provoked the crime.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The 1983 Constitution prohibits the Government from using
 nationality, sex, race, creed, or political philosophy to
 prevent workers from organizing themselves into unions or
 associations. This provision was intended to provide the
 legal framework for secondary legislation, including a revised
 labor code which has never been enacted. In the wake of the
 April 1990 agreement between the Government and the FMLN to
 renew peace talks, President Cristiani established a
 tripartite socioeconomic commission to review conditions in El
 Salvador. The commission formed six subcommittees, one of
 which is dedicated to discussing the reform of labor
 legislation. The subcommittee is chaired by the Labor
 Minister and includes prominent labor and business leaders.
 Efforts to achieve a consensus on labor legislation reform
 continued, but no proposal had been forwarded to the
 legislature by year's end.
 A confusing and sometimes conflicting set of laws governing
 labor relations remains in place. While existing statutes
 provide protections which are enforceable under the
 Constitution, their inconsistencies often result in cumbersome
 procedures and significant delays.
 Legally, only private sector nonagricultural workers have the
 right to form unions and to strike. Employees of the nine
 autonomous public agencies may form unions but are barred from
 striking. The absence of specific laws granting public
 employees the right to strike does not deter such strike
 activity. Existing law bars agricultural workers and
 employees of government ministries and departments from
 forming unions or striking. These employees are represented
 by associations which, in practice, participate in activities
 the same as unions, including resorting to strikes. Public
 sector associations, through a coordinating body called the
 Interstatal, staged a series of coordinated strikes during the
 year demanding wage increases.
 
 
 621
 EL SALVADOR
 The labor code requires that disputes go through direct
 bargaining, conciliation, and arbitration before a strike can
 be called. Labor courts, which are part of the judicial
 system and are ultimately responsible to the Supreme Court,
 are competent to determine the legality of strikes. In
 practice, both labor and management often ignore the onerous
 and time-consuming legal requirements, and most strikes are
 therefore technically illegal. In several instances, workers
 have occupied factory premises as part of a work stoppage. In
 cases where such activity is part of an illegal strike,
 security forces have intervened on occasion.
 Public sector workers staged a series of work stoppages during
 the year demanding wage increases, and there were a number of
 private sector strikes.
 There are approximately 150 active trade unions- employee
 associations, and peasant organizations in-El Salvador. Their
 combined membership is just over 400,000, roughly 15 percent
 of the work force. The National Union of Workers and Peasants
 (UNOC), claiminS some 200,0-0.0 members, remain& 5y-far the
 country's- largest labor organization. These organizations
 freely eIect their officers- in accordance- with their
 individual constitutions an& bylaws-. Leaders of worker
 organizations appear regularly on television, publicize their
 views in the country' smajor rxewspapers, and conduct seminars
 on various issues without government interference. Unions
 have also been able to organizem or participate in peaceful
 public demonstrations without government interference.-
 The state of emergency declared by Eresident Cristiani in
 response to the FMLN offensive of November 1989 limited
 freedom of association until the state of emergency was lifted
 in April 1990. Unions were able to conduct business on a
 normal basis despite the state of emergency, however, and were
 required only to request prior authorization for large
 meetings, and such permission-appeared to. have been routinely
 granted during 1990. Both the pro-FMLN National Unity of
 Salvadoran Workers CUNTS) and UNOC held general assemblies
 during the state of emergency without interference from the
 authorities. Under the state of emergency, one union meeting
 was broken up and the participants briefly held when senior
 military officials failed- to inform lower-level officials that
 authorization for the meeting had been granted. The union
 leaders were quickly released when the improper arrest was
 pointed out to the military High Command. Nevertheless,
 incidents of harassment and violence against unionists and
 members of cooperatives by government forces continued in 1990
 (see below and Sections 1.b. and l.c.).
 There are no restrictions on affiliation with international
 labor organizations, and Salvadoran unions freely affiliate
 with such groups without prior authorization, including the
 International Confederation of Free Trade Unions, the World
 Confederation of Labor, and the Communist-controlled World
 Federation of Trade Unions.
 In 1990 the Committee on Freedom of Association (CFA) of the
 International Labor Organization (ILO) continued its
 consideration of four cases based on complaints filed by
 several international and Salvadoran labor organizations
 alleging violations of ILO Convention 87 on freedom of
 association. The same issues were also examined by the ILO
 Conference Committee on the Application of Conventions and
 Recommendations (CACR) in June. The complaints, some of which
 
 
 622
 EL SALVADOR
 date back to 1981, allege, inter alia, that the Government was
 implicated in the murder, harassment, intimidation, and
 disappearance of trade unionists, and the destruction of trade
 union-property, and that certain public employees were denied
 the right to organize and bargain collectively, and were not
 protected from antiunion discrimination. The CFA noted the
 Government's reply, according to which an agreement had been
 concluded on the reinstatement of the dismissed trade union
 leaders of the~telecommunications sector. The November CFA
 meeting again-expressed.deep preoccupation with violence
 against trade unionists. Acts alleged to have occurred in
 1990 included an assault by the National Guard and Police on
 the premises of the Democratic Workers Confederation (CTD) and
 the arrest of 17 of its members, and the disappearance of an
 officer of the teachers union (ANDES). Noting its awareness
 of the difficulties presently facing the Government, the CFA
 again appealed that it take all practical measures to
 guarantee normal exercise of trade union and human rights, to
 institute judicial inquiries, and to assure that arrested
 trade unionists are released.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The right of collective bargaining is granted in Article 39 of
 the Constitution, and article 269 of the labor code. Under
 the labor code, only private sector workers can exercise this
 right, but the Constitution is interpreted broadly to provide
 all workers the right to bargain collectively. Private sector
 unions use the mechanism of collective bargaining extensively,
 and a similar collective bargaining practice is also followed,
 albeit in a more informal manner, between public employees and
 the Government.
 The Director General's Office of the Ministry of Labor is
 responsible for overseeing the implementation of collective
 bargaining agreements and for acting as a conciliator in
 labor-related disputes in the private sector and autonomous
 government institutions. The Ministry of Labor took part in
 the negotiation or adaptation of 137 collective contracts in
 1990. More collective contracts were signed in 1990 than in
 1989.
 The relationship between the business community and the labor
 movement improved somewhat during 1990, but a large reservoir
 of distrust remains. Labor leaders perceive the Cristiani
 Government as being antilabor, and, as before, businessmen
 frequently take measures to prevent unions from being formed.
 Union leaders have also complained about lengthy and complex
 procedures required to register new unions.
 Article 47 of the Constitution states that union officials at
 the time of their election, throughout their term, and for 1
 year following their term shall not be fired, suspended for
 disciplinary reasons, removed, or debased in their work
 conditions except for legal cause. This provision is
 generally observed in practice. Twice since 1986 the Supreme
 Court has reaffirmed constitutional safeguards protecting
 trade unions, worker associations, peasant organizations, and
 their leaders from arbitrary and capricious behavior by
 management and/or the Government.
 El Salvador has one export processing zone. There are no
 differences between labor regulations in the zone and those
 which prevail in general. There are no labor unions
 represented in any of the firms in the zone, and the firms
 
 
 623
 EL SALVADOR
 discourage labor organizing. The Labor Ministry maintains
 that it has received no complaints from workers in the zone.
 However, the American Federation of Labor and Congress of
 Industrial Organizations contends that stringent registration
 requirements and other harassment effectively block union
 organizing efforts.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 The Constitution prohibits forced or compulsory labor, except
 in cases of public calamity and other instances specified by
 law.
 In 1990,.as it has for a number of years, the IL0's Committee
 of Experts noted with concern the provisions in the penal code
 that allow the imposition of sentences involving compulsory
 labor and has made suggestions on how to improve existing
 legislation and practice. Reform of the-penal code is being
 considered by the Legislative Assembly. The FMLN continues to
 force civilians, including minors, to serve as porters,
 spotters, and couriers for the guerrilla army.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The Constitution prohibits the employment of children under
 the age of 14. The labor code states that exception may be
 made only in cases where it can be demonstrated that such
 employment is absolutely indispensable to the sustenance of
 the minor and his family. This is most often the case with
 children of peasant families who traditionally work with their
 families during planting and harvesting seasons.
 The Constitution also prohibits the employment of persons
 under 18 and all women in occupations considered hazardous.
 The law is enforced through inspections by the Ministry of
 Labor. Inspections during 1990 uncovered a number of
 violations which reportedly were corrected.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.
 The Government's national minimum wage council recommends
 increases in the minimum wages for commercial, industrial,
 service, and agroindustrial employees. Over the past several
 years, wages have not kept pace with inflation. In April the
 Government authorized the first increase in the minimum wage
 since 1986. Workers in commerce, industry, and the service
 sector have a minimum daily salary of approximately $3 in. the
 capital and $2.90 in outlying areas. Agricultural workers
 received a minimum of approximately $1.75 a day. For the most
 part, minimum wages are inadequate to meet the Ministry of
 Economy's standard of basic necessity, and an estimated 40
 percent of the population lives below the poverty level. Wage
 rates for most categories of workers are higher than the legal
 minimums, especially in the private sector. In 1990 laborers
 earned an average of $171.50 per month, while clerk typists
 earned $271.90 per month, and mechanics $320.35 per month.
 The law limits the workday to 6 hours for minors between 14
 and 18 years of age and 8 hours for adults. Premium pay is
 mandated for longer hours. The average workweek is 44 hours.
 The Constitution and the labor code require employers,
 including the Government, to take steps to ensure that
 employees are not placed at risk in their workplaces. Despite
 extremely limited budgetary resources, the Ministry of Labor
 
 
 624
 EL SALVADOR
 attempts to enforce the applicable regulations. According to
 Ministry figures, its Inspector General's office conducted
 approximately 35,000 work site inspections between January 1
 and September 30. Many of these occurred in commercial,
 industrial, and service establishments. The Inspector
 General's Corps cited employers for numerous infractions and
 assessed fines:
 
 
