 EL SALVADOR
 
 El Salvador is a democratic republic governed by a multiparty
 Government of National Unity which was named by a Constituent
 Assembly elected freely in 1982. Democracy in El Salvador
 continues to be limited by the state of siege which suspends
 some constitutional rights in a response to the military
 emergency resulting from guerrilla attacks. The armed forces
 remain a significant political force in the country, and the
 extreme left does not participate in the political system. In
 October 1979 a right-wing military government was overthrown by
 a group of reformist military officers. This military junta
 was replaced in January 1980 by a joint Christian Democratic
 Party-Armed Forces government. After decades of social
 inequality and repression, this Government initiated major
 economic and political reforms. These reforms continue to
 progress although their benefits have been reduced by violent
 resistance from the extreme right and by relentless guerrilla
 warfare from the extreme left abetted by Cuba and Nicaragua.
 In 1983 El Salvador adopted a new constitution drafted by the
 Constituent Assembly in preparation for a presidential election
 in March 1984. With this election, the democratic structure
 envisaged by the coup of 1979 will be in place.
 The Salvadoran Government's authority is currently being
 contested by the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front
 (FMLN)--a coalition of Marxist/Leninist-led guerrilla
 organizations. The political affiliate of this organization,
 the Revolutionary Democratic Front (FDR), includes elements of
 social democratic origin. One of the strategies of the FMLN
 involves the destruction of the Salvadoran economic
 infrastructure. Also targeted are municipal and national
 government installations, military personnel, and alleged
 government collaborators. The guerrillas and the FDR have
 published a general public program for a future government
 which includes a mixed economy and maintenance of certain
 individual liberties. In internal documents and speeches to
 their own organizations, FMLN leaders embrace the concepts of
 dictatorship of the proletariat, of the vanguard role of the
 revolutionary movement with regard to the rest of society, and
 of democratic centralism or disciplined adherence to decisions
 passed down by leaders. Political decisionmaking within the
 guerrilla movement takes place in some cases by bargaining
 among the leaders of its constituent factions, in other cases
 by intimidation and assassination. During 1983 one FMLN
 leader, Comandante Ana Maria (Melinda Amaya Montes) was
 murdered on the orders of another guerrilla leader Cayetano
 Carpio, who committed suicide when his involvement in the
 murder was discovered.
 Abuse of human rights remains a central problem, despite
 efforts of the government to end violence from right-wing death
 squads, some of which have links to the security forces, and
 from its own security forces, as well as from the guerrilla
 left. The level of political violence remains high, but
 noncombatant deaths have declined steadily since a peak in
 1980. The number of disappearances in 1983 remained at about
 the same level as in 1982. Elements within the Government
 security forces are still believed to use torture as arbitirary
 punishment or to extract information from suspected leftists.
 
 
 551
 Individuals can be and are arrested without warrants, detained
 for investigation, sometimes for long periods before charges
 are brought, and, if charged with such crimes as sedition and
 treason, rarely brought to trial.
 All human rights conditions in El Salvador are strongly
 affected by the ongoing civil strife. As is common during
 civil strife, the achievement of a public order that would
 protect each person's rights has been disrupted by military
 operations, partisan hatreds, acts of revenge, the satisfaction
 of personal grudges, pervasive fear, and a prevailing
 uncertainty dominated by violence. This situation contributed
 to, and is complicated by, the near-paralysis of the judicial
 system, which is caused in part by corruption and intimidation
 and which is most evident when crimes of a political nature are
 being considered.
 The allocation of responsibility for specific crimes done by
 certain rightist elements or by the members of the security
 forces associated with them has been difficult. It is
 characteristic of Salvadoran society that personal loyalties to
 relatives or locally powerful individuals are strong and often
 compete with loyalties to legal superiors within the
 organizations of the Government or to officers within the
 military chain of command. Thus, it is often difficult to know
 whether, in taking a given action, a member of the security
 force is obeying orders handed down through a military or
 government chain of command, carrying out the wishes of some
 local patron, or acting on his own.
 The most profound recent change has been the opening up of the
 political system and the restoration of government
 accountability through elections. This new political dynamic
 began with elections for a Constituent Assembly in March 1982.
 Some 1.5 million Salvadorans voted; only the extreme left
 refused to participate. The March 1982 elections produced an
 Assembly in which no party held an absolute majority but which
 proved capable of drafting and approving a modern, liberal
 constitution. A multiparty Government of National Unity, named
 by the Constitutent Assembly, has functioned slowly but
 successfully by consensus.
 The new Constitution, which entered into force on December 20,
 1983, establishes a republican, pluralistic form of government;
 strengthens the legislative branch and enhances judicial
 independence; improves safeguards for individual rights;
 establishes safeguards against excessive provisional detention
 and unreasonable searches; and protects the legal bases of land
 reform.
 Presidential elections will be held on March 25, 1984. Six
 candidates are actively campaigning for the presidency.
 Legislative and mayoral elections are planned for early 1985.
 The Government of El Salvador is seeking a political solution
 to the armed conflict through a dialogue on democratic
 elections within El Salvador and participation in the regional
 Contadora process. El Salvador's Peace Commission remains
 prepared to meet with the armed left and its political
 associates to discuss their participation in free elections,
 including physical security for candidates and access to the
 media.
 
 30-231 0 - 84 - 36
 
 
 552
 In 1980 the civilian-military junta enacted a wide-sweeping
 program of land reform to transfer land ownership from a small
 number of large holders to farmers who had previously worked
 the land as laborers, renters, or sharecroppers. Although
 plagued by problems including illegal evictions of
 beneficiaries, difficulties in compensating former owners, and
 violence, the land reform is making steady progress.
 Major efforts are underway to ensure more effective functioning
 of the criminal justice system, including provision of greater
 judicial independence under the new Constitution and the
 creation of two legal reform commissions. The Government of El
 Salvador is developing programs to improve investigative
 capacities and protection for participants in the legal process
 and to modernize penal and evidentiary codes.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Unlawful or Arbitrary Deprivation of Life
 El Salvador continues to suffer from politically motivated
 violence engendered in part by continuing political
 polarization, as well as a traditional recourse to violence in
 disputes of any nature (political, economic, or even private
 feuds). Extremists of the right and left are guilty of
 politically motivated civilian deaths as are some members of
 the Armed Forces. The climate created by the guerrilla
 violence has further depreciated the value of human life.
 Extremists of both sides employed assassination to eliminate
 perceived enemies, to intimidate, and to make their political
 points. Catholic Archbishop Rivera y Damas has appealed to the
 Government and the Armed Forces to put an end to the repression
 caused by the security forces, the paramilitary bands, and
 fanatic organizations.
 Far right death squads, some of which have had links with
 elements in the security forces, assumed a higher profile
 during the last half of 1983 by targeting prominent individuals
 and forcing the media to carry their communiques. The
 "Maximiliano Hernandez Martinez Anti-Communist Brigade," which
 had been relatively quiet since the March 1982 Constituent
 Assembly elections, resurfaced in September 1983 and claimed
 responsibility for a series of kidnappings and murders.
 Another group, the "Secret Anti-Communist Army," claimed
 responsibility for the murder of two civil servants in late
 June and for the torture and murder on September 10 of two
 Ministry of Education literacy campaign workers. More
 secretive squads operate in rural areas, kidnapping, torturing,
 and murdering their victims without claiming responsibility for
 these acts.
 Some units and individuals of the Armed Forces (which include
 the army, the security forces, and the civil defense) have
 committed violent abuses. On February 22, at least 18 farmers
 at the Las Hojas farm cooperative were killed, apparently by
 elements of a Salvadoran army unit. The judge has completed
 
 
 553
 his investigation and expects to move the case to trial in the
 next few months. (The Government's Human Rights Commission
 carried out its own investigation and delivered its report to
 President Magana.) In Zaragoza, La Libertad Department, there
 are indications that a civil defense force was involved in the
 November 1983 kidnapping of seven men and two pregnant women
 later found dead in a ravine. This incident is under
 investigation.
 Some of the charges against government forces appear to be
 exaggerated, misleading, or false, such as those leveled
 against the Atlacatl Battalion in a November 3, 1983, action
 near Cinquera in Cabanas Department. In this particular case,
 after the alleged massacre was publicized by the guerrillas'
 Radio Venceremos, journalists visited the village of San
 Nicolas near Copapayo, where government troops were accused of
 herding 20 civilians into a house and then murdering them.
 Although the facts are still far from clear, there was
 apparently no evidence of gunfire within the house to support
 the allegation of a cold-blooded murder. This lends
 credibility to the Government's account of a major military
 engagement in a nearby area from which bodies may have been
 brought to the house.
 Once a member of the military has been charged with a civil
 crime, he is dismissed from military service and tried in a
 civilian court as a civilian. In the first eight months of
 1983, 127 members of the Armed Forces were turned over to
 civilian courts for trial. For example, in August, 1983,
 Sergeant Jose Mario Solozano, Commander of the civil defense in
 Verapaz, San Vicente Department, was sentenced to 30 years
 imprisonment for the murder of a seminary student in November
 1981. Several members of the security forces are now facing
 trial for politically motivated human rights violations, but
 none has yet been convicted.
 The Government has stepped up its campaign against death squad
 activity in response to the upsurge in killings claimed by
 death squads of the extreme right. On September 23, 1983, El
 Salvador's Ministry of Defense issued a statement repudiating
 "all terrorist actions from whatever source, because they
 constitute violations of human rights." On December 2,
 Minister of Defense Vides Casanova pledged "to bring before the
 law the members of these terrorist bands--whoever they may be
 and whatever reasons they might give to justify their illegal
 activity." On December 15, in an unusual act, the High Command
 of the Salvadoran Armed Forces and commanders of the military
 and the public security forces issued a statement endorsing the
 position of the Minister of Defense and pledging "to fight the
 death squads and the terrorist groups with all the means at our
 disposal until they are definitively eradicated from our
 country." President Magana, in his December 23 Christmas
 message to the nation, also spoke forcefully against the death
 squads, saying that to permit .such activity is to promote a
 return to the law of the jungle. The President underscored his
 commitment and that of the Armed Forces' commanders to ensure
 the physical security of the citizenry. The Government's
 Political Commission and the Constituent Assembly have also
 spoken out forcefully against terrorists, including the death
 squads, as have political parties with a wide range of
 political philosophies.
 
 
 554
 In consonance with these statements, several officers with
 alleged ties to the death squads were transferred to other
 posts in late November. In December, some of these officers
 were transferred out of the country. On December 2, the
 National Police announced the arrest of three members of the
 Constituent Assembly's security force on charges of kidnaping.
 The arrests were made within 48 hours of the crime, and the
 suspects have since been consigned to the courts. The chief of
 that force, who has been linked in the press with death squad
 activity, left his position with the change in Assembly
 leadership in late December. On December 18, the Minister of
 Defense announced that a specialized investigative unit would
 be organized to investigate and combat the death squads. The
 unit is expected to be operational in early 1984.
 The guerrillas continue to be responsible for significant human
 rights violations, including murder. Former National
 Confederation of Workers (CNT) director Salvador "Bobby"
 Jimenez Molina died in December 1983, following an
 assassination attempt by two presumed terrorists of the Popular
 Liberation Forces (FPL), an extreme left guerrilla group. The
 FPL also claimed responsiblity in June 1983 for the
 assassination of ARENA (National Republican Alliance) Deputy
 and former labor leader Rene Barrios Amaya. Barrios, along
 with Bobby Jimenez, was one of the founders of the CNT. During
 January 1984, ARENA party member Maria Ovidia Amaya, mayor of
 Yamabal, Morazan Department, was dragged from her home and shot
 to death, and ARENA assembly deputy from Usulutan Department
 Ricardo Arnoldo Pohl was assassinated. Several retired and
 active duty officers have been gunned down on the streets of
 San Salvador, away from battle areas. In some instances, the
 guerrillas have taken credit for these attacks. The FPL was
 responsible for the massacres of two groups of military
 prisoners in 1983 and the murder of an American official, Lt.
 Commander Albert Schaufelberger.
 In addition to the civilian deaths which the press directly
 attributed to the guerrillas, the guerrillas are also
 responsible for the deaths of a significant, if indeterminate,
 number of civilians who are forcibly used as a shield against
 government forces in combat situations. The guerrillas have
 interfered with the Armed Forces battlefield communications to
 redirect military fire from the guerrillas themselves to
 civilian targets.
 Sources of information on political violence include
 newspapers, the armed forces, court records, human rights
 organizations, leftist organizations, and personal
 testimonies. Each of these is subject to limitations and/or
 biases. The four press dailies do report on violence.
 Although access to some rural areas is limited, press reports
 of deaths are considered a valid basis for data on political
 violence in rural areas. The armed forces have increased the
 release of information to the public, including casualty
 figures. Government information on guerrilla casualties,
 however, is subject to exaggeration. Court records list
 victims of violence identified by justices of the peace
 throughout the country. Such reports yield little additional
 information in cases of political violence, since witnesses
 rarely come forward. However, they are useful to determine
 trends.
 
 
 555
 Organizations which report on violence, besides the
 Government's Human Rights Commission, include the Legal Aid
 Office of the Archdiocese Commission for Justice and Peace
 (Tutela Legal), Christian Legal Aid (Socorro Juridico
 Christiano), the Committee of Mothers and Relatives of
 Political Prisoners and the Disappeared, and the El Salvador
 Human Rights Commission. In addition, the Center of
 Investigation and Documentation of the Jesuit-run University of
 Central America is a human rights information clearing house.
 These groups rely primarily on newspaper reporting,
 supplemented by other sources such as announcements by
 guerrilla groups and personal testimony. In an effort to
 overcome what many in the Government feel is the leftist bias
 of these human rights groups, President Magana created the
 Human Rights Commission, composed of leaders of the church,
 labor, private sector, and the National Police. The Commission
 monitors and analyzes the human rights situation.
 According to these groups, the monthly averages for such deaths
 in the first six months of 1983 varied from 161 to 470.
 According to press reports, the monthly average was 177,
 compared to 269 in the first half of the previous year. During
 the last six months of 1983, the monthly average dropped to
 104, a 41 percent decrease. The average for all of 1983 was
 140 deaths per month compared to 219 in 1982 and 444 in 1981.
 Moreover, for four, of the last six months of 1983 the number of
 press-reported deaths per month fell below 100 for the first
 time in recent years. Tutela Legal's figures on civilian
 deaths, mostly of guerrilla supporters (masas) that occur
 during military engagements or operations, now account for
 almost 80 percent of Tutela Legal's overall total of civilian
 victims of political violence. When civilian battlefield-
 related deaths are subtracted, Tutela Legal's violence figures
 for the last six months of 1983 are remarkably similar to the
 number of civilian deaths attributable to political violence
 reported in the Salvadoran press.
 b. Disappearance
 The number of press-reported civilian disappearances averaged
 39 per month in 1983. This compares with 160 per month in 1981
 and 38 per month in 1982. Disappearances occur under a variety
 of circumstances. Newspaper and eyewitness accounts often
 describe "armed men in civilian dress" as the perpetrators of
 the seizures. Some persons reported to have disappeared are
 later found assassinated; others may actually be in hiding;
 still others subsequently are found to have been arrested under
 state of seige provisions and detained in security force
 facilities.
 Many of the disappearances of private citizens are attributed
 to government forces. Counterinsurgency units of the different
 security forces routinely practice arbitrary arrest and
 clandestine detention, the former legally permitted by the
 broad provisions of the state of siege Decree 507. The police
 can legally hold a prisoner for only up to 72 hours before
 bringing charges; in practice, prisoners are frequently held
 for longer periods. Family members of individuals detained in
 this way often make inquiries at the different security force
 headquarters to find out where their relatives are being held.
 In late 1983 "disappearances" often turned into reappearances
 within the criminal enforcement system.
 
 
 556
 On December 14, 1983, the Minister of Defense issued a general
 order requiring security force members to be in uniform in
 virtually all cases when conducting arrests, to identify
 themselves while making the arrest, and to notify the Armed
 Forces Chiefs of Staff, the International Committee of the Red
 Cross (ICRC), the Government's Human Rights Commission and the
 detainees' relatives. The order permits incarceration only in
 officially recognized places of detention and reinforces the
 prohibition against the use of torture.
 Guerrilla units stage kidnappings for ransom. Because the
 families of kidnap victims generally try to avoid publicity in
 order to negotiate their release, these guerrilla kidnappings
 receive little media coverage. In his January 8, 1984, homily
 during Sunday mass at San Salvador's Metropolitan Cathedral,
 Auxiliary Archbishop Rosa Chavez publicly called upon the
 guerrilla leadership to release the people they had kidnapped.
 He made particular reference to Luis Ernesto Meardi Borlasca,
 who has been held by the guerrillas since November 23, 1983,
 and who is blind and suffering from heart problems. There are
 continued reports that guerrillas have kidnapped civilians in
 order to recruit them.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 During 1983, elements within the security forces used
 psychological and physical torture as arbitrary punishment or
 to extract information from those suspected of assisting the
 armed guerrilla movement. It is believed that torture almost
 exclusively occurred during the initial stages of detention.
 Electric shock, severe beatings, and deprivation of food, water
 and sleep are the most frequently mentioned types of coercion.
 There is evidence that the use of torture often has been
 prolonged and extreme. It is not possible to establish the
 prevalence of torture because valid and systematic means for
 documenting cases do not exist.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Decree 507 permits arrest without a warrant, and people are
 commonly taken from their homes at night by armed men in
 civilian clothes who refuse to identify themselves. Arrests
 are often made on the basis of another person's denunciation of
 the suspect's alleged subversive links. In fact, the real
 motive for denunciation may be different, such as a purely
 personal dispute or for personal gain. People have given
 testimony of being held in clandestine jails before being
 transferred to one of the security force headquarters.
 Decree 507, as amended by Decree 943, allows the Armed Forces
 to detain an individual for investigation, without charges-. for
 up to 15 days. Then they are required either to release t Q
 person or remand him to the military tribunal. Once remandet,
 to a tribunal, individuals may be held.for up to 180 days
 during a preliminary investigation period, which the tribunal
 may extend. Security forces often hold prisoners, particularly
 those they do not acknowledge holding, much longer for
 investigation. As of mid-September 1983, Mariona Prison had
 376 Decree 507 prisoners; Ilopango Prison had 52 Decree 507
 prisoners. The National Police headquarters in San Salvador is
 
 
 557
 the largest security force detention center, holding up to 250
 individuals. A person acting on behalf of someone who has
 disappeared can file a writ of "personal exhibition" with the
 Supreme Court, which has jurisdiction over all such petitions.
 The Court then names a "Judge Executor" who tries to locate the
 individual. If successful, the "Judge Executor" analyzes for
 the Supreme Court the validity of the legal grounds necessary
 for continued detention. However, if security forces do not
 acknowledge a person's detention, the writ is of little value
 because of the difficulty of locating the person. During 1983,
 the Supreme Court reviewed 1048 such writs and ordered the
 release of the prisoner in over 10 percent (112) of the cases.
 Conditions in the penal centers are generally good. Visitors
 to Mariona and Ilopango confirm that these facilities, where
 political prisoners, along with common criminals, are kept, are
 clean and well-run and provide the basic necessities. There
 have been no recent complaints of ill-treatment by prisoners
 once they are confined within these prisons. The National
 Police have recently allowed representatives from the
 Archdiocese's Legal Aid Office (Oficina de Tutela Legal)
 unimpeded access to the detention facilities.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 After four years of civil war, the historically weak and
 ineffective criminal justice system in El Salvador is in a
 state of near collapse. Delays of two to three years or longer
 in the prosecution of criminal cases are common. In one recent
 case, six former university policemen were convicted of murders
 which occurred in 1978. Regardless of the type of crime,
 judges, lawyers, witnesses, and jury members have been subject
 to bribery, threats, and intimidation.
 In addition to the promulgation of the Constitution, there were
 two developments of major significance to the justice system in
 El Salvador in 1983: the amnesty program and the movement
 toward judicial reform. On May 4 the Constituent Assembly
 unanimously passed an amnesty law drafted by the Government's
 Peace Commission. Under the program, which was in effect from
 May 16 to August 15, the Government offered amnesty to:
 (1) Salvadorans in armed rebellion against the
 government;
 (2) Prisoners detained under Decree 507 who were
 charged with crimes, the penalties for which did not
 exceed four years, and who had spent at least six
 months in prison; and
 -     (3) Prisoners already sentenced under Decree 507
 whose sentences did not exceed four years.
 An Amnesty Board along with the Government's Human Rights
 Commission. and the Intergovernmental Committee for Migration
 (IC) assisted some beneficiaries and family members to
 resettle abroad. The Committee also assisted those
 beneficiaries wishing to remain in El Salvador to settle on
 government-owned farms.
 
 
 558
 When the program ended on August 15, 1,159 individuals had
 benefitted from the amnesty; 562 were political prisoners
 released from prison and 597 were persons who turned themselves
 in and were processed as amnesty beneficiaries. Amnesty Board
 members believe that 60 to 70 percent of the men in the second
 group were actual guerrilla combatants. At the end of 1983
 there were 494 political prisoners being held by the Government.
 Major efforts are underway to ensure more effective functioning
 of the criminal justice system. In June, President Magana
 appointed a Judicial Reform Study Commission composed of
 government officials. The Commission proposed that Decree 507
 be revised to eliminate prolonged detention and to ensure a
 greater measure of due process. A follow-on commission on
 reform of the criminal justice system was created by President
 Magana on September 26 and is charged with a broad mandate to
 recommend to the President code and procedural reforms and
 legal or regulatory changes to improve the judicial system
 generally.
 In a related development, the Supreme Court announced on
 September 9 the formation of its own Penal Reform Commission on
 revision of criminal laws, which will be composed of three
 justices and two private lawyers expert in criminal law.
 Most political cases are dealt with under Decree 507 by the
 military and not by the civilian courts. Most crimes against
 the state, such as treason and sedition, and associated crimes
 related to subversion or terrorism are subject to trial by
 military tribunals. Once remanded to the tribunals,
 individuals may be held for up to 180 days during a preliminary
 investigatory period, which the tribunals may extend. Most of
 the political prisoners are in this extended status. They are
 not permitted legal representation during this period, nor are
 lawyers permitted access to evidence. The tribunals have
 authority to determine admissibility of evidence, including
 extrajudicial confessions and denunciations. Identities of the
 members of the tribunals, who are active duty military
 officers, are secret. The Supreme Court has the authority to
 overturn decisions taken by these tribunals; however, this is
 rarely the case.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence.
 The Government of El Salvador does not interfere in personal
 life except in matters it considers related to the guerrilla
 war, although this exception has had a considerable impact on
 private life. Little is known of guerrilla behavior within
 their own organizations. Both the Government and the
 guerrillas utilize networks of informers. Phone numbers for
 making denunciations to the armed forces are publicized, and
 security forces rely on these informers and anonymous
 denunciations about alleged criminal and subversive activities.
 Decree 507 authorizes search and seizure without a warrant, and
 members of the Armed Forces regularly use forced entry to carry
 out arrests and investigations. The Government's Human Rights
 Commission reported 45 cases of forced entry into a home or
 workplace the first six months of 1983.
 
 
 559
 The National Telephone Company has the ability to monitor
 telephone conversations.
 The constitutional provision protecting the inviolability of
 correspondence is suspended under the state of siege. Postal
 officials have the authority to inspect correspondence, and it
 is believed they do so on occasion.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 State of siege Decree 507 suspends the constitutional rights of
 freedom of speech and press, but the greatest impediments to
 free expression and speech are violent political polarization
 and fear of reprisals, which have made many Salvadorans afraid
 to express their views.
 Most San Salvador newspapers reflect a conservative point of
 view, and criticism of the Government from the right is common
 and often quite vigorous. News of a controversial nature is
 almost always provided by international wire services rather
 than by local reporters. Opinion from the left is limited by
 the newspapers themselves, but to varying degrees they accept
 paid advertisements from organizations loosely associated with
 the left. Spirited and often acrimonious debates are conducted
 through paid ads from groups across the political spectrum. In
 1983, newspapers were not the target of terrorist bombings, as
 in the past, but radio stations have been bombed and attacked
 by both rightist and leftist armed groups. News from the major
 radio stations tends to be the most balanced and thorough.
 Foreign correspondents regularly file reports without
 censorship or delays and find the country and its leaders and
 citizens very accessible.
 The only prominent 1983 example of active government control of
 the media occurred during the mutiny of Lt. Colonel Sigfriedo
 Ochoa, who in January announced that he would not obey orders
 from the Minister of Defense. After several days the
 Government forbade the publication in the local media of any
 information on the subject of the Ochoa mutiny which did not
 come from an official source. Agents were placed at all
 newspapers, radio stations, and television news organizations
 to ensure compliance. The international press was not affected
 by this order and continued to send uncensored accounts out of
 the country.
 In spite of pervasive fear of extremist reprisals, a number of
 sources publish dissenting opinions. Most prominent are the
 frequent news release from Salvadoran organizations denouncing
 human rights abuses. The Jesuit-run University of Central
 America (UCA) publishes a bimonthly journal which often
 supports the guerrilla point of view and which advocates
 negotiations for power sharing with the guerrillas. A recent
 edition was dedicated entirely to the subject of "U.S.
 intervention" in Central America. The UCA also publishes a
 weekly analysis of national and international events with a
 leftist perspective. National University and Archdiocese
 publications are also critical, although the Archdiocese in its
 publication criticizes the guerrillas as well as the Government.
 
 
 560
 Academic freedom is constitutionallly guaranteed. Although the
 National University campus has been closed and occupied by the
 military since 1980, it continues to operate in a number of
 rented locales. There are over 25 private universities in El
 Salvador. While the Government puts no formal restrictions on
 academic freedom, virtually all universities control or limit
 the teaching of subjects which could be considered controver-
 sial. Political activity is prohibited by statute at most of
 the major private universities, and only one university offers
 a degree in political science. In September, three law
 professors from the National University were kidnapped and one
 law professor from the same university was assassinated. A
 right-wing death squad claimed responsibility for two of the
 kidnappings.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Decree 507 suspends the constitutional right to free assembly
 and association. Beginning with the 1982 Constituent Assembly
 election campaign, however, the Salvadoran Government
 reinstated the right of assembly for political parties and
 peaceful organizations, including the Catholic Church and
 democratic labor groups, but not for the organizations of the
 revolutionary left.
 Salvadoran unions are independent and free from government
 control. There is no government-sponsored labor federation.
 The Salvadoran Labor Code recognizes labor's right to strike,
 organize, and negotiate. The right to strike, however, is
 limited in part by Decree 296, which prohibits labor activity
 with potential repercussions on the economy. Although public
 employees are not allowed by the Constitution to organize as
 unions, there were, in fact, a number of well-organized public
 sector strikes in 1983 which elicited no significant reaction
 from the Government.
 Less than 20 percent of the work force belongs to any labor
 organization, including peasant organizations which are not
 recognized formally as labor unions. El Salvador's labor
 organizations maintain close relations with most of the
 important international labor movements. The relative weakness
 of the organized labor movement in El Salvador during the past
 three years is due primarily to the catastrophic state of the
 economy and to political violence. Recent public labor
 demonstrations are an indication that labor strength is again
 on the rise.
 The Popular Democratic Unity (UPD), a federation of farmer
 organizations and labor unions, on March 1, 1983, held a mass
 demonstration in support of the extension of the third phase of
 the agrarian reform. On September 27, the UPD held another,
 larger demonstration in support of agrarian reform.
 The strength of the organized leftist labor federations has
 dissipated in recent years, and the continuing political crisis
 and terrorism have driven some leftist labor leaders and
 organizations underground. Nonetheless, they still exist as
 legal organizations and have been recently successful in
 convincing some democratic labor groups to join their common
 front, the Movement of Labor Union Unity (MUSYGES). MUSYGES
 held its May Day Congress at which participants, protected by
 the Armed Forces, criticized the Government.
 
 
 561
 Reaction from the left and the right to union activity has
 sometimes been extreme. Abductions and murders of labor
 leaders have been a serious problem. Nine union leaders of
 both leftist and rightist orientation disappeared or were
 murdered during 1983, and a number of other labor activists
 suffered a similar fate.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is guaranteed under the Constitution. The
 Catholic Church, headed by Archbishop Arturo Rivera y Damas, is
 one of El Salvador's most influential institutions. The
 hierarchy continues to speak out against human rights abuses by
 all parties, including the army and the security forces, and to
 call for a dialogue between the left and the Government.
 The Church expressed its views on articles in the draft
 Constitution which related to religion and the role of the
 Church and succeeded in obtaining some of the changes it sought.
 The clergy generally was no longer as much a target of rightist
 violence as it was before 1982. However, the "Secret
 Anti-Communist Army" did claim responsibility for the bombing
 without casualties in September of the residence of the Jesuits
 who run the University of Central America. The Archbishop and
 Auxiliary Bishop Rosa Chavez have also received threatening
 phone calls. Church lay workers at times were suspected by the
 Government of aiding or collaborating with the guerrillas. In
 July, six laymen who worked with the Archdiocese's refugee
 program were arrested by the National Police on suspicion of
 membership in a guerrilla group. Two of the six have been
 released for lack of evidence. The other four were in prison
 pending submission of their cases to a military court under
 Decree 507.
 Foreign missionaries were able to enter the country to
 proselytize. Fundamentalist Christian groups continued to
 attract new members.
 d. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign Travel,
 Emigration, and Repatriation
 Although the state of siege decree formally suspended the
 constitutional right to free movement, this suspension
 continued to have little effect in practice. The continuing
 civil strife displaced an estimated 465,000 persons within El
 Salvador, primarily in the northern and eastern departments.
 Another 58,000 to 67,000 displaced Salvadorans lived in camps
 outside El Salvador, primarily in Honduras, Nicaragua, Costa
 Rica, and Mexico. Governments, including that of El Salvador,
 international organizations, and private voluntary organiza-
 tions assisted the displaced.
 There were no restrictions on emigration. The Government
 assisted those amnesty beneficiaries who wished to leave the
 country to resettle elsewhere.
 Salvadorans who were deported back to or, for other reasons,
 returned to El Salvador were not subject to any official
 penalties, harassment, or reprisals. They were free to resume
 their lives in the country. Claims have been made repeatedly
 
 
 562
 that Salvadorans returned from the United States were being
 singled out for persecution, primarily because they had been in
 the United States. All efforts to find evidence to support
 these claims have been unsuccessful.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to
 Change Their Government
 El Salvador is a country in transition to multiparty
 democracy. In 1982 four of the parties in the Constitutent
 Assembly signed the Pact of Apaneca establishing the
 "Government of National Unity" and setting common goals for
 government. The pact also established the Political Commission
 composed of the President, a political independent; the three
 vice presidents, each representing one of the three major
 parties; and the ministers of defense and foreign affairs. The
 Political Commission acts in effect as the Government's
 executive committee. The Armed Forces, which have historically
 dominated the Salvadoran political scene, wield considerable
 power in key decisions. Six parties are represented in the
 60-member Constituent Assembly, elected in 1982. Presidential
 elections are scheduled for March 25, 1984. A new contitution
 was promulgated on December 20, and with its approval the
 Constitutent Assembly became the Legislative Assembly.
 The new Constitution strengthens the rights of private.
 citizens. Presumption of innocence pending proof of guilt is
 codified in the Constitution for the first time. Measures have
 also been taken to strengthen the judiciary. The Attorney
 General is to be appointed by the legislature, rather than by
 the executive, and will have new investigatory powers. The
 Supreme Court's budget will be incorporated unchanged into the
 Government's general budget. There is also provision for
 enhanced judicial review of legislation.
 The Government is also attempting to incorporate all
 Salvadorans into the democratic electoral process. The
 Government's Peace Commission met twice with representatives of
 the guerrilla organizations and their political allies in 1983
 to discuss participation in the upcoming elections and the
 ongoing democratic process.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government has been forthcoming with visiting human rights
 missions, providing information, making its officials available
 for discussion, and permitting the inspection of detention
 centers. In recognition of the situation in El Salvador. the
 Government created an official Human Rights Commission to
 represent individual citizen interests vis-a-vis the security
 forces and justice system.
 The United Nations Human Rights Commission's Special
 Representative visited the country in 1983 for the third
 consecutive year and received substantial cooperation from the
 Government. Representatives of Americas Watch and Amnesty
 International made factfinding visits, as did a group
 cosponsored by the American Association for the Advancement of
 Science and the International League for Human Rights. Other
 private organizatons also sent delegations to report on El
 Salvador's human rights situation; each has been received and
 briefed at the highest levels.
 
 
 563
 The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) continued
 to be active in El Salvador with the cooperation of the
 Government. The ICRC visited prisoners held in the country's
 prisons and detention facilities and provided medical
 assistance in areas not under the control of the Government of
 El Salvador.
 Within El Salvador, there are five nongovernmental
 organizations which have the defense of human rights as their
 stated objectivet The Archdiocese's Oficina de Tutela Legal
 (the Legal Protection Office); Socorro Juridico Cristiano
 (Christian Legal Aid); the El Salvador Human Rights Commission;
 the Committee of Mothers and Relatives of Political Prisoners
 and the Disappeared; and the University Center for
 Investigation and Documentation at the Jesuit-run University of
 Central America.
 Generally these groups accept inquiries in individual human
 rights cases, file write of personal exhibition on behalf of
 the disappeared, and publish statistics. These organizations
 are highly critical of government policy; they denounce both
 the Government and the Armed Forces for human rights violations
 but normally do not criticize the guerrillas for similar
 abuses. These groups generally are not harassed by the
 Government. However, the nongovernmental Human Rights
 Commission was attacked in the press by the Armed Forces Press
 Committee this summer for alleged links to the guerrillas.
 During 1983 the Salvadoran Government created an official Human
 Rights Commission. Its members include lawyers, a peasant
 leader, a representative of the Roman Catholic Church, and the
 Director of the National Police. The official Human Rights
 Commission initiates investigations within 24 hours after
 receipt of an inquiry or complaint. The Commission played an
 important role in denouncing and then investigating the Las
 Hojas massacre in February. During 1983, the Commission
 received 917 complaints or inquiries. Included in this total
 were 45 people under detention by the military who were freed;
 218 people reported to have disappeared who were found to be
 under military detentiof; 83 persons who received protection
 from the Commission; 14 persons reported as missing who were
 found dead and for whom investigations were requested; and 18
 amnesty beneficiaries. The Commission aided 152 amnesty
 beneficiaries in emigrating from El Salvador to Canada,
 Australia, the U.S., and Belgium. The Commission received
 increasing cooperation from the security forces in responding
 to inquiries.
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 El Salvador has a per capita Gross National Product of
 approximately $717. Production is largely based on
 agriculture. Guerrilla attacks on the economic infrastructure,
 increasing population pressure on scarce land, and investment
 uncertainties have curtailed production and growth. Civil
 strife during the last four years, however, has disrupted
 development, particularly in rural areas. Leftist guerrillas
 have targeted the economic infrastructure, attacking the power
 grid, bridges, roads, railroads, bases, the telephone system,
 and crop processing and storage facilities.
 
 
 564
 El Salvador's economy faces severe structural problems with an
 extremely high population density for an agriculturally-based
 economy, high unemployment and underemployment, a lack of
 mineral wealth, and an inadequate health and education
 infrastructure.
 El Salvador's estimated population of five million has a growth
 rate of 2.9 percent per year which places constant pressure on
 standards of living and on meager government revenues. The
 1980 infant mortality rate was 78 per 1,000 live births.
 Roughly 10 percent of the population has an inadequate caloric
 intake. Some 53 percent of the population has easy access to
 potable water.
 Literacy has risen to 62 percent of the total adult popula-
 tion. Some 82 percent of all primary school-age children are
 enrolled in school, with virtually no discrimination on the
 basis of sex.
 In March of 1980, El Salvador instituted sweeping social and
 economic reforms designed in part to transfer ownership of
 farmlands from the small number of large landholders to those
 who worked the land. Under Phase I of the Land Reform Program,
 all farms of more than 500 hectares (1,235 acres) were
 converted into worker cooperatives to be managed jointly by the
 members themselves and the Government Land Reform Institute
 until the cooperatives are able to manage themselves; at that
 point the Government would withdraw and the cooperatives would
 become autonomous. The number of beneficiaries under Phase I
 is 31,359 (or about 188,000 beneficiaries when family members
 are included). Phase II is clarified in the new Salvadoran
 Constitution by establishing a ceiling of 245 hectares (605
 acres) that an individual may own and giving affected owners
 three years to sell property in excess of that limit to
 peasants or peasant organizations. The state can expropriate
 without prior compensation any excess land not disposed of
 during the three-year period. Under Phase III of the land
 reform process, farms previously rented or sharecropped can be
 claimed in parcels of up to seven hectares (17.3 acres) by the
 former renters or sharecroppers. Potential beneficiaries under
 this phase are estimated to number as many as 117,000, excluding
 family members. By late December 1983, some 60,733 persons had
 filed petitions for land under Phase III, over 50 percent of
 those estimated to be eligible. Including family members, more
 than 364,000 Salvadorans are now moving under Phase III toward
 ownership of the land they work. The number of property cw:,ers
 compensated now stands at 499, an increase of 394 in 1983.
 Landowners affected by Phase III have resisted strongly, often
 with violence and forced eviction of beneficiaries. Many who
 have lost land are not wealthy, and there is some evidence that
 most violence and illegal evictions come from the owners of the
 smallest, not largest, farms. Many landowners have filed
 "oppositions" with the Government, thus contesting the
 peasant's claim and keeping the applicant from the land until
 the case is resolved. Peasant organizations have complained
 that the adjudication process takes too long and is too often
 decided in favor of the landlord.
 Although the Government of El Salvador has traditionally
 supported and continues to support private property rights,
 compensation of former owners has been partial and paid very
 slowly, principally because of lack of funds. To date 203
 Phase I properties out of 426 have been compensated.
 Women are active in almost all aspects of political activity.
 There are six women deputies in the Assembly, 10 percent of
 the members, including one who served in 1983 as a vice
 president of the Assembly. Women are also active in political
 party leadership outside the Assembly and occupy municipal as
 well as national government offices. There are several
 professional women's associations as well as the more
 traditional women's charitable organizations, some of which are
 active in lobbying the Government on social welfare issues.
 
 
 565
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (US.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: EL SALVADOR
 1981     1982     1983
 --. -. -.. ------... ---.-.-.-.... -- 7 .. .   ......... �.......o... ....
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        114.0    182.2    245.6
 LOANS ................... 80.0      63.8     86.6
 GRANTS ................    34.0    1  :8.4  159.0
 A.AID ................ ...... 78.3    154.6    198.8
 LOANS..... .    ........   53.8      43.9     47.6
 GRANTS: ...........24.5            110.7    151.2
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)..         44.9     115.0    140.0
 B.FOO FOR PEACE .......        35.3     27.6     46.8
 LOANS .............. .... 26.2    19.9     39.0
 GRANTS ............ .       9.1      7.7      7.8
 TITLE  �TQTAL..,..,,           26,2     19.9     39.0
 f9EPAY. IN $-LOANS .....        6.2     9.9     39.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0       0.0      0.0
 TITLE  I -TOTAL .........       9.1      7.7      7.8
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV 8 WFP.         4.2       5.5      6.2
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....         4.9      2.2      1.6
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...          0.4      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..................   0.0      0.0       0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.4       0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS.....          0.0       0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS .......          0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ............         0.4      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        35.5      82.0     81.3
 LOANS .............. .....  10.0    16.5     46.5
 GRANTS .............   ... 25.5     65.5     34.8
 A.MAP GRANTS ............      25.0     63.5     33.5
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....        10.0     16.5     46.5
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG ....         0.5      2.0      1.3
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0       0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........        0.0       0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...        149.5    264.2    326.9
 LOANS ................... 90.0      80.3    133.1
 GRANTS ............. .... 59.5     183.9    193.8
 ----.-----------.---------....-----.------------....-.--.-
 OTHER US LOANS ..........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......         0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL  OTHER .................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 ..........................................................
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1981     1982     1983     194 -83
 TOTAL ........    40.5     112.8     52.9    778.R
 IBRO               0.0      0.0      0.0     215.1
 IFC                0.0      0.0      0.0       1.0
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0      25.6
 IDB               40.4     112.4     52.9    509.8
 ADB                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFDB               0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNDP               0.1       0.4      0.0     21.3
 OTHER-UN           0.0       0.0      0.0      6.0
 EEC                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 
 
