EL SALVADOR
The report on El Salvador is among the weakest in the Country Reports, as it has been throughout the Reagan Administration. Less a himian rights report than an apologia for the Duarte Government, it is of little use in evaluating the actual human rights situation within the country. By minimizing or excusing serious abuses by a close ally, the State Department diminishes the value of the entire project of the Country Reports, politicizing what should be a sober and factual appraisal of human rights practices.
The weakest portion of the State Department's report is the section on the October 1987 amnesty. The report devotes scant attention to the amnesty, which struck a severe blow to the rule of law and the authority of the civilian government over the military. The amnesty exonerated all persons for all crimes committed in the course of the conflict or related to the conflict, including death squad killings and common crimes. The legislation was drawn extremely broadly, so as to make it virtually impossible for family members ever to pursue justice in the courts for the loss of their relatives. Only one case was exempted — the assassination of Archbishop Romero — at the eleventh-hour insistence of the church. In light of this exculpation of almost all military, security-force and death-squad personnel, the report's observation that the "amnesty has been applied to some cases involving military and security personnel" is an understatement totally inconsistent with accurate reporting.
Similarly, in the section on political killings, the State Department's selective use of available sources ensures a pro-government slant. Of the 169 politically motivated killings that the State Department counted during the first six months of 1987, it attributes "most" to the guerrilla insurgents, the Farabim-do Marti National Liberation Front (FMLN). The report cites as its authority for this figure the Salvadoran press, the guerrilla media and "other publicly available sources." But in El Salvador, neither the local press nor the guerrilla radio
43
Critique
is an effective source for human rights statistics, and the State Department largely ignores the other public sources that do provide accurate information.
The Salvadoran press is not a reliable source because it usually is not able to cover the war, and it does not as a practice investigate killings. While in the past year that press has become more active in reporting on human rights issues, and has even included some information at odds with the government's version of events, it can in no way be considered a systematic or objective recorder of human rights violations.
Most of the Salvadoran print media appears to base its coverj^e of killings mainly on news bulletins from COPREFA, the army press office. COPREFA, in turn, rarely reports on assassinations of civilians by the armed forces, and frequently misattributes such killings to guerrilla executions or land mines. An example is its coverage of the events of April 8,1987, when armed men entered the San Carlos Cooperative in Zacatecoluca, raped several young girls, and threw a grenade into the home of Daniel Ortiz, the treasurer of an agricultural cooperative, wounding Ortiz and his child (Ortiz later died of his wounds) and killing three other adults. The army arrested two people, who were reportedly former members of the armed forces. Nonetheless, La Prensa Grafica, a Salvadoran daily, reported on April 24,1987 that the army press office had included the names of the four dead on a list of purported victims of FMLN mines. The State Department makes no mention of this example of COPREFA's — and the Salvadoran press's — unreliability.
Although the country report also gives as a source the guerrilla media, which frequently does report on army killings, the citation apparently refers to the guerrilla radio's reporting on guerrilla killings. The citation thus is not relevant for assessii^ the State Department's reporting on army killings.
Fmally, the country report refers to "other publicly available sources" in addition to the press. But the report only selectively cites the statistics on killings by the armed forces and guerrillas that are published by the leading public source. Tutela Legal, the highly respected human rights monitoring office of the Archdiocese of San Salvador. In 1987, Tutela Legal reported 24 death squad killings, 60 killings by the armed forces or civil defense, 12 deaths during indiscriminate attacks by the army, 29 killings by the guerrillas, 29 deaths from land
44
El Salvador
mines, and an estimated 280 deaths due to military operations by the armed forces where the majority of the victims are presumed to be civilians. These figures do not support the State Department's claim that "most" political killings were committed by the guerrillas, and the Department omits them from its report. The sole Tutela Legal statistics that the State Department uses are those showing a decline in death squad killings over the past three years, and casting a favorable light on the Duarte government.
The State Department appears to try to justify its limited use of Tutela Legal's findings by criticizing its methodology. For example, the State Department suggests that Tutela Legal adds little to the State Department's review of the press because Tutela Legal purportedly also "uses the press as a major source for its monthly reports." In fact, although Tutela Legal uses the local press for leads, it then, unlike the local press, verifies stories of possible human rights violations by conducting its own interviews of witnesses, judicial personnel and family members. Indeed, Tutela Legal never uses the press alone as the source for a case it reports. Also unlike the local press, Tutela Legal attempts to conduct independent invest^ations of killings of noncombatants in conflicted zones, although its access to such areas is often significantly limited.
The State Department's principal reference to Tutela Legal's human rights statistics is a criticism of its methodology for reporting death squad killings. The report states that from January to May 1987, Tutela Legal tabulated nine death squad killings, but then notes that Tutela Legal does not count or consider murders by the FMLN in its death squad figures," as if to suggest that the organization does not monitor or report on guerrilla violations. In fact, while Tutela Legal properly limits the use of the term of art "death squad" to anonymous killings committed by the military, the security forces or those working with them, it separately reports on FMLN killings and clearly identifies them as such, documenting 29 in 1987.
In attributing most political violence to the left, the State Department suggests that right-wng death squad activity has virtually ceased, and that the government firmly attacks any possible recurrence of it. The report thus asserts that, with one exception, "[rjightwing death squads which formerly publicized their murders did not claim responsibility for any killing during 1987." But
45
Critique
because in the past often no group took responsibility for right-wing death squad killings — a fact that the report neglects to mention — the lack of public claims of responsibility today cannot fairly imply a halt in right-wing death squad killings.
The State Department also mentions several death threats, but hastens to add that "the Government and armed forces condemned the threats and vowed to use the full force of the Government to prevent a resurgence of death squad activity." This limited discussion of death squad activity seriously under-represents this continuing human rights problem and exaggerates the government's efforts to address it. For many years, the Salvadoran government has promised to end death squads and to investigate death squad murders, but not one death squad member has ever been apprehended, tried and convicted for a killing or disappearance. To report on the government's promises of investigation, without at the very least noting the emptiness of these promises, seems to serve no purpose other than to diminish the impact of the few death squad murders that the report does mention.
Moreover, the report ignores several recent killings which demonstrate ongoing death squad activity. For example, on November 8,1987, the bodies of two men were found along the highway with the initials "FDR" written on their chests in red ink, referring to the Revolutionary Democratic Front, the political organization affiliated with the guerrillas. Carried out just weeks before two leading iT!)R representatives returned to El Salvador to resume their political activities in accordance wth the Central American Peace Plan, the killings were taken as a clear warning to the FDR officials not to return.
The report also fails to mention that Archbishop Rivera Damas recently denounced a resurgence of death squad activity, stating: "In recent days I have had the opportunity to meet with almost all of the bishops of the country. They expressed to me their concern over the tendency toward the return of the death squads." While this statement was made three days into 1988, it clearly referred to events in 1987, and was important enough to have been included in the State Department's report. That is particularly true because in other instances the State Department included material from 1988 in the 1987 report, such as Jorge Alberto Miranda Arevalo's televised "confession" to the October 26, 1987
46
El Salvador
murder of Herbert Ernesto Anaya Sanabria, president of the Human Rights Commission of El Salvador (CDHES). The Miranda "confession" was broadcast in 1988 on the day after the Archbishop's unreported statement about rising death squad activity.
The report's treatment of the Anaya murder shows the State Department's selective use of the evidence. In describing the Anaya case, the State Department notes only that Jorge Alberto Miranda Arevalo, whom it identiñes as a member of the People's Revolutionary Army (ERP) guerrilla group, confessed to involvement in Anaya's murder. But the State Department omits mention of the circumstances of Miranda's confession, which raise serious doubts as to its reliability. According to the Salvadoran government, Miranda was apprehended by the police while vandalizing a vehicle, and shortly thereafter he spontaneously confessed to having participated in Anaya's assassination. In fact, Miranda was held incommunicado for twelve days before he was charged with a crime and brought before a judge to ratify his extrajudicial confession — nine days longer than the law allows. In addition, the police paid him $2,400 for turning over two alleged guerrilla arms caches, and he received three injections during his interrogation period. Then, on January 5,1988, President Duarte, accompanied by the Minister of Justice, gave a tele%ised news conference to announce his "moral conviction" that Miranda was a member of the ERP and that Miranda was involved in the Anaya killing, thereby essentially trying, judging and con\icting Miranda by presidential decree on nationwide television. On February 18,1988 — too late for the State Department to include in its report, which was submitted to Congress at the end of January — Miranda retracted his confession, saying that he had been threatened and drugged by the police during detention, and that he was threatened by the police after he changed his confession. Miranda's retraction would appear less of an anomaly after reading the country report if the State Department had more fairly treated the circumstances of his original confession.
The State Department's discussion of disappearances is the most candid section of the report, and an improvement over the previous year's report. The 1987 report notes that "there have been occasional credible reports of persons taken away by men thought to be members of the army or security forces,"
47
Critique
an acknowledgement of government involvement which was not made in the 1986 report. But the 1987 report then needlessly softens this criticism of the armed forces by adding that "positive proof of official responsibility for disappearances "has not been available" — an assertion that applies a higher standard of proof than required even in a U.S. criminal prosecution and which in any event slights the massive e^idence demonstrating military and security-force involvement.
The report cites three cases of disappearances, noting that "the armed and security forces denied any part in the disappearances, and all these cases were referred to the civilian Comission for Invest^ations." While the specific references to three cases is a welcome departure from last year's meager reporting, the State Department does not disclose whether there was evidence suggesting government responsibility for these particular disappearances. The report further, and once again needlessly, minimizes the phenomenon of disappearances by noting that "many persons" reported to have disappeared by their families and human r^ts organizations were later found to have been "legally arrested and duly entered in a security force register," or to have deserted their families, emigrated, or joined the guerrillas. In fact, dozens of individuals were captured by the Army or security forces in 1987 and remain disappeared — a fact which the report would have noted had it bothered to mention, for example, the findings of Tutela Legal, which at year's end showed 50 disappearances following capture by the armed forces, and 38 additional disappearances.
As in past years, the report minimizes the problem of torture of detainees^ though it does note some "mistreatment" and "allegations of abuse." For example, the report mentions that an unnamed prisoner, presumably Hernandes Torres, died "under mysterious circumstances," stating that he died of injuries "allegedly sustained during the time he was in police custody." The report then asserts that the incident is being investigated by the authorities, even though, in fact, there has been no serious investigation by any government authority: none of the prisoners who heard Hernandes Torres being beaten and crying for help have been questioned.
The report's coverage of detention is very deferential to the government, blandly noting, for example, that "arrests without apparent sufficient
48
El Salvador
cause do occur." The comment is an imderstatement even according to the figures of the Salvadoran Government's own official human rights commission, which noted in its report that, of 1364 people arrested from May to October 1987, a total of 1159 (84.9 percent) were released without charge. These figures suggest that a large number of people are arrested for purposes other than to charge them with a crime; to compromise them, to obtain information from them about others, to threaten them, or to attempt to incorporate them into an intelligence network. The high percentage of persons released without charge -- many of whom are arrested merely for suspected association with the guerrillas — makes a mockery of the report's statement that "holding political views opposed to the Government is not justification for arrest if the suspect does not advocate violence."
The report also contends that "detention beyond three days is rare." Unfortunately, reality once again contradicts this rosy picture. The armed forces, particularly the army, have held suspects for longer than 72 hours, and the excuse offered in the report — that "battlefield exigencies preclude the rapid transfer of the arrestee to the police" — is not the reason. For example, in December 1987 six men arrested by the First Brigade in San Jose Guayabal, Cuscatlan, were held for five to six days, not on the battlefield, but in the barracks in San Salvador. The First Brigade denied holding them after the third day, and denied access to the prisoners by the International Committee of the Red Cross throughout their detention.
The discussion of the violations of humanitarian law in armed conflicts is a welcome addition to the report on El Salvador, although even there the reporting on government violations is extremely limited. Of the ten paragraphs in the section, only one mentions government violations. Even then, the State Department's willingness to mention a few "accidental" incidents of bombings of civilians is overshadowed by its blatant assertion, without any apparent support, that many of the reported military violations against civilians "appear to be part of the FMLN's strategy to manipulate human rights issues and organizations for tactical military and political purposes," as if a human rights violation should be excused if reporting on it would aid the guerrillas. The reader is once
49
Critique
again left with the impression of reading a brief for the Duarte government rather than an evenhanded assessment of human rights conditions.
Finally, Section 505(c) of the Trade Act requires the executive branch to report on the status of internationally recognized worker rights in coimtries receiving certain U.S. trade benefits. The Administration purports to satisfy this requirement with the State Department's country reports, but its treatment of the issue in the case of El Salvador is skimpy at best. No mention is made of the extensive military involvement in suppressing efforts by labor unions and peasant associations to organize, associate, bargain and strike. Nor does the report refer to the miu-der of the National Farmworkers' Secretary General for San Miguel, which showed signs of clear military involvement. The report nores altogether the significant legal restrictions on the rights of agricultural workers, such as the prohibition against farm workers' unionizing, striking or obtaining collective contracts. Nor does the report mention the frequent intervention of the military and police to suppress legitimate labor organizing, bargaining and striking.
50
