 EL SALVADOR
 On December 31, 1991, after 11 years of civil war, the Government of El Salvador
 and the Frente Farabundo Marti para la Liberacion Nacional (FMLN) reached an
 agreement ending hostilities and providing for the reintegration of FMLN ex-com-
 batants into the national life of El Salvador. On January 16, 1992, an accord was
 signed to formalize the end of the conflict; a full ceasefire took effect on February
 1 and held throughout the year. On December 15, in the presence of the U.N. Sec-
 retary General and other international witnesses, the final FMLN demobilization
 was celebrated, and by year's end the overall atmosphere countrywide reflected the
 end of the civil war, which caused approximately 60,000 Salvadoran casualties. In
 the Peace Accords the Government and FMLN also agreed to a series of constitu-
 tional reforms; these human rights, judicial, and electoral reforms were ratified by
 the Legislative Assembly.
 The Truth Commission agreed to by both parties in 1991 to investigate serious
 human rights violations in the past decade began its assigned task in 1992 but will
 not report its findings until February 11, 1993. The Ad Hoc Commission established
 to evaluate the human rights record,_professional competence, and commitment to
 democracy of the Salvadoran Armed Forces (ESAF) officer corps presented its con-
 fidential findings to President Cristiani and to U.N. Secretary General Boutros
 Ghali on September 22; President Cristiani had until December 31 to implement its
 findings, which included retiring many officers responsible for human rights viola-
 tions. At the end of the year the Government was discussing implementation of the
 Ad Hoc Commission recommendations with the FMLN and the U.N.
 The ESAF includes the army, air force and navy. Total military expenditures for
 1989, a year of full-scale conflict with the FML  and the last year for which the
 US. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency conducted a detailed analysis, were
 $252 million. Throughout 1992 the armed forces underwent a largescale reduction
 in manpower, and four out of the ESAF's five elite rapid response battalions were
 
 
 396
 dismantled; the final one is scheduled to be eliminated in February 1993. The Na-
 tional Police (PN) is no longer part of the Defense Ministry, and the Treasury Police,
 National Guard, and Civil Defense Forces were abolished in .1992. Training courses
 for the first members of the to-be-established National Civilian Police (PNC) began
 in September, 20 percent of the trainees are from the old National Police and 20
 percent from the FMLN while 60 percent are individuals without involvement on
 either side of the armed conflict. The PN will be abolished once the PNC is fully
 deployed, which is expected to occur by mid-1994.
 E Salvadr has a mixed economy largely based upon agriculture and light manu-
 facturing. The Government undertook a number of free market reforms, and real
 economic growth in 1992 was estimated at 4.6 yercent.
 The end of the civil war brought an overall improvement in the human rights sit-
 uation. There were no confirmed cases of death squad killings in 1992. However,
 human rights violations persist. Both the FMLN and the ESAF committed human
 rights violations in 1992. There were allegations that the ESAF was responsible for
 extrajudicial killings torture of-detainees and arbitrary arrests. The FMLN was al-
 legdly responsible for extrajudicial killings and threats against government offi-
 cials. The U.N. observer mission in El Salvadr (ONUSAL) continued its mission
 begun in July 1991 to verify implementation of the human rights accord signed in
 July 1990. by the Government and the FMLN. In its reporting ONUSAL stated that
 the number of human rights violations continued to decline in 1992, while noting
 that serious violations persisted. ONUSAL also criticized the Government for often
 failing to investigate what a peared to be politically motivated crimes (Section L.a.).
 Military and police officials, people with influence, and FMLN members generally
 enjoyed virtual immunity from prosecution for human rights abuses in 1992. Two
 notable exceptions were the sentencing in January of anESAF colonel and a lieu-
 tenant for the 1989 murders of six Jesuit priests and their two employees, and the
 FMLN's surrender to Salvadoran authorities of two FMLN combatants accused of
 murdering two U.S. servicemen in 1991.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrzjudicial Killing.-The end of hostilities in El Salvador
 led to a reduction in extrajudicial killings, but members of the military, police, and
 FMLN allegedly ommitted~ murders that may have had political motives. On Janu-
 ary 11, Francisca Chavez, a promoter for the San Roque Council of Communities
 Affeed by Disasters and a member of the Salvadoran Communal Movement, was
 shot and killed on a busy San Salvador street. Tutela Legal, the human rights office
 of the archdiocese of San Salvador, and the noverental Human Rights Com-
 mission (CDHES) labeled the crime the work of death squads. On the morning of
 March 2, a labor union's night watchman, Nazario de Jesus Gracias, was murdered
 at the union's San Salvador office. Gracias-arrested in October 1991 by the ESAF's
 First Brigade, then turned over to the National Police, who held Gracias for two
 days before releasing him-had charged that the military and  lie threatened his
 life during and after his period in detention. This and the brutal nature of the
 Gracias slaying, led to credible charges that official elements were responsible for
 the murder. The case has not yet been resolved, despite Salvadoran and ONUSAL
 investigations.
 On the morning of May 19, in a street on the outskirts of San Salvador, FMLN
 member Vladimir Flores was shot numerous times. The incident provoked initial ac-
 cusations by the FMLN and others that the shooting had been a paramilitary death
 squad-type attack. The Government's Special Investigative Unit (SIU) conducted the
 investigation, which indicated that the attack had been criminally-not politically-
 motivated; suspects were arrested. In July, two members of the FENASTRAS Labor
 Federation were killed in separate incidents which were initially characterized by
 some as political. Subsequent investigation by the SIU indicated that both men were
 killed in personal disputes and resulted in the arrest of the presumed murderer of
 one of the men.
 On July 31, assailants shot Eduardo Pineda Valenzuela, formerly the head of the
 prosecution team in the Jesuit case and a ranking official in the newly established
 Office of the Human Rights Ombudsman, leaving him paralyzed. On August 17,
 Mrs. Pineda was robbed of her car at gunpoint, further contributing to speculation
 that one or both incidents were politically motivated.
 In another incident on October 11 in Usulutan, heavily armed men intercepted
 a vehicle in which FMLN/FPL (Popular Forces of Liberation) field commander Pablo
 Antonio Parada Andino was riding and shot Parada several times. Evidence indi-
 cated that some of the attackers were off-duty ESAF members engaged in armed
 
 
 397
 holdups. One ESAF soldier has been arrested, and he is being charged with at-
 tempted robbery and havinginflicted serious injury; two other individuals are also
 being sought by the police. On November 17, Juan Arnulfo Garcia Gamez, a driver/
 bodygu    of    L     L leader Alberto Enriquez was shot to death by unknown
 men while riding a bus in San Salvador. Despite conflicting accounts of the events
 surrounding the murder, reliable sources indicate that Garcia was killed when he
 attempted to resist thieves as they robbed bus passengers at gunpoint.
 There were no confirmed cases of death squad killings nor cases where death
 squads claimed responsibility for murders; nonetheless, human rights organizations
 continued to ascribe certain suspicious deaths to death squads. In early January,
 a grup allng tsef te "ecrt Ary o Naionl Slvaion (ESN)issued threats
 to the Christian Committee for the Displaced of El Salvador (CRjDES) and to elev-
 en members of the National Council of Churches of El Salvador (CNI). Nuria
 Esmeralda do Grande, wife of CNI board member pastor Julio Cesar Grande, was
 abducted, drugged, and held for nearly three days by captors who questioned her
 about CNI members and their work. In late January, the so-called Salvadoran
 Anticommunist Front (FAS) allegdly again sent written threats to Mirtala Lopez,
 one of the directors of CRIPDES.  ats were also received by General Rene Emilio
 Ponce for having signed the peace accords, ONUSAL Chief lqbal Riza, National Rev-
 olutionary Movement (MNR) secretary General Victor Valle, and Nationalist Demo-
 cratic Union (UDN) leader Luis Galvez.
 On August 24, Dr. Jose Mauricio Quintana Abrego, an ex-FMLN supporter who
 became member of the ruling ARENA party and who had ties to ESAF intelligence,
 was kidnaped and murdered by unknown persons. Quintana's murder, which has
 not yet been resolved, and those of several other members of the ESAF led to
 charges that the FM   was res  nsible.
 For much of 1992, the FMLN prevented the elected mayors in former conflict
 areas from assuming office by threatening them. Since mid-July, however, over two-
 thirds of the mayors have returned to their towns and ONUSAL hopes that the re-
 mainder wil return by early January. On September 26, Wilber Alexander Jimenez
 Jaimes, the maywor of San Rafael Oiente and a member of the National Concilition
 Party (PCN), who had been threatened by the FMLN, was robbed and murdered by
 unknown men. However, Jimenez reportedly was carrying the equivalent of $4,600
 at the time of his death and his murder may have been a common, rather than po-
 litical, crime.
 In late September, a national police patrol responding to a call in Santa Tedawas
 ambushed by a large, well-armed group-reportedy FMLN-wearing camouflage
 uniforms and fare paint. One policeman and two attackers were killed in the inci-
 dent. On October 1 in Usulutan, four heavily armed men iring automatic weapons
 ambushed a vehicle carrying three employees of the government Commission for the
 Restoration of Areas (CONARA) who were making routine inspections of local
 projects. Jose Salvador Alvarez was seriously injured. Juan Antnio Luna was
 wounded slightly, while Li Alonzo Lazo escaped injury. Robbery apparently was
 not the motive, as the attackers made no attempt to stp the vehicle. All three men
 had received recent threats from the FMLN to cease their work in Usulutan.
 There was some progress in resolving lIong-outstanding incidents of human rights
 abuse from earlier years. In 1992 FMLN supporter Cesar Ernesto Erazo Cruz was
 acquitted by a jury on charges that he had murdered ex-Foreign Minister and Su-
 preme Court President Dr. Francisco "Chachi" Guerrer in 1989. One charge con-
 nected with Erazo's escape from prison remained; however, he was released on bail
 on August 12. In March FMLN member Joo Alberto Miranda, convicted in 1991
 of the 1987 murder of CDHES coordinator Herbert Anaya, was sentenced to 30
 years in prison.
 Two conservative politicians were shot and killed in the summer of 1989; Adolfo
 Aguilar Payes had been held for both murders since July 1989. Aguilar Payes'
 brother appealed to the Human Rights Ombudsman to Investigate, saying the con-
 fession the police obtained was elicited under torture, and charging the Sixth Crimi-
 nal Court with manipulating the setting of a trial date and the selection of the jury.
 Apuilar Payes began a hunger strike on October 15 on November 19 the Human
 Rights Ombudsman gave the judge 3 days to begin the trial process. A jury acquit-
 ted Agular Payes on December 3, and he was then released.
 In the investigation of the 1981 El Mozote massacre, the judge of the court of first
 instance took testimony and inspected six sites where over 700 men. women. and
 children were killed in 1981. Forensic experts from Argentina and the United States
 collaborated on the exhumations, which began October 13. The Argentine team sub-
 mitted a 78-page report to the judge on December 17. The physical evidence (skele.
 tons of 119 people, 184 cartridge shells, and 245 bullets) confirms a mass murder,
 
 
 398
 which now appears to have been perpetrated by ESAF units. The four US. forensic
 experts are expected to submit their report in January 1993.
 On March 17, the FMLN turned over FMLN combatants Ferman Hernandez and
 Severiano Fuentes Fuentes to government authorities to be tried for the 1991 mur-
 ders of two US. servicemen whose helicopter the FMLN had downed. The judge is
 hearing testimony in the case, which is in the investigative phase.
 On December 16, Jose Maria Tojeira Central America Provincial Head of the Jes-
 uit Order, presented a petition to the President of the National Assembly requesting
 a pardon for the two military officers-Clonel Guillermo Alfredo Benavides and
 Lieutenant Yuhsshi Rene Mendoza--convicted of the 1989 murders of six Jesuit
 priests, their housekeeper and her dauhter. Tojeira said that he remains commit-
 ted to bringing the "intellectual authors of the murders to justice.
 b. Disappearance.-The Constitution forbids unacknowledged detention by the se-
 curity forces or the military.
 There continued to be charges that persons disappeared after being seized by the
 ESAF during 1992 as well as allegations of abductions by the FMLN. There is no
 evidence to verifi these allegations, however.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Credible reports of torture and abuse of detainees by the public security forces con-
 tinued in. 1992, although torture is prohibited by the Constitution. Between July
 and November 1992, the ONUSAL human rights division accepted four reports al-
 leging the use of torture. Reliable human rights monitors reported that detainees
 were threatened deprived of food, water, and sleep, and beaten. The most severe
 problems were beatings and psychological pressure. Most reports charged that
 human rights violations occurred during the 72-hour period of administrative deten-
 tion, prior to the presentation of a prisoner before a judge. Despite some improve-
 ment as a result of new orders issued by the High Command in July 1990 prohibit-
 ing such mistreatment abuses have continued.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, betention, or Exile.-Although prohibited by the Constitution,
 arbitrary arrest and detention continued in 1992. ONUSAL received 428 complaints
 of arbitrary or unlawful detention by the security forces during January-November
 1992, a reduction from previous years. Frequently, the police exceed their mandate
 by arresting people without a warrant when they have only a suspicion of a crime.
 In addition to illegal detentions by the police, ONUSAL reported that members of
 the Civil Defense Forces and Territorial Service continued to detain people, even
 though they were supposed to have been dissolved under the peace accords.
 Although the police can hold a person for 72 hours before presenting him to a
 court, they frequently detained indiviuals longer than the legally sanctioned time
 period. Serious human rights violations could occur during this period, including tor-
 ture, forced confessions, and lack of access to counsel. As an initial move to correct
 this problem, the Legislative Assembly passed in 1992 the Public Defense Law
 which guarantees counsel to indigent defendants from the moment of detention;
 however, an inadate number of public defenders makes enforcement of this pro
 vision difficult. ONUSAL reported that a large proportion of detainees, many of
 whom had been incarcerated four or five years, had never seen a lawyer.
 When the detainee is delivered to the court, the judge may order detention for
 an additional 72 hours to determine if the evidence warrants holding the accused
 for further investigation. This time limit is normally respected. The judge is then
 allowed 120 days to investigate serious crimes, or 15 days for lessr offenses, before
 bringing the accused to trial or dismissing the case. In practice, however, these time
 limits are rarely observed.
 Procedural time limits are essential for a "speedy trial," a fundamental constitu-
 tional principle. The judicial system, however, remained inefficient, with 79,000
 criminal cases, many of which were 5 years or older and inactive. Judges are fre-
 quently criticized for the amount of time it takes to process a case, an  for not ob-
 serving terms and time periods for different procedures. Most observers agree that
 the major obstacles to speedy trials are insufficient criminal investigative capabili-
 ties, inadequate preparation.f legal professionals, weaknesses in the criminal pro-
 cedure code, and poor court adminstrastion.
 Prisoners can remain in jail without a trial or official documentation against them
 for years. While the law permits release pending trial for crimes where the maxi-
 mum penalty does not exceed 3 years, many common crimes (against property,
 homicide, murder, manslaughter, and rape) carry penalties in excess of 3 years,
 thereby precluding release pending trial. As the accused is imprisoned from the mo-
 ment apprehended, and the process can take 2 years, the defendant may end up
 being incarcerated longer than the actual minimum sentence, and at times the max-
 imum sentence. Any detained person may request a review (habeas corpus) by the
 Supreme Court. Although this recourse is frequently used, the majority of such ap-
 
 
 399
 pea's are denied. However, in 1992 this appeal mechanism was used to obtain the
 freedm of individuals in several prominent cases. The Ministry of Justice is review-
 ing the habeas corpus mechanism, and reforms are expected to be proposed in 1993.
 There are no previsions in the law for exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public 7Wa.-The court structure is divided into four levels: jus-
 tices of the peace courts of the first instance, courts of the second instance (appeals
 courts), and the Supreme Court. Jury verdicts can be neither overruled by a judge
 nor appealed to a higher court. Sentences, however, may be appealed up to the Su-
 preme Court. In theory, defendants have the right to the presumption of innocence;
 protection from self incrimination; legal counsel; freedom from coercion; to be
 present in court; the opportunity to confront witnesses; and compensation for dam-
 ages due to judicial error. In practice, almost all of these rights are frequently ig.
 nored.
 Although nominally independent the judiciary Is severely weakened by political
 pressures. Political affiliation and family ties, rather than professiona capabilities,
 are the criteria used to appoint judges. Reappointment is often based more on a
 judge's political loyalty than on integrity or professional qualifications. Civilian
 courts have jurisdiction over military personnel who commit common (nonmilitary)
 crimes, and judges have shown an increased willingness to investigate ESAF
 abuses.
 The Government made some progress in addressing problems in the judiciary, im-
 proving the administrative functions of the courts, updating the legal codes, and im-
 proving the overall professionalism of the system. On December 11, two important
 judicial reform bills were approved by the National Assembly, one establishing a
 new National Council of the Judiciary and the other regulating judicial careers; they
 are expected to improv  e screening and selection process for judges. The Ministry
 of Justice has prepared a series of proposals to broaden protection of individual
 rights in criminal proceedings.
 According to the Supreme Court, the Government has released all political pris-
 oners except those convicted by a jury and, as stipulated in the amnesty law, others
 detained for possible study of their cases by the Truth Commission. A composite list
 of persons considered to be political prisoners by the Committee of Mothers of Politi-
 cal Prisoners, the Disappeared, and the Assassinated of El Salvador (COMADRES),
 the Committee of Relatives for the Liberty of Political Prisoners and the Dis-
 appeared of El Salvador (CODEFAM), the SupremeCourt, and the statistics office
 o the Headarers for Penal and Rehabilitation Centers, would include approxi-
 mately 39 individuas. Establishing the precise number of alleged political prisoners,
 however, is difficult, as various groups use different criteria in identifying those to
 whom they apply the label. Identification of political prisoners is also complicated
 by the fact that some groups erroneously consider individuals jailed for crimes such
 as murder--if ommitted for political purposes-to be prisoners of conscience. How-
 ever, there are persons, against whom evidence is spurious (such as Payes--eee Sec-
 tion l.a.), jailed for crimes such as homicide, subversive association, or robbery.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Accord-
 ing to the Constitution, the police must have the resident's consent a warrant, or
 a reasonable belief that a crime is being or is about to be committed, before entering
 a private dwelling. In practice, the National Police often used forced entry without
 a warrant to carry out arrests and investigations. Wiretapping of telephone commu-
 nications by the Government, the FMLN, private persons, and political parties is
 illegal, but widespread.
 Incidents of forced recruitment by ESAF and FMLN forces largely ended once im-
 plementation of the Peace Accords began. FMLN-linked "public scrutiny" commit-
 tees exercise a high degree of control over the residents of repatriate communities,
 and the FMLN has used intimidation to enforce obedience.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Pess.-Freedom of the press is provided for by the Con-
 stitution, but sometimes it is inhibited by violence and threats of violence. Violence
 and intimidation directed at the press affected foreign correspondents much more
 than the national press. A Reuters correspondent was withdrawn suddenly when his
 car was destroyed by a bomb near midnight on New Yea's Eve, 1991. This followed
 by several weeks an attempt to kidnap him. Upon investigation, however, it was dis-
 covered that the motive for these attempts was personal, not politica. In June the
 Associated Press and the Interpress Servic offices, next door to each other in _the
 same building, were victims of a fire. The cause of the fire remains uncertain, but
 electrical problems may have been responsible. The FMLN-associated wire service,
 Sapres, lost its archives on July 2 in a re which appeared to have been set delib-
 erately.Saspress claimed that it later received a telephone call threatening a further
 
 
 fire and that its director, Ricardo Gomez received a death threat. Journalists from
 Time, Spanish National Radio, CBS and UPI have been mugged, robbed at gun-
 point, or had their homes bur;glfared the UPI correspondent's car was stolen. Some
 international journalists maintain that the large number of major crimes striking
 their small group is not coincidental.
 El Salvador has 5 daily nwspapers, 6 television stations, over 50 radio stations,
 and two cable television systems. The Government operates one television station
 and one radio station. Both the Catholic Church and the ESAP operte radio sta-
 tions; the FMLN broadcasts on one new station and two formerly clandestine ones,
 now fully licensed and operating from San Salvador offices. Print and bradast
 journalists from across a wide political spectrum regularly criticize the Government
 and report opposition (inclding FMLN) views. The Govetrnmentha eli ated
 wartime requirement tat journalists carry a government issued identification card
 in order to practice their profession.
 Academic freedom is rovided for by the Constitution and was generally respected
 by the Government in 1992. University autonomy prohibits law enforcement officials
 from entering public campuses. The Government continues to express its concerns
 that the University of EI Salvador campus is controlled by groups linked to the
 FMLN, but has refrained from any direct intervention in the university.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Any association not formed for
 criminal purposes is legal and permitted in El Salvador. Numerous political, profes-
 siona, religious, labor, and social organizations, including those allied with the
 FMLN, operate without legal restriction. Since the signing of the Peace Accords,
 FMLN members and others on the left have regularly heldor participated in open
 forums and political rallies without incident. Contentious political issues are now
 regularly the subject of seminars, conferences, and media discussions.
 c. Freedom of Re/igion.-Freedm of reigion is guaranteed by the Constitution
 and is respected. Pohtical activity b some religious groups led in previous years to
 incidents of intimidation. In 1992, tere were two reported incidents against mem-
 bers of the CNI. Roman Catholicism is El Salvador's predominant and official reli-
 gion, but a fast-growing sector of the population now practices other faiths, mostly
 evangelical Protestant. These groups practice without hindrance.
 . d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution establishes the right of free movement. Article 97
 states that foreigners may not involve themselves in the internal political affairs of
 the country, and the Government reserves the right to deny entry to, or deport, for-
 eigners believed to violate that section of the law. Freedom of movement throughout
 the country is permitted by the Government.
 There are no restrictions on citizens changing their residence or work place.
 ONUSAL monitored the 15 designated assembly zones-established by the Peace
 Accords-in which FMLN ex-combatants and supporters were concentrated during
 the cease-fire. As FMLN ex-combatants were demobilized, ONUSAL issued them
 documents with which they were free to leave the assembly zones and reintegrate
 into society as civilians. In addition, a major effort is underway by the Government
 to issue or replace citizen identification cards in the 115 municipalities affected by
 the conflict.
 Since 1987, when the first wave of refugees repatriated from Honduras, nearly
 27,000 refugees have returned to El Salvador from Honduras, Nicaragua, Panama,
 and Cuba with the assistance of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refu-
 gees (UNHCR). Refugees were not forced to return and were free to decide where
 to reside, as long as the site was legally obtained. The Government tried to prevent
 returned refugees from squatting on private lands, but was not always successful.
 Properly documented refugees are free to travel within El Salvador. The Govern-
 ment imposes no control on emigration and cooperates with international organiza-
 tions that arrange Salvadoran emigration to other countries.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Salvadoran people exercise their right to change their Government peacefully
 through regularly-scheduled elections (every three years for legislators and local
 o vernment officials, every five years for President and Vice President). Voting is
 y secret ballot and there is umversal suffrage. International observers, including
 te Organization of American States (OAS), certified that the 1991 legislative and
 municipal elections were free and fair. The field of political parties participatimg in
 the elections expanded to include the Democratic Convergence (CD), a coalition of
 leftist parties with ties to the FMLN. The CD received over 12 percent of the vote
 in the 1991 election and eight of 84 National Assembly seats. The CD came in sec-
 ond in total votes in the capital city. The Nationalist Democratic Union, affiliated
 
 
 401
 with the Communist Party, joined the political process in 1991 and won 4 percent
 of the vote and one seat in the Asembly.,
 As called for in the Peace Accorsth FANinitiated tepoeso         eitrn
 as a political party in early 1992, and began carrying out full political activity .i-
 cluding openg local party offices, holdig rallies, and utilizing electronic media)
 even before the-party was legally registered. The Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE)
 tentatively approved the FMLN party registration application in November, and the
 party was iniribed on Decembei 14.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regardmng International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Domestic human rights organizations active in El Salvador include the govern-
 mental Human Rights Commission (CDH), the Catholic Church's Tutela Legal and
 the nongovernmental Human Rights Commission (CDHES). Constitutional reforms
 ratified unanimously in September 1991 created the position of Human Rights Om-
 budsman; Dr. Carlos Maurico Molina Fonseca was elected to the post by the Na-
 tional Assembly in February. As the only human rights organization specifically es-
 tablished by the Constitution, the Ombudsman's office is charged with the task of
 receiving allegations of human rights abuses committed by government officials, in-
 vestigating them and, if warranted, lodging official complaints against specific offi-
 cials. Although the Ombudsman's Office was slow to be gin mnitoring cases, some
 of its potential was demonstrated in the Payes case, where the Ombudsman's in-
 volvement led to Payes' trial after 3 years of imprisonment.
 Viewed by many as linked to the FMLN, the nongovernmental CDHES focuses
 primarily on alleged abuses by the Government. The CDHES also follows cases
 through the investigation and trial stages provides free legal assistance and pub-
 lishes monthly reports. Tutela Legal, the human rights office of the Archdiocese of
 San Salvador, also focuses on allegations of government abuses, follows cases, and
 publishes periodic reports. Numerous other church, labor, university, and other non-
 governmental organizations have human rights offices that also operate without
 legal restriction.
 ONUSAL is mandated to verify and monitor implementation of agreements be-
 tween the Government and the FMLN, to investigate alleged human rights viola-
 tions, and to conduct educational and public awareness campaigns promoting
 human rights. It makes recommendations to the Government and the FMLN and
 also reports directly to the U.N. Secretary General. In its Augut report, although
 noting serious weaknesses in the judicial system, ONUSAL found the overall human
 rights situation had improved. Recognizing this improvement, the United Nations
 downgraded El Salvadois human r     s clasification in 1992, assigning Dr. Pedro
 Nikken as the U.N. human rights adviser for El Salvador, replacing Special
 Rapporteur Pastr Ridruejo.
 Various international human rights groups visit or operate without government
 restrictions. The International Committee of the Red Cros (ICRC) visited prisoners
 and detainees and made confidential reports to the Government on their treatment.
 The ICRC no longer continues its visitation program; in its view there no longer are
 detainees falling within the category of those visited by the ICRC.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Language, or Social Status
 Article 3 of the Salvadoran Constitution states that all people are equal before
 the law and prohibits discrimination based on nationality, race, sex, or religion. El
 Salvador is an ethnically homogeneous country, though a small segment of the pop-
 ulation claims to have descended solely from indigenous peoples. There is no official
 discrimination against them. The Salvadoran National Indigenous Association
 (ANIS) was founded to promote indigenous culture and language.
 Women who comprise approximately 54 percent of the Slvadoran population, are
 granted he same legal    i as men under the Constitution. In practice, women
 suffer discrimination, part Icularly in not having equal access to economic resources
 such as credit and land. Much of women's labor is outside the cash economy and
 not remunerated monetarily. Salaries for women are generally lower than those for
 men, and women are disproportionately represented in low pay and low status jobs
 in the informal sector. Wages paid to professional women remain lower than those
 paid to men in the same profession, and women with lower levels of education work-
 Ing in nonprofessional jobs are paid considerably less than men. Women in El Sal-
 vador do not receive the same level of education and training as men. The average
 level of education completed by women is about 4 years, almost one year less than
 men. Training geared to females tends to focus on areas where they are already eco-
 nomically active and on generally low-income occupations: teaching, nursing, home
 industries or small businesses.
 
 
 Violence against women, including domestic violence, is widespread, but the lack
 of reliable statistics countrywide makes it impossible to gauge its extent. There were
 60 reported rapes in the capital city of San Salvador In a typical month (September
 1992). Rape victims have been encouraged, through a regular newspaper campaign
 spearheaded by the Attorney General's office, to come forward and press charges im-
 mediately after the assault has occurred. Medical and plice personnel have been
 sensitized to their teaks. Since 1991 a public prosecutor has been on duty 24 hours
 a day at the San Salvador Children's Hospital to assist rape victims and their fami-
 lies in taking legal action. Nevertheless, prosecution of raps cases is difficult be-
 cause of the lack of support groups for victim, aggravated by pervasive cultural at-
 titudes. There. are over 10 women-s organizations to assist low income women.
 Major concerns for women's rights groups are equal rights, unemployment, access
 to credit and skills training, illiteray, health services, family planning, child care,
 and violence against women.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Aasociation.-The 1983 Constitution prohibits the Government
 from using nationality, race, sex, creed, or political philosophy to prevent workers
 or employers from organizing themselves into unions or associations. However, a
 confusing and sometimes conflicting set of laws governing labor relations has im-
 peded full realization of the freedom of association clled for in the Constitution.
 The Labor Code prohibits partisan political activity by unions. This prohibition is
 routinely ignored, however, and labor organizations were prominent in partisan ac-
 tivities during the 1991 elections, which saw eight labor leaders elected to Congress.
 In the Peace Accords the Government committed itself to seek consensus on revised
 labor legislation through a Socioeconomic Forum with equal representation from
 labor (including groups aligned with the FMLN), government, and the private se-
 tor. n December 1992, the Government submite its proposals for reforming the
 Labor Code to the Forum. The Forum has created two subcommissions and com-
 menced review of the Labor Code, overcoming a disagreement on which issues would
 be addressed first.
 Legally, only private sector nonagricultural workers have the right to form unions
 and to strie; employees of nine autonomous public agencies may form unions but
 not strike. Both labor and management often ignore the onerous and time-consum-
 ing~ l;e euirements to settle labor disputes, making most strikes technically ifie-
 pe    strikes are illegal, but frequent, and generally settled through
 negotiations between public employee associations and the Government. Public
 school teachers struck for over a month, and a 2-day strike in July was honored by
 some workers from several government ministries (including the Labor Ministry),
 autonomous government agencies, and municipalities.
 Approximately 150 trade unions, employee associations, and peasant organiza-
 tions have a combined membership of 400,000, roughly 15 percent of the work force.
 There are credible charges that the Government has impeded union registration
 through exacting reviews of union documentation and strict interpretation of the
 Constitution, Labor Code, and union statutes. Labor leaders accuse the Minister of
 Labor of conspiring with management to frustrate union registration by, for exam-
 ple, informing management of potential legal challenges to a registration applica-
 tion. Labor alliances change frequently, but an umbrella organization including
 most major labor organizations, the Intergremial gaied new prominence with the
 1991 presentation of a draft labor code and labor's participation in the Forum.
 Unions freely affiliate with international labor organizations.
 Harassment and violence against union and cooperative members decreased in
 1992, as did violence in general, with the signing of the Peace Accords. ONUSAL
 inted outht othe failure of the Government to investigate adequately many vio-
 en crimes against labor leaders (see Section l.a.) remained a serious problem.
 When two members of the FENASTRAS Labor Federation were killed, allegations
 were made that the murdes   were politically motivated. Subsequent investigation,
 however, found that both men were killed in personal disputes. Riot polie inter-
 vened in several labor protests when streets were blocked, buildings occupied, or
 private property damaged, but generally did not employ excessive force.
 The Government has not responded to repeated International Labor Organization
 (H)l) invitations, formal and informal, over the past twoyears, to request an  s.
 Direct Contacts Mission to look into and recommend how El Salvador could remedy
 violations of freedom of asseiation-mostly murders, disappearances and arrests of
 trade union leaders. The ILO Governing Body in November again regretted the
 greview of the violations and lack of government response and made another urgent
 especneall i.e
 
 
 b. The Right to Organize and Bar .a!. Collectively.-The right of collective bar-
 gaining is granted inboth the Constitution and the Labor Code, although it isgen-
 erally accepted that the Labor Code protections are inadequate. The Labor Code
 grants this right only to employees in the private sector and in autonomous agencies
 of the Government, such as utilities and the port authority. Both private sector
 unions (by law) and public sector employee associations (in fact) use the mechanism
 of collective bargaining extensively.
 The Ministry of Labor is responsible for overseeing the implementation of collec-
 tive bargaining agreements and acting as conciliator i labor disputes in the private
 sector and autonomous government institutions. In practice, government ministers
 and the heads of autonomous government institutions negotiate with their labor or-
 ganizations directly, relying on the Labor Ministry only or such duties as officially
 certifyig unions.
 The Constitution provides that union officials at the time of their election,
 throughout their term, and for 1 year following their term, shall not be fired, sus-
 pended for disciplinary reasons, removed, or demoted except for legal cause. This
 provision is generally observed in practice, but in some cases those .attempting to
 form unions have been fired before receiving union credentials.
 El Salvador has two export processing zones (EPZs), one public and one private,
 currently operating and two more under construction. Labor regulations in these
 zones are identical to those throughout the country. There were complaints from
 time to time that companies operating in the EPZ's, as well as other areas, gen-
 erally discourage labor organizing. Working conditions in the zones are generally
 better than those in similar companies outside them. The public EPZ is located near
 El Salvador's main Air Force base and during the war an elite military battalion
 was housed there. Access to the zone is controlled by a civilian manager who does
 not permit unions to conduct organizing activities on the premises. The Ministry of
 Labor opened a branch office in both EPZ's in November 1992. There are no unions
 in any of the firms in either zone.
 c. P-rohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor except in the case of calamity and other instances specified by
 law. This provision is generally honored in practice. The ILO's Committee of Exprts
 has been critical of provisions in the Penal Code which impose penalties involving
 compulsory labor for activities relating to expression ofdpolitial opinion.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Constitution prohibits the em-
 ployment of children under the age of 14. The Labor Code states that exceptions
 may be made only in cases where it can be demonstrated that such employment is
 absolutely indispensable to the sustenance of the minor and his family. This is most
 often the case with children of peasant families who traditionally work with their
 families during planting and harvesting seasons. Children frequently work as ven-
 dors and general laborers in small businesses, especially in the informal sector. The
 Constitution prohibits the employment of persons under 18 years of age and all
 women in occupations considered hazardous. Inspections by the Ministry of Labor,
 however, were insufficient to enforce the law.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Government's national minimum wage
 council has recommended increases in the minimum wages for commercial, indus-
 trial, service, and agroindustrial employes. For the most part minimum wages are
 inadequate to meet the Ministry of Ecnomys standard of basic necessity, and an
 estimated 40 percent of the population lives below the poverty level. Efforts by the
 current Government to reduce its fiscal deficit and restructure the economy have in-
 cluded new taxes and reductions in subsidies to some basic services. The Forum
 plans to discuss ways to mitigate the negative effects of these policies on the poor.
 The law limits the workday to 6 hours for minors between 14 and 18 years of age
 and 8 hours for adults. Premium pay is mandated for longer hours. The Labor Code
 sets a maximum normal workweek of 44 hours, requiring overtime pay for addi-
 tional work and requiring at least 24 hours of rest per week.
 The Constitution and the Labor Code require employers, including the Govern-
 ment, to take steps to ensure that employees are not placed at risk in their work
 places. The Ministry of Labor attempts to enforce the applicable regulations, but has
 very limited powers to force compliance. While the Ministry of Labor conducts inves-
 tigations which sometimes lead to fines or other findings favoring workers, the out-
 dated Labor Code and inadequate enforcement severely limit Ministry effectiveness.
 The Ministry of Labor often seeks to conciliate labor disputes rather than attempt-
 ing to strictly enforce regulations, leading to charges of bias against labor. Corrup-
 tion is another srious problem affecting abor courts. Increases in applicabe fnes
 and overall improvement of Ministry of Labor enforcement powers are amog the
 issues to be determined in designing a new labor code and related legislation. alva-
 
 
 404
 doran health and safety regulations are outdated and inadequate enforcement re-
 mains a problem.
