 EL SALVADOR
 El Salvador is a constitutional, multiparty democracy with an executive branch
 headed b a president, a unicameral legislative assembly, and a separate, politically
 appinted judiciary. Armando Calderon Sol of the Nationalist Republican Alliance
 (ARENA) party was inaugurated President for a 5-year term in June 1994. In the
 Legislative Assembly, the ARENA party holds a plurality. Seven other parties (or
 parties in formation) also hold seats, including the ex-guerrilla organization Frente
 Farabundo Marti para la Liberacion Nacional (FMLN), and its offshoot, the Partido
 Democrata (PD).
 On April 31, the U.N. Secretary General declared the peace process based on the
 1992 Peace Accords which ended a 12-year civil war irreversible. The U.N. Security
 Council ended the mandate of its observer mission (ONUSAL) and authorized the
 Secretary General to form a smaller U.N. mission. Progress, though slower than
 hoped in some areas continued on implementation of the Peace Accords. The Gov-
 ernment completed demobilization of the military-dominated National Police in De-
 cember 1994, and deployed nearly half of the planned 20,000 officers of the new Na-
 tional Civilian Police (PNC in its place. Land transfers, judicial reform, and elec-
 toral reform have all progressed although in each area there have been delays.
 The El Salvador Armed Forces (ESAF) continued to downsize and have approxi-
 mately 18,000 of the 31,000 troop ceiling authorized by the Peace Accords. Although
 the military is no longer responsible for public security, the President ordered the
 ESAF to conduct joint patrols with the PNC in rural areas in response to concerns
 about rising crime. In practice, the military protects PNC officers in the execution
 of their duties. Complaints against the ESAF  gstered with the Human Rights
 Ombudsman's Office (PDDH) declined significantly, and none was verified. Some
 
 
 407
 members of the PNC committed human rights abuses including excessive use of
 force, denial of due process, and improper detention.
 El Salvador has a mixed economy largely based upon agriculture and light manu-
 facturing. The Calderon Sol Government maintained its predecessor's commitment
 to free market reforms. People are free to pursue economic interests, and private
 property is respected. The 1995 rate of real economic growth was 6.3 percent.
 In December 1993, the Government, in conjunction with the United Nations,
 formed the Joint Group for the Investigation of Illegal Armed Groups with Political
 Motivation in El Salvador. The Joint Group found that some groups and persons
 continued to resort to violence to obtain political results, but concluded that the
 Government is committed to combating politically motivated violence. It also high-
 lighted the growth of violent organized crime in El Salvador.
 The level of criminal violence, particularly murder, assaults, kidnaping, robberies,
 and crimes against women and children, remained high. Allegations of politically
 motivated assassinations continue but are less frequent. There were no confirmed
 cases of politically motivated killings, but investigations in a number of cases re-
 main open. Some public figures reported death threats. A particularly disturbing de-
 velopment has been the rise of vigilante groups which claim to be fighting crime
 and, in some cases, fighting corrupt public officials. Such groups have claimed re-
 sponsibility for killing some 20 people whom they identified as gang members. At
 teJoint Group's recommendation, the Government created a special unit within
 the PNC to investigate political and organized crime in August 1994. This unit's op-
 eration was initially hampered by lack of technical and personnel resources. t
 scored a major success in July, however, arresting a number of alleged members of
 a notorious vigilante group, which included several members of the PNC. The PNC
 functioned without an Inspector General from April until October after the Vice
 Minister of Public Security dismissed the incumbent for poor performance. The ab-
 sence of an Inspector General hurt PNC credibility, but the new one was widely re-
 garded as a solid choice.
 The PDDH improved under a new Human Rights Ombudsman, elected in March,
 but has not yet demonstrated its investigative ability. The PDDH received a number
 of complaints against the PNC alleging excessive use of force, arbitrary arrest, and
 detention. Allegations of judicial nisconduct were the second most common. Com-
 plaints against the ESAF ran far behind. Delays in bringing detainees to trial con-
 tinued.
 Prison conditions remain poor. Discrimination against women, the disabled, and
 idigenous people, violence against women, and abuse of children are other human
 rights problems. Reports of sexual abuse and mistreatment of women continued to
 rise. Some 20 judges have been forced to resign since the judicial reform process
 began, and others were under investigation. While moving deliberately, the new Su-
 pr   e  ourt seated in 1994 displayed relatively greater enery in udicial reform.
  e on the creation of the special courts and procedures or poitical and orga-
 nized crime cases has been limited. Problems of corruption and incompetence in the
 judicial system remained.
 The Government moved to improve the legal basis for respect for human rights.
 In March the Legislative Assembly acted on a major Truth Commission (a body es-
 tablished by the 1992 Peace Accords) recommendation by voting unanimously to rat-
 ify two international human rights treaties (the International Pact of Civil and Po-
 litical Rights and the Optional Protocol of the American Convention of Human
 Rights) and to roize the compulsory jurisdiction of the Inter-American Court of
 HIman Rights. Although it acted with some reservations, El Salvador has ratified
 four of the six international instruments recommended by the Truth Commission.
 In March the U.N. Human Rights Commission (UNHRC), citing the reduction in
 complaints of human rights violations, removed El Salvador from its list of countries
 subject to permanent monitoring and ended the role of the UNHRC Independent Ex-
 rtAt the recommendation of the UNHRC, a delegation from the U.N. Human
 ights Center in Geneva visited in June to begin the design of a technical assist-
 ance program for El Salvador.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no confirmed cases of po-
 litical killings, although there were murders with possible political overtones. Politi-
 cal violence has declined rapidly over the last few years; common crime has risen
 just as rapidly. The result is that most of the extrajudicial killings were due to vigi-
 lantism, rather than to political motivations. The most notorious vigilante organiza-
 tion, the so-called Sombra Negra (Black Shadow) group, surfaced in San Miguel in
 
 
 December 1994 when it murdered three reputed gang members. The Sombra Negra
 claimed credit for killings of alleged gang members during the early part of the
 year. In May unidentified persons claiming to speak for Sombra Negra threatened
 allegedly corrupt judges, and "copycat" threats appeared, supposedly from new
 groups. The existence of other groups was never proven, and those threats were
 never carried out. In July the PNC's Organized Crime Division arrested 16 alleged
 members of the group, including 4 members of the PNC. Of those arrested, nine,
 including two PNC officers, were bound over for trial; the investigation continues.
 Immediately after the arrests, the PDDH published the results of an investigation
 into the December 1994 Sombra Negra killings. The investigation castigated Sombra
 Negra for usurping the role of the State and noted that there was stilr no definitive
 proof of PNC involvement. It also called for an exhaustive internal investigation into
 the possibility that the vigilantes might have ties to the police. The PDDH report
 quoted an anonous source as sayngthat Sombra Negra enjoyed logistic and
 moral support from some public officials in the Department of San     Ie. The
 PDDH declined to name the officials. Approximately 20 people have been-killed by
 vigilante groups or in circumstanes suggestive of their mode of operation.
 Althoughi there were no confirmed cases of poitical kilings, in some cases politi-
 cal motivation cannot be ruled out. In February six unidentified attackers murdered
 the ARENA mayor of the town of Osicala, Jose Natividad Majano Garcia. In March
 Joel de Jesus Melgar, the president of a local cooperative and an FMLN member,
 was kidnaped and murdered. His family s    lated that the motive was a land dis-
 pute involving the cooperative. In April FMN and municipal council member Jaime
 Coto was shot and killed; the killing may have been related to land disputes. In July
 unknown assailants shot and killed Guadalupe Villalta, a member of a street ven-
 dors union. The killing came after confrontations that occurred when San Salvador
 municipal police tried to clear vendors from a street the police claimed the vendors
 were obstructing. In September the Criminal Investigative Division detained 19
 PNC agents for possible involvement in the murder of Adriano Vilanova, the suspect
 in a fatal hit and run accident. In November Castulo Rodriguez Caballero, the
 ARENA mayor of a rural town was murdered. Also in November, shots were fired
 at the car of Legislative Assembly Vice President and PD leader, Ana Guadalupe
 Martinez, seriouiy wounding the driver, a PNC officer. In December FMLN leader
 Ramon Boanerges was shot and killed in his truck while driving outside the capital
 city. These cases remain under investigation.
 There were no new developments in the investigations of the 1994 killings of:
 Simon de Jesus Cartagena Pineda and his stepdaughter, Javier Roberto Perdomo,
 Ismael Bernardino Sion, Bill Martinez Zaldana Heriberto Galicia Sanchez, Jose
 Isaias Calzada Mejia, Luis Valdivieso Granados, Elba Irene Magana de Romero, and
 David Faustino Merino Ramirez. Nor were there any developments in the investiga-
 tion of the shootings that occurred at a bus cooperative protest near San Miguel.
 The prosecution of those responsible for the 1991 murders of Lieutenant Colonel
 David Pickett and Private First Class Ernest Dawson came to a close. Pickett and
 Dawson were in a US. army helicopter that was shot down by FMLN combatants
 in 1991. A third crew member, Chief Warrant Officer Daniel Scott, was killed in
 the crash, but Pickett and Dawson survived only to be murdered by their FMLN
 captors. Despite El Salvador's apparent obligations under international law, the Su-
 preme Court ruled in August that the killers were protected by the 1993 law which
 granted a general amnesty for all political crimes committed during the war.
 There was progress in the investigation of the 1993 shooting of FMLN leader
 Francisco Velis Castellanos. The authorities identified a former PNC detective, Car-
 los Romero Alfaro, as a principal suspect, and issued an order for his arrest. Due
 to what PNC investigations called negligence, Romero Alfaro escaped arrest and fled
 to the United States where he was apprehended in September. In early 1996, a
 magistrate judge ordered his extradition, but it has not yet taken place.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits such practices, but complaints against the PNC for lack
 of due process and use of excessive force continued.
 The PNC was the subject of more complaints of human rights violations than any
 other government institution. This reflects nationwide reaction to their arrest au-
 thority, to their use of force, and possibly, to their inexperience. Out of a total of
 4,696 complaints filed, the PDDH received 1,844 allegations against the PNC. The
 majority were for improper detention and denial of due process. The PDDH resolved
 a total of 172 cases during the year. The most consistent criticism of the PNC from
 human rights advocates focused on the use of force to confront demonstrations by
 labor unions and groups of ex-civil war combatants demanding compensation. Occa-
 sionally these confrontations became violent. At times, the violence was initiated by
 
 
 409
 the demonstrators who resorted to swinging clubs and throwing rocks; however, the
 PNC antiriot units were too quick to resort to tear gas and rubber bullets. A young
 demonstrator died in November after the PNC unilaterally decided to terminate
 PDDH-led negotiations and to storm a government building seized by protesters
 who were holding hostages. A PNC officer, Tomas Antonio Coronado Valles, fired
 a rubber bullet at close range at protester Rene Antonio Pineda, wounding him mor-
 tally. The officer has been charged with murder. The incident led to an agreement
 between the PDDH and the PNC to develop programs aimed at training security
 forces to confront such situations in a more humane way. PNC handling of subse-
 quent, similar situations was much improved.
 Prison conditions remained bleak, with overcrowding the most significant prob-
 lem. The largest prison, designed for 800 prisoners, holds approximately 2,400. Most
 cells are 15 by 20 feet, and some hold as many as 24 prisoners. Some prisoners must
 sleep on the floor or "buy" a bed when one becomes available. Prisoners are fed, but
 most find it necessary to supplement their rations with help from family. The pris-
 ons are violent, with guards exercising little control. Killings among prisoners are
 common. Following prison riots in 1994, the Ministry of Justice hired 500 additional
 gnards. Although conditions have not improved otherwise, no riots occurred in 1995.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution prohibits arbitrary ar-
 rest and detention or compulsory exile. The number of complaints of arbitrary arrest
 and detention continues to decline. Complaints that PNC officers violated due proc-
 ess rights of detainees continued. The courts generally enforced a ruling that inter-
 rogation without the presence of a public defender amounts to coercion, and any evi-
 dence so obtained is inadmissible; thus police authorities generally delayed ques-
 tioning until a public defender arrived. However, since low salaries and insufficient
 supervision limit the number of cases that public defenders handle, they are not al-
 ways available when the police call.
 By law, the police may hold a person for 72 hours before delivering the suspect
 to court, after which time the judge may order detention for an additional 72 hours
 to determine if an investigation is warranted. Because of a lack of holding cells,
 such detainees are often sent to the prisons where they may be mixed with violent
 criminals. The law allows 120 days to investigate serious crimes, and 45 days for
 lesser offenses, before a judge must bring the accused to trial or dismiss the case.
 In practice, the authorities rarely observed these time limits.
 Although the law permits release pending trial for crimes in which the maximum
 penalty does not exceed 3 years, many crimes (homicide, murder, manslaughter,
 rape, and crimes agast property) carry penalties in excess of 3 years, thereby pre-
 cluding release pending trial. Because it may take several years for a case to come
 to trial, some prisoners were incarcerated longer than the maximum legal sentence
 for their crimes. Any detainee may request a review (habeas orpus) by the Supreme
 Court, but the court denies the overwhelming majority of such requests. Approxi-
 mately 80 percent of all inmates are awaiting trial or sentencing.
 e. DeniafFar Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary and the Government respects this provision in practice.
 The court structure has four levels: justices of the peace, first instance (district)
 courts, second instance (appellate) courts, and the Supreme Court. Civilian courts
 exercise jurisdiction over military personnel who commit nonmilitary crimes.
 Judges, not juries, rule on most cases; however, a judge cannot overrule a jury ver-
 dict nor can the defendant appeal it to a higher court. Defendants may appeal their
 sentences, however, up to the Supreme Court.
 Two new court systems (family and juvenile offenders) began to function on the
 basis of revised legislation which introduced oral trials and new rights for the par-
 ties. Both systems stressed conciliation as an alternative to adjudication. A new Ju-
 venile Code provided for due process in criminal cases, raised the age of majority
 from 16 to 18 years, limited sentences to a maximum of 7 years, and introduced al-
 ternatives to incarceration. The hasty passage of these laws led to numerous prob-
 lems in implementation, largely a result of the continuing weaknesses of the institu-
 tions involved and their icuties in assuming often radically changed roles.
 Under the Constitution, defendants have the right to a presumption of innocence,
 protection from self-incrimination, legal counsel, freedom from coercion, and com-
 pensation for damages due to judiciar error. They also have the right to be present
 in court and to con front witnesses. While compliance with these provisions is still
 far from satisfactory, it improved, in large part due to the judicial school's training
 programs and the evaluation activities conducted by the National Council of the Ju-
 diciary (CNJ-an independent body provided for in the Constitution to nominate,
 train, and evaluate judges) and the Supreme Court.
 The Assembly elected a new slate of justices to the Supreme Court in 1994. These
 justices continued their mandate to identify and dismiss inept or corrupt judges.
 
 
 Since the program began, the Court has forced about 20 lower level judges to resign
 and is investigating several more. Judges who felt threatened by the CNJ were criti-
 cal of the rocess of evaluations it conducted. With a partial change of membership
 of the CNJ, and an entirely new Court, a cooperative relationship continued to de-
 velop.
 Despite some progress, problems of corruption and incompetence in the judicial
 system remaine     though judicial salaries are now high enough to attract quali-
 fied judges, this is still not the case for prosecutors or defense lawyers. Training pro-
 grams are insufficient to compensate for inadequate university training, low pay,
 and poor supervision. While the new laws emphasizing rights represent a marked
 improvement, they also add to the confusion by requiring new levels of coordination,
 comprehension, and thoughtful application on the part of court personnel. Impunity,
 especially of the politically, economically, or institutionally well-connected, continues
 to be a problem. 0NUSAL's 1994 comment that the judicial system's deficient insti-
 tutions contribute to this impunity as well as to the increase in common and orga-
 nized crime remains valid.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Accord-
 ing to the Constitution, the police must have the resident's consent, a warrant, or
 a reasonable belief that a crime is being or is about to be committed, before entering
 a private dwelling. Government authorities generally respected these rights. Wire-
 tapping of telephone communications by the Government, private persons, and polit-
 ical parties is illegal but occurs.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of the
 press, and the Government respects this right in practice.
 El Salvador has 5 daily newspapers, 10 television stations, approximately 100 li-
 censed radio stations, and 2 major cable television systems. Print and broadcast
 journalists regularly criticize the Government and report opposition views. Accord-
 ing to major media associations, the Government did not use direct or indirect
 means to control the media. In December at the request of the Salvadoran Associa-
 tion of Radio Broadcasters, the National Telecommunications Association (ANTEL)
 closed 11 low-power, unlicensed radio stations operating in small rural communities.
 The unlicensed stations charged that they were victims of a government attempt to
 restrict free speech. ANTEL countered that the stations' illicit signals interefered
 with legitimate use of the radio spectrum. Negotiations continued. Some media out-
 lets accused the Government of favoritism in the apportionment of its advertising
 but they did not produce any firm evidence to substantiate their complaints. Vigi-
 lante organizations threatened reporters and media outlets, but did not carry out
 any of their threats.
 The Constitution provides for academic freedom, and the Government respects
 this right in practice.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 peaceful assembly and association for any lawful purpose and the Government re-
 spects this right in practice. There is no requirement for permits to hold public
 meetings. The Supreme Court declared in June that a 1994 decree by the mayor
 of San Salvador prohibiting public demonstrations in the capital during business
 hours was unconstitutional. Throughout the year, ex-combatants demanding com-
 pensation and public workers wanting higher pay demonstrated publicly in San Sal-
 vador. Confrontations between these groups and the PNC led to accusations by the
 PDDH, the FMLN, and the demonstrators of police brutality. The demonstrators
 regularly broke the law; they blocked major thoroughfares, trespassed, and violated
 regulations prohibiting demonstrators from wearing masks and carrying weapons.
 The PNC responded with tear gas, rubber pellets, and batons-in the view of some,
 prematurely resorting to force. In a November 23 incident, a PNC officer killed a
 protester with a rubber bullet fired at close range.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for these rights, and the Government re-
 spects them in practice.
 The Government has provisions for granting asylum and refugee status. The Gov-
 ernment cooperates with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
 the International Organization for Migration in assisting refugees. There were no
 reports of forced expulsions.
 
 
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens exercise the right to change their government peacefully through regu-
 larly scheduled elections. The President and Vice President are elected every 5
 years; legislative and municipal elections are held every 3 years. The Constitution
 bars the President from election to consecutive terms. Voting is by secret ballot, and
 there is universal suffrage.
 The number of women active in politics is relatively small. In the 1994 elections,
 Salvadorans elected nine women to the Legislative Assembly, a slight increase from
 the number in the previous Assembly. The President and I of the 4 vice presidents
 of the Assembly are women, as are 2 of the 15 Supreme Court justices. One cabinet
 minister is a woman, as are 31 of the 262 mayors. In March a woman was elected
 to serve as the Government's Human Rights Ombudsman.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government demonstrated a willingness to discuss human rights issues and
 problems with international, local, and nongovernmental organizations (NGO's). A
 number of local nongovernmental human rights organizations, including the Human
 Rights Commission of El Salvador (CDHES), focus primarily on alleged abuses by
 the Government. The CDHES follows cases through the investigation and trial
 stages, provides free legal assistance, and publishes monthly reports. Numerous
 other NGO's, as well as church, labor, and university groups, have human rights
 offices that operate without restriction. In addition, various international human
 rights groups visit and operate freely, including migration and other humanitarian
 and technical assistance groups.
 The U.N. Mission to El Salvadr, downsized in April, continues to monitor imple-
 mentation of the Peace Accords. It turned over its human rights monitoring function
 to the PDDH. As the only human rights organization specifically established by the
 Constitution, the PDDH receives and investigates allegations of human rights
 abuses committed by government officials and, if warranted, lodges complaints
 against specific officials. The PDDH still suffers from administrative confusion and
 a lack of well-trained personnel that hamper its investigatory capacity. The new
 Ombudsman demonstrated a willingness to speak out on public issues.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution states that all people are equal before the law, and prohibits dis-
 crimination based on nationality, race, sex, or religion. In practice discrimination
 against women and the disabled occurs in salaries, in hiring, and in access to credit
 and to education.
 Women.-Violence against women, including domestic violence, is widespread. Al-
 though the Institute of Legal Medicine recorded a decrease in reports of domestic
 violence against women, from 312 reports during the July-December 1994 period,
 to 235 during the January-June 1995 period, it is still a serious concern. The Center
 for Women, a leading women's group, reported that out of the 571 women who re-
 quested legal advice on the most common women's problems such as housing, ali-
 mony, sexual abuse, and child custody in the first 6 months of 1995, 451 sadthey
 had been mistreated by their spouse. The Attorney General's office received on aver-
 age 10 cases a day of family violence, women being the main victims. In general,
 women are reluctant to report spousal abuse. The PDDH says that in 1994 hun-
 dreds of domestic abuse victims who underwent psychotherapy refused to report
 their cases formally. Major government institutions such as the PDDH, the Attorney
 General's office, the Supreme Court, and the PNC coordinated efforts to combat
 family violence via "rhe Program of Family Relations Improvement." The National
 Secretariat for the Family has a much-publicized hotline for victims to report do-
 mestic abuse. The hotline received 1,934 calls during its first 3 months. Of these
 calls, 43.5 percent were reports of physical abuse.
 Reports of sexual abuse of women continued to rise. In 1994, the latest year-long
 period for which statistics are available, the Institute for Legal Medicine received
 684 reports of sexual abuse of women, compared with 598 reports in 1993. The At-
 torney General's office reported 591 cases of mistreatment of women in the first 6
 months of 1995, compared to 4   in the last 6 months of 1994. A main concern for
 women is that due to the lack of witnesses, only 10 percent of rape cases result in
 convictions. NGO's pushed for new criminal legislation to strenghen the evidentiary
 value given to rape victims' testimony. There are eight main NGO's actively coordi-
 nating efforts to promote women's rights. Media articles made women more aware
 
 
 of these NGO's and the services they offered, and encouraged women to report abuse
 and look for legal advice.
 The Constitution grants women the same legal rights as men but they suffer dis-
 crimination in practice. A new Family Code went into effect in 1994 which amended
 some laws that discriminated against women, most notably the large number living
 in common law marriages. The new law also established courts to resolve family dis-
 putes. El Salvador ratified the Inter-American Convention to Prevent, Sanction, and
 Eradicate Violence Against Women.
 Women suffer from economic discrimination and do not have equal access to credit
 and land ownership. Women are paid less than men, and over 25 percent of working
 women earn less than the minimum wage. Of the economically active female popu-
 lation, 65 percent work in the informal economy. Training for women is generally
 confined to low-wage occupational areas where women already hold most positions,
 such as teaching, nursing, home industries, or small businesses.
 Children.-Government concern for children's rights and welfare is reflected more
 in its efforts to reduce poverty and promote family stability through economic
 growth than in direct expenditure on children. The Salvadoran Institute for the Pro-
 tection of Children (SIPC), an autonomous entity, is responsible for protecting and
 promoting children's rights. A new Juvenile Offender's Code went into effect in
 March, increasing the age of majority from 16 to 18 years. The law guarantees mi-
 nors due process, establishes a ditional treatment facilities for offenders, and re-
 duces sentences for crimes by minors.
 The Government works closely through state institutions and with the United Na-
 tions Children's Fund to promote protection and general awareness of children's
 rights. Children continued to fall victim to physical and sexual abuse, abandonment,
 exploitation, and neglect, however. The Institute of Legal Medicine recorded an in-
 crease in reports of sexual abuse of children under 14 years of age, from 172 reports
 in the first 6 months of 1994, to 203 between July and December 1994, and 192
 for the January to June 1995 period. The Attorney General's office registered an in-
 crease in offenses against children, nearly one half of which were sexual abuse
 cases. According to the PDDH, over 85 percent of all abuse occurs in schools and
 at home, with only a small percentage being reported. Out of the 1,857 children at-
 tended at San Salvador's largest children's hospital between 1989 and 1993, nearly
 one quarter were treated for sexual abuse carried out by family members or friends
 of the family. In order to promote and protect the rights of children in the commu-
 nity, the Assistant Human Rights Ombudsman for the Protection of Minors began
 to organize municipal authorities, community members, education centers, and
 other institutions to monitor and combat abuse against children and to educate the
 community on children's rights.
 Child abandonment and labor exploitation increased. The SIPC reports that in
 1994 abandonment was the second most common problem seen among children;
 from January to April 1995 it was the leading problem. The Attorney General's of-
 fice runs a program for San Salvador's rising number of street children but lack of
 funds hampers the program. The murders of 7 street children caused alarm and a
 call for tighter protection of the approximately 1,200 minors living in the streets of
 San Salvador.
 Relief from the child abandonment problem through adoption is limited by the
 1994 Family Code which favors domestic adoptions over foreign ones. Infant mal-
 nutrition is also of increasing concern; Ministry of Health figures for the first half
 of the year indicate that 50 percent of infants under the age of five are undernour-
 ished. Government primary nutrition programs exist but lack financial resources.
 People With Disabiities.-Except or the war wounded, who have secured both
 government and international funding for rehabilitation and retraining programs,
 the Government has no program to combat discrimination against the disabled, nor
 are there any laws mandating provision of access for people with disabilities. The
 Government does not enforce a decree passed in 1984 stating that one out of every
 500 employees must be a person with disabilities. Access to basic education is lim-
 ited due to lack of facilities and appropriate transportation. There is no provision
 of state services. Only a few of the Government's community based health promoters
 have been trained to treat the disabled, and they rarely provide such service, tend-
 ing rather to focus on life-threatening conditions and preventive care for mothers
 and children. It is estimated that between 7 and 10 percent of the population is af-
 flicted by some form of disability. There are few organizations dedicated to protect-
 ing and promoting the rights of people with disabilities. Foreign funds for badly
 needed rehabilitation services channeled through the Telethon Foundation Pro-Re-
 habilitation, a local private voluntary organization, help address numerous rehabili-
 tation issues and provide alternatives for the education and rehabilitation of the dis-
 abled population. A semiautonomous institute, the Salvadoran Rehabilitation Insti-
 
 
 tute for the Disabled (ISRI), also provides assistance to the disabled. ISRI offers
 medical treatment and counseling, special education programs, and professional
 training courses. Founded in 1957, ISRI has 10 centers throughout-the country and
 receives assistance from the Government and national and international private and
 nongovernmental organizations.
 The residents of a home for the blind went on a brief hunger strike in September
 protesting conditions at the home. Widely reported in the press, it appears to be the
 first time that people with disabilities banded together for this sort of protest. They
 succeeded in removing the director of the home and prompted the Government to
 create a special commission made up of representatives of the PDDH, the Legisla-
 tive Assembly, and the home's residents, to address their complaints.
 Indigenous People.-El Salvador is an ethnically homogeneous country, although
 a small segment of the population claims to have descended solely from indigenous
 people. The last census of Indians showed 80,000 in 1930, or 5.6 percent of the pop-
 ulation. In 1932 government forces killed approximately 30,000 mostly indigenous
 people following an uprising. In the face of such repression, most remaining indige-
 nous people adopted local customs and successfully assimilated into the general pop-
 ulation. There remain a few very small communities of indigenous people who still
 wear traditional dress, speak their native language, and maintain traditional cus-
 toms without repression or interference. The Constitution makes no specific provi-
 sions for the rights of indigenous people.
 The indigenous population is believed to be the poorest group in the country. In
 a 1994 study, the PDDH found that 90 percent of indigenous people lived in condi-
 tions of extreme poverty, with average monthly incomes one-half the legal minimum
 wage. Employment opportunities outside the informal economy are few, and a high
 illiteracy rate precludes indigenous people from competing for skilled jobs. Indige-
 nous people generally earn less than other agricultural laborers, and indigenous
 women in particular have little access to educational and work opportunities since
 they head most of the households. Access to land is a growing problem confronting
 indigenous people. Few possess titles to land, and access to bank loans and other
 forms of credit is extremely limited. Domestic violence is widespread within indige-
 nous communities.
 The Salvadoran National Indigenous Association sponsored the first meeting of
 the indigenous population in August. Leaders of the event called for respect for in-
 digenous rights, as well as for constitutional recognition of their existence. The Na-
 tional Council for Art and Culture opened an indigenous department, which works
 together with 11 indigenous organizations to promote and support customs and tra-
 ditional festivals.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution prohibits the Government from
 using nationality, race, sex, creed, or political philosophy as a means to prevent
 workers or employers from organizing themselves into unions or associations. Nu-
 merous and sometimes conflicting laws governing labor relations impede full realiza-
 tion of the freedom of association, although Labor Code amendments developed by
 the International Labor Organization (ILO) and approved in 1994 brought about
 some improvements. The Labor Code prohibits partisan political activity by unions,
 but this prohibition is routinely ignored.
 In the 1992 Peace Accords, the Government committed itself to seek consensus
 on revised labor legislation through the Socioeconomic Forum with equal represen-
 tation from labor (including groups aligned with the FMLN), the Government, and
 the private sector. The Assembly passed legislation in 1994 streamlining the process
 required to form a union, extending union rights to agricultural, independent, and
 small-business workers, and extending the right to strike to union federations. The
 legislation also established a tripartite National Labor Council to replace the Socio-
 economic Forum.
 There are approximately 150 active unions, public employee associations, and
 peasant organizations, which represent over 300,000 Salvadorans, approximately 20
 percent of the total work force. The Labor Code forbids foreigners from holding lead-
 ership positions in unions, but unions freely affiliate with international labor organi-
 zations.
 Only private sector workers have the right to form unions and strike; employees
 of nine autonomous public agencies may form unions but not strike. Nevertheless,
 many workers including those in the public sector form employee associations that
 frequently carried out strikes which, while technically illegal, were treated as legiti-
 mate.
 
 
 414
 
 Negotiations between public employee associations and the Government generally
 settle public sector strikes, although the Labor Code provides for mandatory arbitra-
 tion of public sector disputes.
 After a series of public sector strikes in mid-1994, the Government threatened to
 use the police to open public buildings which strikers forced shut. Beginning early
 in 1995, the Government began to expel strikers from public buildings, an action
 which led to accusations of government oppression. In several cases, the police used
 tear gas and rubber bullets against workers. In the majority of cases, however, the
 strikers violated laws and initiated the violence. In several street disturbances,
 strikers armed with clubs and rocks attacked the police. Public workers' unions
 claim that the Government failed to bargain in good faith.
 The law prohibits antiunion actions before a union is legally registered. However,
 under the previous Labor Code, there were credible charges that the Government
 impeded union registration through exacting reviews of union documentation and
 strict interpretation of the Constitution, Labor Code, and union statutes. ILO-draft-
 ed changes have streamlined the process and it is now difficult for management to
 use bureaucratic inertia to impede the formation of a union.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Constitution and the
 Labor Code provide for collective bargaining rights, but only to employees in the pri-
 vate sector and in autonomous government agencies, such as utilities and the port
 authority. However, both private sector unions (by law) and public sector employee
 associations (in practice) use collective bargaining extensively.
 The Ministry of Labor oversees implementation of collective bargaining agree-
 ments and acts as conciliator in labor disputes in the private sector and autonomous
 government institutions. In practie, mimisters and the heads of autonomous govern-
 ment institutions often negotiate with labor organizations directly, relyig on the
 Lsbor Ministry only for such functions as officially certifying unions. The Ministry
 often seeks to conciliate labor disputes through informal channels rather than at-
 tempting strictly to enforce regulations, leading to charges that the Ministry is bi-
 ased against labor. Corruption continues to be a serious problem affecting labor in-
 spectors and courts.
 The Consitution prohibits discrimination against unions. It provides that union
 officials at the time of their election, throughout their term, and for 1 year following
 their term shall not be fired, suspended for disciplinary reasons, removed, or de-
 moted except for legal cause. Employers generally observed this provision in prac-
 tice, but in some cases fired those attempting to form unions before receiving their
 union credentials. Even under the revised Code, there were credible reports of gov-
 ernment inaction following dismissal of legally recognized union representatives.
 The law requires employers to rehire employees fired or any type of union activity,
 although the authorities sometimes failed to enforce this requirement. In many
 cases, employers convince fired employees to take a cash payment in lieu of return-
 ingt work.
 There are nine export processing zones (EPZs). Labor regulations in these zones
 are identical to those throughout the country. Companies operating in the EPZ's,
 while providing higher salaries and benefits than companies outside the EPZ's
 strongly discourage organizing. There were credible reports of some foreign-owned
 factories dismissing union organizers. In addition, unions accused some companies
 of physically abusing their workers. While labor inspectors and courts have been in-
 effective in investigating and reacting to such complaints, the Government has
 formed interagency committees (consisting of representatives of the Labor Ministry,
 Economic Ministry, and the PDDH) to investigate alleged violations.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor, except in the case of calamity and other instances specified by
 law. This provision is followed in practice.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-he Constitution prohibits the em-
 ployment of children under the age of 14. It provides for exceptions only where such
 employment is absolutely indispensable to the sustenance of the minor and his fam-
 ily, most often the case with children of peasant families who traditionally work
 with their families during planting and harvesting seasons. Children also frequently
 work as vendors and general laborers in small businesses, especially in the informal
 sector. Parents of children in circumstances such as these often do not allow their
 children to complete schooling through the ninth grade as the law requires, since
 the labor which the children perform is considered vital to the family. Child labor
 is not found in the industrial sector. The Ministry of Labor is responsible for enforc-
 ing child labor laws.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work-in July the Government raised the minimum
 wages for ommercial, industrial, service, and agroindustrial employees by 10 per-
 cent. The new rate was about p4.40 (38.50 colones) per day for industrial and serv-
 
 
 ice workers; and about $3.30 (28.60 colones) in wages, including a food allowance,
 per day for agroindustrial employees. (Full-time employees who are paid minimum
 wage receive pay for 30 days a month.) Despite these increases, minimum wages
 did not keep up with the Ministry of Economy's estimate of the increase in the cost
 of living. An estimated 40 percent of the population lives below the poverty level.
 The Labor Ministry is responsible for enforcing minimum wage laws and does so
 effectively in the formal sector.
 The law limits the workday to 6 hours for minors between 14 and 18 years of age
 and 8 hours for adults, and mandates premium pay for longer hours. The Labor
 Code sets a maximum normal workweek of 44 hours, requiring overtime pay for ad-
 ditional work and limiting the workweek to no more than 6 days.
 The Constitution and the Labor Code require employers, including the Govern-
 ment, to take steps to ensure that employees are not placed at risk in their work
 places, and prohibit the employment of persons under 18 years of age and all
 women in occupations considered hazardous. Nevertheless, health and safety regula-
 tions are outdated, and inadequate enforcement remains a problem. Workers can re-
 move themselves from dangerous work situations without jeopardizing their employ-
 ment only in situations where they can present a medical certificate issued by a doc-
 tor or the Social Security Institute indicating that their health is at risk while using
 certain equipment or substances. The Ministry of Labor attempts to enforce the ap-
 plicable regulations and conducts investigations which sometimes lead to fines or
 other findings favoring workers. The Ministry has very limited powers to enforce
 compliance, however, and has suffered resource cutbacks which curb its effective-
 ness.
