 EL SALVADOR
 Throughout 1981 the human rights situation in El Salvador
 remained troubled. The civil strife and endemic violence
 which has convulsed the country for years continued. Human
 rights violations were frequent, but there was a downward
 trend in political violence. Extreme leftist terrorists
 and guerrillas, right-wing death squads and some members
 of the government's internal security forces all had a hand
 in the violence. At the same time, significant strides
 were made by El Salvador's government in moving toward a
 democratic process for resolving conflicts and in implementing
 socio-economic reforms aimed at reducing the social causes
 of the present division and strife.
 During the 1970's traditional authority structures in El
 Salvador, already eroded by social changes and development
 problems, came under increasing pressure from left and right-
 wing terrorism. On October 15, 1979, a group of military
 officers who sought to introduce economic and political
 reforms overthrew the regime of General Humberto Romero
 and created a civil-military coalition called the Revolution-
 ary Governing Junta. The junta faced a fragmented society
 in which the political process was discredited and a consid-
 erable minority on both the right and left advocated achieve-
 ment of their political goals through violence. Peaceful
 change suited neither those who believed that one more push
 would destroy the army nor those who opposed all reforms.
 The extreme left staged violent disturbances and continued
 its campaign of terrorism. At the opposite extreme, rightists
 conspired to mount a countercoup to prevent reforms. Opponents
 of change increasingly resorted to private death squads
 and vigilante bands. The junta gradually disintegrated.
 Its civilian members, unable to act effectively and frustrated
 by their inability to agree on promised reforms, resigned
 after ten weeks. The military members of the junta then
 reached an agreement with the Christian Democratic Party
 to form a new government. Despite several internal changes
 in its composition, this second junta has remained in power
 and has committed itself to a free electoral process. Con-
 stituent assembly elections are scheduled to be held in
 March 1982 and presidential elections in 1983.
 In spite of coup threats from the extreme right, intensified
 guerrilla warfare from the radical left and terrorism from
 both sides, the second junta undertook a far-reaching socio-
 economic reform program in March 1980. Most significant
 is agrarian reform. Under Phase I of this reform, the Salva-
 doran Agrarian Reform Institute expropriated land holdings
 exceeding 500 hectares, organized those holdings into peasant
 cooperatives and began the process of transferring complete
 ownership to the cooperative members. Under decree 207
 relating to the agrarian reform, tenants and sharecroppers
 can claim title to the lands they have traditionally rented.
 The other reforms include nationalization of the banking
 system and of the export of coffee and sugar, El Salvador's
 most important foreign exchange earners.
 Alarmed by these reforms, the extreme right reasserted its
 intention to bring down the government and re-establish
 the old order through armed violence -- violence in which
 some security forces personnel participated in contravention
 of government and military regulations. The extreme left
 also rejected the reforms and declared its intention to
 seize power from the centrist junta through violence. Leftist
 (424)
 
 
 425
 revolutionaries, supported by Cuba, created the Farabundo
 Marti Liberation Front (FNLN). The political front groups
 associated with the revolutionaries joined several non-Marxist-
 Leninist organizations to form the Democratic Revolutionary
 Front (FDR). The combined political-guerrilla movement,
 the FMLN-FDR, has employed a mix of terrorism, sabotage,
 political agitation and disinformation to demoralize and
 discredit the government. In contrast to the government's
 efforts to control violence, the FMLN-FDR openly espoused
 the use of violence to achieve political ends and in a radio
 broadcast claimed responsibility for 2,083 casualties and
 378 acts of sabotage and explosions from June to December 1981.
 By late 1981, the rightist threat to the government had
 abated but not disappeared. The extreme left, on the other
 hand, has intensified its efforts to undermine the government
 through guerrilla warfare supported by Cuba and Nicaragua.
 The left's actions have helped perpetuate the vicious cycle
 of provocation, outrage and revenge. Contending forces
 of the extreme right and left cause a daily toll of murders
 and assassinations throughout the country.
 The Catholic Church has condemned the violence of leftist
 and rightist extremists and the excesses of security forces
 personnel. It has called for a dialogue among the contending
 parties to resolve the conflict. Church institutions have
 been attacked by both the right and the left. Threats against
 the clergy have forced a number of them, including the Mary-
 knoll Community, to flee the country.
 The government has taken steps to curb abuses by the security
 forces: The paramilitary organization 'ORDEN" has been
 outlawed. A military code of conduct was adopted in October
 1980 explicitly prohibiting any actions by military personnel
 injurious to human rights. The high command has repeatedly
 exhorted the officer corps to ensure that all soldiers adhere
 to the code of conduct. A number of officers sympathetic
 to the violent right have been removed from command positions.
 Six members of the National Guard suspected of murdering
 four American churchwomen in December 1980 are under detention
 pending the results of the investigation of this crime.
 Statistics on numbers of people killed as a result of El
 Salvador's current political violence are difficult to obtain
 and are unreliable. Available figures are useful principally
 to set trend lines. Two Salvadoran institutions, the Legal
 Aid Office which identifies itself with the Archbishopric,
 and the staff of the Central American University (UCA),
 maintain statistics on the number of persons murdered.
 Both institutions are sympathetic to anti-government forces.
 Their statistics often have a monthly variance numbering
 in the hundreds. The United States Embassy in San Salvador
 maintains its own count of deaths attributable to political
 violence, gleaned primarily from press reports. According
 to the embassy's count, there were 6,116 violent deaths
 during the twelve-month period ending January 1, 1982.
 The embassy's figures also show a decline in average monthly
 totals from around 800 per month in late 1980 and in the
 beginning of 1981 to 200-400 per month at the end of the
 year. Some Church sources claim that perhaps twice as many
 non-combatants have been killed.
 In only a small percentage of political murders is it possible
 to determine who or which group bears responsibility. In
 most cases, no organization has sufficient information about
 the sources of violence to support specific allocations
 
 
 426
 of responsibility. Some killings clearly are the result
 of combat activity between the military and the guerrillas.
 Other killings or terrorist acts are the work of extreme
 leftists who claim responsibility for them. Other murders
 and bombings are committed by rightist elements who acknow-
 ledge responsibility. Sometimes members of the official
 and local security forces, acting against standing regu-
 lations, are associated with these acts. In the vast majority
 of cases, however, no one claims responsibility, and it
 is virtually impossible to determine exactly who is respon-
 sible for such crimes. Moreover, many apparent acts of
 political violence are probably common crimes or crimes
 of vengeance.  (El Salvador has long had a very high homicide
 rate.)
 The high level of violence from all sources has burdened
 the country with 208,000 displaced persons inside of El
 Salvador and drives considerable numbers outside the country.
 The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees maintains
 under its auspices 37,700 Salvadorans in neighboring countries.
 By the last few months of 1981 the number of refugees had
 stabilized.
 In an effort to maintain national security, the government
 in 1980 suspended constitutional provisions for the rights
 of free entry and exit, the right to inviolability of commun-
 ications and the right to express and circulate opinions
 freely. The latter restriction has been limited to prohibiting
 political advertising by extremist groups to publicize kid-
 napping ransom demands. Paid advertising by opposition
 groups, including some associated with the FMLN-FDR, continues
 to appear. Decree 507 of December 3, 1980, governs proceedings
 against crimes committed under the state of siege provisions
 of the constitution and permits the arrest and holding of
 certain prisoners for 180 days during "in camera" investiga-
 tions. A curfew was also put into effect at the time of
 the January 1981 guerrilla offensive, but was lifted in
 October 1981.
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom
 from:
 a. Torture
 The 1952 constitution prohibits "all forms of torture." There
 have been numerous reports that terrorists of both the left
 and the right have used torture to gain information and to
 intimidate their opponents. Bodies bearing clear signs
 of torture have been discovered. Despite constitutional
 bans and government policy against using torture, individual
 members of the security forces may have been involved in
 unsolved crimes of murder with torture. There have been
 credible accounts of torture and abuse at interrogation
 centers operated by the security forces, especially the
 treasury police, during investigations of people suspected
 of subversion. Some persons who have been captured by govern-
 ment forces have alleged that they were tortured during
 interrogation. Psychological torture by leftist and rightist
 terrorists in the form of threats against or murders of
 family members of prisoners has also been claimed.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 There have been few credible reports of physical punishment
 or brutal treatment in regular prisons. Most prisons are
 
 
 427
 spartan. This reflects lack of financial resources rather
 than deliberate government policy to maintain punitive con-
 ditions. Prisoners are permitted visits from family members
 and their attorneys. Since opening its delegation in San
 Salvador in June 1980, the International Committee of the
 Red Cross (ICRC) has obtained from the authorities permission
 for its delegates to visit permanent or temporary military
 or civilian places of detention, to talk in private with
 the detainees and to provide them with supplies when necessary.
 During the first half of 1981, 295 visits were made to 159
 places of detention. During that period the ICRC visited
 775 detainees for the first time.
 Clashes between the armed forces and guerrilla bands rarely
 result in the taking of prisoners by either side, although
 the guerrillas, in a much publicized departure, seized at
 least a dozen prisoners in September 1981 and offered to
 return them through the ICRC. No agreement has been reached
 for their return. There are frequent reports of military/
 security forces arriving in villages with lists of suspected
 terrorists and shooting on-the-spot those found. The radical
 left regularly publishes communiques claiming responsibility
 for similar murders of suspected opponents. Security forces
 personnel have also engaged in a number of widely publicized
 killings, including one in March 1981 in a suburban neighbor-
 hood of San Salvador that left 24 bodies in the streets.
 Similar acts by the left also are common; terrorist attacks
 on crowded buses often leave dozens of dead in their wake.
 In another incident, persons believed by most to be leftist
 terrorists entered a town and killed 21 relatives of security
 force members.
 Armed leftists are responsible for a large number of kidnap-
 pings for ransom and murders of government officials, dipl-
 omats, land-owners, members of the now-proscribed para-military
 group "ORDEN" and suspected informers, as well as prominent
 professional people. The "join-us-or-die" tactics of the
 guerrillas have caused thousands of persons to flee their
 homes in rural areas, as have military operations and armed
 rightist efforts to disrupt the agrarian reform or exact
 vengeance on leftists. Security personnel forces have at
 times been associated with -- or overlooked -- the actions
 of right-wing extremists.
 c. Disappearances
 Disappearances in El Salvador are frequent and are attested
 by frequent petitions for information in the local press.
 Paramilitary or security forces personnel probably bear
 responsibility in a number of these cases. In the frequent
 habeas corpus proceedings that arise from these disappearances,
 however, government forces invariably deny a connection
 with these disappearances. The guerrillas are also known
 to impress young men into their ranks by coercion. The
 large number of corpses, often mutilated, discovered through-
 out El Salvador dictates quick, on-the-spot burial. It
 is often impossible to identify a corpse before it must
 be interred. This intensifies the tragedy of the disappeared.
 Unidentified bodies have been discovered at isolated spots
 around the country, such as the El Playon lava bed outside
 San Salvador.
 d. -Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 El Salvador's judicial system does not function effectively
 when politically motivated crimes are brought before it.
 
 
 428
 Until passage of decree 507, no serious attempts were made
 to use the judiciary to control political violence. Judiciary
 staffs have themselves been the frequent targets of threats
 and assassination attempts. Consequently, no matter how
 strong the evidence against them, those of the right and
 left charged with crimes of violence are regularly released
 by intimidated courts. The incapacity of the judicial system
 has encouraged elements of the security forces and ordinary
 citizens to ignore it and to dispense their own brands of
 "justice."
 Under normal Salvadoran law, a person can be arrested and
 legally held for 72 hours. Many detainees have spent a
 longer period awaiting trial. Most detainees are suspected
 members of armed leftist groups arrested during raids or
 routine searches for arms or propaganda. At the end of
 November 1981 there were a total of 381 political prisoners
 under detention at the Mariona, Santa Tecla and Women's
 Prisons. At any given time, many people -- perhaps several
 hundreds -- are detained at police detention centers around
 the country under state of siege regulations for periods
 of 72 hours to 180 days.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The judicial system is slow and overburdened. Along with
 the general disintegration of institutions in El Salvador
 after the October 1979 coup, the judicial system had nearly
 collapsed by January 1981. By November 1981, however, it
 was beginning to show some signs of revitalization. In
 that month a man was indicted for the murder of the mayor
 of Suchitoto. This was the first indictment for political
 murder in 1981. After arraignment, long delays usually
 occur before trial. An additional handicap has been the
 reluctance of citizens to act as witnesses. Trials are
 public, and courts are believed to operate fairly in most
 non-political cases.
 f. Invasion of the Home
 Under the state of siege, the security forces may enter
 homes without a warrant. Illegal forced entry is regularly
 practiced by terrorist groups of the right and left. While
 in some parts of the country this suggests action by the
 security forces, there are other areas where guerrilla groups
 operate with equal impunity.
 2.   Respect for Civil and Political Freedoms, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 In March 1981 the government invoked a constitutional pro-
 vision which allows it to limit the free expression and
 circulation of opinions. This limitation has been applied
 specifically to prohibit some advertisements placed by ex-
 tremist groups that seek to inflame public opinion. This
 has not prevented, however, statements calling openly for
 an end to the present government. Advertising by political
 parties and action groups, much of it bitterly critical
 of elements of the government, has continued as El Salvador
 moves toward scheduled elections in March 1982. In practice,
 freedom of speech and the press are limited not so much
 by governmental dictate as by fear of retribution from right-
 ist and leftist terrorists. Since October 1979 two major
 morning dailies, both conservative, and one conservative
 afternoon daily have been the victims of leftist terrorist
 
 
 429
 bombs. Two pro-FMLN-FDR papers have been harassed out of
 business by rightist terrorists. In one case, the kidnapping,
 torture and murder of La Cronica's news editor on July 12,
 1981, led to the closing of the newspaper. Such actions
 have eliminated the leftist press from El Salvador, but
 many activities and pronouncements of the leftist opposition
 are covered in the major newspapers as news stories and
 in paid advertisements. On September 15, 1981, for example,
 the press published a call for a public boycott of the Inde-
 pendence Day ceremonies (a call which was ignored by the
 populace).
 In January 1981 during the FMLN-FDR's failed "final" or
 "general" offensive, the government temporarily banned all
 non-governmental radio news broadcasts. According to the
 government, this step was taken because radios not only
 reach much more of the public than television and the press,
 but because some broadcasts had tended to sensationalize
 the news. This general ban was partially lifted in late
 May 1981, when radio stations were given permission to carry
 international news, but not local news of El Salvador.
 Through their own initiative, radio stations have gradually
 been reporting more local news, although they continue to
 avoid news of a political or military nature.
 Television and the press have been relatively free. Although
 constitutional guarantees of free expression are not in
 force, in practice both television and newspapers have not
 been altogether prohibited from reporting political or mili-
 tary developments. The two major morning newspapers are
 anti-government from a rightist perspective in both their
 editorial policy and their news coverage. Television and
 the press are constrained only from disseminating information
 that would abet the guerrillas. They are not forbidden
 to criticize the government.
 Freedom of assembly is guaranteed by the constitution but
 is currently limited by the fear of terrorism and by the
 state of siege provisions of the constitution. In October
 1981 the government lifted the state of siege for political
 parties participating in the constituent assembly elections.
 Freedom of religion is also guaranteed. Complaints have
 arisen not because of its abridgement, but rather because
 allegations of political activism by clergy have resulted
 in their being targeted by rightist extremists. Notorious
 examples of violence against religious persons included
 the murders of Archbishop Romero and four American church
 workers during 1980. Religious workers perceived to be
 politically active continued to be endangered during 1981.
 The government's attitude toward labor unions is positive.
 There are a number of large and active free labor unions
 and peasant federations. The latter have benefited greatly
 from the government's land reform, although incidents persist
 of harassment or violence by local security forces or para-
 military personnel. A number of trade union leaders of
 leftist, centrist or neutral orientation have been killed.
 Both the right and the left have been accused in these incidents.
 Some union leaders who have attempted to withdraw from leftist
 groups have-been killed and others threatened, presumably
 by their erstwhile collaborators. A reform of the labor
 code which will facilitate union activity and strengthen
 workers' rights has been under discussion since 1980 but
 has not yet been enacted, largely because of concern about
 it on the part of both labor and management. In 1981 workers
 focused more on preserving jobs in a declining economy than
 
 
 430
 on expanding economic benefits. Despite its generally favor-
 able attitude toward unions, the government has moved against
 them when national security interests have been threatened.
 The state-owned power company's union was dissolved after
 a politically-inspired strike and power shutdown in 1980,
 and several of its leaders have remained in prison.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 The constitutional provision which guarantees the rights
 to enter and leave El Salvador freely and to reside where
 one wishes, and prohibitions against expatriation, have
 been formally suspended, but without any visible effect.
 Freedom of movement within the country is not restricted
 by law, but in practice is sharply limited by combat and
 terrorism.
 In the past few years, fear of violence and a declining
 economy have caused large numbers of Salvadorans to leave
 El Salvador. Many rightist and leftist opposition political
 leaders currently reside outside El Salvador.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Government policy is to open the political process through
 elections and to encourage all non-violent political parties
 and groups to participate in them. To this end the government
 offered amnesty to its opponents on October 15, 1981, and
 scheduled elections for a constituent assembly in 1982 and
 for the presidency in 1983. The central elections council
 drew up a draft election law in May 1981 and invited all
 pre-established parties, including those associated with
 the FMLN-FDR in armed opposition, as well as parties in
 formation, to participate in the electoral process. The
 law requires, however, that parties wishing to participate
 obey constitutional and other norms requiring them to renounce
 violence. Seven political parties have met the registration
 requirements and announced their intention to participate
 in the constituent assembly elections. The new electoral
 law was promulgated by the junta in December 1981 after
 thorough discussion among the government, political parties
 and the elections council.
 President Duarte, in his September 15 Independence Day ad-
 dress, called upon the two recognized parties within the
 FDR (one a social democratic and the other a communist party)
 to participate in the elections, and suggested that the
 FDR as a whole register as a political party and test its
 popular support. The FMLN-FDR so far has rejected partici-
 pation in the electoral process, claiming that conditions
 in the country prevent free elections and insisting that
 the government and military be restructured before any elec-
 tions take place.
 The constitution extends nationality, citizenship and all
 corresponding rights, including suffrage, equally to men
 and women. Many women hold positions in the professions,
 political parties and government, as well as jobs in factor-
 ies, offices, schools and homes. Women continue to be under-
 represented, however, in public positions of authority and
 influence.
 3.   Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 
 
 431
 The government has welcomed visits by several groups inter-
 ested in the human rights situation, including a delegation
 from the European Parliament. A special representative
 of the United Nations Human Rights Commission visited El
 Salvador in October 1981. A visit by the Inter-American
 Commission on Human Rights is pending.
 International human rights organizations continue to protest
 detentions, disappearances and murders. Some human rights
 organizations maintain that the majority of reported human
 rights violations are inflicted by the security forces or
 by persons not involved in guerrilla activities. The govern-
 ment denies this.
 The issue of human rights investigations in El Salvador
 has been complicated by the history of the Salvadoran Com-
 mission on Human Rights. In 1980 several members representing
 extreme leftist groups moved this organization toward parti-
 cipation in anti-government political activities. After
 two members of the commission were murdered in late 1980
 and early 1981, the organization virtually disappeared and
 only resumed its activities in July 1981. In addition to
 this commission, a Committee of Relatives of Political Pri-
 soners and the Disappeared publishes frequent pleas and
 statements against the government.
 4.   Economic and Social Circumstances
 El Salvador has a per capita gross national product of approx-
 imately $540 per year. Production is largely based on agri-
 culture; but decapitalized farms, insecure investment planning
 and increasing pressure on marginal lands make farming in-
 creasingly difficult. Since 1960 there has been rapid develop-
 ment in manufacturing, merchandising and industrial services.
 El Salvador's economy faces severe structural problems: an
 extremely high population density for an agriculture-based
 economy, high unemployment and underemployment, a lack of
 mineral wealth and an inadequate health and education infra-
 structure.
 The high population growth rate of 2.9 percent per year
 places constant pressure on development. The rate has in-
 creased substantially since 1960, when it was 2.3 percent
 per year, due largely to an improvement in life expectancy
 (up from 50 years to 63 years) and in the infant mortality
 rate (down from more than 108 per 1,000 live births to 60
 per 1,00 live births). Education has also improved. Literacy
 is up to 62 percent of the total adult population, up from
 49 percent in 1960, in large part as a result of the lengthening
 of the primary school curriculum by three years in 1971.
 Some 80 percent of all school-age children are enrolled,
 with virtually no discrimination on the basis of sex. Roughly
 ten percent of the population has an inadequate caloric
 intake, an improvement from 20 percent in 1960. Some 47
 percent of the population, mostly in rural areas, lives
 without easy access to potable water, down from 60 percent
 in 1960. Some 20 percent of the urban population and 32
 percent of the rural population fall below the World Bank's
 estimate of absolute poverty.
 Much of the progress in health and education programs took
 place in the 1970's. Widespread terrorism during the last
 three years, however, has physically disrupted development,
 especially in rural areas, weakened the economic base for
 development and forced a rechanneling of funds into non-
 
 
 432
 development efforts such as national defense. Leftist guer-
 rillas have specifically targeted the economic infrastructure
 for sabotage, attacking the power grid, bridges, roads,
 railroads, telephone system and crop storage areas.
 Until 1979 Salvadoran society was characterized by a small,
 wealthy, conservative upper class whose economic and political
 dominance stemmed from control of the land; a small but
 growing middle class of entrepreneurs, managers, technicians
 and skilled workers, most of whom came from the non-agricul-
 tural sector; and a large illiterate or semi-literate class
 engaged in seasonal agricultural work, domestic service,
 marginal farming or unskilled labor. Historically, the
 distribution of wealth, income and opportunity has been
 highly skewed.
 In March 1980 El Salvador instituted sweeping social and
 economic reforms designed to transfer ownership of farmlands
 from a small number of large landholders to those who till
 the soil. Under Phase I of the land reform program, all
 farms of more than 500 hectares were converted into worker
 cooperatives to be managed jointly by the members themselves
 and the government land reform institute for a period of
 up to five years, after which the government would withdraw
 and the cooperatives would become autonomous. The titling
 process, after a slow start, is continuing, and the majority
 of cooperatives are expected to receive titles later in
 1982. Under Phase III of the land reform process, farms
 not worked directly by their owners can be claimed, in parcels
 of up to seven hectares each, by the tenant farmers or share-
 croppers who work them. In spite of the administrative
 complexity of the task, which is expected to require five
 years to complete, more than'16,000 provisional titles (pro-
 visional because adequate property surveys are not available
 and because arrangements for compensating former owners
 are not completed) have already been issued to new owners.
 By November 1981 some 24,000 beneficiaries had filed for
 title to new lands under this program, and more than 97,000
 acres had been affected. Upon completion of both these
 programs, some 750,000 persons will be directly benefited,
 and more than 23 percent of the nation's farmland will have
 changed ownership. In November 1981, more than 553,000
 acres or 10.5 percent of total farmland had been affected
 by the reform effort. Phase II of the agrarian reform pro-
 gram, affecting medium-sized farms (100-500 hectares), has
 apparently been postponed indefinitely due to economic,
 administrative and financial problems, in spite of some
 continuing support within the Salvadoran government. Bureau-
 cratic delays and violence in the countryside have hampered
 the implementation of land reform measures.
 Although El Salvador has traditionally supported and continues
 to support the rights of private property, compensation
 of former owners of expropriated property, in the form of
 cash and bonds, is being paid slowly. As of November 1981,
 72 affected owners of Phase I properties of over 500 hectares
 have received $44 million in compensation -- $4 million
 in cash and $40 million in agrarian reform bonds. Another
 112 properties have been approved for payment of $65 million
 in cash and bonds, but 142 properties are still awaiting
 final valuation and authorization for payment of compensation.
 No compensation has yet been paid under the decree 207 program
 to transfer property to tenant formers and sharecroppers.
 
 
 433
 In efforts to facilitate agrarian reform and broaden credit
 availability, the government acquired partial ownership
 of the commercial banking system and placed under state
 monopoly the foreign marketing of coffee and sugar, two
 of the nation's three major export crops.
 ,There are tight restrictions on outflows of capital and
 imports. Domestic credit is also in short supply for both
 public and private sector uses.
 In 1981 E1 Salvador's economy experienced its third consecu-
 tive year of decline. The principal reasons were higher
 import costsl weakness in the world markets for its major
 exports, coffee and sugar; disruption caused by terrorism
 and guerrilla warfare; and profound investor and producer
 uncertainty. The weakness in the economy has placed a severe
 strain on government resourcese impeded smooth implementation
 of reforms; reduced the nation's capacity to continue develop-
 ment in education, health and lower income housingl and
 added to political and administrative difficulties by increas-
 ing discontent and further dividing the nation.
 
 
 434
 U.S.Uft:KIAb -LUANS ANG L6AN1b- UL$LiLAl1UNb ANU LOAN AUIHUKLAlONS
 (U.S.FIS AL YtAKb - MILLIUNS OF DULLARS)
 LOUNTRY: EL SALVAUOK
 IECON. ASSIS.-IIAL,..          11.     56.3    11'*.0
 LOANS .................... 4.Z      40j.4     uco0
 KANS...................       7.Z     17.9      34.0
 AAIU ,.   .................   o,       .3      o15.3
 LUANS .............. 4.    ...2   31.4      5.b
 GRANT.......................Z.1 L.9           24.,
 ISEk.SUPP.A SSIS 1.         0.0       9.1     4-*.9
 b.FOOD FUR VEA(,t..2..            2.1      5.5      35.3
 LuAN...................   .   OU    3.0     2b.2
 GRANTS.............. 2.9              2.,       9.1
 fITL I-OTAL.........          OG        3.0    c.2
 RLPAY. IN s-LOANS .....          OeU      J.0      26.2
 PAY. IN FUK. .UK .....           0.0      0.0       6.0
 TITLE lI-UlAL,........           2.9      k.5       V.1
 E.RELItFoE(.bEV G wFP,           1.3      0.5       4.2
 VOL.KELI EF AG(ENLY.....         1.       2.0       -.9
 C.UTIt*K ECON. ASSI.I...          1.b      0.       0.4
 LOANS.............         .. 0.0      0.0       0.0
 GRANTS....     .      ........  1.6    0.5       0.4
 PEALE LUKP......          1,0       0.5      0.0
 NARCU1lLS, .......          U.       0.0       L.0
 UTHR............        U.U       -0.0      0.4
 EI.MIL. ASSISI.-OAL ..           !. 5.v            35.5
 LOANS. ................      .         5.7      1U.0
 GKANTs........... ....   .   .         0.2      25.5
 A.MAP kPKANTS ..........         U00      OU      25.0
 b.CRE0IT SAL-FMS ..            0.0      ,.?I     IU.0
 C.INIL i41L.EL. TKNG....         0.0      G.Z       0.5p
 O.TRAN-EXLESS S10A  ...        0.0     .0.0       U.0
 E.OIHtR GKANI S .......          0.0      0.0       U.U
 II1.TOIAL Et;N. , MIL...         11.4     04.2     I''9.5
 LOANS....    . . ........... ..4.'   4b.1      90.u
 6KANTS............. ....,1.1                  59.5
 uTHER uS LUANS ..........          0.1     0.1       0.0
 EX-IN I3ANIK LOANS .......,0.1 .1                   0.0
 ALL 07HER ....................e.           0.0       0.0
 ASS STANCE I-KUM lN[tmNAIILINAL AENCI'S
 1919      190      11      19,wb-0 1
 [OTAL........ .....bO.U     d.9     ..5     00.9
 Idit) e3. :                  0.0      0.0    214.2
 IFC                 G.0      0.0      0.0     .1.0
 IUA                 0.0      0.1,      0.0     Z5.0
 IDS                29.5     -to. 5    140.4   343.1
 AIM                 c 0      0.0       0.0       0.U
 AFUb                0.0      '0.0      0.0       0.0
 UNUP                ..0       0. 4     0.1     Z I.U
 0THtR-UN            1.4       0.u   .  0.0       6.0
 EE0 .U                       0.v      .0.0      0.0
 
 
