 EL SALVADOR
 The election of Jose Napoleon Duarte, inaugurated as President
 on June 1, 1984, represented an important step in
 El Salvador's five-year evolution as a democratic nation.
 Virtually the entire country of El Salvador has accepted the
 results as valid and the new President's authority as
 legitimate. Preparations are under way for legislative and
 municipal elections that will be held in March 1985. Although
 sharply divided on numerous issues, the political parties have
 respected the constitutional system.
 The new Christian Democratic President faces formidable
 challenges: the country's violent history, a dedicated
 Marxist insurgency with strong ties to and material support
 from Nicaragua and the Cuban/Soviet bloc, a severely depressed
 economy, and still-weak institutions for public administration
 and the administration of justice. The greatest test to date
 for the cohesiveness of the new democratic system came in
 October when President Duarte announced his La Palma
 initiative for dialogue with the left in his speech at the
 United Nations General Assembly. The issue has been openly
 debated, and criticized or embraced, but Duarte's authority to
 conduct the dialogue, as long as it does not violate the 1983
 Constitution by leading to power sharing with the armed
 insurgents on any bass other than electoral, has been
 unchallenged.
 The new Government is working actively to end violence from
 both the far right and far left, to strengthen the rule of law
 and the system of justice, to pursue the dialogue with the
 armed left within a democratic, constitutional framework, and
 to restore economic growth while protecting social reforms.
 The military by and large has accepted that the Armed Forces
 are bound by the Constitution and must remain apolitical and
 non-partisan. During the presidential elections and in their
 relations with the new civilian Government under President
 Duarte the military has maintained its neutrality and has
 deferred to civil authority.
 The country continues to suffer from an active insurgency with
 an estimated 9,000 - 11,000 guerrillas of the Farabundo Marti
 National Liberation Front (FMLN), in conjunction with its
 political counterpart, the Democratic Revolutionary Front
 (FDR), a coalition of organizations led by Marxist-Leninists.
 The insurgent forces have the capability to conduct
 hit-and-run operations in areas of the country where the
 Salvadoran Armed Forces lack the resources to maintain a
 permanent security presence. The FMLN-FDR remains actively
 engaged in terrorism against both human and economic targets
 and committed to the overthrow of the constitutionally elected
 Government. The guerrillas' low level of popular support,
 however, coupled with declining morale, desertions, and lack
 of volunteers, have induced the guerrillas to resort to forced
 recruitment to augment their ranks. In addition the
 guerrillas have used terrorist tactics and destruction of
 civilian targets and infrastructure evidently in an attempt to
 coerce villagers into lending support to the FMLN-FDR or, at a
 minimum, intimidating the people into not reporting a
 guerrilla presence to government authorities.
 Human rights conditions in El Salvador are strongly affected
 by the ongoing civil strife. The achievement of a stable
 public order sufficient to protect individual rights has been
 disrupted by guerrilla and military operations, partisan
 
 
 513
 EL SALVADOR
 hatreds, acts of revenge, fear, and a prevailing uncertainty
 characterized by violence. This situation contributes to, and
 is complicated by, the ineffective operation of the judicial
 system, caused in part by corruption and intimidation. The
 Government has been working to unclog the court system,
 however, and has been at least partly successful in its effort
 to eliminate the backlog of state of emergency cases.
 The Armed Forces continue to be accused of human rights
 abuses, but the focus of these allegations has shifted
 primarily to the killing of non-combatants by gunfire or
 aerial bombardment. Most of these accusations, however,
 originate with the guerrillas themselves or from sources close
 to and sympathetic to the guerrillas and are in most cases
 either exaggerated or simply baseless. The great majority of
 civilian battle deaths appear to take place almost exclusively
 in connection with operations against legitimate military
 targets where 'masas" (the guerrilla term for their unarmed
 logistical support personnel) are present. Some allegations
 of gratuitous violence against civilians continue to occur,
 however. The Duarte Administration and the military High
 Command have both served notice that they expect all
 reasonable precautions to be taken to avoid the death or
 injury of innocent civilians. President Duarte has issued
 clear guidelines concerning the use of aerial bombardment in
 order to codify and strengthen existing rules of engagement.
 The brutal phenomenon known as 'death squad" assassination
 activity has not been completely extirpated but has declined
 dramatically, along with the overall level of civil violence.
 The best indicative data show civilian deaths to have declined
 from a level of 444 per month in 1981 and 298 per month in
 1982, to 139 per month in 1983 and 46 per month for the second
 half of 1984, since Duarte took office. The far right
 extremist Maximiliano Hernandez Martinez Brigade has been
 silent and inactive in the past year; the Secret
 Anti-Communist Army (ESA) has issued occasional threatening
 bulletins, but has claimed authorship of only one killing and
 one bombing (no injuries) in all of 1984. Indicators and
 statistics from all sources reflect the dramatic drop in
 killings attributed to "death squad* activity, except those
 attributed to the far left Clara Elizabeth Ramirez Brigade.
 Human rights abuses remain a central issue in El Salvador.
 However, there has been substantial progress in the past
 year. The security forces now provide human rights
 instruction to their trainees and a chaplain corps is being
 established for soldiers in the field. Despite occasional
 violations, the arrest and detention rules issued in December
 1983 by the Minister of Defense are now by and large being
 followed. Accountability for and treatment of arrestees is
 greatly improved; credible allegations of torture are much
 diminished.
 A prime contributing factor in human rights abuses is a
 generally inadequate judicial system. Lack of confidence in
 the availability of justice due to inefficiency, corruption
 and intimidation is a serious problem, prompting some in the
 populace to take the law into their own hands. The Duarte
 Administration is attempting to remedy this problem by
 strengthening the administration of justice and is
 implementing several initiatives begun under the previous
 Government. These include a revisory commission to review the
 
 
 514
 EL SALVADOR
 justice system, a special investigative unit for political
 crimes and especially significant or notorious criminal cases,
 a forensic laboratory, and a judicial protection unit to
 shield participants in the judicial process from intimidation
 or injury. The judicial protection unit completed its first
 mission when it provided protection in May at the trial of the
 accused murderers of four American churchwomen.
 The economic system underwent a dramatic reform in 1980 when
 the junta decreed land reform, nationalized the banks, and
 made cotton, sugar and coffee exports a government monopoly.
 For a variety of reasons, including the armed conflict, low
 world prices for El Salvador's export products, high fuel
 costs and the virtual collapse of the Central American Common
 Market, El Salvador's gross domestic product (GDP) has
 suffered a 25 percent decline over the past five years. This
 decline bottomed out in 1983, and a small increase in GDP is
 projected for 1984, but not in per capita terms. Foreign
 investment has yet to resume, domestic private sector
 confidence has not yet recovered to the point where major new
 investments are under way, and the economy remains dependent
 on external assistance.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Many violent deaths in El Salvador go unexplained; it is often
 impossible to distinguish those that are politically motivated
 (from either political extreme) from those which are disguised
 as such in order to evade criminal detection. Nonetheless, a
 substantial number of unexplained deaths, against the
 background of prolonged and bitter conflict, can be presumed
 to be politically related. While absolute numbers for such
 deaths cannot be determined, it is safe to conclude that those
 numbers rise or fall correspondingly with the level of overall
 figures for violent deaths. Death figures compiled from all
 press reports as violence level indicators since 1980 suggest
 political killings are now substantially lower than in the
 past. The trend is clear: late 1980 - oyer 800 per month;
 1981 - 444 per month; 1982 - 298 per month; 1983 - 139 per
 muntn; January-June 1984 - 88 per month; and July-November
 1984 - 46 per month.
 The Duarte Government took steps to tighten discipline and
 control in order to deal with abuse of authority within the
 military and other security forces. Officers suspected of
 death squad type activity were removed from their commands. A
 key new position, Vice Minister of Defense for Public
 Security, was created to supervise and coordinate the
 operations of the security forces; Col. Rodolfo Revelo and
 Col. Rinaldo Golcher were appointed to head the National and
 Treasury Police, respectively, and those organizations show
 improvement in their respect for civil and human rights. The
 new director of tne Treasury Police has disbanded its 110
 member intelligence unit, long considered the source of many
 abuses. It is not possible to state confidently how much
 residual violence is attributable to individuals who are
 collaterally officials of the Government or its security
 forces, but the evidence does clearly support a finding of
 significant and progressive reduction.
 
 
 515
 EL SALVADOR
 In 1984, there was a sharp decline in terrorist actions for
 which death squads have claimed responsibility or which can be
 attributed to them. The Secret Anti-Communist Army apparently
 was far less active in 1984 than in late 1983, having claimed
 responsibility for only one murder. However, it did issue
 several threatening communiques and took responsibility for
 several victimless bombings. Another identifiable death
 squad, the 'Maximiliano Hernandez Martinez Brigade,' was
 apparently inactive during most of 1984, and a newly formed
 self-described death squad, 'Special Command of the Domingo
 Monterrosa Barrios Brigade," issued communiques in December
 tnreatening to expose and execute leftists in the Government
 and to demand an explanation for the death of Lt.Col.
 Monterrosa.
 Charges continue to be leveled at the Salvadoran Armed Forces
 for indiscriminate bombing attacks and gratuitous violence
 against innocent civilians. President Duarte has investigated
 some of the more sensational charges of massacres and has
 stated that he found them to be baseless. He has made it
 clear, however, that he will not tolerate the wanton use of
 violence against noncombatant civilians.
 In contrast to the situation in the past, there is no credible
 evidence to suggest that violence against civilians is now
 even tacit Government policy, nor that its scale in any way
 approaches the claims of FMLN propaganda or the reports of
 some human rights groups. As far as can be determined, the
 majority of alleged civilian deaths stemming from military
 operations were actually guerrilla combatants. Most of the
 remainder were among the so-called Imasas,* the guerrilla term
 for their supporters who comprise the FMLN logistical support
 apparatus. These people, although themselves not usually
 armed, are often present with or near the guerrillas during
 combat operations, and in guerrilla installations which
 represent legitimate military targets and periodically come
 under Armed Forces attack. Sensitive to charges about misuse
 of air power, however, President Duarte and the military
 command have modified and strengthened the rules of aerial
 engagement to help ensure against its accidental or
 intentional misuse against civilians.
 The FMLN-FDR continues to commit significant human rights
 violations. Some specific examples cited here and in the
 following section indicate the range of their terrorist
 activity, which includes kidnappings, killings, forced
 recruitments, and intimidation of the populace. In January an
 American citizen was shot and killed when the vehicle in which
 she was riding with her husband and two small children failed
 to stop at a guerrilla roadblock. FMLN mining of the runway
 of a civilian airport in March caused three deaths. According
 to witnesses, in February guerrilla forces massacred 29.
 captured soldiers in western El Salvador. An unarmed military
 judge was killed by would-be kidnappers when he resisted
 abduction. Two local Red Cross workers who were traveling in
 a Red Cross ambulance were killed by guerrillas. The Armed
 Forces of National Liberation (FAL) seized a San Salvador bank
 in August, killing a civilian guard. In 1984 leftist
 terrorists killed three retired army officers and three
 Legislative Assembly deputies; they attempted the murder of a
 fourth deputy, wounding him badly. According to press
 reports, leftist groups carried out 63 unambiguobsly political
 killings during the first half of 1984.
 
 
 516
 EL SALVADOR
 In November and December anti-government terrorism increased
 dramatically. The left wing death squad "Clara Elizabeth
 Ramirez Front" claimed responsibility for the assassination of
 two U.S. Embassy guards, a Ministry of Justice guard and a
 civilian official of the National Electric company. Another
 guerrilla group, the "Raphael Antonio Arce Zablah Brigade"
 shot and killed two policemen on the street..
 b. Disappearance
 The number of press-reported civilian disappearances averaged
 13 per month through November 1984, for a total of 137. This
 is well below the levels of 39 per month in 1983, 38 per month
 in 1982, and 160 per month in 1981. By comparison, Tutela
 Legal (the legal aid office of the Catholic Archdiocese)
 reported 107 civilian disappearances January - August 1984.
 Disappearances occur under a variety of circumstances.
 Newspaper and eyewitness accounts often describe "armed men in
 civilian dress" as perpetrators of seizures. Some persons
 reported to have disappeared are later found dead, others may
 be in hiding, and still others subsequently are found to have
 been apprehended and held in unacknowledged detention by
 security forces only to reappear in the criminal justice
 system. Under the arrest and detention procedural guidelines
 in force qince December 1983, this latter problem has been
 reduced. This order requires security force members to be in
 uniform in all but a few cases and identify themselves while
 making arrests, and to notify the Armed Forces Chiefs of
 Staff, the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC),
 the Government's Human Rights Commission and the detainees'
 relatives witihin 24 hours of the arrest. The order permits
 incarceration only in official prisons and prohibits the use
 of torture.
 Guerrilla units stage kidnappings for ransom or prisoner
 exchanges. Because the families of kidnap victims generally
 try to avoid publicity in order to negotiate their release,
 these kidnappings receive little media coverage. The
 guerrillas launched a systematic forced recruitment campaign
 in the spring, in which some 1500 young people of both sexes
 were abducted. The Church has taken public note of the
 events. In his homily on December 23, Auxiliary Bishop Rosa
 Chavez lamented the abduction for ransom by the guerrillas of
 civilians in the eastern part of the country.
 Although most disappearances are routinely attributed by human
 rights monitoring organizations to the police forces, in the
 majority of cases it is not possible to substantiate an
 assertion of involvement by security or military forces in the
 disappearance. Similarly, it is impossible to tell how many
 disappearances are actually desertions of family, criminal
 acts, emigration (typically to the U.S. or neighboring
 countries), or enlistments into guerrilla ranks. Government
 policy, to which the chiefs of the security services are
 publicly committed, condemns violation of human rights via the
 disappearance of suspected subversives. President Duarte, who
 has long demanded that the security services act with complete
 legality, has said that he believes the disappearance problem
 to be vastly overstated.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Although it is difficult to gather hard evidence in torture
 cases, incidents of torture and lesser forms of mistreatment
 
 
 517
 EL SALVADOR
 continue to be reported, but they are fewer in number than'in
 previous years. The Catholic Church's human rights office,
 Tutela Legal, asserts that while the number of cases of
 torture has significantly declined, the methods are more
 refined with use of electric shock, psychological torture and
 other techniques that do not leave marks. There have been
 repeated accusations of rape by captors.
 Interviews with detainees and prisoners produce credible
 claims of torture or harsh treatment, especially during the
 initial stages of detention to extract confessions. For
 example, a university student who was abducted in August later
 turned up at National Police Headquarters showing clear signs
 of having been tortured. The policy of notification of
 families and the Human Rights Commission within 24 hours of
 arrest should, if adhered to, reduce opportunities for torture
 to occur. The new directors of the National and Treasury
 Police and National Guard have launched active campaigns to
 educate their police agents about the Government's policy
 against torture and cruel and degrading treatment.
 According to the Ministry of Defense, 1168 guerrilla
 combatants and supporters voluntarily turned themselves in to
 the Government during 1984. An additional 1853 guerrillas and
 supporters were captured. After an initial debriefing by the
 intelligence section of the capturing unit, these guerrillas
 and supporters are transferred to one of the public security
 forces within 72 hours of capture by the Army. Once they have
 arrived at the designated security force headquarters, they
 are treated in accordance with standard arrest procedures
 including the notification of a family member, the
 goveEnmental Human Rights Commission, and the ICRC. The
 prisoners are usually held in small groups for a 15-day
 incarceration in the security force headquarters. At the end
 of this period, the prisoner is assigned to an instructional
 judge under the provisions of Decree 50 as a person accused of
 armed subversion of the state.
 The guerrillas have established a poor record for treatment of
 captured members of the Armed Forces. While ordinary soldiers
 are most often released within a few days of capture, officers
 and cadets are not, but are held prisoner for prolonged
 periods in order to be used by the guerrillas for later
 exchanges. Frequently, prisoners released by the guerrillas
 have exhibited signs of severe beatings, deprivation of food
 and similar treatment.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Arrests in El Salvador can be made by the security forces
 without a warrant. The disposition of arrested persons is
 determined by an instructional magistrate who, like trial
 magistrates at various levels of the judicial process, may
 decide on the release or continued detention of a suspect for
 additional investigation before charges are brought or trial
 begins. This principle applies to 'political* and common
 crimes alike. In practice, it is impossible to say how many
 arrests are not based on reasonable probable cause, as even
 dismissal of charges at the instructional level often reflects
 either ineffective investigation or is a matter of convenience
 in an overburdened judicial system.
 The Constitution provides for the suspension of constitutional
 guarantees in times of emergency. Special legislation
 
 
 518
 EL SALVADOR
 provides for separate procedures and judicial handling of such
 politically motivated crimes as treason, sabotage, rebellion
 and participation in organized groups dedicated to the
 overthrow of the Government by use of force. Arrest for
 political beliefs, as such, is not contemplated in law and
 apparently does not occur. Some 2000 arrests have been made
 under state of emergency legislation.
 Until February 1984, judicial disposition of these crimes was
 regulated by Decree 507. This legislation was replaced by
 Decree 50, which was designed to provide increased protection
 for persons arrested for state of emergency crimes. The
 Decree halved the periods of permissible detention before.a
 defendant must be charged and brought to trial. If security
 forces hold a suspect for more than 15 days following arrest
 without consigning him to an instructional judge, they are in
 violation of Decree 50 and may be prosecuted for improper
 imprisonment. Persons arrested under Decree 50 once consigned
 to a judge may not be held without charge for more than 15
 days unless further investigation is ordered by the
 investigating judge. Persons arrested have no right to
 counsel before charges are brought but may retain counsel as
 soon as charged or remanded to detention pending further
 investigation. Elevation of a case to trial ordinarily must
 occur no later than 75 days from the date of arrest by the
 security forces. Any delay beyond this period must be based
 upon a judicial decree that orders further investigation along
 specified lines.
 Special Decree 50 courts were established immediately after
 the Decree came into effect, but caseloads, lack of resources
 and bad management of the system prevent their working as well
 as they should. Nevertheless, the entire backlog of Decree
 507 cases in the instructional phase, which automatically fell
 under the procedural terms of Decree 50, has now been
 eliminated, by either dismissing charges (in the majority of
 cases) or elevating the cases to the trial stage. At present,
 270 persons are charged and awaiting trial. The Decree 50
 system does not safeguard against arbitrary arrest, but it
 does preclude prolonged arbitrary detention in 'political*
 cases and provides a formal framework for due process.
 In common criminal cases bail is available until sentencing,
 provided the offense involved is not punishable by more than
 three years' imprisonment. After arrest, the police may
 detain a person for up to 72 hours before bringing the case
 before an investigating magistrate for dismissal or
 provisional detention pending criminal investigation. In
 theory, the investigational phase may not last more than 87
 days, after which the trial stage must begin or charges be
 dismissed. Legal detention may, however, be continued for
 further investigation if so decided by the trial judge or the
 appellate court. Again, the theoretical framework provides
 for protection of due process following arrest. In practice,
 violations of the system occur. If these violations
 constitute illegal detention, they provide the basis for
 prosecution of responsible persons on those charges.
 Prolonged detention is ordinarily the result of repeated
 extensions of the instructional phase, although the difficulty
 in coping with the backlog of cases confronting investigating
 and trial magistrates also plays a role in lengthy detentions.
 The scope of the judicial reform project now under way will
 take these and other issues under full consideration. The
 
 
 519
 EL SALVADOR
 revisory commission in charge of the reform process was
 formally constituted by a presidential decree issued on August
 24, 1984. This commission will undertake a diagnostic
 examination of the entire legal system, beginning with the
 area of criminal justice. Its objective is to revise the
 penal code so that it is consistent with the new Constitution
 and will thus examine existing legislation governing arrest
 and detention procedures, and propose its modification. The
 commission is made up of distinguished members of the bar and
 professors of law, all of whom have a broad comprehension of
 both Latin American jurisprudence and other systems of law.
 In the past, clandestine jails were known to exist, but in
 1984 the security forces claim they have been totally
 eliminated. Despite such claims, however, there were reports
 during 1984, of temporary detention at such locations. Most
 arrests are made by the National Police, which holds prisoners
 in group cells before they are either released by the
 investigating magistrate or transferred to a regular prison
 pending investigation of the accusations against them.
 Conditions in the penal centers are generally good. Visitors
 confirm that these facilities are clean and well-run and
 provide the basic necessities. There have been no recent
 complaints of ill-treatment by prisoners once they are
 confined within these prisons. The National Police allow
 representatives from the International Committee of the Red
 Cross (ICRC) unimpeded access to their detention facilities.
 The 360 male political prisoners at Mariona Prison and the 20
 female political prisoners at Ilopango Prison, in fact, enjoy
 an extraordinary amount of freedom in their own separate
 section, to organize their own cultural, social and
 educational programs.
 There are no legal provisions for exile nor for the revocation
 of citizenship.
 e. Denial of Pair Public Trial
 Trials of common or political criminals in El Salvador are
 neither denied nor unfairly conducted as matters of government
 policy. However the obvious inadequacy and inefficiency of the
 judicial system often prevents speedy and effective justice.
 Incarcerated persons normally wait from 6 to 18 months before
 coming to trial while their cases remain open, theoretically
 under instructional investigation. In fact, of a prison
 population that fluctuates between 3,500 and 4,000 inmates,
 only 10 to 15 percent are actually serving sentences as
 opposed to awaiting trial. When finally tried, most can
 expect to have charges dismissed at the trial stage or to be
 acquitted, very often due simply to the poor investigative
 capacity of the police and magistrate.
 At year's end, there was only one person actually serving a
 sentence for a state-of-emergency crime, a Costa Rican pilot
 convicted of running guns for the PILN-FDR. Some 40 to 50
 other persons have been convicted of crimes under Decree
 b07/50 provisions. These persons are normally accused of
 multiple offenses, usually sabotage or abetting guerrilla
 activities as well as membership in a subversive (FMLN-FDR)
 organization. In practice, the instructional phase normally
 fails to meet the requirements for proof for conviction of the
 greater offenses, such as sabotage. Thus, Decree 507/50
 
 40-387 0 - 85 - 34
 
 
 520
 EL SALVADOR
 convictions have been limited to membership in a subversive
 organization, punishable by imprisonment for not more than one
 year. Since time served in pre-trial'detention is subtracted
 from the sentence imposed, the effect thus far has been the
 dismissal of all defendants.
 Over the past ten years, the overall conviction rate has never
 exceeded 20 percent, and in 1983 it was only 14 percent. A
 few prisoners wait far longer than normal to come to trial.
 These are usually sensational or sensitive cases which remain
 under more or less active investigation in an effort to
 produce evidence for conviction. A good example is the case
 of ex-Mdjor Roeder, a notorious kidnapper and extortionist who
 spent two years in detention awaiting trial. When tried,
 however, (and to widespread outrage) he was acquitted amid
 suspicion that he had bribed or intimidated the jury. Another
 example is the case of the STECEL electric union workers,
 freed in October 1984 after four years of detention prolonged
 in part because of problems in obtaining adequate legal
 representation and in part because of wide public opprobrium
 surrounding their case and the knowledge that a conviction was
 unlikely.
 An effort to grapple with intimidation through the Judicial
 Protection Unit (JPU) is under study by the Ministry of
 Justice. It is intended to provide protection to judges,
 juries and officers of the courts in those difficult or
 sensitive cases in which intimidation could be expected to
 come into play. Although the JPU is not yet officially
 constituted, the Ministry of Justice has completed the
 preparation of regulations that will govern its activity and
 the unit should be activated in the near future. The Judicial
 Protection Unit had its trial run when it was temporarily
 activated to provide protection in the trial of the murderers
 of the U.S. churchwomen, which it did effectively.
 One crucial component of the work of the Revisory Commission
 for Judicial Reform is the study of trial procedures,
 including rules of evidence. It will examine such elements as
 the extra-judicial confession. Many members of the Salvadoran
 bar consider such confessions to be inherently unreliable.
 They favor either outright elimination of confessions as
 evidence or at least strict measures to ensure the validity of
 confessions.
 The judiciary is independent in theory and, for the greatest
 part, in practice. However, Supreme Court Magistrates and the
 Attorney General are chosen by vote in the Legislative
 Assembly after their candidacies are presented by the
 political parties. The nominations thus take on a high
 political coloration. This has had little practical effect on
 the administration of justice as a whole, but does come into
 play at the final appellate level. A greater threat to
 judicial independence has historically been the role of the
 military. Although it makes no effort to coerce convictions
 in either criminal cases (i.e. Roeder) or state of emergency
 cases (like STECEL), the Armed Forces have yet to embrace the
 principle that they are equal to other citizens before the
 law. Magistrates are reluctant to take on the responsibility
 of bringing charges against military officers or the police
 forces, the members of which cannot be relied upon to testify
 or otherwise to cooperate in prosecuting crimes allegedly
 committed by brother officers.
 
 
 521
 EL SALVADOR
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Government does not interfere in personal life except in
 matters it considers related to the armed conflict. Both the
 Government and guerrillas use networks of informers. Phone
 numbers for making denunciations to the Armed Forces have been
 publicized (although little used), and security forces rely on
 informers and anonymous denunciations about alleged criminal
 and subversive activities. On the other hand, there is no
 campaign to coerce the public into acting as informants.
 Members of the security forces use forced entry to carry out
 arrests and investigations. The official Human Rights
 Commission no longer maintains statistics on forced entry;
 other groups have never done so. The constitutional provision
 protecting the inviolability of correspondence is suspended
 under the state of siege. Postal officials have the authority
 to inspect correspondence and do so on occasion.
 These provisions may be revised by the legislature (a
 representative and independent body) when it wishes. Thus
 far, they have been routinely extended, usually by unanimous
 vote, on a monthly basis.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 State of siege decrees suspend the constitutional rights of
 freedom of speech and press but in day-to-day life are seldom
 invoked. Self-censorship out of fear of violent reprisal,
 both in the media as well as by individuals, is the leading
 constraint on free expression in El Salvador. Salvadoran
 newspapers publish communiques by the extreme left and right
 out of fear of reprisal.
 The two leading newspapers in the capital are conservative,
 and criticism of the Government from a rightist perspective is
 vigorous and frequent. The papers frequently run
 international wire service accounts of controversial local
 events rather than rely on their own reporters, thus putting
 some distance between themselves and any criticism which might
 De generated.
 Radio stations are much more vigorous in their pursuit of
 news, running a wider variety of stories than the newspapers.
 Radio not only has the best quality news, but also the
 broadest reach in Salvadoran society. Television devotes
 little time to news, but its independence and quality fall
 somewhere between the newspapers and radio stations.
 The Government has recently begun to try again to enforce a
 5-year-old decree forbidding the publication of anonymous
 communiques and statements. This was provoked by an
 announcement by the extremist organization which calls itself
 the Secret Anti-Communist Army *declaring war" on the La Palma
 dialogue process. Additionally, the Government has withheld
 advertisements by government agencies from one ultra-
 conservative paper because of its extremely anti-government
 editorial positions..
 The publications of the Jesuit-run Central American University
 continue to criticize the Government from a leftist
 
 
 522
 EL SALVADOR
 perspective. Their bi-weekly newspaper and bi-monthly
 journal, as well as other occasional publications, have made
 no secret of their philosophical support for the political
 leaders of the insurrection. In general their criticism shies
 only at supporting the violent overthrow of the Government.
 The press (including the conservative press) routinely accepts
 paid ads from leftist organizations expressing anti-government
 views.
 Academic freedom is guaranteed by the constitution, and is, in
 principle, quite broadly interpreted. For example, as is the
 case in many Latin American countries, university authorities
 routinely assert that local police have no jurisdiction on
 campus. After having been closed for four years following
 violent clashes between 'students' and the army, the main
 campus of the University of El Salvador was recently
 reopened. The rector has said in interviews that he considers
 political activism to be the duty of every student and that
 students are free not merely to study at the university, but
 must also make a political commitment. Arrests or penalties
 do not appear to be exacted on the basis of violations of
 limits on freedom of speech and press.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The constitutional right to free assembly and association is
 suspended under the state of emergency. The Government has
 reinstated the right of assembly for political parties and
 peaceful organizations, including church and labor groups, but
 not for the formal membership organizations of the
 revolutionary left.
 Althougn now inactive, two FMLN-FDR member organizations are
 still recognized as legal parties, the MNR (National
 Revolutionary Movement) and the UDN (National Democratic
 Union, an explicit communist party front). Pro-left
 sentiments are also aired through the freedom of expression
 and assembly accorded to groups that refrain from explicit
 identification with the armed left. These include the "human
 rights* organization Committee of Mothers of the Disappeared
 and the left-dominated Unitarian Labor Movement of El Salvador
 (MUSYGES).
 Salvadoran unions are free and independent from government
 control. There is no government-sponsored labor federation.
 The Popular Democratic Unity (UPD), a loose association of
 peasant organizations and labor unions, joined the Christian
 Democratic Party (PDC) in an electoral agreement during the
 1984 presidential elections. This agre'ement, known in El
 Salvador as the 'Social Pact," included a promise by the PDC
 to name UPD peasant leaders to top positions in all of the
 land reform institutions. Thus far, however, the UPD's
 presence in the Duarte government does not seem to have
 compromised the independence of the UPD member organizations.
 Rather, it has allowed those most affected by the agrarian
 reform to exercise direct control over agrarian reform
 institutions.
 The Salvadoran labor code is being amended to reflect changes
 pertaining to labor in the 1983 Constitution and will
 recognize the right of peasants to organize in labor unions.
 Although the new Constitution continues to bar public
 employees of non-autonomous government agencies from
 organizing into labor unions, these government workers are
 
 
 523
 EL SALVADOR
 represented by professional associations whose function is
 similar to that of unions. Wage increase demands by many
 public employees gave rise in early 1984 to a series of public
 employee strikes. Public employee strikes are illegal in
 El Salvador, but the Government adopted a.,largely conciliatory
 approach and ultimately enacted a 10 percent wage increase for
 all government employees.
 El Salvador's labor organizations maintain close relations
 with most of the important international labor movements.
 FESINCONSTRANS, El Salvador's largest urban labor federation,
 is an affiliate of the Interamerican Regional Labor
 Organization (ORIT), the International Confederation of Free
 Trade Unions' (ICFTU) regional organization. Many of the
 member organizations in the leftist-led MUSYGES have loose
 links with the Communist-dominated World Federation of Trade
 Unions (WFTU) and have sent representatives to WFTU meetings
 in Prague, Havana and Mexico City in recent years. The four
 largest leftist-led unions of MUSYGES confederation all enjoy
 official legal recognition by the Government of El Salvador.
 Nine members of the leftist-led Revolutionary Labor Federation
 (FSR, a member of MUSYGES) were arrested by the National
 Police in January 1984 for conspiring against the Government.
 Although the Government displayed evidence against them, most
 ot the FSR detainees were eventually released from prison
 later that year. Two other leftist labor leaders were
 detained briefly under suspicion of subversive activities and
 then released.
 There are several complaints against the Government of El
 Salvador pending before the International Labor Organization's
 Committee on Freedom of Association. Moat concern the arrest
 of various trade union leaders (for example, the nine FSR
 members) and the search of trade union premises. All predate
 the Duarte Government.
 Freedom of peaceful assembly is protected in article 560 of
 the Civil Code as long as the group requesting permission to
 hold a march or demonstration can demonstrate that it has a
 legitimate 'particular interest' to represent. The Ministry
 ot the Interior issues permits for these marches almost as a
 matter of course, although it has the legal prerogative to
 turn down any such request. Democratic unions, leftist labor
 groups, and anti-government demonstrators have demonstrated
 freely with National Police protection.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is constitutionally guaranteed in El
 Salvador and respected in practice. Although historically
 Roman Catholic, El Salvador has become increasingly multi-
 denominational, chiefly through the efforts of foreign
 missionaries now supported by numerous Salvadoran clerics.
 Although these missionaries generally operate freely and
 without harassment, some have become victims of violence. In
 one recent case a Lutheran minister was brutally murdered in
 eastern El Salvador. The alleged murderers have been arrested
 and are currently being held for trial.
 Tne Catholic Church continues to be one of the most
 influential and respected institutions in the country. It
 uses its influence among the huge number of practicing
 Catholics to speak out forcefully on social issues, most
 
 
 524
 EL SALVADOR
 notably on the need for peace and on human rights matters,
 from the pulpit and in its church publications.
 Over the past year, relations between the Church and the
 Government, including the military and security forces have
 become less strained. Although the Church continues to decry
 human rights violations, it has on numerous occasions
 recognized the major improvements in the overall human rights
 situation. The Church's prestige was underscored when it was
 asked to coordinate and preside at the La Palma meeting
 between the Government and leaders of the FMLN-FDR. Despite
 the courageous role of the Catholic Church in moderating the
 dialogue between tne Government and the guerrilla forces, the
 left and elements of the far right have attacked the Church
 and the Auxiliary Bishop personally for alleged bias.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Although the state of siege decree formally suspends the
 constitutional right to free movement, this suspension is not
 invoked in practice. The continuing armed conflict has
 displaced an estimated 450,000 persons within El Salvador,
 primarily in the northern and eastern departments. Another
 10,000 displaced Salvadorans live in camps outside
 El Salvador, primarily in Honduras. Thousands more are
 tnought to be living in Mexico and elsewhere in Central
 America. Governments (including the Salvadoran),
 international organizations and private voluntary
 organizations assist the displaced. The Government has
 imposed no control on emigration and has assisted amnesty
 beneficiaries and detainees who wish to settle elsewhere after
 release. It assists the displaced persons and other
 individuals wishing to return to El Salvador to reintegrate
 into society.
 Increased forced recruitment by the guerrillas in the
 northeastern part of the country has caused increased internal
 displacement and an exodus of Salvadorans who flee into
 Honduras and then attempt to re-enter El Salvador into
 government controlled areas.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 1984 saw El Salvador move further in its transition to an
 open, more participatory democratic system. It enjoys a
 directly elected legislature and directly elected presidency
 which may not constitutionally succeed itself. For the first
 time, a president was elected without the interference of the
 armed forces, who adopted political neutrality, sought to
 safeguard the process and renounced their right to vote in the
 election. The military has explicitly recognized the
 President's constitutional position as Commander in Chief of
 the Armed Forces.
 Six parties have been represented in the legislature since the
 1982 elections. They will run again in March 1985, when
 mayors will also for the first time be directly elected.
 Several small political parties are not represented in the
 legislature but have legal status and freely organize and
 publish. Right to membership in any legally recognized party
 is unrestricted.
 
 
 525
 EL SALVADOR
 Two opposition parties of the left, the MNR (National
 Revolutionary Movement) and the communist UDN (National
 Democratic Union), are legally recognized but have chosen not
 to participate in the system. Both are member parties of the
 FMLN-FDR. The Constitution now permits the legalization of
 all political parties that do not advocate armed opposition,
 provided they meet the required minimummembership standards.
 The Government and the majority of the constitutional
 opposition have expressed support for the integration of the
 currently armed leftist groups into the system as disarmed,
 legal political parties.
 Eight parties contested the first round of the Presidential
 elections held on March 25, 1984, following a prolonged and
 active period of campaigning. Despite administrative problems
 and guerrilla interference some 1.4 million votes were cast,
 representing more than 75 percent of the electorate. As no
 party obtained an absolute majority of the votes, a second
 round between the two most successful parties, the Christian
 Democrats (PDC) led by Jose Napoleon Duarte and the National
 Republican Alliance (ARENA) of Roberto D'Aubuisson, occurred
 on May 6, when over 1.5 million Salvadorans turned out to vote
 in the second round despite guerrilla threats and calls for a
 boycott. Procedurally, the election went more smoothly than
 the first round; Jose Napoleon Duarte, 6merged as the victor
 with 54 percent of the popular vote.
 The Salvadoran Government invited more than sixty nations and
 international organizations to observe the March 25 elections
 and verify their honesty, and approximately thirty nations'
 representatives returned to El Salvador. to observe the second
 round. Most observers noted administrative problems in the
 March 25th round but all endorsed the fairness of the
 elections.
 In both election rounds, guerrillas sought to disrupt the
 vote. Before the first round, they assassinated several
 political leaders, made threats and propagandized against the
 election. On March 25 guerrillas successfully blocked
 delivery of electoral materials to some voting locations,
 stole thousands of identity documents to prevent citizens from
 voting and caused a major power failure on election eve. In
 some cases, electoral materials had to be delivered in the
 dark, resulting in missing.registry pages and other problems.
 This guerrilla effort to disrupt the voting process had little
 effect on the turnout.
 During the second round, the guerrillas set off bombs in San
 Salvador, again stole identity documents and launched an
 attack on San Miguel, the country's third largest city. The
 Salvadoran Army thwarted the attack and voting proceeded
 normally in most of the country. In the second round, 46
 small municipalities were unable to vote because of guerrilla
 activity.
 There were some charges of political favoritism being shown by
 local military commanders. However, most proved false and the
 military in fact, with only negligible exceptions, lived up to
 its promise of non-interference and neutrality. Extensive
 offensive operations to prevent a major guerrilla disruption
 were conducted during both rounds. The strategy proved
 effective, although it exacted a toll of over 100 deaths of
 military personnel.
 
 
 526
 EL SALVADOR
 Participation in the political system is not restricted on the
 basis of class, religion, ethnic background or sex. The
 members of the legislature and the memberships of the parties
 represent a heterogenous mixture of Salvadoran society. The
 President of the National Assembly is a woman and a member of
 a small opposition party in the Government.
 The Government faces clearcut political opposition from the
 parties which lost in the presidential election, but which
 constitute a potential majority within the legislature. No
 coalition has emerged to dominate the political process from
 either side; many key votes now see ad hoc majorities develop
 for or against the Government.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Duarte Government has been very forthcoming with visiting
 human rights missions, consistently providing information,
 making its officials available for discussion, and permitting
 the inspection of detention centers.
 Human rights delegations-who visited in 1984 include the
 Lawyer's Committee on Human Rights, Faculty Committee on Human
 Rights in El Salvador and Central America, Lutheran Church
 delegations, the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Human
 Rights, Americas Watch, Medical Aid for El Salvador, and the
 Unitarian Universalist Service Committee. Numerous U.S.
 Congressional and staff delegations have also looked closely
 into human rights matters.
 Prisoners are interviewed on a systematic basis by
 representatives of the International Committee of the Red
 Cross (ICRC) and the Government's Human Rights Commission.
 Both organizations are notified of arrests of political
 detainees. The United Nations Human Rights Commission's
 Special Rapporteur for El Salvador visited that country in
 September on a fact-finding tour in preparation for his annual
 report. As in previous years, he had access to high-level
 Salvadoran officials, including President Duarte and ranking
 members of the military and security forces. He had free
 exchanges with local human rights groups, visited Mariona and
 Ilopango prisons and was permitted to interview detainees. In
 his report to the UN, he noted the improvements in the general
 human rights situation over last year, praised the Duarte
 Government for its increased control over death squad activity
 and the improved criminal justice system, but expressed
 concern about civilian casualties from aerial bombardment by
 Salvadoran forces.
 Various other groups have also visited, been granted
 interviews with Government officials and allowed entry into
 the prisons.
 Amnesty International issued a report in May 1984 on
 extrajudicial executions in El Salvador based on evidence
 developed during a visit to El Salvador by that organization
 in July 1983. The report found that the historical incidence
 of such executions was massive and that Salvadoran procedures
 of recording and investigating.violent deaths were defective,
 and urged that Salvadoran authorities ensure that forensic
 evidence be systematically collected.
 
 
 527
 EL SALVADOR
 Sources of information on political violence include
 newspapers, the armed forces, court records, human rights
 organizations, leftist organizations, and personal
 testimonies. Each of these is subject to limitations and/or
 biases. Government information on guerrilla casualties is
 subject to exaggeration. Court records list victims of
 violence identified by justices of the peace throughout the
 country. Most reports yield little information on the nature
 of political violence but, nevertheless, are useful in
 determining trends.
 The official Human Rights Commission, composed of leaders of
 the Church, labor, private sector and the National Police, was
 established by the Magana Government to represent individual
 citizens' interests before the security forces and justice
 system. The Commission's relations with the Duarte Government
 and the military security services are good. During the first
 six months of 1984, the Commission dealt with 1,535 cases;
 including complaints and inquiries about disappearances,
 reasons for arrests, and interviews With detainees. The
 Commission found that 594 persons alleged to be "missing' were
 actually under arrest in the instructional or trial phase of
 their cases; 142 persons thought to be under arrest had
 already been freed; 52 cases were provided urgent financial
 assistance while under detention; 24 persons alleged to be
 'missing' were actually cases of PMLN abductions; in two cases
 persons who were reported as missing were found dead.
 Other organizations which report on violence, besides the
 government Human Rights Commission, include the Legal Aid
 Office of the Archdiocese (Tutela Legal), Christian Legal Aid
 (Socorro Juridico Cristiano), and the unofficial El Salvador
 Human Rights Commission (CDHES). In addition, the Center of
 Investigation and Documentation of the Jesuit-run University
 of Central America is a human rights information clearing
 house. These groups rely primarily on newspaper reporting,
 supplemented by other sources such as announcements by
 guerrilla groups and personal testimony.
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 El Salvador currently has a per capita gross domestic product
 (GDP) of approximately $648. In 1983, agriculture accounted
 for about 21.3 percent and industry 15 percent of GDP. Before
 1960, El Salvador's economy was almost completely dependent on
 a few subsistence crops and coffee. The creation of the
 Central American Common Market (CACM) in that year stimulated
 exports of manufactured goods to other Central American
 countries, and real GDP growth during the 1960's and 1970's
 exceeded 5 percent per annum.
 Nevertheless, many years of neglect of the country's rapidly
 growing poor population, profound social inequities, and an
 inability of the country's public and private institutions to
 address structural disparities produced increasing political
 violence and terrorism during the 1970's. Despite a military
 coup in 1979, which brought to power a Government that
 implemented a series of sweeping economic reforms, political
 violence increased. The violence, in turn, contributed to
 further declines in living conditions for the majority of
 Salvadorans. Thousands were driven from their homes and those
 who remained suffered from a decrease in public services due
 to the violence and the Government's financial shortfalls.
 
 
 528
 EL SALVADOR
 Exacerbating economic problems brought on by internal violence
 were external factors such as the world recession, declining
 prices for the country's main exports, and sharply reduced
 demand from El Salvador's trading partners in the CACM. The
 combined results produced an economic crisis. Between 1979
 and 1983, the country experienced a 25 percent reduction in
 real GDP, a 33 percent decline in exports, a substantial
 increase in unemployment, large-scale capital flight and a 75
 percent reduction in private investment. Only in 1983 was
 this decline halted. A 2.8 percent annual rate of population
 growth combined with the highest population density in the
 western hemispnere (589 people per square mile in 1983) also
 limits economic opportunity for a large part of the
 population. The adult literacy rate is about 62 percent, and
 the primary school enrollment in 1981 was about 83 percent.
 In 1984, there are 69 infant deaths per 1,000 live births.
 Life expectancy is 64.5 years. The per capita calorie intake
 is about 89 percent of nutritional requirements. Limited
 access to education, health services, improved shelter, and a
 highly skewed distribution of income and wealth affect
 dramatically the nature of El Salvador's development.
 A dramatic shift in the ownership of over 25 percent of
 El Salvador's agricultural land brought about under the
 Agrarian Reform Program has affected El Salvador's social
 structure. In March 1980, El Salvador instituted sweeping
 social and economic reforms designed in part to transfer
 ownership of farmlands from the small number of large
 landholders to those who worked the land. Under Phase I of
 the Land Reform Program, all farms of more than 500 hectares
 (1,235 acres) were converted into worker cooperatives to be
 managed jointly by their members and the Government Land
 Reform Institute until the cooperatives are able to manage
 themselves. The number of beneficiaries under Phase I is
 31,359 families. The 1983 Constitution clarified Phase II by
 estanlishing a ceiling of 245 hectares (605 acres) that an
 individual may own, and by giving affected owners three years
 to sell property in excess of that limit to peasants, small
 farmers or peasant organizations. The state can expropriate,
 without prior compensation, any excess land not disposed of
 during the three-year period. Under Phase III of the Land
 Reform Process, farms previously rented or sharecropped could
 be claimed in parcels of up to seven hectares (17.3 acres) by
 the former renters or sharecroppers. By June 30, 1984, when
 tne opportunity for presentation of claims ended 63,640 persons
 had filed 79,110 petitions for land under Phase III.
 Including family members, under Phase III more than 300,000
 Salvadorans are now moving towards ownership of the land they
 work. Landowners affected by Phase III have resisted strongly,
 often with violence and forced eviction of beneficiaries.
 Many who have lost land are not wealthy, and there is some
 evidence that most violence and illegal evictions come from
 the owners of the smallest, not largest, farms. Many
 landowners have filed legal protests with the Government, thus
 contesting the claims and keeping the applicants from the land
 until .the case is resolved. Peasant organizations have
 complained that the adjudication process takes too long and is
 too often decided in favor of the landlord.
 Although the Government has traditionally supported, and
 continues to support, private property rights, compensation of
 former owners has been partial and paid very slowly, mainly
 because of lack of funds. To date, 256 Phase I properties out
 of 470 have been compensated.
 
 
 529
 EL SALVADOR
 Under the Constitution women enjoy the same legal rights as
 men. Women are represented in government in both elected and
 appointed positions. The President of the Legislative
 Assembly is a woman, seven women have been elected to the
 60-member Assembly as deputies, and two women serve on the
 city council for San Salvador. Women hold positions of Vice
 Ministers of Foreign Trade, Public Works, Education, and
 Justice. Until recently, a woman was president of a major
 state bank and is currently serving in an equally important
 financial position. Women serve on the boards of directors of
 several banks. The majority of elementary teachers, nurses,
 and secretaries are women, as well as about fifty percent of
 the teachers on the high school level and between 30 to 40
 percent of the university professors, and several deans.
 Women also play a role in private industry, especially as
 owners of small concerns. There are women serving at higher
 levels, and several major companies are owned and operated by
 women. Women are well represented in the professions. About
 30 percent of the physicians, 50 percent of the dentists and
 more than 30 percent of the attorneys are women. Women are
 members of the armed forces as nurses, in administrative areas
 and in intelligence. Some women have been trained for combat,
 but no decision has been reached as to whether they will be
 used in that role. The National Police iS training women as
 detectives and has a corps of policewomen.
 A high proportion of women in the lower economic strata are
 heads of single family households, often fending for large
 families. Seventy percent of the children in El Salvador are
 born out of wedlock and most are not legally recognized by
 their fathers even when occupying the same domicile.
 
 
 530
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: EL SALVADOR
 1982     1983    1984
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...       182.2   245.6    215.9
 LOANS ..............      63.8     86.6     81.2
 GRANTS .............     118.4    159.0    134.7
 A.AID ....................... 154.6   198.8    161.4
 LOANS ..............      43.9     47.6     32.2
 GRANTS .............      110.7   151.2    129.2
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)..       115.0    140.0    120.2
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE ......       27.6     46.8     54.5
 LOANS ..............      19.9     39.0     49.0
 GRANTS .............       .7.7     7.8      5.5
 TITLE I-TOTAL 1.........       9.9     39.0     49.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS ....        19.9    39.0     49.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR ....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE 1I-TOTAL .........       7.7      7.8      5.5
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.        5.5      6.2      3.7
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY.....        2.2      1.6      1.8
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST'...       0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS ......       0.0      0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...       82.0     81.3    196.6
 LOANS ..............       16.5    46.5     18.5
 GRANTS.; ...........      65.5     34.8    178.1
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........      63.5     33.5    176.8
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....      16.5     46.5     18.5
 C.INTL MIL.E.TRNG ....       2.0      1.3      1.3
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & NIL...      264.2    326.9    412.5
 LOANS ..............  .80.3     133.1     99.7
 GRANTS .............      183.9   193.8    312.8
 OTHER US LOANS ..........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IN BANK LOANS .......       0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL  OTHER ..............      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1982     1983    1984     1946-84
 TOTAL ........   112.8     53.3    114.3   877.4
 IBRO               0.0     0.0      0.0    215.1
 IFC                0.0     0.0      0.0      1.0
 IDA                0.0     0.0      0.0     25.6
 IDB              112.4    52.9    114.0    607.7
 ADS                0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFOB               0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNDP               0.4     0.4      0.0     21.7
 OTHER-UN           0.0     0.0      0.3      6.3
 EEC                0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
 531
