El Salvador
T^he State Department's Countiy Report for El Salvador in 1996 is JL substandard. It disappoints on virtually every level of analysis. Some of its errors are so egregious as to warrant review by the State Department's Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor. After critiquing ideologically slanted and factually dubious human rights reports on El Salvador for more than a decade, the Lawyers Committee has abstained from publishing a review over the last three years. This year's report makes painfully dear that accurate human rights reporting on El Salvador is no higher a priority today than it was in the years of extensive U.S. government involvement in that country's internal conflict. The report's grave errors of commission as well as omission are all the more disturbing, and far less defensible, when compared to the high quality of reporting that characterizes other reports reviewed in this volume.
Reverting to the discredited methodology of earlier years, the State Department has practically ignored the many non-governmental and international organizations that continue to report on El Salvador. None of these is cited; domestic human rights organizations are mentioned only to note that they are free to carry out their activities, that they have criticized a vagrancy law and that they were concerned that a new NGO law gave too much power to the government's Interior Ministry. The authors appear to be indifferent to relevant international human rights norms and to interpretations of these norms by respected authorities. The reports of El Salvador's own human rights Ombudsman are also ignored. Created pursuant to the peace accords which ended the nation's armed conflict, the Office of the Counsel for the Defense of Human Rights (PDDH) enjoys a high level of public trust unique among the country's widely discredited public institutions; the report acknowledges as much. The PDDH gets high marks from a wide array of domestic and international human rights NGOs — a first in El Salvador and quite unusual for government Ombudsman offices elsewhere in Latin America. The PDDH has a reputation for independence, and the office has conducted serious investigations into alleged human rights violations, issuing thoughtful findings and concrete recommendations. Unfortunately, the PDDH's findings, a number of which run counter to the views expressed in the report, are largely ignored.
85
Critique 1996
The structure of the State Department's report unduly emphasizes government responses to human rights problems without attempting to evaluate their appropriateness, their sincerity, or their impact. One government agency, the National Civilian Police {Policía Nacional Civil: PNC), whose existence is regarded by the State Department as a major achievement, receives particularly favorable treatment. However, the PNC has a far more mixed record than the report allows; some of the report's statements and omissions on the subject are highly misleading. This is not too surprising, given the embassy's disproportionate reliance on police statistics in preparing its discussion of abuses by the police. Considering the ready availability of information on police abuses, the agency's lack of investigation and prosecution, and the alleged pressure by the Deputy Police Director and the Ministry of Public Security on one investigative body, the PNC's Inspector General, the report's flaws are hard to excuse as oversight.
The report too often refrains from issuing critical conclusions in its own voice, although it implicitly questions a number of allegations of rights abuses. The report is full of references to "problems" — "[ijmpunity...continued to be a problem," "domestic violence [among indigenous people] is a problem," "violence against women. . .is a widespread and serious problem." It also alludes to "complaints," for example, "against the PNC for excessive use of force and denial of due process...." But it provides little supporting analysis, and no real assessment of the government's responsibility in these matters. On other fronts, the report's tone is neutral, even mildly positive, in discussing developments that threaten the rights of Salvadorans. For instance, the report frames its discussion of the repugnant Emergency Law Against Common and Organized Crime with the assertion that the law was spurred by "public demand for firm action" and won the support of all parties in the national legislature, with the exception of the Farabundo Marti Front for National Liberation (FMLN). However, in a striking omission, the report fails to discuss the lengthy opinion issued by the Constitutional Court holding that the law violates El Salvador's Constitution in numerous respects.
86
El Salvador
The report appears to dismiss allegations which it regards as unproven, even when the absence of evidence is due to the failure of competent authorities to investigate. Some passages are even reminiscent of the now notorious Reagan-era State Department cable which effectively denied the occurrence of the 1981 El Mozote massacre of some 700 people by reporting that embassy investigators, who never made it to the scene of the crime, had discovered no evidence that such an atrocity had occurred. The report's attempts to downplay more recent reports of abuses leads it into similarly murky waters. For example, the report states: "Some public figures reported death threats but none was substantiated." Readers may be more confused than relieved to leam that "[i]ncidents of alleged police brutality ...were not repeated." Without the information that the Ombudsman's office received 101 reports of disappearances (an increase over 1995), the reader will have difficulty evaluating the statement that "[tjhere were no confirmed reports of politically motivated disappearances" (emphasis added).
One omission worth noting is the report's failure to mention steps the government has taken to reintroduce the death penalty in El Salvador. The legislature approved a constitutional amendment which would, if ratified by this year's legislative session, reinstate capital punishment and place El Salvador in direct violation of its binding obligation not to expand or renew the death penalty under the American Convention on Human Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. This omission, which is not unique to the report on El Salvador, may be attributed to the State Department's unvwllingness to criticize other governments for failing to adhere to legal norms which the United States continues to ignore.
The report reaches a low point in its description of the National Civilian Police. The PNC was inaugurated in 1992, with encouragement and funding from the United States, as a force that was to be grounded in respect for human rights. The report seems to be intent on maintaining uncritical U.S. support for the PNC in spite of the record number of complaints against its agents in 1996. By neglecting to include data from the PDDH, the UN and international and national NGOs on complaints against the PNC, the report fails to fulfill its basic mandate and seriously
87
Critique 1996
undermines its credibility. The State Department should reflect on the likely effect that its positive spin on the PNC will have on poUce leaders such as Rodrigo Avila, director of the PNC, who publicly stated that complaints of human rights abuses by police agents "are made by delinquents who have been apprehended and are trying to alleviate their legal situation."
The report's assertion that there were no confirmed cases of political killings is misleading. Information from international and domestic NGOs, including Tutela Legal, the Jesuit-run Central American University (UCA) and the Institute of Juridical Studies (lEJES), shows not only a substantial increase in complaints of politically motivated crime, but also, in the words of the report, the "clear inability and apparent lack of will" of state institutions to ascertain when a crime is politically motivated.
In its work report on the period from July 1995 to June 1996, the PDDH summarizes one case that it considers illustrative of the many that indicate political motives and are reminiscent of death squad modus operandi. Astonishingly, the report makes no mention of the case or of the PDDH's contention that politically motivated killings continue in El Salvador.
On April 16, Carlos Wilfredo Hernández, Jairo Hernández and José Fidel Córdoba, all teenagers, were at their home in Cantón El Platanillo in the department of Quetzaltepeque, when six armed men in military uniform broke into their home, beat the young men, ordered them at gunpoint to leave, and tied the young men's thumbs, a common practice of death squads in the 1980s. The assailants then covered the victims' heads with sheets and cut off one young man's head with an axe. The armed men proceeded to a neighboring house, ordering the two surviving young men, their heads shrouded, to accompany them. The band went from house to house terrorizing residents and committing acts of violence. In one instance the barrel of a sub-machine gun was inserted in the mouth of an elderly woman while she prayed, and the father of one of the three young men was hanged from a tree in the town square. The PDDH attested in its report that the perpetrators exhibited many of the characteristics of a paramilitary organization such as military discipline, the use of sophisticated weapons and electronic communication systems,
88
El Salvador
and a sophisticated logistical capacity. The report also noted that governmental authorities, including police and judicial authorities, reacted in a remarkably negligent manner. Police authorities did not report the incidents until almost two days had passed, and the Justice of the Peace failed to conduct an autopsy in a timely fashion. As of June 1997, no one has been arrested for the crimes committed in Cantón El Platanillo.
The reaction of law enforcement and judicial authorities in this case has been described by both governmental and independent organizations as the norm. Given such a consensus, the report's exclusive reliance on police statistics in its section on political and other extrajudicial killings is sloppy at best. At worst, this section is deliberately misleading.
The report appears to accept a finding of "improper police procedures" in the case of Francisco Manzanares, who was shot and killed by a PNC agent. Contrary to the report's assertions, NGOs report that Manzanares was active in politics at the time of his death, and that he was killed deliberately by PNC agents.
Although the report correctly acknowledges that the PDDH remains limited in its ability to investigate human rights violations, it fails to include information from independent observers who attribute the PDDH's weaknesses to a lack of funding and support from the executive and legislative branches, motivated at least in part by the government's dislike and distrust of the PDDH's independence and its willingness to be openly critical of abuses and aggressive in its reporting and analysis. In a December report on El Salvador, the UN Secretary General recognized the cause of the PDDH's troubles by calling on the Salvadoran government to provide the Ombudsman's office with the resources necessary to carry out its mandate.
Recent legislation on NGOs may have further restricted the investigative capabilities of El Salvador's institutions. The new law purports to give the Ministry of the Interior authority to deny or delay applications for legal registration of all NGOs. Registration is crucial for obtaining the international funds on which many Salvadoran NGOs depend for their survival. In addition, the new law makes it difficult for foreign NGO workers to obtain visas, thwarting international cooperation at a time when it is urgently needed. Advocates are concerned that such
89
Critique 1996
hurdles will effectively limit services provided by NGOs to the most vulnerable sectors of the population, and that registration is intended as a means of controlling NGOs that do not share the government's political and social perspectives. The State Department should take care to report on the law's impact in next year's report.
The report fails to mention death threats made against personnel of the Madeleine Lagadec Center for the Promotion of Human Rights. According to Amnesty International, Eliezar Ambelis received an anonymous note in September threatening him with death unless he stopped his work with the center. Mr. Ambelis was subsequently detained and shot by masked assailants on October 8 in San Vicente. The organization's office in Santa Ana was subsequently burglarized and human rights documents were taken. Despite continued incidents of threats and intimidation, the authorities have failed to perform an exhaustive investigation.
The report's discussion of the government's closing of eleven low-power, unlicensed radio stations in small rural communities — which the report refers to as "so-called community radio stations" — is flawed. The authors fail to recognize the political nature of these closures, and the invaluable service that the stations offer to many marginalized communities. The report also neglects to mention that almost all the stations closed were located in communities with a traditional FMLN base, instead citing government claims that the signals from these stations interfered with licensed users, and that the air waves are "already oversubscribed." In fact, government technicians determined that space was available on the broadcasting spectrum, at which time the government immediately stopped negotiations with the community stations and refused to grant licenses. NGOs contend that the rural stations could have been allowed to operate with provisions prohibiting interference with the larger stations. The report fails to recognize that the situation of the community radio stations implicates fundamental issues related to human rights and democracy such as: freedom of expression, public participation and the right to information. In addition, the report neglects to mention that both the PDDH and the Supreme Court eventually found that the government's closing of the radio stations was unconsritutional.
90
El Salvador
This year's report ignores the harm to human lives caused by El Salvador's extreme environmental degradation, which has resulted from a near-total lack of regulation. Although El Salvador has ratified several international agreements stipulating the right to health and a healthy environment, several international organizations, including the U.S. Agency for International Development and the World Bank, have declared El Salvador one of the countries with the most severe environmental degradation on the American continent. Lack of access to clean water is a principal cause of death among children in rural areas.
Ninety percent of El Salvador's rivers are contaminated, and 60% of these have been declared "dead." A 1995 report published by the U.S. Agency for International Development stated that "[t]he annual economic costs associated with illness from contaminated water, in lost wages, has been estimated to be between $93 and $140 million, the latter about 70% of the average amount of international annual post-war aid to El Salvador."
While the State Department's instructions do not mandate reporting on environmental degradation per se, the report can fairly be faulted for failing to acknowledge the violations of civil and political liberties which have plagued communities protesting their lack of access to water. Local press and human rights advocates have reported the violent suppression of protests over water issues on several occasions. Community groups and the PDDH cite violent confrontations as evidence of the lack of public participation in government decisions that affect natural resources. Disputes over access to water have occurred in Sonsonate, El Playón and San Ramón, where residents protested the government's diversion of their own water supply to neighboring housing developments. PNC agents violentiy suppressed the demonstration, resulting in the arrest and injury of several people.
The report's account of the government's response to politically motivated death threats made by the Roberto D'Aubuisson Nationalist Force (FURODA) against social and political leaders, including Human Rights Ombudsman Victoria de Aviles, is by all independent accounts inaccurate. The report states that: "Government and ARENA party officials condemned the threats, and the PNC director said the police
91
Critique 1996
were working with the Ombudsman to provide security." In fact, some government officials, including Minister of Public Security Hugo Barrera, publicly dismissed the threats directed at Dr. Aviles as "exaggerated" and "implausible." Although the report correctly observes that PNC officials were working with the Ombudsman to provide security, it ignores the most obvious failure in the government's response to FURODA: an investigation that has been characterized by independent organizations as incomplete, slow and half-hearted.
In light of such an inconclusive and inadequate government response to FURODA, the report's statement that "[t]he existence of this and other groups was never proven, and although threats continued in some cases, none were carried out," rings hollow. Most disturbing, however, is the report's reluctance to call the government to task in such cases, especially given the government's history of allying with death squads responsible for the murders of thousands of Salvadorans in the 1980s.
The report fails to analyze the government's response to these serious violations under guidelines articulated by the UN Joint Group for the Investigation of Politically Motivated Illegal Armed Groups. The Joint Group's report, issued in 1994, urged the Salvadoran government to make every resource available for eradicating illegal armed groups through a series of investigative and preventive measures, and called on the international community to monitor and support efforts to eradicate death squads.
The Joint Group's report is particularly relevant to the PDDH's resolution on the 1995 killing of Ramón Mauricio García-Prieto Giralt. García-Prieto was shot in front of his house with his five-month-old child in his arms and his wife at his side. While police investigations resulted in the arrest and conviction of two assailants who were determined by a court to have acted alone, the PDDH concluded from independent investigations that Mr. García-Prieto was in fact assassinated by an illegal, armed and irregular group that operated with the government's "knowledge and tolerance." The PDDH cited "overwhelming evidence," including documentation found on the assailants identifying them as members of both the Division of Military Intelligence (S-2) and the PNC, indicating the participation of state actors in Garcia-Prieto's death.
92
El Salvador
Numerous irregularities in the subsequent judicial process, as well as continued threats to the Garda-Prieto family in 1996, also led the PDDH to conclude that responsibility for Garcia-Prieto's death "transcends the level of a small, isolated group and that the group that assassinated Mr. Garda-Prieto is linked to a greater illegal, armed structure, with a strong financial, political, operative and logistical capacity.. .which has not been investigated by the corresponding authorities, and which is steeped in alarming impunity." In the face of such evidence, the report's brief and vague paragraph on the "unproved existence" of death squads is, to say the least, inadequate.
The report's account of the participation of governmental authorities in the 1995 murder of medical student Adriano Vilanova is typical of its laudatory treatment of offidal reaction to extrajudidal killings, even when all independent sources indicate that the government response has been inadequate. The report states that "[t]he PDDH report suggested that PNC members were guilty of extrajudicial killing and that a judge had impeded investigation of the case, but it did not contain any new evidence to support these allegations" (emphasis added). In fact, the PDDH's report contains detailed evidence of violations of the Disciplinary Regimen of the PNC, including document fraud, perjury, detention without charges beyond the constitutionally mandated period, conducting an extra-official police investigation and violation of due process.
The PDDH report describes the existence and participation of irregular groups within the PNC that undertake investigations and arrests without legal authority. The PDDH report also describes the ramifications of Vilanova's death for human rights workers and journalists covering the case, who have received death threats in their efforts to clarify the circumstances of the killing. It seems to have escaped the report's authors that the PNC agents charged with Vilanova's murder have since been released, and that the case is reportedly stalled.
In its reporting on FURODA, the murder of Adriano Vilanova, and the arrest of PNC officer Tomás Coronado Valles, the report leads the reader to believe that there is substantial cooperation between the PDDH, the PNC, the Ministry of Public Security and other government agendes. In fact, many observers have stated that the lack of cooperation and
93
Critique 1996
outright antagonism among governmental bodies has been destructive to the very organs charged with protecting Salvadorans' rights, particularly the PNC, the Ministry of Public Security and the judicial system. This dynamic has also adversely affected the PDDH.
The report's one-sentence examination of disappearances disregards the 101 reports of disappearances that the PDDH received. The report also fails to mention that the police either did not investigate these cases at all or did so only very superficially. Moreover, the report fails to take note of the fact that thousands of disappearances have gone unsolved for over ten years. The absence of progress in resolving these cases is in itself an ongoing violation of the right to due process. The report's neglect of this issue is consistent with the unwillingness of previous reports to address El Salvador's systematic failure to hold civilian authorities accountable for human rights violations.
Although the report's section on torture briefly recognizes the institutional weaknesses of the PNC Inspector General's office, it grossly understates the incidence of torture and similar abuses. According to the PDDH, over 1,000 cases of excessive use of force were confirmed by its personnel. The great majority involved police agents and occurred when the victims were under arrest. The report states that complaints of excessive use of force by PNC agents are due to "their license to use force and carry out arrests, as well as their inexperience." This woefully simplistic analysis fails to take into account a variety of structural problems: a criminal investigations unit that itself faces widespread allegations of organized criminal activity but has never been investigated; irregular police gangs that operate outside the law; non-existent or ill-functioning internal disciplinary mechanisms; and under-funding that cripples many attempts to provide adequate public security. Other organizations, including the UN, describe the PNCs problems as a lack of adequately defined procedures (either internal or external), politicization, and inadequate coordination with the judicial system and the Ministry of Public Security.
By failing to accurately pinpoint the PNCs weaknesses, the report underscores its implicit thesis that violations by government agents are isolated, sporadic incidents. When vague references are made to
94
El Salvador
institutional weaknesses, they are dismissed as part of the growing pains suffered by El Salvador's nascent police force. The murder of 15 year-old William Antonio Gait^n Ayala on January 4, 1996 by PNC agents, and the subsequent failure of the PNC to investigate the slaying, is considered by human rights advocates to be emblematic of the structural problems which continue to pervade the PNC, and the impunity which still prevails for government agents who commit human rights abuses. Although evidence gathered by the Human Rights Institute of the UCA (IDHUCA), the PDDH and Gaitan's family overwhelmingly indicates that Gaitan, a high school student with no criminal record, was summarily executed by PNC agents, the police continued, without any evidence, to publicly portray the killing as the result of criminal activity by Gaitan, and therefore a justifiable homicide. When the PDDH took up the case and issued a ruling finding serious abuses by the PNC, the office was criticized by government officials for defending "delinquents."
The report recognizes neither the positive efforts of professors at the National Police Training Academy to institutionalize respect for human rights, nor the frustration on the part of some members of the academy with the constraints they still face. PNC cadets are now required to take human rights classes as part of their training, and human rights observers have praised the rigorous content of these classes. Unfortunately, these efforts generally tal<Le place in a vacuum because the academy is given no resources to provide follow-up, and some academy personnel as well as NGOs complain that once in the field, the good lessons learned are quickly forgotten.
In its section on arbitrary arrest, detention or exile, the report states that "[t]he courts generally enforced a ruling that interrogation without the presence of a public defender amounts to coercion, and that any evidence so obtained is inadmissible." According to lawyers from the lEJES, this assertion is wholly inaccurate. In 1996, courts at every level regularly admitted as evidence confessions made without counsel and under duress. The report justifies this violation of domestic and international law by concluding that forced confessions occur due to low salaries and insufficient supervision of public defenders. While the report is correct in recognizing the under funding of the Salvadoran defense bar,
95
Critique 1996
lack of economic resources cannot exempt the government from its duty to provide detainees with counsel and protect them from coercion or force. Proposed legislation to abolish all forms of extrajudicial confessions has languished in the National Assembly, despite UN insistence that such provisions are obligatory under the Peace Accords.
The report downplays the frequency with which the right to due process is violated. The use of forced confessions in judicial proceedings is not the only problem; unlawful detention is also widespread. According to the IDHUCA's Legal Assistance Office, the report's assertion that "some prisoners have been incarcerated longer than the maximum legal sentence for their crimes" understates the problem. Research conducted by the institute indicate that eight out of ten prisoners await trial for three years or more, despite constitutional guarantees to the contrary.
The report fails to link this alarming situation with overcrowding in prisons, as evidenced by its assertion that overcrowding ceased with construction of a new prison. Instead of examining the inadequate judicial processes that increase the prison population by their failure to guarantee the right to due process, the report attempts to explain the situation in terms of building construction. A new prison already houses twice its prisoner capacity. Moreover, while lack of security is an issue for the inmates, the report does not recognize that their basic human needs are not met: they receive inadequate food and medical treatment.
The report's statement that the government respects the constitutional provision establishing an independent judiciary is incorrect. Independent observers, including the UN and the government's own Ombudsman's office, have stated that the judidary is routinely influenced by political and financial interests. The report's conclusions also contradict the UN Secretary General's observation in December that the failure to purge the justice system of corrupt officials, and the lack of coordination between judicial officials and police resulted in a "declining and precarious justice system."
The report fails to mention massacres, threats and other human rights violations committed against members of the National Association of Indigenous Salvadorans (ANIS) by agents of the PNC, ARENA and the judiciary. According to ANIS, PNC agents searched the homes of 45
96
El Salvador
association members without warrants, captured 30, and jailed 13. An unarmed 17-year-old was killed by agents conducting the sweep. In November, an unidentified death squad that ANIS believes to be comprised of demobilized army soldiers massacred nine members of a Nahuat family in the department of Sonsonate. Although arrests have been made, ANIS says the intellectual authors have not been apprehended and the judicial process has been marked by irregularities.
Along with the report's misrepresentation of political killings in El Salvador, the report significantly mischaracterizes all crime problems simply as a result of "gangs," while ignoring official connections, corruption and the legacy of impunity. Heavily armed criminal groups are found in rural and urban areas. Some reportedly have direct ties to government officials who are complicit in crimes or fail to investigate and prosecute them.
The report does not mention the PNC's treatment of gays and lesbians. Police often round up gay men and transvestites from local bars, jailing them without cause. There they are typically subjected to sexual, physical and verbal abuse from the police. There is no recourse for these individuals as the police and the judicial system typically do not address their claims, and provide no relief or protection. Gays and transvestites have also been killed by individuals identifying themselves as members of the death squad La Sombra Negra (The Black Shadow).
The report should have commented on the lack of progress in investigations into earlier attacks on the only two groups that work with both the HIV/AIDS and gay and lesbian populations, FUNDASIDA and the Oscar Romero AIDS Project. In 1994, the coordinator of the Romero Project, Wilfredo Valencia-Palados, was beaten and threatened by two men. He was subsequently threatened twice more and shot. In June 1995, the offices of FUNDASIDA were broken into by members of La Sombra Negra looking for Dr. Francisco Carillo, the center's director, and threatening to kill him. Office equipment was taken, as well as confidential documents containing the names of members of Entre Amigps, El Salvador's first organized support group of male homosexuals. Later, Dr. Carillo, FUNDASIDA and Entre Amigos received telephone threats from La Sombra Negra, in which the caller mentioned individual members
97
Critique 1996
by name and warned that a bomb had been placed in FUNDASIDA. When the police were called to investigate, they were concerned only with the HIV status of the men who were in the office, and did not file a report. As of June, no progress had been made into this break-in or the threats against FUNDASIDA and Dr. Cariilo.
Although the report briefly mentions "allegations" of police brutality against children, it fails to describe systematic human rights violations committed against thousands of street children. The State Department, like the Salvadoran government, downplays reports by street children of abuse from the PNC. A youth who spoke out about abuses at a 1996 forum in San Salvador entitled "Youth Confronting Violence," at which members of the PNC were present, was later beaten by police, then murdered by a private citizen.
The report misrepresents the work of the Salvadoran Institute for the Protection of Children (ISPM), a governmental institution which interns children in orphanages. Street children are often incarcerated when the ISPM intervenes. When the Olof Palme Foundation presented the ISPM with a report detailing the assassinations of street children in 1995, the ISPM rejected its findings. Only one PNC officer has been tried for the abuse of street children, despite numerous complaints filed by the Olof Palme Foundation.
The report's section on women, while recognizing some of the reasons for the under reporting of rape and sexual harassment, fails to address governmental responsibility for the impunity enjoyed by rapists and perpetrators of domestic violence. Women's advocates point to a police force that is systematically unresponsive to complaints of domestic violence as a key factor in under reporting. The Institute for Research, Training and Development of Women reports that victims who file complaints are commonly sought out by their attackers and threatened, beaten or killed. The report should have acknowledged women's fear of physical reprisals and their lack of confidence in the police as important reasons for under reporting. Police typically fail to intervene under the pretext that such situations are "family matters." The report's characterization of the Emergency Law Against Common and Organized Crime as beneficial to rape victims is incorrect. Women's advocates say
98
El Salvador
the law is, in practice, inconsequential to victims, who still must meet an insurmountable evidentiary burden to have their cases heard in a court of law.
In its discussion of worker rights, the report's assertion that "[i]n past years there were credible reports of some foreign-owned factories dismissing union organizers," severely understates restrictions to the freedom of association of maquiladora workers in the Export Processing Zones (EPZ's). The PDDH identified maquiladoras as generating many human rights abuses, including massive firing in order to prevent the formation of unions. Other worker rights violations cited by the PDDH but not addressed by the State Department include forced exposure to hazardous materials without appropriate protection, failure to pay Social Security benefits, and physical, sexual and psychological abuse. The report fails to mention the particular abuses suffered by young women, who malee up a large percentage of maquiladora workers, including forced pregnancy tests and widespread sexual harassment. As in other sections, the report merely states the laws concerning labor and makes only cursory mention of how such laws are implemented. Specific references to 1994 changes in the Labor Code conflict with reports by unions and NGOs, who view the laws as weak and seldom enforced. The report does not mention the disturbing comments made by government officials, including President Armando Calderón Sol and the Minister of the Interior, who identified union workers as "traitors who should be shot."
Clearly, the State Department's reporting on El Salvador leaves much to be desired. Reporting from valuable governmental and nongovernmental sources is virtually ignored; the report is consistently uncritical in its discussion of governmental responses to human rights concerns; and alleged violations which the State Department deems unproven are dismissed without considering the reliability of the source. The 1997 report should make every effort to rectify these serious shortcomings.
99
