 EL SALVADOR
 El Salvador is a constitutional, multiparty democracy with an executive branch
 headed by a president, a unicameral national assembly, and a separate, politically
 appointed judiciary. Armando Calderon Sol of the Nationalist Republican Alliance
 (ARENA) party was inaugurated President for a 5-year term on June 1. National
 and international observers judged the March presidential and legislative elections
 to be generally free, fair, and nonviolent. Competing for the first time in electoral
 politics, the Frente Farabundo Marti para Ia Liberacion Nacional (FMLN) emerged
 as the major opposition party. In November the U.N. Secretary General praised the
 new Government for its commitment to the 1992 Peace Accords, which ended a 12-
 iear civil war, but noted delays in implementing some provisions, including demobi-
 lization of the National Police (PN) deployment of the National Civilian Police
 (PNC), judicial and electoral reform, land transfers, economic reinsertion programs,
 and implementation of Truth Commission recommendations. (The Peace Accords es-
 tablished a Truth Commission to investigate serious human rights violations during
 the revious decade.) Nevertheless, the U.N. Observer Mission in El Salvador
 (ONUSAL), which monitors and verifies implementation of agreements between the
 Government and the FMLN, concluded that both sides had complied with most key
 measures by the end of the year.
 The El Salvador Armed Forces (ESAF), which include the army, air force and
 navy, reduced its manpower well below the 31,000 troops authorized by the Peace
 Accords to approximately 22,000. In August the U.N. Secretary General reported in-
 dications that some ESAF members continued to carry out internal intelligence ac-
 tivities contrary to the new armed forces mandate set forth by the Constitution. By
 the end of the year, the new PNC had replaced the military-controlled PN through-
 out the nation.
 In December 1993, the Government, in conjunction with the United Nations,
 formed the Joint Group for the Investigation of Illegal Armed Groups with Political
 Motivation in El Salvador. Comprising the chief of ONUSAL's human rights divi-
 sion, the Human Rights Ombudsman, and two Salvadoran attorne     a pointed by
 the President, the Joint Group reported its findings on July 28. It found that some
 groups and persons continued to resort to violence to obtain political results, includ-
 ing members of the military and police institutions, as well as judicial and munici-
 pi organs. The report concluded that the Government is committed to combating
 
 
 391
 politically motivated violence. It also highlighted the growth of violent organized
 common crime in El Salvador. The Joint Group recommended creation of a special
 unit within the PNC to investigate political and organized crime a verification role
 for the National Counsel for the DeTense of Human Rights (PDDH-headed by the
 Human Rights Ombudsman) in suspected political killings, and further reforms of
 the judicial system, the ESAF, and government intelligence gathering. The Govern-
 ment agreed to implement the Joint Group's recommendations. In August the PNC
 created a special unit within its criminal investigative division to focus on suspected
 political violence. In September the Supreme Court fired 10 low-level judges for in-
 competence forced the resignations of high-level Supreme Court administrative per-
 sonnel, and initiated investigations of additional judges' performance. The court
 fired three more judges in November.
 El Salvador has a mixed economy largely based upon agriculture and light manu-
 factnng. The Calderon Sol Government maintained its predecessor's commitment
 to free market reforms, including privatizing additional banks and hotels. People are
 free to pursue economic interests, and private property is respected. The 1994 rate
 of real economic gwth was 5 percent.
 The number or extrajudicia-killings, torture, disappearances, and mistreatment
 of detainees declined significantly in 1994. Other forms of human rights abuses, in-
 cluding use of excessive force andi    y from prosecution, also declined. Delays
 in bringing detainees to trial and violence against women and children did not de-
 cline. Reflecting the PNC's nationwide deployment, the greatest number of human
 rights complaints filed with ONUSAL were accusations against its members; a
 much smaer nmber were filed against the ESAF. Victims attributed approxi-
 mately 25 percent of such complaints to "unidntified" or "irregular groups."
 The level of violence in El Salvador remained high, particularly murder, assaults,
 and robberies, including crimes against women and children. Aegations of politi-
 cally motivated assassinations, which had increased early in the year, declined by
 the latter half of the year. There were no confirmed cases of politically motivated
 killings, but investigations in a number of cases remain open. Some public figures
 reported death threats.
 The Government acted to improve the institutional context for human rights. In
 April the Legislative Assembly approved constitutional amendments on judicial re-
 form that addressed a number of recommendations by the Truth Commission. The
 former Supreme Court Justices ignored a Truth Commission recommendation that
 they resign due to complicity in the coverup of human rights abuses and served to
 the end of their terms in June. In July the National Assembly elected a new re-
 form-minded Supreme Court. In September the Government appointed a PNd in-
 spector general to investigate allegations of human rights abuses committed by PNC
 agents. There were reforms in other areas mandated by the Peace Accords, such as
 PNC training and deployment, PN demobilization, PDDH expansion, and judicial re-
 form.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Klling.-ONUSAL did not confirm any re-
 Forts of  litical killings in 1994, although it continued to investigate some murders
 or   ssi e political motivation. These include: two unknown armed men shot and
 killed Simon de Jesus Cartagena Pineda, a member of the Renewed Expression of
 the People (ERP) faction of the FMLN and a local municipal council candidate, and
 his stepdaughter on January 11. On January 19, unknown assailants killed Javier
 Roberto Perdomo, a Panamanian technician with the Inter-American Institute of
 Agricultural Science, as he drove with his family in the countryside. On February
 7, three masked armed men shot and killed Ismael Bernardino Sion, a member of
 the Popular Liberation Front (FPL) faction of the FMLN, in his home. On March
 9, an unknown assailant shot and killed Jorge Bill Martinez Zaldana, a former tech-
 nician of Radio Venceremos and a FMLN guerrilla, on a bus as he was returning
 to his home.
 Other cases pending ONUSAL determination included the murder of Heriberto
 Galicia Sanchez, a former alternate Assembly candidate of the National Revolution-
 ary Movement (MNR) party, the killing of Jose Isaias Calzada Mejia, an FMLN
 member who had worked as a voting table representative in the April presidential
 run-off; Luis Valdivieso Granados, a PN agent and a former ESAF soldier, found
 dead with his hands tied to a tree trunk. Assailants shot and killed Elba Irene
 Magana de Romero, sister of ARENA Assembly Deputy Carlos Guillermo Magana.
 In November three unknown assailants shot FPL member David Faustino Merino
 Ramirez and wounded two other FPL members in a restaurant in San Salvador.
 
 
 392
 The number of extrajudicial killings by government forces confirmed by ONUSAL
 declined significantly from 1993 to 1994. By October ONUSAL confirmed five
 extrajudicial killings by government officials, including an ESAF member based in
 Morazan department who killed a fleeing bicycle thief (ONUSAL termed it an arbi-
 tra  execution) and a PN agent who killed one youth and seriously inured another
 in Snta Ana department. The PN agnt responsible for the latter killing resigned
 the following day. ONUSAL confirmed three other reports of extrajudicial killings,
 including a NC   .ent who fired into a house in San Salvador while attempting to
 break up a domestic dispute, killing an elderly man, a PNC agent who shot a man
 without provocation while he was driving in San Vicente, and off-duty PNC agents
 who shot and killed a man on a bicycle in San Miguel.
 The Government made progress toward res1oving some human rights cases.
 ONUSAL and the Government concluded that sever    murders of persons with ties
 to the ARENA party were the result of common crime. Police arrested a person al-
 leged to have ties to the FMLN for the highly publicized attacks on Elmer Cruz
 Pineda, bodyguard of FMLN leader and Assembly Deputy Nidia Diaz (Maria
 Valladares). On the other hand, circumstances surrounding the attacks against
 Ruben Oswaldo Escalante an ARENA candidate for the San Marcos municipal
 council, and PNC director Rodrigo Avila remain unclear.
 There were no confirmed cases of death squad killings in 1994. In its July 28 re-
 port, the Joint Group found that civil war-era death squads were no longer active.
 However, death threats directed against individuals and groups across the political
 spectrum remained a method of intimidation. In April Mario Valiente, the ARENA
 mayor of San Salvador, reportedly received two death threats. In May the Salva-
 doran Revolutionary Front (FRS) issued a communique denouncing the leaders of
 the National Resistance (RN) and ERP factions of the FMLN as traitors and sen-
 tencing them to death. In June the "Domingo Monterrosa Command" issued death
 threats against members of the Joint Group, the Human Rights Ombudsman, Arch-
 bishop Arturo Rivera Damas, and Jesuit priests. The group made no additional
 threats, and no evidence of its existence or activities appeared. In October a district
 court judge in Usulutan and prosecutors in the Attorney General's office in San
 Miguel reportedly received death threats. Reports of death threats, which had in-
 creased up through the inauguration of the new President in June, declined in the
 latter half of the year.
 On November 14, a bus cooperative blocked a highway around San Miguel to pro-
 test competition from illegal buses. After negotiations broke down, PNC officials and
 army officers gave the protesters 5 minutes to clear the road. In the ensuing confu-
 sion, shots were fired and an army sergeant and 2 civilians died, and about 20 oth-
 ers were wounded. It is unclear Who initiated the shooting or who fired the fatal
 shots. The PNC investigation continues.
 b. Disappearance.-The Constitution forbids unacknowledged detention by the po-
 lice or the military. ONUSAL investigated several allegations of disappearances, but
 all were unfounded.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits torture. In December the Legislative Assembly ratified
 the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment
 or Punishment, subject to reservations.
 The number of confirmed reports of torture by security forces declined in 1994,
 as did the number of reported incidents of mistreatment of detainees and uses of
 excessive force. From January to September, ONUSAL confirmed three reports of
 torture, two by the PNC and one by the PN. In July five PNC agents arrived at
 the house of Carlos and Miguel Grande Menjivar. The police beat the two, took
 them to an unidentified place, blindfolded them, and interrogated them about the
 location of an alleged arms cache. They placed plastic bags over their heads, burned
 Mi el's thorax with cigarettes, and repeatedlyhit both. ONUSAL reported that the
 P C has yet to respond to PDDH inquiries, nor has it taken disciplinary action
 against the agents. ONUSAL counted a significant decrease in reported incidents
 of mistreatment, from 120 reports during April-December 1993, to 74 reports during
 January-September 1994. The number of reported incidents of use of excessive force
 declined slightly, from 45 during April-December 1993 to 39 during January-June
 1994.
 Prison conditions remained bleak, with overcrowding the most significant prob-
 lem. The largest prison, built 20 years ago to hold 800 prisoners, holds approxi-
 mately 2,800. Most cells are 15 by 20 feet, and some hold as many as 24 prisoners.
 Some prisoners must sleep on the floor or "buy" a bed when one becomes available.
 Prisoners are fed, but most find it necessary to supplement their rations with help
 from family. Approximately 40 prisoners died at the hands of other prisoners in
 riots, including 9 in February at the Santa Ana central penitentiary and 12 in Au-
 
 
 393
 gust at the maximum security prison in San Salvador. To try to stem prison vio-
 lence, the Ministry of Justice hired 500 additional security guaids in September.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution prohibits arbitrary ar-
 rest and detention or compulsory exile. ONUSAL reported a significant reduction in
 the number of arbitrary or unlawful detentions by security forces, from 185 com-
 plaints from April-December 1993, to 94 complaints from January-September 1994.
 Salvadoran courts generally enforced a ruling that questioning without the presence
 of a public defender is considered coercion, and any evidence so obtained is madmis-
 sible; thus police authorities generally delayed questioning until a public defender
 arrived. From January to August,  b _c de enders freed from incarceration approxi-
 mately 50 percent of their clients. owever, because of low salaries and insufficient
 supervision, the public defenders were able to handle only a limited number of
 cases.
 By law, the police ma hold a person for 72 hours before delivering him to court,
 after which time the Tjudyge may order detention for an additional 72 hours to deter-
 mine if an investigation is warranted. The law allows 120 days to investigate seri-
 ous crimes, and 45 days for lesser offenses, before a judge must bring the accused
 to trial or dismiss the case. In practice, the authorities rarely observed these time
 limits.
 Although the law permits release pending trial for crimes in which the maximum
 penalty does not exceed 3 years, many common crimes (homicide, murder, man-
 slaughter, rape and crimes against proerty) carry penalties in excess of 3 years,
 thereby precluding release pending trial. Because it may take several years for a
 case to come to trial, some prisoners were incarcerated longer than the maximum
 legal sentence for their crimes. Any detainee may request a review (habeas corpus)
 by the Supreme Court, but the overwhelming nrma.jority of such requests are denied.
 Approximately 80 percent of all inmates are awaiting trial or sentencing.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The court structure is divided into four levels: jus-
 tices of the peace, first instance (district) courts, second instance (appellate) courtsI
 and the Supreme Court. Civilian courts exercise jurisdiction over military personnel
 who commit common (nonmilitary) crimes. Judges, not juries, rule on most crimes;
 however, a judge cannot overrule a jury verdict nor can it be appealed to a higher
 court. Sentences, however, may be appealed up to the Supreme Court. Under the
 Constitution, defendants have the rigt to a presumption of innocence, protection
 from self-incrimination, legal counsel, freedom from coercion, and compensation for
 damages due to judicial error. They also have the right to be present in court and
 to confront witnesses. However, the authorities frequently ignored many of these
 rights in practice.
 Judicial reform made some headway in 1994. In April the Legislative Assembly
 approved two constitutional amendments consistent with Truth Commission rec-
 ommendations to remove the Supreme Courtes authority to discipline lawyers and
 allow lower courts to hear habeas corpus appeals. The Assembly voted to create a
 new council to discipline lawyers; the Supreme Court will retain the power to li-
 cense them. Under the Constitution, the new Assembly must also approve the
 amendments for them to become law.
 In July justices of the old Supreme Court left office when their term expired, after
 ioring a Truth Commission recommendation that the court resign due to its com-
 plicity in covering up human rights abuses. The Assembly elected a new Supreme
 Court which, in its first month, acted on its stated commitment to judicial reform
 by firing 10 low-level judges and forcing the resignations of high-level Supreme
 Court administrative personnel. As recommended by the Truth Commission, the Na-
 tional Council of the Judiciary (NCJ)-an independent body that screens and nomi-
 nates judicial candidates-evaluated judges for judicial aptitude, efficiency, discre-
 tion, and impartiality. It also created a judicial school-administered by the NCJ-
 to train judges, lawyers, and administrative personnel in ethics, administration, and
 judicial reform.
 Despite these reforms, some judges continued to be only nominally independent,
 appointed or reappointed through political affiliation and personal ties rather than
 for professional capabilities. ONUSAL criticized the Assembly for failing to enact re-
 forms recommended by the Truth Commission and passed by the former Assembly,
 such as reducing the Supreme Court's power, amending the NCJ law to guarantee
 the Council greater independence from the Supreme Court, and modernizing the
 criminal justice system as well as for not ratifying some international human rights
 conventions. Some politically economically, or institutionally well-connected Salva-
 dorans continued to enjoy effective immunity from prosecution. ONUSAL said the
 judicial system's deficient institutions contributed to this impunity and to the in-
 crease in organized crime in 1994.
 All available evidence indicates that the Government holds no political prisoners.
 
 
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Accord-
 ing to the Constitution, the police must have the resident's consent, a warrant, or
 a reasonable belief that a crime is being or is about to be committed, before entering
 a private dwelling. In practice, however, the authorities used forced entry to carry
 out arrests and investigations. Wiretapping of telephone communications by the
 Government, private persons, and political parties is illegal but occurs.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of the
 press, and this provision is respected in practice. There was one reported incident
 of a government attempt to limit freedom of speech. The Government on May 3 or-
 dered the expulsion of Angel Maria Martinez Mendizabal, a Spanish priest, for a
 sermon which allegedly violated Articles 82 and 97 of the Constitution, prohibiting
 members of the clergy and foreigners from engaging in partisan political activity.
 The Supreme Court provisionally suspended the expulsion on May 5 pending consid-
 eration of an appeal filed by Martinez and the PDDH, and took no action on the
 appeal by the end of the year.
 El Salvador has 5 daily newspapers, 8 television stations, approximately 150 radio
 stations, and 3 cable television systems. Print and broadcast journalists regularly
 criticize the Government and report opposition views. The Government did not use
 direct or indirect means to control the media.
 The Constitution provides for academic freedom, and the Government respects
 this right in practice.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 peaceful assembly and association for any lawful purpose. The Government respects
 this right in practice. Organizations do not require permits to hold public meetings.
 In May, however, the mayor of San Salvador issued a decree prohibiting public dem-
 onstrations in the capital during business hours. Some organizations held peaceful
 demonstrations in defiance of the mayor's decree. The mayors office imposed fines,
 which the organizations refused to pay.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Freedom of religion is guaranteed by the Constitution
 and is respected. Roman Catholicism is the official religion, but other faiths practice
 without hindrance.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution guarantees citizens the right to travel freely domesti-
 cally and abroad. There are no restrictions on citizens changing their residence or
 workplace. The Government has provisions for granting asylum and refugee status.
 The Government imposes no control on emigration and cooperates with inter-
 national organizations that arrange Salvadoran emigration to other countries.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens exercise the right to change their government peacefully through regu-
 larly scheduled elections. The president and vice president are elected every 5 years;
 legislative and municipal elections are held every 3 years. The Constitution bars the
 President from election to consecutive terms. Voting is by secret ballot, and there
 is universal suffrage. There were elections in March for all national and local offices,
 including the Presidency, the 84-seat Legislative Assembly, and all municipal coun-
 cils. The Nationalist Republican Alliance party garnered 68 percent of the vote in
 the second round of the presidential election and 39 seats in the Assembly. Compet-
 ing for the first time in electoral politics, the FMLN emerged as the major opposi-
 tion party, capturing 32 percent of the vote in the presidential election and 21 As-
 sembly seats. ONUSAL, local, and international observers, including a US. presi-
 dential delegation, judged the March 20 and April 24 (presidential second round)
 elections to be generally free, fair, and nonviolent, despite first-round administrative
 irregularities.
 Prior to the election, the Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE) undertook a successful
 registration campaign aimed at the traditionally underrepresented, primarily youth
 and women. By election day, the TSE had registered 75 to 80 percent of eligible vot-
 ers, although only approximately 47 percent exercised that rig t.
 The number of women in politics is small. In the March elections, Salvadorans
 elected nine women to the Legislative Assembly, a slight increase from the number
 in the previous Assembly. The president and 1 of the 4 vice presidents of the Assem-
 bly are women, as are 2 of the 14 Supreme Court justices. One Cabinet minister
 is female, as are 31 of the 262 mayors.
 
 
 395
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government demonstrated a willingness to discuss human rights issues and
 problems with international, local, and nongovernmental organizations (NGO s). A
 number of nongovernmental human rights organizations, including the Catholic
 Church's Tutela Legal and the Human Rights Commission (CDHES), focus pri-
 marily on alleged abuses by the Government. The CDHES follows cases through the
 investigation and trial stages, provides free legal assistance and publishes monthly
 reports. Tutela Legal, the human rights office of the archdiocese of San Salvador,
 also follows cases and publishes periodic reports. Numerous other church, labor, uni-
 versity groups, and NGO's have human rights offices that operate without legal re-
 striction. In addition, various international human rights groups visit or operate
 without government restrictions.
 The Joint Group, comprised of the chief of ONUSAL's human rights division, the
 Human Rights Ombudsman, and two Salvadoran attorneys appointed by the Presi-
 dent, reported in July. It also provided the state prosecutor on a confidential basis
 information concerning specific acts of violence. The Joint Group criticized some
 agents of the state, political parties, and NGO's for insufficient collaboration during
 its investigative period, but did not accuse any group of deliberately blocking the
 investigation.
 ONUfSALIs mandate is to verify and monitor implementation of agreements be-
 tween the Government and the FMLN, to investigate alleged human rights viola-
 tions, and to conduct educational and public awareness campaigns promoting
 human rights. It makes recommendations to the Government and     e    LN, and
 reports directly to the U.N. Secretary General. ONUSAL noted in November a sig-
 nificant reduction in reports of human rights abuses in 1994 compared to 1993, in-
 cluding arbitrary kiling death threats, and mistreatment, and confirmned no politi-
 cally motivated killings. It noted improvements in the judicial system, the PNC, and
 the PDDH, concluding that the process of promoting and protecting human rights
 is advancing. However it emphasized the need to complete judicial, police, and
 penal reforms, and criticized the Legislative Assembly for dragging its feet on judi-
 cial reform.
 As the only human rights organization specifically established by the Constitu-
 tion, the PDDH receives and investigates allegations of human rights abuses com-
 mitted by government officials and, if warranted, lodges official complaints against
 specific officials. In 1994 the PDDH received 4,284 reports of human rights viola-
 tions, a significant increase from the 2,071 reports received in 1993. This upswing
 reflects, to a large degree, the PDDH's wider presence in the country. The PDDH
 opened 8 regional offices in 1994, giving it 12 offices covering 12 of the country's
 14 departments.
 The PDDH will take over the ONUSAL human rights monitoring function in
 1995. In its November report to the Secretary General, ONUSAL commended the
 PDDH for progress in verifying human rights violations, strengthening institutional
 capacity, and promoting human rights education, but noted inadequacies in PDDH
 personnel, equipment, and financial resources.
 The PDDH lodged complaints of human rights abuses against various government
 agencies, most frequently the PNC and the judiciary. In numerous cases, the PDDH
 made specific recommendations for improvements in procedures and for indemnifica-
 tion of victims. The PDDH criticized publicly the penal system's director general for
 failing to resolve the underlying problems prompting the prison riots, and called on
 the authorities to take steps to avoid future outbreaks of prison violence. Although
 some of its recommendations were ignored, the PDDH said that some institutions
 did act on its recommendations in a satisfactory manner. The PDDH commended
 the Legislative Assembly for initiating a review of the Penal Code.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution states that all people are equal before the law and prohibits dis-
 crimination based on nationality, race, sex, or religion.
 Women.-Women are granted the same legal rights as men under the Constitu-
 tion, but suffer discrimination in practice. To improve their situation, the Legisla-
 tive Assembly enacted a new Family Code in October 1993 which amends somelaws
 that discriminated against women, most notably the large number living in common
 law marriages. The new law also establishes courts to resolve family disputes.
 Women suffer from economic discrimination and do not have equal access to credit
 and land ownership. Wages and salaries for women remain lower than those paid
 to men. Of the economically active female population, 65 percent works in the infor-
 mal economy. Training for females is generally confined to low-wage occupational
 
 
 396
 areas where women already hold most positions, such as teaching, nursing, home
 industries, or small businesses.
 Violence against women, including domestic violence, is widespread and appar-
 ently rising. The Institute of Legal Medicine reported an increase in domestic vio-
 lence against women, from 378 reports during the July-December 1993 period, to
 496 during the January-June 1994 period. Reports of sexual abuse against women
 also continued to rise. In 1993, the latest year-long period for which statistics are
 available the Institute for Legal Medicine received 598 reports of sexual abuse,
 compared with 564 reports in 1992.
 From January to July 1994, hospitals in the capital city of San Salvador received,
 on average, 65 reports of rape per month, an increase over the 56 reports per month
 received in 1993. The PNC received only four reports of rapes per month during the
 first 6 months of 1994. To increase reporting of rapes, a regular newspaper cam-
 paign by the Attorney General's office has encouraged victims to press charges im-
 mediately after the assault has occurred. A public prosecutor is on duty 24 hours
 a day at the San Salvador children's hospital to assist rape victims and their fami-
 lies in taking legal action. Nevertheless, prosecution of rape cases is difficult be-
 cause of pervasive cultural attitudes.
 Children.-The Government recognizes its responsibility for children's rights and
 welfare, though this is reflected more in its efforts to reduce poverty and promote
 family stability through economic growth than in direct expenditure on children.
 The Salvadoran Institute for the Protection of Children, an autonomous entity, is
 responsible for protecting and promoting children's ights. The Legislative Assembly
 passed in June a juvenile offenders law extending the age of a minor from 16 to
 18 years old. Scheduled to  into effect in March 1995, the law guarantees minors
 due process, establishes additional treatment facilities for offenders, and reduces the
 sentences for minor crimes.
 The Government works closely with state institutions and the United Nations
 Children's Fund (UNICEF) to promote protection and general awareness of chil-
 dren's rights. Despite these efforts, children continued to fall victim to physical and
 sexual abuse, abandonment, exploitation, and neglect. From January to August
 1994, the PDDH for the protection of children received 75 reports per month of
 abuses against children. The number of children treated for physical abuse in the
 largest public hospital in San Salvador rose significantly from 92 cases in 1992 to
 525 in 1993. Abused continued at this rate for the first 6 months of 1994 when the
 hospital attended to 272 abused children. The Institute of Legal Medicine recorded
 a reduction in reports of sexual abuse of children from 580 reports in 1992 to 432
 in 1993. From January to May 1994, the Institute received 121 reports of sexual
 abuse of children.
 Child abandonment and labor exploitation are growing problems. UNICEF re-
 ported that there were approximately 200,000 displaced children in 1994, and ap-
 proximately 270,000 children work up to 12 hours per day. Child malnutrition and
 the large numbers of orphans are also significant problems.
 Indigenous People.-El Salvador is an ethnically homogeneous country, though a
 small segment of the population claims to have descended solely from indigenous
 peoples. The last census of Indians in El Salvador showed 80,000 in 1930, or 5.6
 percent of the population. In 1932 government forces killed approximately 30,000
 following an abortive uprising. In the face of such repression, most remaining indig-
 enous people adopted local customs and successfully assimilated into the general
 population. There remain a few very small communities of indigenous peop le who
 still wear traditional dress, speak their native language, and maintain traditional
 customs without repression or interference. The Constitution makes no specific pro-
 visions for the rights of indigenous people, and their ability to participate in deci-
 sions affecting their lands, culture, traditions, or the allocation of natural resources
 is limited.
 The indigenous population generally is believed to be the poorest group in the
 country. In a 1994 study, the PDDH found that 90 percent of the indigenous people
 lived in conditions of extreme poverty, with average monthly incomes one-half the
 legal minimum wage. Employment opportunities outside the informal economy are
 few, and a high illiteracy rate precludes indigenous people from competing for lim-
 ited skilled jobs. Indigenous people generally earn less than other laborers in farm
 and other agricultural work, and women in particular have little access to edu-
 cational and work opportunities since they head most of the households. Access to
 land is a growing problem confronting indigenous people. Few possess titles to land,
 and access to bank loans and other forms of credit is extremely limited. Domestic
 violence is widespread within indigenous communities.
 People With Disabilities.-Except for the war wounded, who have secured both
 government and international funding for rehabilitation and retraining programs,
 
 
 397
 the Government has no program to combat discrimination against the disable4, nor
 are there any laws mandating provision of access for people with disabilities. There
 are few organizations dedicated to protecting andpromting the rights of people
 with disabilities. A semiautonomous institute, the Salvadoran Rehabilitation Insti-
 tute for the Disabled (ISRI), is the primary organization providing assistance to ap-
 proximately 12,000 disabled persons annually. ISRI offers medical treatment and
 counseling, apeci education programs, and professional training ourses. Founded
 in 1957, ISRI has 10 centers throughout the country and receives assistance from
 the Government and national and international private and nongovernental orga-
 nizations.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right cVf Association.-The Constitution prohibits the Government from
 using nationality, race, sex, creed, or political philosophy to prevent workers or em-
 ployers from organizing themselves into unions or associations. Numerous and
 sometimes conflicting laws governing labor relations impede full realization of the
 freedom of association, although recent Labor Code amendments (sponsored by the
 International Labor Organization-ILO) may bring about improvements, once they
 are fully implemented. The current Labor Code prohibits p artisan political activity
 by unions, but this prohibition is routinely ignored, and labor continues to play an
 important role in political activities.
 In the 1992 peace accords, the Government committed itself to seek consensus on
 revised labor legislation through a socioeconomic forum with equal representation
 from labor (including groups aligned with the FMLN), the Government, and the pri-
 vate sector. The Assembly passed such legislation in April, which streamlines the
 process required to form a union, extends union rights to agricultural, independent,
 and small-business workers, and extends the right to strike to union federations.
 There are approximately 150 active unions, public employee associations, and
 peasant organizations, which represent over 300,000 Salvadorans, approximately 20
 percent of the total work force. Labor alliances continued to change frequently, with
 no one group able to claim a leading role. The current Labor Code forbids foregers
 from holding leadership positions in unions, but unions freely afliliate with inter-
 national labor organizations.
 Only private sector nonagricultural workers have the right to form unions and
 strike; employees of nine autonomous public agencies may form unions but not
 strike. Nevertheless workers from other sectors, including the public sector, fre-
 quently have carried out strikes that, while technically illegal, were treated as le-
 gitimate. Negotiations between public employee associations and the Government
 generally settle public sector strikes, although the Labor Code provides for manda-
 tory arbitration of public sector disputes. After a series of public sector strikes in
 June and July, the Government issued a warning that public workers would not be
 aid for days on strike, and threatened to use the police to open public buildings
 forced shut by strikers. The Government docked the pay of striking member of a
 teachers' union, but in September announced an agreement, including an almost 30-
 percent pay raise, with the same teachers' union. Labor disputes, and some strikes,
 continued in other public sectors, including public health and the judiciary.
 The law prohibits antiunion actions before a union is legally registered; however,
 under the previous Labor Code, there were credible charges that the Government
 impeded union registration through exacting reviews of union documentation and
 strict interpretation of the Constitution, Labor Code, and union statutes. With ILO
 assistance, the Labor Ministry put together a restructuring plan in mid-1994. It is
 too early to tell if full implementation of the changes to the Labor Code and the
 restructuring of the Ministry will improve union registration.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Constitution and the
 Labor Code provide for collective bargaining rights, but only to employees in the pri-
 vate sector and in autonomous government agencies, such as utilities and the port
 authoritty. However, both private sector unions (by law) and public sector employee
 associati'ons (in practice) use collective bargaining extensively.
 The Ministry of Labor oversees implementation of collective bargaining agree-
 ments and acts as conciliator in labor disputes in the private sector and autonomous
 government institutions. In practice, ministers and the heads of autonomous govern-
 ment institutions often negotiate with labor oanizations directly, rel  g on the
 Labor Ministry only for such duties as officially certifying unions. heMinistry
 often seeks to conciliate labor disputes through informal channels rather than at-
 tempting strictly to enforce regulations, leading to charges of bias against labor.
 Corruption continues to be a serious problem affecting labor courts.
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination against unions. It provides that union
 officials at the time of their election, throughout their term, and for 1 year following
 
 
 their term shall not be fired, suspended for disciplinary reasons, removed, or de-
 moted except for legal cause. Employers generally observed this provision in prac-
 tice, but in some cases fired those attempting to form unions before receiving their
 union credentials. Even under the revised Code, there were credible reports of gov-
 ernment inaction following dismissal of legally recognize d union representatives.
 The law requires employers to rehire employees fired or any type of union activity,
 although the authorities sometimes do not enforce this requirement. In many cases,
 employers convince fired employees to take a cash payment in lieu of returning to
 work.
 There are six functioning export processing zones (EPZ's). Labor regulations in
 these zones are identical to those throughout the country. Companies operating in
 the EPZ's, while providing higher salaries and benefits than companies outside the
 EPZ's, strongly discourage organizing. There were credible reports of some foreiga-
 owned factories dismissing union organizers and, in some cases, physically abusing
 their workers. Government actions against violations have been ineffective, in part
 because of an inefficient legal system and in part because of fear of losing the fac-
 tories to other countries.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor, except in the case of calamity and other instances specified by
 law. This provision is followed in practice.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Constitution prohibits the em-
 ployment of children under the age of 14. It provides for exceptions only where such
 employment is absolutely indispensable to the sustenance of the minor and his fam-
 ily, most often the case with children of peasant families who traditionally work
 with their families during planting and harvesting seasons. Children also frequently
 work as vendrs and general laborers in small businesses, especially in the informal
 sector. Parents of children in circumstances such as these often d not allow their
 children to complete schooling through the ninth grade as the law requires since
 the labor which the children perform is considered vital to the family. Child labor
 is not found in the industrial sector. The Ministry of Labor is responsible for enforc-
 ing child labor laws.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-In July the Government raised the minimum
 wages for commercial, industrial, service, and grindustrial employees by 13 per-
 cent. The new rate for industrial and service workers was about $4 (35 colones) per
 day; agroindustrial employees must be paid about $3 (26 colones) in wages, includ-
 ing a food allowance, per day. Despite these increases, minimum wages were gen-
 erally inadequate to meet the Ministry of Economy's standard of basic necessity. An
 estimated 40 percent of the population lives below the poverty level. The Labor Min-
 istry is responsible for enforcing minimum wage laws and does so effectively in the
 formal sector.
 The law limits the workday to 6 hours for minors between 14 and 18 years of age
 and 8 hours for adults. Premium pay is mandated for longer hours. The Labor Code
 sets a maximum normal workweek of 44 hours, requiring overtime pay for addi-
 tional work and limiting the workweek to no more than 6 days.
 The Constitution and the Labor Code require employers, including the Govern-
 ment, to take steps to ensure that employees are notplaced at risk in their work-
 places, and prohibit the employment of persons under 18 years of age and all
 women in occupations considered hazardous. Nevertheless, Salvadoran health and
 safety regulations are outdated, and inadequate enforcement remains a problem.
 Workers can remove themselves from dangerous work situations without jeopardiz-
 ing their employment if they present a medical certificate issued by a doctor or the
 Social Security Institute indicating that their health is at risk while using certain
 equipment or substances. The Ministry of Labor attempts to enforce the applicable
 regulations and conducts investigations which sometimes lead to fines or other find-
 ings favoring workers. The Ministry has very limited powers to enforce compliance,
 however, and has suffered cutbacks in resources to carry out certification and in-
 spection duties, which curb its effectiveness.
