 EL SALVADOR
 Since the end of World War Ii, El Salvador's politics
 have been dominated by the military within a context of
 political parties and elections. Executive power is vested
 in the President and a Council of Ministers appointed by
 the President. The present government is headed by General
 Carlos Humberto Romero who assumed office on July 1, 1977,
 after a controversial election. Reactions to the election
 included demonstrations alleging fraud, mass arrests,
 some killings, exile of political opposition leaders,
 and imposition of a state of siege. The latter resulted
 in the temporary suspension of the Constitutional rights
 of freedom of assembly, movement, speech and privacy of
 correspondence. The state of siege lasted entil the Romero
 government took office. There are increasing pressures
 from dissatisfied sectors of Salvadoran society demanding
 socio-economic reforms. More conservative sectors oppose
 change. There has also been an upsurge of terrorism by
 extremists of both left and right. In late 1977 the Govern-
 ment took a number of socio-economic and security measures.
 The Property Tax Law on Rural Land includes provisions
 for improving the lot of low-income peasants. A Law for
 the Defense and Guarantee of Public Order (see Section
 3) sets forth stricter penalties and more sweeping legal
 procedure* for limiting some political activities.
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a.   Torture
 Torture has occurred under previous administrations.
 Allegations have been made that individuals still
 supposedly being held as political prisoners have been
 tortured but, to date, there is no available hard evidence
 of use of torture at the direction of the Romero administra-
 tion. More information in this regard is expected from
 the visit in January 1978 by the Inter-American Human Rights
 Commission. There has been some credible testimony of
 National Guard torture of suspected subversives and terrorists
 during 1977. It is unclear whether these alleged violations
 were acquiesced in by the central government or carried
 out independently by subordinate authorities. Apparently
 no indictments have been brought as a result of these alleged
 abuses.
 (159)
 
 
 160
 b.   Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Such treatment or punishment is forbidden by Salvadoran
 law. However, some abuses have occurred, particularly
 in rural areas. Elements of the security forces,
 a civilian para-military organization "Orden" and
 rural police have been charged by opposition members
 with responsibility for disappearances and killings
 in some rural communities. No disciplinary action
 appears to have been taken against these groups.
 Early in 1977, under the previous Molina administration,
 an undisclosed number of persons were killed following
 demonstrations protesting the election.
 During 1977 terrorism from both the left and the right, as
 well as from criminal groups, resulted in the kidnapping
 and assassination of several prominent personages. These
 incidents included terrorist murders of the country's
 Foreign Minister, National University Rector, a former
 President, and two Catholic priests. The Romero
 administration has refrained from using terror as an
 excuse for reimposition of the state of siege even
 though it is under strong pressure from some influential
 sectors to repress dissent harshly.
 c.   Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 During 1977 there were a number of arrests with political
 overtones and without prompt indictment and trial. The
 Government considered those arrested to be involved in
 terrorist or subversive activities. Most of the arrests
 took place during the Molina administration. Some of those
 detained have been neither acknowledged as prisoners
 by the Government nor otherwise accounted for. Seemingly
 reliable reports continue that not all detainees under
 the state of siege have been turned over to civilian courts.
 During 1977 there was some mistreatment of detained
 American citizens. The United States Government found it
 necessary also to protest the failure of Salvadoran authori-
 ties to comply with the provisions of the Vienna Convention
 of Consular Relations with regard to notification or right
 of access to consular agents. The Romero Government has
 aiven assurances of compliance with the Convention.
 
 
 161
 d.   Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Salvadoran judicial system is believed to operate
 on a fairly independent basis--and to provide fair
 public trials-in cases which do not involve members
 of the wealthiest class or persons allegedly involved
 in subversive activities.
 Detention of political prisoners without charge or .trial-
 rather than the fairness of trials-has been the focus
 of allegations of human rights violations.
 e.   Invasion of the Home
 House to house searches have been regular practices of
 previous governments. President Romero has refrained
 from a government policy of unwarranted search" and
 seizure.
 2.   Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfill-
 ment of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health
 Care and Education
 Coupled with a highly skewed income (a small minority
 controlling most of the country's wealth), overpopulation
 is perhaps El Salvador's most serious problem. The
 Government has formulated one of the most progressive
 national, family planning policies within the hemisphere.
 The drive to provide a wide range of contraceptive.
 services to the public receives priority attention
 of the Health Ministry.
 Health care has received strong financial support
 from the Government. New regional hospitals, financed
 by the Inter-American Development Bank, are under con-
 struction. In addition, the Government plans to begin
 new initiatives to combat malaria incidence and promote
 better sanitation in rural areas.
 Agricultural policy has'emphasized increased production
 of basic foodstuffs which most directly benefit the
 rural and urban poor. The preliminary five year
 plan for. 1978-82, endorsed by the Romero administration,
 continues efforts designed to reach self-sufficiency
 
 
 in basic grains and also seeks to increase employment
 in the agricultural sector. Larqe landholdings continue
 in the hands of a very small group of families. Concen-
 tration of much land into large holdings, along with
 rural oversupply of labor, has produced extremely
 low rural incomes. An ambitious program to redistribute
 large tracts of valuable agricultural land to landless
 peasants was abandoned in 1976. A less extensive
 land reform pr9gram, which is not expected to break
 up the more productive of the large landholdings,
 is now reportedly being drafted.
 Considerable progress has been made in constructing
 and equipping new schools. The new government has
 indicated that its top priorities over the next
 five years will be in improving education in the
 rural areas and devoting more attention to the provision
 of vocational education to both the school age population
 and out-of-school youths and adults. Twenty percent of
 the national budget is allocated to education.
 The Government is extensively subsidizing the construction
 of public housing and minimum shelter facilities.
 The Salvadoran tax system is generally considered
 regressive. However, a property tax law on rural
 land devdted to agriculture and/or pastoral use was
 passed in late 1977. Among its objectives, the law
 aims at improving the welfare of lowest income sec-
 tors, especially the rural poor, and stimulating more
 efficient land utilization.
 Corruption involving public funds is not notorious in
 El Salvador, but it does occur and presumably
 diverts resources from the Door.
 3.   Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including
 a.   Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion,
 and Assembly
 The state of siege which was lifted on July 1, 1977
 restricted civil and political liberties guaranteed
 under the Constitution. Freedom of religion is possibly
 being inhibited in the countryside as a result of official
 and even some public belief that there are priests who
 
 
 163
 exhort the people to what are considered to be illegal
 acts. Under the Constitution, ciergymen are prohibited
 from including in sermons political propaganda or
 criticism of the laws, the Government or public officials.
 There is some reason to believe that the qovernment
 security forces may continue to open and censor nail,
 which is constitutionally authorized only during a
 state of siege. In times of tension, the otherwise generally
 respected rights of peaceable assembly have been restricted.
 The Romero government has allowed large demonstrations
 by worker groups demanding increased wages. Shooting
 occurred in one such demonstration, and several persons
 were killed.
 The Law for the Defense and Guarantee of Public Order,
 enacted November 25, 1977, authorizes prison sentences
 for persons guilty of disturbing any form of public
 order and for those who profess and propagandize
 political "doctrines contrary to democracy." Its sweep-
 ing nature has been criticized as jeopardizing civil
 and political liberties.
 There is presently no media censorship on political
 grounds, but press organs often practice self-censor-
 ship. With the lifting of the state of siege, one
 closed ne.wspaper has been permitted to reopen and
 speak out critically against the Government.
 Labor orqhnization is permitted, but the Government has
 often attempted to influence the unions and make them
 dependent on official approval, especially in rural areas.
 Some labor leaders, particularly of such nationwide
 unions as the teachers union (ANDES), and some peasant
 organizations, have been harassed and a few detained.
 b.   Freedom of Movement Within the Country,
 Foreign Travel and Emigration
 There is freedom of movement within the country (although
 sometimes limited during periods of political tension)
 as well as freedom to travel abroad, and to emigrate.
 Exile has been used for political purposes, but the
 present regime has stated that all of the few remaining
 political exiles may return to the country.
 
 
 c.   Freedom to Participate in the Political
 Process
 In INarch 1976, the opposition parties boycotted the
 legislative elections, charging the Central Electoral
 Commission with administrative improprieties. As a
 result, all deputies in the Legislative Assembly
 are of the government party. The last presidential
 elections, in early 1977, were marked by evidence
 of fraud.
 At the close of 1977 there seemed to be greater freedom
 to participate in the political process than earlier
 in the year. The Government has expressed its
 support for open municipal elections in March,
 although opposition parties which are legally
 authorized and operate actively have announced
 a boycott.
 4.   Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and non-Governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 In the fall of 1977, the Romero administration
 took the initiative in formally inviting the Inter-
 American-Human Rights Commission to visit El Salvador
 and to conduct an investigation. The Commission
 came in January 1978. Prior to that time the Govern-
 ment of El Salvador had not seemed disposed toward
 scrutiny by external groups.
 
 
