EL SALVADOR
The report on El Salvador does not present an accurate, realistic assessment of human rights violations in a country which is a major recipient of U.S. economic and military assistance. While acknowledging past abuses, the 1989 analysis underplays significant patterns and events, offers incomplete, misleading information, and apologizes for flagrant violations committed by members of the armed forces and a lack of civilian control. A politicized presentation, the report does not provide the uninitiated reader with a reliable portrait of the human rights reality in El Salvador.
The State Department continued to rely on local press reports as the main source of information on human rights developments in EI Salvador during 1989. This relatively effortless technique has been repeatedly questioned, and is inconsistent with international norms and standards for human rights monitoring. Yet the weakness in this methodology takes on added import in 1989, a year in which restrictions, abuses and attacks against the local and international press were widespread and well-documented. On November 12, the government imposed a state of siege and suspended certain constitutional guarantees, including the right to freedom of speech and press, movement, peaceful assembly, and association, and inviolability of correspondence. For 23 days (from November 11 to December 4, 1989), all radio stations were required to join a nationwide radio hook-up and a censor was assigned to some television news programs and daily newspapers. The national radio network, operating out of the Army's Radio Cuscatlan, broadcast threats and accusations against many individuals and organizations perceived to be anti-government; some of those mentioned became the targets of political violence.
With no alternative, the local news media based much of its coverage on communiqués from the military press office, COPREFA, which is not objective and often inaccurate. The costs of trying to cover the news in El Salvador were high; the Committee to Protect Journalists reported that more journalists were killed or "disappeared" in El Salvador in 1989 than in any other country.
Concerning prosecution of governmental authorities allegedly responsible for human rights abuses, the report admits that abuses continue, but claims that "successful investigation and prosecution efforts now mean that military personnel, including officers, cannot count themselves immune to prosecution." This is an extreme
63
El Salvador
exaggeration of the efforts and successes to date. No Salvadoran military officer has ever been convicted of a human rights crime, in spite of enormous pressure, increased human and financial resources and technical expertise. The State Department admits that ". . . traditionally, officers of the armed and security forces have been treated differently from other citizens before the law," but states that this is all beginning to change. We are not convinced. The State Department states that "[a]lthough the military leadership showed somewhat greater cooperation in investigations of reported human rights abuses by members of the military [in 1989], this attitude has not reached the lower ranks of the [Salvadoran armed forces], where cooperation with civilian investigators is, at best, erratic or problematic."
We see few indications that the military leadership is keenly interested in and cooperating with judicial investigations. Of the three prosecutions of military personnel cited, one -- the Rivas Aguirre case -- involved common crime, and was not politically motivated. The Lawyers Committee and other human rights organizations have repeatedly pointed this out, and a ranking U.S. Embassy official admitted as much to the Lawyers Committee. Yet despite this official acknowledgement, the case is cited inappropriately three times in the report.
The other two examples of attempted prosecution serve to illustrate the degree to which members of the armed forces consider themselves above the law. After the September 1988 San Francisco massacre in which 10 peasants were killed, military spokesmen presented three different versions of events. It was only after considerable international pressure -- including a February 1989 visit by Vice President Dan Quayle -- that any serious attempt was made to investigate the killings. By late February 1989, five months after the massacre, members of the Fifth Brigade testified that their commanding officer ordered them to kill the peasants. But at year's end the accused remained in military custody and were still on the Army payroll. The Fifth Brigade Commander was absolved of all responsibility in the case. (In May 1990, charges were dropped against all but one of those under arrest. Major Mauricio Beltran Granados is the sole defendant ordered to stand trial.) The first judge assigned to the case resigned under pressure; his successor felt threatened by the presence of men watching him, and asked for protection during 1989.
64
El Salvador
The second prosecution of military officials cited by the State Department involved the November 16 murder of six Jesuit priests and two women. Despite extensive circumstantial evidence implicating the armed forces, it is doubtful that the investigation would have progressed had it not been for international vigilance. As late as January 2, 1990, U.S. Ambassador William Walker was alleging that the assailants were likely FMLN guerrillas dressed in army uniforms. Salvadoran church officials who pressed for a serious investigation were maligned by the Attorney General and high-ranking military officers.
The State Department's description of the murders of the Jesuits and the two women fails to mention the mistreatment of a key witness by members of the Special Investigative Unit (SIU) and the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation; does not comment on the failure of the Attorney General to seriously investigate the case; and implies that the investigation is complete. The report incorrectly states that . . nine soldiers of the Atlacatl Battalion, including a colonel and two lieutenants, were in legal custody for the killings." Only seven of the nine defendants are members of the Atlacatl Battalion; one of the lieutenants charged is assigned to the Military Academy and Colonel Benavides -- a member of the powerful tandona, which today dominates the military -- commands the Academy. Eight of the nine military personnel named are in custody at security force headquarters in San Salvador and are still receiving army pay; there are reliable reports that Colonel Benavides is receiving special treatment, including excursions to the beach. Almost as if it wished to diminish the offense, the State Department refers to the nine as mere "wrongdoers."
Unmentioned in the report is a pattern of increasing intimidation and attacks against the witnesses and victims of crimes, and against those institutions which seek to investigate and prosecute persons responsible for human rights abuses. For example, death threats against the Archbishop of San Salvador and several Protestant pastors, verbal attacks by high-ranking military officials against the work and staff of the Central American University José Simeón Cañas (UCA) and Tutela Legal, the human rights office of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of San Salvador, were notable in 1989 and had serious repercussions.
The State Department belittles the death squad killings reported by Tutela Legal and labels several nongovernmental organizations, including the Committee of Mothers of Political
65
El Salvador
Prisoners, Disappeared, and Assassinated in El Salvador (COMADRES), the Christian Committee for the Displaced (CRIPDES), and the nongovernmental Human Rights Commission of El Salvador (CDHES), as groups "controlled by the FMLN," paving the way for attacks against them and their members. Not surprisingly, more than 70 members of the CDHES, CRIPDES, and COMADRES were arrested during 1989; the COMADRES office was bombed on October 31; and the offices of the CDHES, COMADRES, and CRIPDES were entered and searched at different times during the year. During raids and searches in November, files, documents and other equipment and supplies were stolen by soldiers from the offices of COMADRES and CRIPDES.
In its review of political killings, the report does not accurately portray that there has been a marked, well-documented increase in political killings from 1987 to 1988 and a significant number of such murders in 1989. After apologizing for the uncertainty of data collection and classification, the report contends that "of the 138 apparently politically motivated killings of noncombatants during the first 8 months of the year, 64 appear clearly to have been perpetrated by the FMLN, with another 16 probably attributed to them; 14 killings were attributed to military personnel; and in 2 cases there was insufficient evidence to designate the likely assailants." None of the killings were attributed to death squads, and there is no explanation of how FMLN responsibility is so clearly discernible while the responsibility of the armed forces and other groups is less clear. During 1989 Tutela Legal documented 31 political assassinations attributable to the FMLN, less than half the number reported by the State Department, but also reported 76 killings attributed to the military, security forces and civil defense patrols, and 35 attributed to death squads.
The State Department candidly admits that there "continued to be reports of noncombatant killings attributed to the military and police," but understates the magnitude of the problem. The report should have included other cases, such as the February 2 murders of Mario Antonio Flores Cubas, an economics student at the University of El Salvador, and José Gerardo Gómez, an agricultural worker, who were taken away by men in uniform in Colonia Miramonte and found dead with signs of torture near Acajutla; the November 12 killing of women's activist Norma Guirola de Herrera; as well as the political killings of several unionists and members of peasant associations during the year.
66
El Salvador
The report mentions 14 political killings attributable to members of the armed forces in 1989, the same figure cited in the report for 1988, but its case descriptions omit significant details, leave most of the victims nameless, and fail to mention that there were attempted cover-ups in all 14 cases. Eleven of the 14 examples cited can be attributed to the Atlacatl Battalion — the first U.S.-trained elite special forces battalion established in El Salvador — including the November murders of six Jesuit priests and two women.
The State Department fails to describe accurately the July 1989 deaths of two villagers from Tres Ceibas and Camotepeque. Héctor Joaquín Miranda Marroquin was among seven men arrested on July 2-3 during a joint military operation by soldiers of the Atlacatl Battalion and the First Brigade. He was severely beaten, held at the First Brigade garrison for 10 days without adequate medical attention, and died in a public hospital on July 13, the day after he was removed from the garrison by the International Committee of the Red Cross. The five surviving detainees were beaten, tortured and held incommunicado for up to 16 days, far in excess of the 72-hour limit on administrative detention. First Brigade troops initially denied holding them and later told the detainees' relatives that the men were voluntarily collaborating with the military. Another detainee, Lucio Parada Cea, also died in custody. Soldiers secretly buried his body, in an attempt to hide his death. Commander Elena Fuentes told reporters that Parada had "fallen off a pickup truck," an allegation not substantiated by any other source.
The High Command ordered an investigation into the deaths three weeks later, only after the incident was reported in U.S. newspapers and U.S. Embassy officials made inquiries. The State Department claims that two soldiers were charged with the murders and mentions that one of the two is in custody in El Salvador; however. Corporal Salvador Alcides Gómez Gómez, an Atlacatl Battalion member detained on August 17, was released in December. The report fails to describe accurately this incident or offer an analysis of how the investigation is progressing; also lacking is a critical assessment of the allegations of Cesar Vielman Joya Martínez, a former soldier who has testified in the United States that he belonged to a death squad operating out of the First Brigade.
U.S. officials have repeatedly indicated that death squad killings in El Salvador would jeopardize U.S. aid, which could explain why the State Department acknowledges no death squad killings in 1989. The 1989 report fails to make any distinction between right-
67
El Salvador
wing vigilantes, death squads, paramilitary units, civil defense patrols, and, for that matter, military and security force units trying to cover up a crime. The report also fails to recognize that paramilitary groups — whatever they are called — continue to operate with impunity in El Salvador, but concedes that "right-wing vigilantism continued to be a serious human rights concern."
The report avoids mention of civil defense patrols and the lack of accountability for their activities. On May 6, Colonel Juan Orlando Zepeda, then Commander of the First Infantry Brigade and currently Vice Minister of Defense, created a "Patriotic Civic Defense" patrol of private citizens who would be "watchmen and denounce any suspicious movements." Archbishop Arturo Rivera y Damas objected, saying the patrol "will only deepen the internal conflict . . . and bear bitter fruits." José Napoleón Duarte, then President of the Republic and Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces, said he had not been consulted about the creation of the Patriotic Civic Defense patrol, and ordered that the group be disbanded.
It was never confirmed that the Patriotic Civic Defense patrols were completely disbanded, but there were confirmed reports of 1989 political killings by members of the country's extensive civil defense network. For example, a day laborer was shot to death by members of the Jayaque civil defense patrol in January; a busload of villagers witnessed the murder. A 35-year-old tailor was taken from his house in a rural village of Santa Ana by the local civil defense unit in July and shot in the back of the head. With the aid of the local justice of the peace, the assailants were identified but there were no further efforts to investigate or prosecute this case.
The report seriously misrepresents the pattern of attacks against churches and nongovernmental organizations by members of the armed forces, and fails to hold the Salvadoran government accountable for these abuses. The State Department recognizes that "[hjolding political views opposed to those of the Government is not justification for arrest unless the suspect advocates violence . . ." and "the courts have held that membership in a front organization controlled by the guerrillas is not in itself sufficient reason for holding an arrestee, although membership in one of the guerrilla groups is." Yet labels such as "front groups," "FMLN fronts," "political parties linked to the FMLN," "pro-FMLN labor organizations," are used throughout the report without definition or precision.
68
El Salvador
Labelling an organization a "front group" jeopardizes the safety and lives of its members. The case of FENASTRAS, a labor coalition which the report calls "FMLN-linked," is striking. While it is not a crime to belong to a labor union, over 70 FENASTRAS activists were detained during 1989, accused of "subversive association" and acts of terrorism. The majority were released by judges who determined there was no basis for further detention. Two arrested FENASTRAS members "disappeared," however. Many of those arrested were also mistreated during detention. In late October, FENASTRAS offices were destroyed in a powerful explosion that killed 10 people. The labels used by the State Department are dangerous and the practice should be stopped.
In its section on discrimination, the report mentions in passing the September 1989 rape of a FENASTRAS woman and "alleged" rapes of six other FENASTRAS members who were detained by the security forces, noting "[o]nly one of the seven filed a formal complaint and submitted to a physical examination; the examination substantiated the allegation. Both the National Police and the SIU were investigating the case in October." The report fails to mention that Julia Tatiana Mendoza, whose rape was confirmed by an examining physician, was killed in the October bomb blast at the FENASTRAS office. The Lawyers Committee has received reports that rape of female detainees is common, and that female relatives of male detainees often report being sexually abused at the time of the man's arrest.
The report mentions the legal procedures the security forces must follow to enter and search a dwelling, but fails to detail the extent of the abuse of such procedures in 1989. The report states that "[t]he government in general does not interfere arbitrarily in the personal lives of citizens," but also asserts that the government "has a right to intervene when it believes national security is threatened." The State Department excuses the many illegal, indiscriminate entries of the premises of religious and humanitarian organizations by citing, without assessing, government assertions that "the military forces were acting on intelligence reports indicating that either such premises or some of the individuals therein were acting on behalf of the FMLN." The report falls short of stating that churches and humanitarian organizations are a threat to national security, and that such suspicions justify illegal procedures. It does admit that "[t]he Government was accused in late November of indiscriminately entering the premises of religious and humanitarian organizations.
69
El Salvador
conducting mass arrests, and seizing property found on the premises," but appears to justify these attacks, saying they "occurred during the first 2 weeks of the offensive, when [military] units were investigating leads relating to arms caches or other indications of support for the FMLN."
Later in the report, the State Department claims that the armed forces "searched the facilities of at least 25 church groups which it had reason to believe were sympathizing with or supporting the FMLN." In El Salvador, "reason to believe" can be nothing more than an anonymous denunciation or threat, or membership in a church in a low-income area. Sixty church buildings and 50 offices and buildings of nongovernmental organizations, including members' homes, were entered and searched during the period from November 11 through December 31 and not a single arms cache was found in any of them. Many of the church buildings and homes of church workers which were entered were also ransacked and looted, and reports of many of the incidents were followed by official denials that the incidents had occurred. This is not mentioned by the State Department, which claims that "[t]he overwhelming majority of religious institutions and facilities were not affected."
While the State Department correctly observes that "there continue to be credible charges of persons who disappeared after having been taken away by members of the army or security forces," it is not correct to state that "in relatively few cases are disappeared persons never accounted for." The number of "disappeared" in El Salvador exceeds 7,000 persons during the last decade of war, and those responsible for their "disappearance" must be held accountable. The statement that, "most of the time their detention is eventually acknowledged . . ." is a de facto admission that the army or security forces do not as a matter of course acknowledge detentions within the time periods required by the Constitution and other laws. There is mention of 56 disappearances during the first eight months of the year, based on press reports and including "runaway children"; Tutela Legal, by contrast, reported 101 persons disappeared during 1989 and another 117 persons arrested and subsequently "disappeared." The "disappearances" of Sara Cristina Chan Chan and José Francisco Massin, both FENASTRAS members, and Marta Lidia Guzman, a member of the National Union of Displaced Earthquake Victims (UNADES), are incorrectly portrayed as isolated incidents; they are consistent with a series of attacks against these nongovernmental organizations.
70
El Salvador
The report fails to mention other labor unionists and members of peasant associations who "disappeared" in 1989. Four farmers and members of the "San Cayetano El Rosario" agricultural cooperative in Ahuachapán, were abducted by armed, uniformed soldiers and armed men in civilian clothing as the four were riding in a truck on December 29; the armed forces continue to deny they have the men in custody or know their whereabouts. Two other members of the same cooperative, Juan Antonio Juarez Vasquez and Julio Cesar Juarez Vazquez, "disappeared" after being abducted on December 5 by uniformed soldiers. A total of six men "disappeared" on this same farm during 1989.
The report's section on torture is poor. It mentions "alleged abuses" such as the use of severe beatings, rape and choking, but states that "it is not believed that there is a government policy that permits or condones torture or mistreatment of prisoners." Information from nongovernmental human rights organizations indicates that the use of torture in El Salvador is widespread and increasing, and is allowed to occur with the consent or tacit approval of military officials. Professor José Antonio Pastor Ridruejo, the United Nations Special Representative for El Salvador, noted in his 1989 report that based on his research in El Salvador he has "the impression that the proportion [of torture cases] is higher than in immediately preceding years."
The State Department report says that a physician for the governmental Human Rights Commission who examined trade unionist José Tomás Mazariego determined that he had not been tortured with acid while in police custody, as Mazariego testified. The report fails to add that a doctor in the United States who later examined Mazariego concluded that "[t]he physical findings are entirely consistent with his reports of torture and the application of a chemical irritating substance to his skin . . . ."
The State Department neglects to mention deaths during military custody, or in a hospital following beatings and torture during detention. For example, Yuri Edson Aparicio Campos, a 32-year-old student at the University of El Salvador, left his house in Soyapango on November 8 and was not seen or heard from again until relatives found him, unconscious, in Rosales Hospital. Aparicio Campos had been taken to the hospital by National Police agents at 10:00 p.m. on November 19. He later died from the beatings he had received while in police custody.
71
El Salvador
The section on the use of excessive force and violations of humanitarian law in internal conflicts is one-sided and incomplete. First, the claim that "[t]here were no reported civilian casualties as a result of [Air Force bombings near civilian populations] in rural areas is incorrect. In March five civilians were killed and another five seriously injured during an Air Force attack on a village north of Torola, department of Morazan. This incident was mentioned in a report by the State Department on April 1.
The report focuses exclusively on Air Force bombings, but there were other forms of indiscriminate attacks against the civilian population as well. Several civilians were killed by mortars fired at their villages and soldiers shooting indiscriminately among civilians. At least one person was shot and killed on the spot because he was outside after curfew hours.
The report states that the "guerrillas' use of unmarked, indiscriminately placed land mines and booby traps is a major cause of death and maiming among peasants" but fails to mention that the army has used the same tactics. Tutela Legal reported 27 deaths caused by land mines and other explosive artifacts attributable to the FMLN and seven deaths by land mines and explosive artifacts attributable to the army.
Finally, the report barely touches upon numerous violations of health rights and principles of medical neutrality which were violated during 1989. Throughout the year there was a pattern of systematic abuses against health workers, including arrests, intimidation, torture and killings. Health care services to civilian populations were routinely obstructed, and health care centers and supplies were often attacked and destroyed. In addition, the report credits the government with allowing a group of 46 war-wounded and handicapped FMLN ex-combatants to leave El Salvador for medical assistance on October 7, but fails to mention that the evacuation of another 109 war-wounded FMLN combatants was ultimately blocked by ARENA officials.
There is also no mention of the rapid closure of political space after President Cristiani was elected in March and assumed power on June 1. As an example of self-imposed exile, the report states that Democratic Convergence leader Rubén Zamora left El Salvador in late 1989, alleging that his life was in jeopardy, but does not concede that Zamora's fears were well-founded. The State Department claims that the Convergence's "participation [in the presidential elections] was a
72
El Salvador
milestone . . . because it demonstrated that political toleration in the country existed . . but also reports that the Convergence "charged the military with intimidation at its rallies" and some Convergence "members were arrested in rural departments, but were subsequently released."
The elections took place amid a "violent environment that has characterized the country in recent years." Zamora's house in San Salvador and that of his brother's widow, UDN party leader Aronette Diaz, were bombed in October. Several of Zamora's party members were arrested in 1989, and party leader Jorge Villacorta was arrested, beaten and held overnight by Treasury Police agents on December 6 as he re-entered El Salvador from Guatemala; two other party activists were killed by Army soldiers in October. The offices, leaders and members of other political parties suffered similar attacks. By late December, space for political organizing had effectively closed.
The State Department observes that the "Government continued to be receptive to official groups interested in human rights." In fact, staff members of the Lawyers Committee, as well as cooperating attorneys, have on several occasions been denied visas to El Salvador (most recently in February 1990). Once in El Salvador, however, the Committee has found Salvadoran government officials cooperative.
We disagree with the report's conclusion that academic freedom is "respected by the Government." Among the Jesuits murdered by uniformed soldiers on November 16 were the UCA's rector, vice-rector, and two faculty members. Consistent proponents of peaceful social change, these intellectuals were labelled "ringleaders" of the FMLN by rightists within the government and the military and others. A total of 13 university faculty members, students and workers were killed in 1989, most of them by members of the armed forces. There were reports of the arrest and/or "disappearance" of 134 members of the university community in 1989. Soldiers entered the campus of the University of El Salvador, the largest public university, during the November offensive and did not return the campus to the University community until June 1990. Classes, research activities and other programs came to a halt, and were resumed in February 1990 in provisional buildings throughout San Salvador.
73
El Salvador
In keeping with Esquipulas II, the government allowed the repatriation of Salvadoran refugees from Honduras, but failed to guarantee respect for their rights once in El Salvador. The report says "there is no government harassment of persons returning to El Salvador from abroad." However, church and other humanitarian workers have documented a pattern of abuse against repatriates and the internally displaced. Many of the repatriates have been detained, arrested, and mistreated; some have "disappeared." Government and military officials are quick to accuse the repatriates and displaced persons returning to conflictive areas of collaborating with guerrilla forces. Their own movements are restricted, deliveries of food and other humanitarian relief supplies to their communities are blocked, and humanitarian workers attempting to assist them in their reconstruction and development programs are harassed. Fewer than half of the Salvadoran adults who repatriated from refugee camps in Honduras have received their personal identity cards; they remain a marginalized, immobile, and suspect population.
The report's section on labor rights largely repeats the 1988 report. No specific examples of labor rights violations in 1989 are mentioned, nor is the involvement of the military in suppressing the efforts of labor unions, cooperatives, and peasant associations' right to organize, associate, bargain collectively and strike. Some unionists and members of peasant associations were victims of political killings; others "disappeared" during 1989. For example, Mateo Diaz Bernal, 19, the Secretary of Conflicts of FENASTRAS, was arrested by armed, uniformed National Police agents at 6:00 p.m. on February 20 near downtown San Salvador; he was never seen again.
74
