 EL SALVADOR
 El Salvador is a constitutional democracy with an executive
 branch headed by a president, a unicameral Legislative Assembly
 and a separate, but politically appointed, judiciary. Alfredo
 Cristiani of the Nationalist Republican Alliance (ARENA) was
 inaugurated President for a 5-year term beginning on June 1,
 1989. Six political parties or coalitions participated in the
 March 1991 legislative and municipal elections in which ARENA
 lost its absolute majority in the Assembly and all six parties
 or coalitions won at least one seat.
 The Armed Forces of El Salvador (ESAF) include the army, air
 force, and navy as well as the public security forces (the
 Treaqury Police, the National Guard, and the National Police)
 and the Civil Defense Forces (CDF). The security forces share
 law enforcement responsibilities and report to the Vice
 Minister of Defense for Public Security. These military and
 police forces have been responsible for significant human
 rights abuses in previous years and in 1991. During peace
 talks, the Government and the Farabundo Marti Front for
 National Liberation (FMLN) agreed on September 25 that the
 Treasury Police and the National Guard will be dissolved and
 the National Police will be replaced by a new national civilian
 police force.
 In El Salvador's mixed economy, private property is generally
 respected. Due mainly to the Government's free market reforms,
 the economy grew by 3.4 percent in 1990, and exports increased
 substantially. Although the FMLN continued to attack economic
 targets until a truce began on November 16, war-related damage
 declined significantly in 1991.
 On December 31, the Government and the FMLN signed an agreement
 ending 11 years of civil war and providing for the
 reintegration of FMLN excombatants into the national life of El
 Salvador. The Government and FMLN agreed to a series of
 constitutional reforms; these human rights, judicial, and
 electoral reforms were ratified by the Legislative Assembly.
 The parties also agreed to establish a truth commission to
 investigate serious human rights violations in the past decade
 and to create an "ad hoc" commission to evaluate the human
 rights record, professional competence, and commitment to
 democracy of each ESAF officer. The U.N. Observer Mission in
 El Salvador (ONUSAL) began in July 1991 its mission of
 verifying the human rights accord signed in July 1990 by the
 Government and the FMLN.
 In his annual report, the U.N. Special Rapporteur stated, as he
 did in 1990, that there were fewer human rights violations in
 1991 than in the previous year, but that serious human rights
 violations persist. There were incidents of extrajudicial
 killings, torture of detainees, arbitrary arrest and
 incommunicado detention, forced recruitment, intimidation and
 abuse of noncombatants and civilian organizations perceived to
 be sympathetic to the FMLN, and some violations of worker
 rights by the ESAF. There were also incidents of extrajudicial
 killings, forced recruitment, attacks on civilian targets, and
 threats against government officials carried out by the FMLN.
 Both sides in the conflict put civilians at risk, although
 civilian casualties continued to decline. Although there were
 a few notable prosecutions for human rights violations in 1991,
 military and police officials, people with influence, and FMLN
 guerrillas continued to enjoy virtual immunity from such
 
 
 593
 EL SALVADOR
 prosecutions. Both the U.N. Special Rapporteur and ONUSAL
 concluded that cursory investigations by the Government of
 human rights abuses contribute to a continuing atmosphere of
 insecurity.
 With a few notable exceptions, the ESAF and the FMLN continued
 to avoid or resist legal accountability for human rights
 violations. The FMLN refused to turn suspects over for
 prosecution after they shot down a U.S. helicopter and killed
 two surviving U.S. military personnel on January 2. All 13 CDF
 members charged in the Armenia well case were acquitted on
 October 9 despite overwhelming evidence that they killed 30
 peasants in 1981. However, three members of the FMLN were
 convicted on May 2 of the 1985 Zona Rosa murders of four U.S.
 Marine Embassy security guards and nine others. A jury found
 active duty army Colonel Guillermo Benavides guilty of ordering
 the murder of six Jesuit priests, their housekeeper, and her
 daughter in November 1989. Lieutenant Yusshi Rene Mendoza was
 convicted of ordering the murder of the housekeeper's
 daughter. Both received 30-year sentences. Three other
 officers received 3-year sentences on lesser charges related to
 the murders. Four lower ranking soldiers, who had admitted to
 the shooting, were exonerated by the jury. The ESAF high
 command offered only limited cooperation in the investigation
 of the Jesuit case; the court transcripts reveal perjury and
 contradictions by high-ranking ESAF officers. The ESAF as an
 institution also tried to limit the judicial investigation to
 the named suspects; speculation continues over the possible
 involvement of, or coverup by, other high-ranking officers in
 the case.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were several political and other extrajudicial killings
 by the ESAF in 1991. Atlacatl battalion soldiers murdered a
 wounded FMLN combatant on May 15. The National Police arrested
 Carlos Arturo Aguilar of the Atlacatl' battalion for throwing a
 hand grenade at the Ahuachapan lottery building on February 9
 that killed Luis Francisco Contreras; Efrain Mazariego, a
 member of a local military patrol, confessed to the murder on
 February 11 of Salvador Lopez (Mazariego, nevertheless, was
 later found innocent and released by a civilian court); and in
 March, a subsergeant in the Salvadoran navy, Saul Antonio
 Bonilla, was charged with the murder in December 1990 of Jose
 Carlos Hernandez, a Green Cross member. On September 7,
 Rosalio Hernandez died apparently as a result.of being beaten
 by the guards at a new military hospital. Jose Maria Chacon
 was shot and killed (and his wife and daughter wounded) on
 September 21; a Fifth Brigade soldier was arrested. On
 September 25, Jose Samuel Fuentes was taken from his home and
 died after being tortured by three men; a national policeman
 and a municipal policeman were arrested. Human rights abuses
 by the ESAF-supervised CDF also persisted. On February 9, 15
 CDF members in Zacamil Canton were arrested for the February
 murder of 3 civilians; 7 were released within 72 hours, and 7
 others were released on February 12.
 
 
 594
 EL SALVADOR
 On September 28, Colonel Guillermo Benavides was convicted of
 the murders in November 1989 of six Jesuit priests, their
 housekeeper, and her daughter; Lieutenant Yusshi Rene Mendoza
 was convicted of the murder of the housekeeper's daughter,
 Celina Ramos. Seven lower ranking soldiers, including four who
 admitted doing the actual killing, were exonerated by the jury,
 apparently on the grounds that the soldiers were following
 orders. The enlisted men are still on active duty. The
 military authorities offered only limited cooperation in the
 investigation and trial of these murders. Evidence was
 fabricated and destroyed, and some witnesses provided false
 testimony. Speculation continues that other high-ranking
 officers may have been the intellectual authors of the crime or
 acted to cover it up. Despite overwhelming evidence, all 13
 CDF defendants accused of killing more than 30 people in the
 1981 Armenia Wells case were acquitted on October 9; unit
 commander Sergeant Bernardino Tula and several soldiers who had
 confessed to the murders were among those freed. On April 30,
 Air Force Lieutenant Victor Manuel Aguilar, Sergeant Jorge
 Alberto Ramos and Private Vidal Antonio Pleytes were convicted
 for the beating death in December 1986 of a mentally retarded
 man, Marcelino Barrera. A judicial investigation continues
 into the alleged ESAF massacre of several hundred people in and
 around the town of Mozote in 1981.
 The U.N. Special Rapporteur concluded in his 1991 report that
 charges of death squad activity are plausible but difficult to
 verify, and that some cases may be common crimes made to look
 like death squad killings. In January, 15 members of the same
 family were killed in El Zapote in what many observers now
 believe was a family feud. Isaac Martinez, a former leftist
 political candidate, was found hacked to death on May 14; his
 wife and stepson later confessed to killing him in
 self-defense. Martin Ayala, the nightwatchman at the Council
 for Marginal Communities, was killed and his common-law wife
 severely slashed on July 6. Despite claims of political
 motivation for his murder, most evidence indicates that the
 murder was part of a robbery attempt. In February unknown
 assailants killed Herberto Aristides Robles of the leftist
 Nationalist Democratic Union (UDN) party and his pregnant wife
 in a drive-by shooting. Elmer Dagoberto Lopez was stabbed 13
 times, his face rendered unrecognizable, and he was bound hand
 and foot and dumped into a river. Gustavo Rosa Ramirez was
 shot seven times in his home in La Libertad on May 19 by three
 men in civilian clothes. Ramirez had been arrested and
 allegedly tortured by the National Police 1 month prior to his
 death. On September 24, Miguel Angel Martinez, a member of the
 construction workers' union, was killed, and then dumped by the
 side of the road at a busy San Salvador intersection.
 Numerous death threats were reported in 1991. In June Nora
 Garcia, the director of the Institute of Investigation,
 Training, and Development of Women (IMU), received telephoned
 death threats and was told to close the IMU training center by
 the firqt of July; the calls stopped and nothing further
 happened as the deadline passed. On July 6, unknown assailants
 ransacked and robbed the "Little Community" religious center.
 This incident, like the one on June 30, 1990, was preceded by
 threatening telephone calls which stopped after the break-in.
 A group calling itself the Salvadoran Anti-Communist Front
 (FAS) appeared in 1991 and issued written threats to a variety
 of groups beginning in May. A FAS communique demanded that
 businesses halt service to members of the United Nations, the
 
 
 595
 EL SALVADOR
 International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), and other
 humanitarian organizations which it claimed violated Salvadoran
 sovereignty. Later communiques were delivered to Lutheran
 Bishop Medardo Gomez, Christian Committee for Displaced People
 in El Salvador (CRIPDES) director Mirtala Lopez, two members of
 the Legislative Assembly, and other religious, union, and
 community organization leaders. Senior government officials
 denounced the threats, but government investigations have
 failed to determine who produced the communiques.
 The FMLN committed several political and other extrajudicial
 killings in 1991. On January 2, FMLN combatants shot down a
 U.S. military helicopter. Chief Warrant Officer Daniel Scott
 was killed in the crash, but Lieutenant Colonel David Pickett
 and Airman Ernest Dawson survived the crash and, according to
 eyewitness testimony, were brutally beaten and then murdered.
 The FMLN has refused to cooperate with either government or
 U.S. investigations. Other FMLN killings included the
 detention and subsequent execution on April 8 of ESAF member
 Guillermo Hernandez, the assassinations of two off-duty
 officers (Captain Carlos Alfredo Lopez and Captain Nestor Ariel
 Lam), the summary execution of Treasury Police member Serafino
 Orlando Merino on July 31, and the killing of a wounded
 sbldier, Emerson Vigil, by stopping his military ambulance and
 disconnecting his intravenous transfusion. Three members of
 the FMLN were convicted on May 2 of the 1985 Zona Rosa murders
 of 4 U.S. marines and 9 other persons, and sentenced to 25, 11,
 and 4 years in prison, respectively. On June 15, suspected
 FMLN member Adolfo Aguilar was ordered to trial for the 1989
 murders of conservative politicians Edgar Chacon and Gabriel
 Payes. On October 12, FMLN member Jorge Alberto Miranda was
 found guilty of the murder of Herbert Ernesto Anaya, the
 coordinator of the Non-Governmental Human Rights Commission
 (CDHES). Although Miranda confessed, neither the CDHES nor
 Anaya's widow believe he is guilty.
 b. Disappearance
 The Constitution forbids unacknowledged detention by the.
 security forces or the military. Nevertheless, the U.N.
 Special Rapporteur cited a figure of 87 disappearances in
 1991. ONUSAL stated that many claims of disappearance turned
 out tobe illegal detentions or military recruitment. Some of
 those reported as disappeared in 1990 have been found murdered,
 and in three cases ESAF or CDF personnel have been charged.
 San Cayetano Cooperative members Julio Cesar Juarez and Juan
 Antonio Juarez, reported as disappeared in 1990, were found
 murdered, and four CDF personnel have been charged. There was
 no further investigation in the 1990 disappearances and
 subsequent murders of Angel Maria and Julia del Carmen Ponce of
 the La Reforma Cooperative, nor of Nelson Chincilla.
 Kidnapings by the FMLN increased. Rancher Gregorio Zelaya of
 Usulutan was released after his family reportedly paid ransom,
 and ARENA ex-mayoral candidate Miguel Angel Vasquez and Justice
 of the Peace Manuel de Jesus Villegas were released on April
 23. The FMLN abducted navy Lieutenant Pedro Antonio Hernandez
 from a public bus and released him only after his family agreed
 to pay a ransom. Guillermo "Billy" Sol, businessman and ARENA
 treasurer, was kidnaped by unknown assailants on July 18.
 Despite charges by ARENA politicians, there is no evidence that
 he was taken by the FMLN.
 
 
 596
 EL SALVADOR
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 .Treatment or Punishment
 Although prohibited by the Constitution, torture and other
 abuse of detainees by the public security forces and the
 military continued in 1991. Reliable human rights monitors
 reported that detainees were threatened, deprived of food,
 water, and-sleep, subjected to prolonged interrogation while
 blindfolded, forced to stand for long periods of time, and
 beaten. There were also some credible charges of injection
 with unidentified drugs, near drownings, and electric shock.
 These abuses occur most often during the 72-hour period of
 administrative detention prior to the presentation of a
 prisoner before a judge. The U.N. Special Rapporteur noted
 that' nistreatment was more serious in the cases of detainees
 belonging to organizations suspected of being sympathetic to
 the FMLN. ESAF personnel have never been prosecuted for abuse
 of detainees or prisoners.
 During 1991*government forces frequently resorted to abusive
 tactics to intimidate noncombatants perceived as FMLN
 sympathizers. The U.N. Special Rapporteur again noted the use
 of intimidation andthreats by government forces against
 humanitarian, labor, rural, and repatriate organizations. On
 January 29, Patricia Garcia of the Committee of Mothers of
 Political Prisoners, Disappeared, and Assassinated of El
 Salvador (COMADRES) was arrested by the National Police. After
 her release due to lack of evidence on February 7, she claimed
 she had'been raped, threatened with other physical torture,
 forced to stand for long periods, and deprived of sleep.
 Amnesty International and the CDHES report that in January
 Ricardo Osmaro Escobar was arrested by the National Guard in
 Cabasnas, beaten and given electric shocks, and that Valentin
 Ramos-was arrested by soldiers of the Third Military Detachment
 in Morazan, beaten, and threatened with death. Both were
 released after about a week. ONUSAL reports visiting five
 young men in San Salvador, Santa Ana, and La Libertad
 Departments in August and September who had been badly beaten
 while in detention. On October 5, a 20-year-old woman was
 arrested and claimed she was taken to a military brigade
 barracks and raped repeatedly. Opposition leaders accused CDF
 units of abuse and harassment of their campaign workers. Both
 the'U.N. Special Rapporteur and the Inter-American Human
 Rights Commission"(IAHRC) stated that the ESAF has frequently
 committed abuses 'nd created obstacles that make it difficult
 for.repatriate communities to function. An ESAF operation
 against the FMLN in an area north of the Segundo Montes
 repatriate community in August resulted in a miscarriage by a
 female resident (see Section l.g.).
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Although prohibited by the Constitution, arbitrary arrest and
 detention continued in 1991. According to the Supreme Court's
 information office, 2,000 to 3,000 persons were arrested every
 month from January to August by the security forces. Nearly
 two-thirds of these detainees were not formally charged and
 were released before seeing a judge. The ESAF frequently takes
 advantage of the 72-hour administrative detention provision to
 arrest and sometimes abuse persons perceived to be sympathetic
 to the FMLN or otherwise opposed to the Government. Nearly 50
 percent of those detained on suspicion of subversive offenses
 were subsequently released and never formally charged.
 
 
 597
 EL SALVADOR
 However, the number of persons detained on this charge declined
 by more than 30 percent in 1991, with 766 detentions registered
 in 1990 as compared to 535 detentions in 1991. On June 15, 27
 people were arrested at Los Olivos farm in San Salvador
 Department and charged with "subversive associations"; 6 days
 later, a judge found no merit to the charges and ordered all 27
 released immediately.
 The Constitution requires that all persons detained by the
 security forces be turned over to the courts within 72 hours of
 arrest or be freed, but this requirement is frequently
 ignored. Although it is a crime for the public security forces
 or the military to hold a suspect longer than 72 hours,
 violators are never prosecuted. The ESAF also routinely fails
 to notify the courts that an arrest has been made. When a
 detainee is delivered to the court, the judge may order
 detention for an additional 72 hours to determine if the
 evidence warrants holding the accused for further
 investigation. This time limit is normally respected. The
 judge is then allowed 120 days to investigate serious crimes,
 or 45 days for lesser offenses, before bringing the accused to
 trial or dismissing the case. In practice, however, these time
 limits are only rarely observed. El Salvador does not allow
 for pretrial release in serious cases, and a suspect may spend
 years in jail before being tried. As a recourse against
 illegal detention, any accused person may request a review by
 an appeals court or the Supreme Court.
 The Constitution provides for the right to legal counsel for
 criminal suspects, but the ESAF seldom permits attorney access
 during the initial 72-hour period of detention and
 interrogation when the ESAF most often attempts to extract a
 confession or abuses detainees (see Section l.c.). In an
 attempt to improve respect for detainees' rights, the Supreme
 Court opened a Detainee Information Office in 1990. The Office
 is supposed to receive timely reports from the courts, the
 military, and the public security forces on arrests and the
 status of detainees. In practice, the courts routinely provide
 timely information on detainees under their jurisdiction, but
 according to the ONUSAL the Office receives no information from
 the Army and very little from the police in conflictive zones.
 There are no legal provisions for exile. As of year's end,
 FMLN leaders outside the country were subject to arrest for
 participation in guerrilla operations were they to return.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Legislative Assembly appoints the 14 magistrates of the
 Supreme Court for 5-year terms, and the Supreme Court in turn
 appoints all lower court judges. The court structure is
 divided into four levels: justices of the peace, courts of
 first instance, courts of second instance (appeals courts), and
 the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court hears appeals from
 appellate courts, decides writs of habeas corpus and
 constitutional questions, and settles disputes between the
 legislative and executive branches. Jury verdicts can be
 neither overruled by a judge nor appealed to a higher court.
 Sentences, however, may be appealed up to the Supreme Court.
 In theory, defendants have the right to the presumption of
 innocence; protection from self-incrimination; legal counsel;
 freedom from coercion; to be present in court; the opportunity
 
 
 598
 EL SALVADOR
 to-confront witnesses; and compensation for damages due to
 judicial error. In practice, almost all of these rights are
 restricted.
 Although nominally independent, the judiciary is severely
 weakened by political pressures. Political affiliation and
 family ties, rather than professional capabilities, are often
 the criteria used for appointing judges. Reappointment is
 based more on a judge's political loyalty than on integrity or
 professional qualifications. War has added to the pressures on
 judicial personnel, who have always been vulnerable to
 political influence, bribes, and threats. Judges are often
 unwilling to investigate or prosecute members of the armed
 forces or the FMLN. Death threats are also common in cases
 that involve organized crime.
 Civilian judicial authority has never extended to the military
 officer corps. Some low-ranking members of the military and
 police have been discharged and turned over to the civilian
 courts for trial on criminal charges, but ESAF officers have
 traditionally committed human rights abuses with impunity.
 Judges are frequently reluctant to bring charges against them,
 and military colleagues fail to cooperate in investigations of
 fellow officers. Although a colonel and a lieutenant were
 convicted of murder in the Jesuit case, the ESAF offered only
 limited cooperation with the judicial investigation; court
 transcripts indicate that high-ranking ESAF officers perjured
 themselves to sustain a coverup which may have been designed to
 protect the identities of other ESAF officers possibly involved
 in the crime.
 In 1991 the Legislative Assembly approved reform measures
 designed to depoliticize and strengthen the judiciary.
 Constitutional reform of the judicial system ratified on
 October 23 will extend the terms of Supreme Court magistrates
 to 9 years. The Court president will be newly chosen every 3
 years, to coincide with the term of the Assembly. The Assembly
 will also be required to select magistrates from a list
 developed by the National Judicial Council comprised of law
 school deans, Supreme Court magistrates, and Assembly
 appointees. The reforms will also establish a judicial career
 law, mandate pay increases, and create-a judicial training
 institute. However, it is still far from certain what impact
 these reforms will have on the judicial system. In September
 government authorities reported there were 127 political
 prisoners, of whom 125 are awaiting trial. As of September 6,
 COMADRES put the number of political prisoners at 99.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 According to the Constitution, before entering a private
 dwelling the security forces must have the resident's consent,
 a warrant, or a reasonable belief that a crime is being or is
 about to be committed. However, in practice, the ESAF often
 uses forced entry without a warrant to carry out arrests and
 investigations. The ESAF also frequently intercepts mail
 deliveries in war zones, and wiretapping-of telephone
 communications by the Government, the FMLN, private persons,
 and political parties, while illegal, is widespread. The
 military draft is applied arbitrarily, and recruits are
 forcibly taken off of streets and buses; the sons of the
 
 
 599
 EL SALVADOR
 wealthy or the well-connected are almost never required to
 serve in the military forces.
 The guerrillas arbitrarily interfere with the lives of
 inhabitants in war zones by, among other things, intercepting
 mail and requiring villagers to attend indoctrination
 sessions. They engage in forced recruitment to fill their
 ranks or to obtain laborers and porters, often coercing young
 children to accompany combatants, or even to engage in combat.
 Committees tied to the FMLN exercise a high degree of
 influence, often through intimidation, over the residents of
 repatriate communities.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian
 Law in Internal Conflicts
 As the battle for territory in the countryside intensified
 during peace negotiations, human rights monitors condemned both
 the ESAF and the FMLN for repeatedly endangering the safety of
 civilians.
 On April 8 in Jucuaran, Usulutan, an air force bomb landed in a
 civilian area, killing.Maria Dominga Coreas and her son, Jose
 Nelson Coreas. The Air Force accepted responsibility for the
 deaths and paid compensation tothe family. On September 2, 9
 month-old Mayra Norelvis Salazar was killed during a military
 operation in the area of San Jose Las Flores, Chalatenango;
 ONUSAL suggested the ESAF may have been responsible, although
 it also noted the earlier presence of FMLN combatants in the'
 area. Dora Alicia Gonzalez was injured and suffered a
 miscarriage when, according to ONUSAL, the ESAF used excessive
 force in reacting to civilians carrying rocks and machetes in
 or near the Segundo Montes repatriate community.
 The FMLN continued to put civilians at risk during offensive
 operations. One civilian was killed when the guerrillas     -
 attacked the ESAF High Command in San Salvador on February 17.
 On February 26, when the FMLN attacked the San Salvador suburb
 of Escalon and fired on the President's residence, one civilian
 was killed. On April 8, a 14-year-old boy, Edwin Alvarado, was
 killed, 10 civilians were wounded, and 3 schools were damaged
 when the FMLN attacked the National Police, the CDF, and the
 telephone company in Quetzaltepeque. The FMLN also killed
 civilians during an attack on*May'22 ort the First Brigade, an
 attack on July 22 on the town of Guazapa, and an attack on
 October 8 on Apastepeue. FMLN use of unmarked,
 indiscriminately placed mines and booby traps also caused
 deaths and maiming of civilians,'but the use of these mines
 appeared to be declining: 23 civilians were killed in the
 first 5 months of 1990 and 4 in the first 5 months of 1991.
 The ESAF has confiscated food and medical supplies from
 humanitarian organizations intended for villages (including
 repatriate communities) in areas of combat or heavy guerrilla
 presence. The IAHRC reported that the ESAF subjects civilians
 living in war zones to arbitrary searches, harassment, and
 threats. A March report by the International Commission on
 Medical Neutrality and a June report by the CDHES assert that
 other humanitarian workers confront similar problems.
 The FMLN often uses threats against officials in conflict zones
 to weaken the Government's influence there. In May and June,
 the FMLN threatened mayors and judges in Usulutan and city
 
 
 600
 EL SALVADOR
 council members in Morazan. After FMLN threats to the city
 council in Guatijagua in June, 10 members resigned. FMLN
 threats kept eight Chalatenango mayors from moving their
 offices from Chalatenango City back to their respective
 localities. In August the FMLN kidnaped four government
 employees in La Union and threatened to kill them if they
 continued their development-projects. FMLN death-threats
 against judicial and other governmental authorities in conflict
 zones impeded human rights and other investigations.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 El Salvador has 5 daily newspapers, 6 television stations, over
 50 radio stations and 2 cable television systems. The
 Government operates-one television station and one radio
 station. Both the Catholic Church and the ESAF operate radio
 stations; the FMLN broadcasts from two clandestine stations.
 Print and broadcast journalists, from all points on the
 political spectrum, regularly criticize the Government and
 report opposition (including FMLN) views.
 Freedom of expression is provided for by the Constitution, but
 sometimes it is inhibited by violence and threats of violence.
 Diario Latino, a leftist newspaper run by its workers, suffered
 substantial damage during an arson-caused fire on February 9.
 Although the-perpetrators had not been located by year's end,
 speculation regarding their identity ranged from the extreme
 right to an inside plot.
 Academic freedom is provided for by the Constitution and was
 generally respected by the Government during 1991. University
 autonomy prohibits law enforcement officials from entering
 campuses. The Government continues to express its concern,
 supported by credible reports, that the University of El
 Salvador campus is used by the FMLN as a safe haven for urban
 guerrilla operations.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Any association not formed for criminal purposes is legal and
 permitted in El Salvador. Numerous political, professional,
 religious, labor, and social organizations, including some
 allied with the FMLN, operate without legal restriction.
 However, in practice, members of certain labor, humanitarian,
 and peasant organizations were harassed by security forces (see
 Sections I.c. and l.g.).
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is provided for in the Constitution and is
 respected in practice. However, the political activity of some
 religious groups has led to incidents of intimidation of
 certain members of these groups. Roman Catholicism is El
 Salvador's dominant and official religion, but a growing sector
 of the population (estimated at over 20 percent) now practices
 other faiths, mostly Protestant and Evangelical.
 
 
 601
 EL SALVADOR
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Constitution establishes the right of free movement.
 Article 97 states that foreigners may not involve themselves in
 the internal political affairs of the country, and the
 Government occasionally denies entry or deports foreigners
 believed.to violate that section of the law. Local military
 commanders require that foreigners (except accredited
 journalists) apply for permission to enter war zones and often
 restrict entry when military operations are under way. Travel
 by Salvadorans within El Salvador is occasionally restricted
 for similar reasons. While there are no other limits on
 freedom of movement in the rest of.the country, those'W ithout
 proper identification documents are subject tb arrest.  By
 September about 38,000 displaced persons .inEl Salvador still
 required government assistance.
 Since the.first massive repatriation in late 1987;
 approximately 26,900 Salvadorans have repatriated from
 Honduras, Nicaragua, and Panama. Documentation is the most
 pressing issue for all repatriate communities;'despite efforts
 by the Government and the U.N. High-Commissioner for Refuqees
 (UNHCR), 80 percent of repatriates remain. undocumented.
 The Government uses accepted U.N. standards to. determine the
 status of refugees and asylum seekers. The Government imposes
 no controls on emigration and cooperates with international
 organizations that arrange Salvadoran emigration to other
 countries.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights:, The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Citizens have the right to change their Government through
 secret ballot elections, which occur every 3 years for
 legislators and local officials and every 5 years for the
 president-and. vice-president. In the March legislative-and
 municipal elections,, the rulingARENA party lost its absolute
 majority in the Legislative Assembly bywinning only 39 of  4"
 seats, and a coalition of leftist parties, after .ending its -
 electoral boycott in 1989, won 8 seats and came in second in
 total votes-in the capital. The far-left Nationalist
 Democratic Union joined the political process in.1991 and now
 holds one seat.in the Assembly., Leaders of the armed FMLN
 insurgency have also announced their intention to dismantle
 their military structure under U.N. supervision and field
 candidates in 1994, when elections for all levels of office,
 from president to town council, will coincide.
 A Salvadoran's desire to support a certain political party or
 participate in political activity is not always respected (see
 Section l.c.). Also in 1991, a grenade-exploded'in front of a
 Democratic Convergence office (no injuries), a caravan of ARENA
 activists fired upon UDN supporters (a UDN candidate lost an
 eye), and residents of the Segundo Montes Repatriate community
 violently prevented the moderate Authentic Christian Movement
 from campaigning in norther Morazan.
 
 
 602
 EL SALVADOR
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Domestic human rights organizations active in El Salvador
 include the governmental Human Rights Commission (CDH), the
 Catholic Church's Tutela Legal and the nongovernmental CDHES.
 The CDH compiles information regarding detainees and the
 condition of those released from custody. Human rights
 constitutional reforms ratified unanimously on September 11
 created the position of Human Rights Ombudsman. Although the
 secondary laws that will define the exact role and powers of
 the Ombudsman had not been formulated by year's end, the broad
 mandate of this new office likely will transform or encompass
 the CDH. Tutela Legal, the human rights offide of the
 Archdiocese of San Salvador, conducts its own investigations,
 reporting its findings to government and church authorities.
 The nongovernmental CDHES interviews victims and other
 witnesses and conducts investigations; the CDHES focuses
 primarily on abuses by the Government. The Lutheran Church,
 many labor unions, universities, and other nongovernmental
 organizations also have human rights offices. The CDH, the
 Lutheran DDH, the ICRC, and Catholic clergy give regularly
 scheduled courses on human rights for police, military, and
 civil defense personnel.
 ONUSAL inaugurated its principal office in San Salvador on July
 26. ONUSAL is investigating human rights violations,
 conducting an educational and public awareness campaign
 promoting human rights, and will make recommendations to the
 Government and the FMLN as well as report directly to the U.N.
 Secretary General. The ICRC assists noncombatants in war
 zones, visits prisoners and detainees accused of guerrilla
 activity, and makes confidential reports to the Government on
 human rights issues. The U.N. Special Rapporteur on human
 rights in El Salvador made his 11th annual visit to the country
 in September. High-ranking government officials and military
 officers met regularly during 1991 with legislators from
 different countries and with members of human rights
 organizations, church and labor groups, and others with an
 interest in human rights matters.
 There were some threats against human rights monitors in 1991.
 Threatening letters were sent by the FAS to Mirtala Lopez of
 CRIPDES; there were also FAS threats against ONUSAL. The
 nongovermental CDHES reported the following incidents: on the
 night of September 4, ex-CDHES member Zuleyma Argueta was
 arrested by men in civilian clothes, taken to a National Police
 post, and questioned about CDHES activities; on September 5,
 the house of CDHES education specialist Azucena Mejia was
 illegally searched by uniformed National Police officers; on
 December 19, while filming alleged violations during a land
 seizure in Santa Ana, CDHES delegate Miguel Montenegro was
 arrested and released within an hour.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Article 3"of the Constitution states that all people are equal
 before the law and prohibits discrimination based on
 nationality, race, sex, or religion. El Salvador is an
 ethnically homogeneous country. - The Government does not permit
 or condone discrimination in housing, jobs, or education
 against the country's small minority groups.
 
 
 603
 SALVADOR
 Under the Constitution women enjoy the same legal rights as men
 but still suffer discrimination. Salaries for women are
 generally lower than those for men, and women are
 disproportionally represented in low-pay and low-status jobs in
 the informal sector. Wages paid to professional women remain
 lower than those paid to men in the same profession, and women
 with lower levels of education working in nonprofessional jobs
 are paid considerably less than men. In fact, most are not
 even paid the legislated minimum wage. Training geared to
 females tends to focus on areas where they are already
 economically active and in generally low-income occupations:
 teaching, nursing, home industries or micro-enterprises, home
 economics, and gardening. Training in such traditionally
 male-dominated areas as computer sciences, engineering,
 agricultural economics, agricultural sciences, and business
 administration still tends to be reserved for males. This
 perception of traditional male/female roles discourages females
 from moving into high-growth, higher paying occupations. In
 addition, women do not have equal access to economic resources
 such as credit and land.
 Violence against women, including domestic violence, is
 widespread, but the lack of reliable statistics countrywide
 makes it impossible to gauge its true extent. Statistics in
 San Miguel, the third largest city, show that there were 400
 rape cases from January to July and that the majority of the
 victims were minors. Rape and domestic violence cases are
 rarely prosecuted as judges often dismiss the charges, blaming'
 the victim for provoking the crime. A judge in a September
 rape case ruled that a woman cannot deny conjugal privileges to
 her husband. Prosecution of rape cases is difficult because of
 lack of support groups for victims, lack of forensic
 capability, and cultural attitudes. However, some efforts were
 undertaken to encourage rape victims to come forward and press
 charges. Since August a public prosecutor has been on duty 24
 hours a day at the San Salvador children's hospital to assist
 rape victims and their families .in taking legal action. The
 National Secretariat of the Family, headed by the wife of the
 President, Margarita Cristiani, has organized conferences on
 the prevention of domestic violence and child abuse.
 Women's rights groups are active in El Salvador. There are
 nearly 100 women's organizations to assist low-income women.
 Major concerns for women's rights groups are equal rights,
 unemployment, access to credit and skills training, illiteracy,
 health services, family planning, child care, and violence
 against women.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The 1983 Constitution prohibits the Government from using
 nationality, sex, race, creed, or political philosophy to
 prevent workers or employers from organizing themselves into
 unions or associations. This provision was intended to provide
 the legal framework for secondary legislation, including a
 revised Labor Code. However, a confusing and sometimes
 conflicting set of laws governing labor relations remains in
 place. While existing statutes provide protections that are
 enforceable under the Constitution, their inconsistencies often
 result in cumbersome procedures and significant delays. The
 National Union of Salvadoran Workers and Peasants (UNOC)
 
 
 604
 EL SALVADOR
 charged in October that the Cristiani Government had not
 granted legal recognition to a single union since it has been
 in power. On August 16, the Intergremial, an umbrella group
 which includes El Salvador's largest labor organizations,
 presented a draft labor code to the Legislative Assembly, to
 which eight labor leaders were elected in 1991, and also to the
 political parties. The proposed legislation was prepared by
 the UNOC, El Salvador's largest labor group, and both the
 Government and the private sector are reportedly studying the
 UNOC draft in order to negotiate final legislation.
 Legally, only private sector nonagricultural workers have the
 right to form unions and to strike, while employees of the nine
 autonomous public institutions may form unions but not strike.
 The 6xisting Labor Code requires that disputes go through
 direct bargaining, conciliation, and arbitration before a
 strike may be called. In practice since both labor and
 management often ignore the onerous and time-consuming legal
 requirements, most strikes are technically illegal. The
 absence of specific laws granting public employees the right to
 strike has not deterred such strike activity. The most
 important strikes in 1991 were organized by public employee
 associations and by a coordinating group of government
 employees called UNASTEMA. Work stoppages were called by
 teachers and employees of the Education Ministry, municipal
 workers in San Salvador and other cities, employees at the
 Treasury and Public Works Ministries, and the state-owned
 telephone company. All of these public employee strikes were
 eventually resolved through negotiations between labor and the
 Government.
 There are approximately 150 currently active trade unions,
 employee associations, and peasant organizations, with a
 combined membership of just over 400,000, roughly 15 percent of
 the work force. The UNOC, claiming some 200,000 members,
 remains by far the country's largest labor organization. These
 organizations freely elect their officers in accordance with
 their constitutions and bylawis. Leaders of worker
 organizations appear frequently on television, publish their
 views in major newspapers, and conduct seminars without
 government interference. There are no restrictions on
 affiliation with international organizations, and unions freely
 affiliate with such international labor organizations.
 Incidents of harassment and violence against union and
 cooperative members continued in 1991. According to the
 ONUSAL, on September 24, construction union member Miguel Angel
 Martinez was found murdered in San Salvador. The construction
 union leaders had previously been threatened by the FAS. The
 U.N. Special Rapporteur noted the r~pression of strikes and
 demonstrations by the ESAF.
 An International Labor Organization committee extensively
 examined two freedom of association complaints against El
 Salvador in 1991. Among other issues, it deplored the large
 number of violent deaths and disappearances in the recent past,
 failure to comply with legal prescriptions concerning arrests
 and detentions, the use of force to break strikes and the
 dismissal of unionists for participating in strikes, and
 antiunion discrimination.
 
 
 605
 EL SALVADOR
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The right of collective bargaining is granted in both the
 Constitution and the Labor Code. Under the Labor Code, only
 private sector workers may exercise this right, but the
 Constitution is interpreted broadly to provide all workers the
 right to bargain collectively. Private sector unions use the
 mechanism of collective bargaining extensively, and a similar
 collective bargaining practice is also followed, although more
 informally, between public employee associations and the
 Government. However, collective bargaining agreements signed
 by public employee associations are not enforceable under the
 Labor Code.
 The Director General's office of the Ministry of Labor is
 responsible for overseeing the implementation of collective
 bargaining agreements and acting as conciliator in
 labor-related disputes in the private sector and autonomous
 government institutions. The Ministry of Labor is also
 frequently asked to conciliate labor disputes involving public
 employee associations, although these associations are not
 technically covered by the Labor Code. The Ministry
 successfully conciliated 126 disputes'in which workers alleged
 violations of contracts or the Labor Code by management.
 The relationship between the business community and the labor
 movement remains strained, and business leaders continue to
 take measures to prevent unions from being formed. Union
 'leaders have also complained about lengthy and complex
 procedures required to register new unions. An outdated Labor
 Code, inadequate enforcement authority, and corruption remain
 obstacles to fully protecting the right to organize.
 The Constitution provides that union officials at the time of
 their election, throughout their term, and for I year following
 their term shall not be fired, suspended for disciplinary
 reasons, removed, or debased in their work conditions except
 for legal cause. This provision is generally observed in
 practice.
 El Salvador has one export processing zone. There are no
 differences between labor regulations in this zone and those
 which prevail elsewhere. However, there are no labor unions
 represented in any of the firms in the zone, and the firms
 discourage labor organizing.
 a. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 The Constitution prohibits forced or compulsory labor except in
 cases of public calamity and other instances specified by law.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The Constitution prohibits the employment of children under the
 age of 14. The Labor Code states that exceptions may be made
 only in cases where it can be demonstrated that such employment
 is absolutely indispensable to the sustenance of the minor and
 his family. This is most often the case with children of
 peasant families who traditionally work with their families
 during planting and harvesting seasons. The Constitution also
 prohibits the employment of persons under 18 years of age and
 all women in occupations considered hazardous. Inspections by
 the Ministry of Labor are insufficient to fully enforce the law.
 
 
 66
 EL SALVADOR
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The Government's National Minimum Wage Council recommends
 increases in the minimum wages for commercial, industrial,
 service, and agroindustrial employees. For the most part,
 minimum wages are inadequate to meet the Ministry of Economy's
 standard of basic necessity, and an estimated 40 percent of the
 population lives below the poverty level.
 The law limits the workday to 6 hours for minors between 14 and
 18 years of age and 8 hours for adults. Premium pay is
 mandated for longer hours. The average workweek is 44 hours.
 The Constitution and the Labor Code require employers,
 including the Government, to take steps to ensure that
 employees are not placed at risk in their workplaces. Despite
 extremely limited budgetary resources, the Ministry of Labor
 attempts to enforce the applicable regulations. According to
 Ministry figures, its Office of the Inspector General conducted
 approximately 58,000 worksite inspections between June 1990 and
 July 1991. The Inspector General's corps cited employers for
 numerous infractions and assessed fines. Salvadoran health and
 safety regulations are outdated, however, and inadequate
 enforcement remains a problem.
 
 
 67
