EL SALVADOR
This year, as in every year for whidi the Reagan Administration has been responsible for the Country Reports, the report on El Salvador is poor. While it is not surprising that the Reagan Administration's last report on El Salvador was flawed by the same dubious reporting tactics that characterized previous reports, it is nonetheless disappointing. Reports on most countries have improved considerably over the course of the last eight years as the State Department made a conscious effort to respond to criticisms from human rights groups. In the case of El Salvador, however, the Administration's approach has made its reporting nearly useless in evaluating human rights in that country. The 1988 report attacks the credibility of human rights groups, casts aspersions on the \ictims of government abuse, omits significant facts, misstates other facts, and at times attempts to cover up or excuse the Salvadoran government's appalling human rights record.
We have sometimes criticized the Reagan Administration for failing to implement a hiunan rights poli<^ appropriate to the human rights problems accurately described in various country reports. Yet in the case of El Salvador, the State Department's dogged insistence on issuing a country report which is inaccurate and politicized is entirely consistent with U.S. policy. Fortunately, public condemnation of human rights abuses in El Salvador from Vice President Quayle early in President Bush's term allows us to hope that this may be the last country report of this poor quality.
The State Department approaches candor m the introduction with respect to past abuses by acknowledging:
Up to 1983 members of the security forces acquiesced in the operations of several formal paramilitary groups operating as rightwing death squads. Some of the paramilitary groups are believed to have had members belonging at the same time to the police or military. Although statistics are imreliable, there
51
Critique
are credible estimates that these groups summarily executed thousands of persons during the 1980-1983 period.
While this statement understates the death-squad violence of the early 1980's, it is nonetheless considerably more candid than State Department reporting at the time. In its 1981 country report, for example, the State Department acknowledged 6,116 violent deaths, but refused to assign blame, noting that "in only a small percentage of political murders is it possible to determine who or which group bears responsibility." The most it would say about military complicity in right-wing death squads was the mild comment that "sometimes members of the offidal and local security forces, acting against standing regulations, are associated with these acts."
In a similar vein, the 1982 report complained that "it is difficult to establish... whether the Government bears full responsibility for the crimes of certain rightist elements, and the members of the security forces assodated with them...." The 1982 report went even so far as to announce:
In 1982, the organized death squads of the far right virtually disappeared from the pubUc scene. The most prominent of the death squads, the Maximiliano Hernández Martínez Brigade, made only two public statements in 1982, both denying connection vñth other groups linked to extreme rightist violence. While such squads may continue to exist, their program of sowing public terror though violent elimination of suspected subversives appears to have subsided.
The statements in the 1988 report about death-squad activity in El Salvador today are comparable in quality to the misleading reports of the early 1980s. The 1988 report notes, for example, that reports of a death-squad revival "have not been substantiated." In our view, a rise in death-squad killings has been amply substantiated. President José Napoleón Duarte's 1988 State of the Union address spoke of the "extremist death squads that seem to be coming back to life"; the Archbishop of San Salvador condemned the return of the death squads on national television on January 3,1988; and The Washington Post, The Miami Herald and other major U.S. newspapers released comprehensive news stories on the resurgence of death-squad activity in 1988, including testimony
52
El Salvador
from former death squad members describing the reorganization of the squads and their relationship to the ARENA party.
The report introduces its discussion of poUtical killing by hailing substantial improvement in the security forces' human rights record, and by claiming that although estimates of political killings t^ human rights groups were higher than those of the Embassy, they "are nevertheless consistent with a significant downward trend since the early 1^'s." This is false. All leading independent human rights groups, including Amnesty International, Americas Watch, the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights and the human rights office of the Archdiocese of San Salvador (Tutela Legal), reported that political killings were higher in 1988 than in 1987. The surge in political killings in 1988 was also widely reported in the U.S. press. Tutela Legal attributed 92 killings to government forces in 1988 (up 28% from last year), 60 to death squads (up 150% from last year) and 31 to the Farabundo Marti Front for National Liberation (FMLN) (up 42% from last year.)
The State Department cites Tutela Legal's figures but attempts to diminish their sig^iificance by noting that Tutela Legal "has acknowledged that in many cases the motivations for and perpetrators of killings cannot easily be determined" It is worth noting in this context that Tutela Legal does not assign blame for killings arbUrarily. In addition to cases in which responsibility for abuses is assigned to specific groups. Tutela Legal compiles information on "spedal cases" in which it is not known whether the perpetrators were guerrillas, soldiers, death squads or others. Accordingly, these cases do not appear in Tutela Legal's charts of deaths attributed to particular parties. Tutela Legal does attribute to death squads those crimes that have the characteristics of death squad operations,* even when it may be impossible to know which death squad, or which branch of the military or police, is responsible. That methodology is appropriate since the purpose of operating as a death-squad is to make attribution difficult.
For example, deaUi squads often dump bodies - frequeotty stripped of identificatioii documents - in a different location fiYMn where the abduction or killing took place, and death-squad victims often bear signs of torture.
53
Critique
For its part, the State Department relies for its statistics on newspaper coverage, "guerrilla media" and other pubUcly available sources, and comes up with a figure of 185 killings of noncombatants in the fu-st ten months of 1988. Of these, the State Department attributes 114 to the FMLN, 34 to deaths as a result of combat, 18 to unknown authors, and 14 to members of the armed forces. (There is no explanation why these numbers add up to 180, not 185.) An additional 42 are said to have died from mines laid by the guerrillas. No killings are attributed to death squads.
The ñgure of 14 deaths by uniformed members of the armed forces for the first ten months of 1988 seems to have been picked from thin air. The report appears to acknowledge that the Army killed eight civilians and "two guerrillas"* in San Vicente in September, two men and a boy at Puerta del Diablo in February, and two men whose tortured bodies were found in El Tablón, Morazán in February (a third man captured with them remains disappeared). These killings alone add up to 15. In addition, the report appears to acknowledge the killing by the municipal police of a Christian Democrat (PDC) official in Soyapango in December.**
The report omits altogether other well documented cases, which, if they had been considered, would have placed the total number of government ^ictims much higher than 14. For example, in April 1988, three sand diggers from the Soyapango slum near San Salvador were found shot dead a week after
In fact, all ten of the victims have been identified as civilians from the village of San Francisco.
We say "appears to acknowledge" because even in these extremely well documented cases (in which eyewitnesses and the international press clearfy attributed the killings to the government) the State Department cannot bring itself to apportion responsibility unequivocally in its own words. In the case of the ten civilians murdered by government soldiers In San Vicente, for example, the report notes blandly that 'local residents contradicted the military's version" and "initial evidence from a court investigation and an exhumati<Hi casts doubt on the militaiy's version."
54
El Salvador
having been picked up by Air Force soldiers*; and in November 1988, three civilians were killed by the Army in Piedra Luna, Morazán.
In those few cases which it does describe, the report tends to be weak on details or politically biased. In the case of the murder of Judge Jorge Serrano, the authors attempt to shift the blame from right-wing death squads and their cohorts among the Salvadoran officer corps to the guerrillas. Judge Serrano, as the report notes, was presiding over several important cases. One was the prosecution of three FMLN guerrillas for the murder of four U.S. marines, and the other a kidnapping-for-profit ring run by, among others, "four active and former military officers." The report states that "Serrano's assassination is generally thought to be tied to one of these cases...." It would have been more correct if the report had noted that it is very likely that the judge was murdered because of his prosecution of the kidnapping ring. In that case, three witnesses in the case had been killed (two while in police custody) and another judge handling an aspect had her home machine-gunned. In neglecting to mention this other violence in the kidnapping case, the report omits important evidence tending to clarify which of Judge Serrano's two sensitive cases led to his murder.
The report's description of the murder of a PDC elections registrar in Soyapango in December 1988 is also unsatisfactory. As in the other cases of killings by the military or police, the State Department simply cannot bring itself to condemn the Salvadoran authorities unequivocally. The report notes only: A PDC official...was killed in a December 12 altercation with municipal police. Some ^tnesses asserted that the incident was politically motivated, but details remained sketchy at year's end.
The Washinffon Post found the details much less "sketchy"; on December 13, Post correspondent Douglas Farah reported the following:
The four witnesses [leaders of the Christian Democrat Party], visibly shaken and their clothes splattered with blood, gave similar accounts when speaking to reporters last night. They
* Monsignor Rosa Chávez denounced this case in an Paril 24 homily, stating that "aU the facts that the Archdiocese has received point in the same direction; the captors appear to be members of the Armed Forces.
55
Critique
said the registry group was followed by the mayor, Antonio Vasquez Corena, his bodyguards and Municipal PoUce, in-clud^g the local commander, in two vehicles with darkened windows. They stopped us by the Shell gas station and tried to take me with them," said Rufino Landaverde, 29, also a Christian Democrat. "They would not properly identify themselves, and when they began hitting me, BoniUa Campos [the victim] tried to stop them, asking what we had done wrong. They were armed, and the mayor had a pistol. One of the police put an M16 up against his ribs, next to his heart, and shot... He fell in that moment, and was dead when we got him to the hospital."
Although the report is extremely limited in its coverage of killings by the military, it is nonetheless an improvement over the State Department's 1987 report. The 1987 report included less detail and fewer cases than the 1988 report, and was even milder in tone. We welcome small improvements, such as this year's acknowledgment that "[t]here were credible allegations that the military was xmcooperative in, and in some cases hindered, investigations of reported military abuses of human rights". This statement contrasts with last year's report, which lauded the government's judicial "reform" efforts and said not a word about the military's frequent obstruction of justice.
Unfortunately, this candor is offset by the remark that "not all commanders who have been presented with such charges [of torturing prisoners] have taken action against the offenders." We are unaware of even a single instance in which an officer took action against a subordinate for practicing torture, much less in which an officer himself was disciplined for ordering or allowing such abuse.
Last year we commended the State Department's improved coverage of disappearances. This year, unfortxmately, coverage of one of the most significant and well-documented disappearances in 1988 is flawed by the State Department's speculation on the victim's links to the guerrillas. Eliseo Córdova Aguilar, who disappeared following detention by the Treasury Police in July, is identified in the report as "an executive of a pro-FMLN labor union." There is no basis for suggesting the disappeared man supported the guerrillas, and, indeed, such a comment might well be his death sentence if he is still alive, since
56
El Salvador
it implies that his disappearance is warranted by his purported pro-guerrilla activities.
The report's discussion of El Salvador's judicial system contains one particularly egre^ous flaw. The report states that the October 1987 amnesty "was decreed in accordance with the Government's international obligations under the October 1987 Esquipulas agreement." This characterization of El Salvador's obligations under the Esquipulas agreement — which was signed in August 1987, not October — is false. The Salvadoran amnesty exculpated a significant number of military personnel, death-squad members and guerrillas, despite their involvement in murder, disappearances, torture and other gross abuses. The Esquipulas agreement in no way required such a broad amnesty for military and guerrilla abuses against civilians. Indeed, such a broad interpretation contradicts the spirit of the requirement in the Esquipulas agreement that governments respect human rights, and violates the duty of governments under international law to prosecute gross human rights offenders. Both the 1987 and 1988 State Department reports fail to indicate the grave setback for civilian authority over the military and for the protection of human rights which the Salvadoran amnesty represents.
The report's treatment of freedom of movement in and out of El Salvador is negligent. The report correctly notes that the return to El Salvador of several thousand refugees from Honduras was a significant act of compliance with Esquipulas II, which calls for governments to take urgent action to address the situation of refugees and displaced people. But the report fails to note that refugees returning to El Salvador are often considered guerrillas by the Salvadoran military and treated accordingly. Contrary to the report's assertion that "there is no evidence of a Government policy of harassment of individuals returning to El Salvador from abroad," Americas Watch and numerous church and humanitarian organizations have documented extensive repression of retiu-ned refugees and internally displaced persons. Several returnees in the repatriation sites in Chalatenango, Cabañas and Cuscatlán have been beaten, disappeared or killed, as have displaced Salvadorans who have repopulated areas of conflict. Many others have been arrested and held in military barracks for longer than the constitutional limit of 72 hoiu-s. In addition, the military has
57
Critique
repeatedly blocked deliveries of food and supplies to these communities and has relentlessly harassed the humanitarian organizations seeking to help these Salvadorans rebuild their lives.
There were numerous actions against foreign humanitarian workers in 1988 which should have been mentioned in the report. For example, on January 8,1988, Colonel Juan Orlando Zepeda« then-head of intelligence for the Armed Forces High Command, wrote to the highest officials of the Catholic and Lutheran churches in El Salvador asking that they "impede" the visits of foreign rel^ous workers to conflictive areas because they may "associate with terrorist deliquents of the FMLN which use the civilian population as a cover and as a source of logistical supply or recruitment." Between December 1987 and early June 1988, at least 44 foreign workers were temporarily detained by the military. Many have been threatened for working in repopulated towns, and one was beaten. Moreover, the Government has become increasingly aggressive about expelling foreigners from the coimtry or denying permission for foreign nationals to visit El Salvador. On August 9, for example, 15 Spanish citizens visiting El Salvador were arrested by military patrols, detained overnight by the Treasury Police (which, they say, subjected them to ph)^ical mistreatment and psycholo^cal pressure), and expelled from the coxmtry. Eleven foreigners (including European, U.S. and Japanese citizens) were arrested during a march by students and workers of the National University on September 14 and expelled from the country.
The State Department's characterization of Tutela Legal in the report's discussion of the government's attitude toward human rights organizations is wholly objectionable. In the past, we have condemned the State Department's criticism of Tutela Legal because it was not based on a disagreement over the facts, but, rather, on a misunderstanding of the organization's methodology. This year the report goes even further, accusing Tutela Legal of "seldom using its findings to assist government authorities in prosecuting human rights offenders...." This statement is inappropriate for a number of reasons. First, it suggests that Tutela Legal is hostile to government efforts to prosecute human rights violators and is impeding justice in El Salvador. This is false. Tutela Legal provides legal assistance to the families of victims and to the vic-
58
El Salvador
tims themselves and encourages them to present their cases to the proper court. If it were not for these efforts, many human rights cases would never be presented, because the witnesses and victims have no confidence m the judicial system and are afraid of retaliation mthout the backing of the Archdiocese's human rights office. Second, the implication that the church's human rights office is in part responsible for the government's failure to prosecute human rights violators is di^aceful. The Salvadoran government bears full responsibility for its failure to prcHect its citizenry from abuses by members of the Armed Forces or to bring to justice those responsible for tens of thousands of killings and disappearances. Finally, the statement completely ignores the great danger faced by those Salvadorans who attempt to seek redress of abuses in the courts. Lawyers, witnesses and relatives of victims have been threatened, jailed and even killed as a result of protesting or attempting to prosecute abuses by the Armed Forces.
The report's coverage of labor rights in El Salvador is more extensive than last year's report, although, like most of the report, it is flawed by the State Department's political biases and efforts to minimize government abuses. The assertion that the right to strike in the private sector is freely exercised is simply false. The Salvadoran Labor Code is replete with restrictions on the right to strike, and contains labyrinthian procedures that must be followed for strikes to gain legal recognition. Legal strikes are thus very rare. We particularly object to the report's assertion that "FMLN-linked labor organizations seek to use ostensibly peaceful dissent to provoke government actions, then level charges of workers' rights violations when the Government maintains order." While it is true that some unionists (along \wth others) have engaged in vandalism during anti-govemment demonstrations, this by no means justifies the regular suppression of legitimate strikes, negotiations and work-stoppages by the military and the police. There were many such occasions in 1988 which should have been mentioned in the report, including the mihtary's interference in the Public Works Ministry (ATMOP) workers* strike m October (in which eight ATMOP leaders were jailed and abused by soldiers in an effort to break the strike, and dozens of unionists were interrogated and harassed by soldiers occupying worksites); military harassment of ANTMAG (workers of the Ministry of
59
Critique
Agriculture and Livestock) in December, just after a series of successful actions by ANTMAG to obtain back salary and bonuses; and military mtervention in an ATCEL (Electrical Workers) strike in June, when soldiers beat and injured unionists attempting to support the union's strike in a solidarity march.
The report also ignores gross abuses against several imionists and members of peasant associations, including the detention and disappearance of five members of the National Association of Farmworkers in October, and the jailing and torture of Fredy Torres, Secretary of Culture of the Social Security employees union (STISSS). Nor does the report mention that leftist unionists were denounced and threatened by a newly formed death squad in December, that a child care facility owned by the union federation FENASTRAS was raided by Treasury Police (and four people arrested) in September, or that the military raided the headquarters of the UNTS labor federation in September.
60
