EL SALVADOR
Continuing a several-year trend, the State Department's 1991 report on El Salvador is vastly improved over those issued in the 1980s, when reports on Central America were a useful indicator of U.S. policy in the isthmus, not of the human rights reality. Employing for the most part neutral language, the State Department now indicates that serious problems persist and in several instances places blame with the Armed Forces of El Salvador (ESAF). Gone is most of the apologia that characterized previous years. The second paragraph, for example, acknowledges that "military and police forces have been responsible for significant human rights abuses in previous years and in 1991." While the 1990 report complained that "elements of the military continue to resist a full investigation of the Jesuit case," this year's account charges that the "high command" and "military authorities" offered "only limited cooperation," fabricated and destroyed evidence and perjured themselves.
While an improvement, the report is flawed in two general respects. First, current U.S. policy hangs on the legitimacy of the ARENA government. The report describes El Salvador as a "constitutional democracy" and U.S. officials regularly assert that the Armed Forces answer to civilian authority and to President Alfredo Cristiani as commander-in-chief. While assigning blame to the military for human rights violations, the report does not take the next logical step by pointing out the failure of civilian authorities to identify those responsible and hold them accountable. Only the justice system is singled out for blame.
Second, while many key cases are mentioned, they are described in such a cursory or bland fashion that their context and meaning get lost. Some landmark cases are omitted altogether. While the information included in the report is by and large correct, the uninitiated reader is still not provided with an accurate portrayal of the country's human rights situation. While the country moved steadily toward the peace accord at year's end, violations in all categories continued, despite the arrival of a United Nations monitoring team (ONUSAL) in July. The third ONUSAL human rights report covering the period November-
94
El Salvador
December 1991 does a good job of portraying the continuing human rights crisis, and observes that
. . . violations of fundamental human rights are still extremely prevalent. Not only is the number of such violations cause for concern, but also the nature of some of those which have occurred frequently in recent weeks. These include summary executions and death threats by organized groups. It is also disturbing that State organs, including the judicial system and its auxiliary bodies, remain incapable of preventing, investigating and punishing violations of fundamental human rights. Other consequences of the conflict, such as problems relating to the lack of personal documentation, also persist.
The section on political and other extrajudicial killing opens with the refreshingly straightforward — albeit somewhat understated — declaration that "[tjhere were several political and other extrajudicial killings by the ESAF in 1991." The paragraph briefly lists several examples of murders committed by the military, the Atlacatl Battalion prominent among them. The Atlacatl is the U.S.-created and trained elite battalion that has been consistently responsible for some of the worst violations, from the 1981 El Mozote massacre of some 1,000 civilians to the 1989 Jesuit murders, to the cases mentioned in the report during 1991. That the report appropriately opens with ESAF violations is evidence of further improvement; the 1990 report led by dismissing data on political killings as unreliable, then followed with a paragraph on violations committed by the opposition Farabundo Marti Front for National Liberation (FMLN). In another welcome innovation, this year's report says "lh]uman rights abuses by the ESAF-supervised [Civil Defense Forces] also persisted," and mentions a Zacamil murder case. As we have pointed out in the past, crimes committed by the civil defense are plentiful and warrant thorough treatment since these groups are armed and operated by the army and have functioned by and large as thugs, either at the military's behest or for their own profit.
95
El Salvador
The paragraph that describes the prosecutions of several army cases would have benefitted from some additional information. The report recounts the October acquittal of 13 civil defense members for the 1981 murders of seven people at Armenia. The shocking end of the decade-long case received extensive attention in El Salvador, which is not communicated in the report's bland presentation. It was known as the "macabre well" case because somewhere between 19 and 41 victims were murdered and tossed into a well. According to IDHUCA, the human rights institute at the Central American University, troops from Detachment Number 6 in Sonsonate surrounded the courthouse while the trial was in progress. The jurors, whose identities were not concealed from the defendants, declined to hear the full oral arguments, voting to acquit after only an hour's deliberation. ARENA members of the National Assembly were present in the courtroom; one of them embraced the jury foreman after the verdict was read. Even the Attorney General's office, the Fiscalía, moved to have the verdict overturned, citing irregularifies.
Another early case mentioned, the 1981 massacre in and around El Mozote, is likewise inadequately presented. The report says "several hundred people" were killed by the ESAF. In fact, contemporary accounts placed the number of victims between 733 and over 1,000. Tutela Legal, the human rights office of the Archdiocese of San Salvador, compiled during 1991 a list of 794 persons killed over the course of several days by the Atlacatl Battalion. As noted, the Atlacatl was formed by the United States in 1981 and most of its 1,000 members at the time had been trained at Fort Bragg or Fort Benning, calling into question the oft-stated assertion that U.S. training improves human rights compliance. U.S. officials initially denied any massacre had taken place, despite the vivid accounts of two U.S. journalists who visited the scene about a month later and still found body parts and corpses scattered about.
The report's statement that "a judicial investigation continues" is not inaccurate, but a bit misleading. On October 26, 1990, Tutela Legal and several nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) in Morazán department filed a lawsuit with the court in San Francisco Gotera. Since
96
El Salvador
no judicial investigation took place contemporaneously with the crime, an exhumation was necessary to establish a corpus delicti. Since late 1990, Tutela and others have been trying to arrange the exhumation. Their efforts have only been met with delays. By year's end, no exhumation had occurred. In its third report, the ONUSAL human rights mission said that given "present conditions in the country, it is therefore advisable from the scientific and technical standpoint to use the services of international experts in forensic anthropology, who could be present, together with local professionals, to supervise the exhumation and laboratory analyses." The ONUSAL team also reported that as of mid-February 1992, the army had yet to answer the judge's request for information on which military units were operating around El Mozote at the time of the massacre.
The report's treatment of death squad killings is reminiscent of earlier attempts to downplay the crimes of these paramilitary groups. According to preliminary data compiled by IDHUCA, death squads killed 45 Salvadorans during 1991. The first three of the seven cases mentioned in the report are dismissed by the State Department as common crimes. In two of them ~ the El Zapote massacre of 15 men, women and children from the same family and that of 60-year-old nightwatchman Martin Ayala Ramirez, who was hacked to death as he guarded the offices of a community organization (CCM) ~ the common crime motive was quickly "established" by the U.S.-funded and military-staffed Special Investigative Unit (SIU). Woefully slow and inept at investigating the kinds of serious human rights crimes it was set up to tackle, the SIU has of late developed a reputation for rapidly wrapping up investigations of apparently political crimes which conveniently turn out to be motivated by personal vendettas, sometimes with robbery as a motive. Monsignor Gregorio Rosa Chávez, Auxiliary Bishop of San Salvador, commented on the SIU's work on the Ayala case on August 11, saying:
The affected parties reject [the SIU's] version energetically, which they consider skillfully constructed to obscure the truth. The Archbishopric agrees with this skepticism because the SIU's previous actions have not
97
El Salvador
given it the necessary credibility. The sophisticated technical means that they use for investigations could be very useful in finding out the truth quickly, but they can also be the perfect instruments for disguising lies.
Both of the cases mentioned above involved, according to the SIU, love triangles, making for spicy newspaper copy. Following its investigation of the El Zapote massacre, which was especially gruesome and complicated by Salvadoran standards, Americas Watch concluded that "the murders could have resulted from a family feud." Yet Americas Watch went on to observe that the "government's investigation never seriously considered the possibility of military involvement, and on occasion actively sought to dismiss it." Of the SIU's recent performance in general, Americas Watch observed that it "seems most efficient when it is protecting members of the military from the consequences of their own crimes. " It would also have been pertinent for the report to have mentioned that the judge in the Zapote case pressured a survivor, trying to get her to change her testimony indicating that the attackers were soldiers wearing camouflage uniforms.
Of the Ayala murder, the report says that "ld]espite claims of political motivation for his murder, most evidence indicates that the murder was part of a robbery attempt." Human rights observers consulted by the Lawyers Committee did not readily concur with this assessment. Among those who disagree is Professor José Antonio Pastor Ridruejo, the UN Special Representative who visited the defendants in jail. Of the suspects, who were displayed by the SIU on Salvadoran television less than a month after the killing, the Special Representative said the "obvious contradictions in their statements would seem to indicate that it was not they who committed the crime." The report should have mentioned that members of the CCM had been forcibly evicted from land they occupied by the National Police just days before the murder. Had this relevant piece of information been included, the motive might not have looked so clear.
While we welcome the mention of some of the numerous death threats issued during 1991 ~ which included members of the ONUSAL
98
El Salvador
mission -- we question the report's facile acceptance that "government investigations have failed to determine who produced the communiques." Several of those threatened, among them Mirtala López of the nongovernmental peasant group CRIPDES, received written threats over the fax machine, which should be easily traceable. Others were issued over the telephone and as the report mentions elsewhere, "wiretapping of telephone communications ... is widespread." Clearly, the technology exists to trace such calls. Another common medium employed by those who seek to intimidate are paid advertisements. By custom, Salvadoran newspapers do not accept paid advertisements that are not signed. Those who sell advertising at Diario de Hoy, for example, the far-right paper that runs many of these advertisements, must know who is behind them. The notion that these blatant death threats are not traceable is ludicrous and does not deserve the credibility offered by the report. The Salvadorans' longstanding unwillingness to identify and expose those responsible calls into question their commitment to put an end to death squad activities.
The section ends with several political and extrajudicial killings attributed to the FMLN during 1991. A case that perplexed many was the FMLN's January 2 executions of two wounded U.S. airmen who were shot down as they flew at tree-top level over guerrilla territory; a third man did not survive the crash. ' Peasants who later provided testimony to the court saw the men alive in FMLN custody. Returning about 20 minutes later, the peasants found the two shot through the head. No account by these witnesses mentions, as the report asserts, that the U.S. servicemen were "brutally beaten." Tutela Legal, the only group to do a full report on the case, did not record such testimony. Nor does the report prepared by two U.S. military medical examiners who examined the bodies in Washington, D.C. mention beatings. The only relevant testimony on the public record is that of a peasant who says he was hiding in the bushes. He says he saw the murders from a distance and mentions that a guerrilla "hit Dawson's head with one of his hands. ..." That the FMLN grossly violated the rules of war by executing the two wounded men is obvious and indisputable. Article 7 of Additional Protocol II to the Geneva Conventions says that all wounded "shall be respected and protected" and "treated humanely and shall receive, to the
99
El Salvador
fullest extent practicable and with the least possible delay, the medical care and attention required by their condition." But the report's attempt to suggest further cruelty is unfounded.
The State Department is also being less than candid in its assertion that the FMLN "has refused to cooperate with either government or U.S. investigations." Negotiations between the FMLN and representatives of the U.S. government in this case began quietly as early as August 1991. At one point the FMLN agreed to turn the two detainees over to the United States, which had indicted one of the combatants for murder under a 1986 law which extends U.S. criminal jurisdiction in cases where U.S. citizens are attacked abroad. The FMLN reneged on the agreement when the leadership met resistance from within the organization and from others in the Salvadoran opposition. In March 1992, the two were finally turned over to a Salvadoran judge in the presence of Supreme Court President Mauricio Gutiérrez Castro and representatives of ONUSAL and the Fiscalía.
While the transfer of the defendants to the Salvadoran courts occurred in 1992 and was therefore outside the reporting period, the report should have mentioned the FMLN's efforts to try the two men itself. The applicability of common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions concerning internal armed conflicts has long been acknowledged in the case of El Salvador's civil war. Additional Protocol II has a higher threshold of application and implies rebel control over territory of the kind exhibited by El Salvador's guerrilla movement. Protocol II assumes two competing authorities — the FMLN and the Salvadoran government -- and establishes standards that must be met. According to Protocol II, Article 6, as a belligerent party the FMLN may assume jurisdiction within its zones of control by putting the two men on trial, taking steps to offer "the essential guarantees of independence and impartiality."
Throughout 1991, the FMLN took steps to hold a trial in its own territory, deciding ultimately to refer the case to the Truth Commission created as part of the peace accord. Supreme Court President Gutiérrez Castro threatened to file criminal charges against Salvadoran or foreign trial observers. While we are aware that the State Department never
100
El Salvador
accepted the FMLN's right to stage a trial itself, and in fact -- bypassing Salvadoran courts ~ argued that the suspects should be tried in the United States, the report should have acknowledged that in the view of the FMLN and most human rights authorities, international humanitarian law allowed the FMLN to try their own combatants. As has been repeatedly pointed out, the State Department has previously argued elsewhere that the Nicaraguan contras were not obligated to turn their combatants over to the Nicaraguan courts for trial.
The report's discussion of the 1987 murder case of Herbert Anaya, coordinator of the nongovernmental Human Rights Commission of El Salvador, is another example of an inadequate presentation. It correctly notes that neither the Commission nor Mr. Anaya's widow believe the man convicted, an FMLN member, is guilty. The account says that Jorge Alberto Miranda, convicted on October 12, confessed, but does not report that he also retracted that confession saying he had been pressured and drugged. The case has been characterized by irregularities from the outset, none of which are mentioned in the report. Presiding Judge Luis Edgar Morales Joya dismissed the case on evidentiary grounds; that decision was overturned. Judge Morales was subsequently transferred to the less prestigious traffic court and ultimately fled the country in 1991 when a grenade exploded under his car. No attempt was made by Salvadoran authorities to investigate that incident until Judge Morales himself contacted the Justice of the Peace.
The section on disappearances inappropriately includes FMLN kidnappings, which should be addressed in its discussion of violations of humanitarian law. Moreover, the inclusion of the case of businessman Guillermo Sol here is inappropriate as the report observes, "there is no evidence that he was taken by the FMLN." The Sol kidnapping reportedly stems from a dispute among right-wing Salvadoran groups.
Like last year, the section on torture is among the most candid in the report, pointing out that "government forces frequently resorted to abusive tactics to intimidate noncombatants perceived as FMLN sympathizers." El Salvador remains a nation of torture victims and no torturers, and the report correctly says "ESAF personnel have never been
101
El Salvador
prosecuted for abuse of detainees or prisoners." The mention of several cases including electric shock, rape and beatings is welcome. The report paints a telling picture of the dangers faced by Salvadorans active in nongovernmental organizations or in opposition political parties. We note, as we did last year, the differing language: "Reliable human rights monitors reported" forms of torture which do not leave marks. As though casting doubt on the quality of the information, the report refers to "some credible charges" of the use of drugs, near drownings, and electric shock. ONUSAL's third human rights report, the last covering 1991, describes several incidents of torture and says it received 41 complaints of torture during November and December.
The section on arbitrary arrest appropriately points out how the Salvadoran military has made use of arbitrary arrest to intimidate or as a fishing expedition. The report says that nearly 50% of those detained on suspicion of subversive offenses are later released without charge and also mentions the dangers of such practices. Though the law provides that detainees must be freed within 72 hours or turned over to the civilian courts, "this requirement is frequently ignored" according to the report, which also alludes to the danger of torture during this 72-hour period, when "the ESAF most often attempts to extract a confession or abuses detainees." This year the report acknowledges, citing ONUSAL, that the Armed Forces are not cooperating with the Supreme Court's Detainee Information Office. ONUSAL has also criticized the army for making arrests even when the person is not found in the act of committing a crime {in flagrante delicto), violating Salvadoran procedure.
The report's fair public trial discussion is good, highlighting many of the problems that legal and human rights observers have long mentioned. Most basic due process rights "are restricted." While "nominally independent, the judiciary is severely weakened by political pressures." Most of the prominent cases that reached the courts during 1991 are appropriately mentioned elsewhere. Worthy of mention is the ongoing case involving Dr. Arturo Ramiro Méndez Azahar, an attorney representing the Salvadoran distributor of Shell Oil. Dr. Méndez filed a petition with the Legislative Assembly calling for the impeachment of
102
El Salvador
the members of the constitutional chamber of the Supreme Court. He charged the magistrates with impropriety in a civil suit involving Shell. In late 1991, the Salvadoran Supreme Court revoked Méndez' right to practice law and to serve as a notary. On October 26, an arrest warrant was issued for Dr. Méndez, purportedly for having illegally removed a document from court files. Regardless of the merits of Méndez' charges, he acted within the law in filing his complaint. Instead of dealing with the facts in the case, the Supreme Court has responded vindictively, further compromising the rule of law in El Salvador.
The section on violations of humanitarian law appropriately mentions cases in which the FMLN and the army "repeatedly endanger[ed] the safety of civilians." Deaths and woundings of civilian noncombatants as a result of combat remained high throughout 1991, as the war wound through its last year. In another improvement over last year, the report states that the "ESAF has confiscated food and medical supplies from humanitarian organizations intended for villages (including repatriate communities) in areas of combat or heavy guerrilla presence."
As in previous years. El Salvador's repatriate communities were especially targeted. Segundo Montes, the large community of returnees at Meanguera, Morazán, suffered several incursions by the army during the year. ONUSAL's first report mentioned the investigation of a military "raid" on Segundo Montes on August 17-18 in which nine people were seriously injured by grenades, mortars and machine-gunning (a pregnant woman lost her child as a result); 25 more received lesser injuries; and 23 were "poisoned by tear-gas bombs." The report "concludes that there is no decisive evidence that armed members of FMLN were in the community at the time of the incidents. Everything would seem to indicate that the purpose of the military actions was to intimidate the civilian population in order to facilitate a military operation in northern Morazán. In any case, the army's response was out of all proportion to the alleged attack by members of the community." In addition, the Washington Office on Latin America (WOLA) reported incidents on September 10 and 16 in which the Arce and Belloso Battalions stole goods amounting to $2,500 from the community store. Northern communities reported indiscriminate mortar attacks by the army
103
El Salvador
throughout 1991, among them Perquin, San Fernando, Torola and Jocoatique in late September; Cinquera, Cabanas on August 15 and 20; and San José Las Flores on August 26.
This year's discussion of freedom of expression is likewise an improvement over last year's, which had described a "vigorous" free speech environment. The limits of that freedom were underlined on February 9, when the leftist Diario Latino was largely destroyed by fire. The editor-in-chief blamed the army. The investigation reportedly sought to prove that a dissident faction at the newspaper had torched the plant. The Committee to Protect Journalists documented 10 other incidents of attacks against the press; mention of these incidents would have provided a more complete portrait had they been included in the report.
A bomb exploded under the jeep of a Reuters correspondent at 11:45 p.m., minutes before the peace accord was signed in New York City on December 31. Vivien Margaret Altman, reporter for Australian and New Zealand Radio, was escorted to the airport for deportation on April 4; immigration authorities reversed their decision before the plane left. Three foreign correspondents received death threats delivered to their homes from the Salvadoran Anti-Communist Front. Film, notebooks and video and audio tapes were confiscated from 18 foreign and Salvadoran journalists detained by the army in San Francisco Gotera, Morazàn, on February 2; 48 hours passed before the material was returned. Wounded in crossfire near San José Las Flores, Dan Alder of UPI and stringer Thomas Long were detained and searched at a roadblock by an officer who appeared to be waiting for them. The two were on their way to the hospital. Long was severely injured at the time. Reporters for the Soviet Tass and the Cuban Prensa Latina were denied access to the country, despite holding valid visas.
The section on freedom of peaceful assembly and association candidly acknowledges that while any "association not formed for criminal purposes is legal [....] in practice, members of certain labor, humanitarian, and peasant organizations were harassed by security forces." One case that the report could have mentioned was the June detention of 29 persons attending a technical training course on
104
El Salvador
administration run by the Salvadoran Association of Integral Development (ASDI), a legally registered group which works with peasants; six of those arrested were ASDI staff. Uniformed members of the National Police and the Treasury Police entered and searched the ASDI training center in San Salvador department. The men had neither a search warrant nor an arrest warrant. Accused of "subversive association," the peasants were illegally detained for six days and ultimately released by a judge who found no cause to hold them. The security forces confiscated equipment during the search, including three vehicles.
Unlike last year, this year's account of freedom of religion acknowledges "incidents of intimidation" of church members, but attributes the problems to the "political activity of some religious groups. " As we pointed out last year. El Salvador's Christians have long been targeted and some of the many incidents bear mentioning. Covered elsewhere in the report, members of the "Small Community" of lay Catholic women began receiving telephone threats in June and their home was ransacked and burglarized on June 6. In contrast to the report's assertion that the threats stopped after the break-in, they continued through year's end. The women had also been threatened and their home searched in 1990. Maryknoll Father Ronald Hennessy also received telephoned threats during 1991. '
ONUSAL reported that on November 19, the Rev. José Roberto Palacios, secretary of the Executive Board of the Salvadoran National Council of Churches, was arrested by the National Guard and accused of being a "bogus minister" and an FMLN collaborator. On November 30, men in a vehicle with polarized windows attempted to kidnap Pilar Serrano Rivas, the sister-in-law of Rev. Palacios who works with the Christian Youth and Student Community. Rev. Palacios told ONUSAL that "while the National Guard was interrogating him, he was shown photographs of his sister-in-law and Council members in various locations."
We agree that the lack of personal documentation — which the report calls the "most pressing issue for all repatriate communities" ~ is
105
El Salvador
critical. A longstanding problem, it has repeatedly been pinpointed by ONUSAL. The State Department reports that "80% of the repatriates remain undocumented" despite "efforts by the Government and the UN High Commissioner for Refugees." While we concur that some steps have been taken, clearly something is very wrong given that the great majority of returnees have remained for years in a quasi legal status vulnerable to abuse. The report should examine the issue more carefully.
The report in its discussion of respect for political rights asserts in an understatement that a "Salvadoran's desire to support a certain political party or participate in political activity is not always respected." In the view of Americas Watch, March's municipal and legislative elections "were preceded by more election-related political violence than had accompanied the presidential elections of 1989." Numerous incidents of harassment and acts of violence were outlined in the reports of the Organization of American States, IDHUCA and WOLA. Representing a gross lack of respect for differing political views, some of these cases should have been included in the report. The leftist UDN party was especially hard-hit; two of its members were murdered (mentioned elsewhere in the report) and another lost her eye in a shooting, both incidents during the electoral period. IDHUCA reported that "ARENA leaders and activists also resorted to . . . intimidation. Individuals identified as bodyguards for the mayor of Zacatecoluca (La Paz), Saúl Rivera, proceeded to intimidate those who attended a Convergence rally in that city; in Cara Sucia (Ahuachapán), members of the UDN were threatened by Major D'Aubuisson's bodyguards."
The report's discussion of the government's openness to human rights investigations represents another improvement. Examples of harassment of members of the nongovernmental group CDHES are appropriately mentioned. While the report does not repeat the once typical criticism of Tutela Legal, its director, Maria Julia Hernández, was singled out for unjustified ridicule by the State Department in early February on the basis of her reference to "mercy homicide." Ms. Hernández had given a press briefing in San Salvador after interviewing the two FMLN combatants detained for the killing of the U.S. airmen.
106
El Salvador
She repeated the rebels' version of the events — that they had determined that the U.S. soldiers were suffering from what would surely be mortal wounds and that given the absence of medical care, in their judgment, it was more humane to kill the men. She then described accurately the "mercy homicide" provision of Salvadoran law (Article 156 of the Criminal Code) which was potentially applicable in the case. The State Department's unwarranted reaction provoked additional attacks on Ms. Hernández in El Salvador. Yet the State Department did not stop at verbally attacking Ms. Hernández. She was later detained at Houston airport for an hour and a half while her possessions were searched. In Washington, without prior notice, FBI agents visited her at her hotel seeking to question her.
Like last year, the section on worker rights appropriately mentions "a confusing and sometimes conflicting set of laws governing labor relations" and that given "onerous and time-consuming legal requirements, most strikes are technically illegal." It mentions the case of unionist Miguel Angel Martinez, whose body was thrown from a vehicle after the victim had been shot, according to ONUSAL. Martinez was a member of the Construction Workers' Union, which had received written death threats by the Salvadoran Anti-Communist Front.
Given the numbers of trade unionists targeted, more cases should have been included. According to a Salvadoran radio report, the offices of the Society of Workers in the town of Usulután were bombed on September 18. WOLA reported a series of death threats against Pedro Regalado, the Construction Workers' Union secretary general. The threats to Regalado came after a September 15 demonstration in which he expressed opposition to U.S. military aid. A September 16 note signed by the Salvadoran Anti-Communist Front (FAS) warned, "just as we eliminated the Jesuits; we are firm in our commitment to terminate the life of those who claim to be union leaders and their families . . . [Y]our end is near . . . [Y]ou are on the edge of death." According to Regalado, five days after Martinez' killing four armed men in a vehicle intercepted his car, obliged him to get out, and asked him if he had understood the phone calls, the letters and the "signal" they had left in
107
El Salvador
the school where Martínez' body was found, thus linking the FAS to the killing.
The report states that the International Labor Organization (ILO) "deplored the large number of violent deaths and disappearances in the recent past. ..." While appropriate to quote sources such as the ILO, the State Department should speak in its own voice on this issue. Given its extensive political and financial role in the country and extensive trade relations, the United States is in a unique position to encourage positive change and has a special responsibility to closely monitor labor rights. A challenge to El Salvador's trade privileges remains pending before the U.S. Trade Representative, an acknowledgment in some measure that worker rights have not been respected.
108
