 EL SALVADOR
 El Salvador is a constitutional, multiparty democracy with an executive branch
 headed by a president, a unicameral legislative assembly, and a separate, politically
 appointed, independent judiciary. Armando Caldern Sol of the Nationalist Repub-
 lican Alliance Party (ARENA) was inaugurated President for a 5-year term in June
 1994. In the Legislative Assembly, the ARENA party holds a plurality. Seven other
 parties also hold seats, including the ex- errilla organization Farabundo Marti
 Front for National Liberation (FMLN), and its offshoot, the Democratic Party.
 Since the Peace Accords ended the 12-year civil war in 1992, the Government has
 reduced the armed forces (including civilian employees) by over 70 percent, created
 a new Civilian National Police (PNC); redefined the role of the military; integrated
 the former guerrillas into political life; and completed a land transfer program. The
 military continues to provide protection for PNC patrols in rural areas, a measure
 begun in 1995 in response to action by well-armed criminal bands. Members of the
 PNC were charged with having committed human rights abuses.
 El Salvador has a mixed economy largely based upon agriculture and light manu-
 facturing. The Government is committed to privatization and free market reforms.
 People are free to pursue economic interests, and private property is respected. The
 rate of real economic growth continued to be strong, and per capita gross domestic
 product was about $1,710. About 40 percent of the population lives below the pov-
 erty level.
 The Government's human rights record improved somewhat. There were two
 cases in which olice agents face charges of extrajudicial killings. Occasional use of
 excessive force by the police, denial of due process, lengthy pretrial detention, and
 long delays in trials were also problems. Prison conditions remain poor, although
 overcrowding was reduced somewhat. The judiciary is inefficient and subject to cor-
 ruption. The Supreme Court did not move quickly enough to discipline or dismiss
 incompetent judges. The resulting widespread impunity continues to be a problem.
 Politically motivated assassinations appear to have ended, although a number of
 cases from past years remain unsolved. Some public figures reported death threats,
 but none was subantiated. Discrimination against women, the disabled, and indig-
 enous people, violence against women, and abuse of children are also problems. The
 level of criminal violence, particularly murder, assaults, kidnaping, and robberies
 remained high. In March growing public demand for firnm action against crime led
 to the passage of an Emergency Law against Common and Organized Crime, which
 won the suppit of all political parties represented in the Legislative Assembly, ex-
 cept the FML. Shortly after the law's passage, the Government's Human Rights
 Ombudsman and other critics filed several constitutional challenges against it; at
 year's end, the Supreme Court had not ruled on the law's constitutionality. On De-
 cember 4, the Legislature approved a new Criminal Procedures Code, as called for
 by the Peace Accords.
 In April the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA) reduced the U.N. Mission
 to El Salvador to a small office of verification, reflecting continued progress in im-
 plementation of the Peace Accords. The UNGA further scaled back the U.N. pres-
 ence in December and eliminated the position of Special Representative of the Sec-
 retary General. The Human Rights Ombudsman, whose office was created by the
 Peace Accords, continued to speak out on issues such as harsh prison conditions and
 the emergency law, but the investigative capacity of her agency, the Office of the
 Counsel or the Defense of Human Rights (PDDH), remained limited. Nonetheless,
 polls indicate that the PDDH retains a high level of public trust.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killings.-There were no confirmed cases of
 political killings. However, there were two cases in which the authorities charged
 PNC officers with extrajudicial killing. Six PNC agents and two PNC drivers face
 charges of killing four persons (including a minor) during a brawl in San Pedro
 Masahuat in March. After a justice of the peace ordered the arrest of the agents,
 a trial judge released two of them on the grounds that there was insufficient evi-
 
 
 443
 dence. A higher court ordered the two back into confinement, but one fled in the
 meantime, Officials of the Attorney General's office alleged that PNC agents in San
 Pedro Masahuat attempted to intimidate witnesses and interfere with the proceed-
 ings in an effort to protect their colleagues. The justice of the peace has received
 police protection at the request of the Supreme Court.
 In October a PNC agent shot and killed Francisco Manzanares in what the police
 said was investigation of an extortion case. Although not active in politics at the
 time of his death, Manzanares' past as an FMLN combatant and party member
 raised the issue of political killing. The authorities charged PNC agent Guillermo
 Linares with wrongful death and detained three other PNC agents for having re-
 moved the body from the crime scene when they took Manzanares to a hospital. The
 incident was under active investigation at year's end; preliminary evidence indicated
 improcer police procedures rather than a deliberate killing.
 In September unidentified assailants shot and killed Siegfried Guth Zapata, the
 nephew of ARENA's then president, in San Salvador. The motive is unknown; the
 case remained under investigation at year's end.
 Politically motivated threats were made during the year, but the existence of or-
 ganized groups was never proven. Since May a previously unknown group calling
 itself the "Roberto D'Aubisson Nationalist Force" (FURODA) had made politically
 motivated threats against 15 prominent citizens, including the Human Rights Om-
 budsman and other government officials. The existence of this and other groups was
 never proven, and although threats continued in some cases, none were carried out.
 In November Ombudsman Dr. Marina de Aviles publicized the FURODA threats
 against her and her staff but vowed to continue her work. Government and ARENA
 party officials condemned the threats, and the PNC director said the police were
 working directly with the Ombudsman to provide collaboration and security.
 Tomas Coronado Valles, the PNC officer who killed a protester with a rubber bul-
 let in November 1995, remained under a charge of manslaughter. The Ministry of
 Public Security and the PDDH completed work on the details of an agreement,
 signed after the November 1995 incident, to govern coordination in situations such
 as violent public demonstrations.
 The authorities detained, but later released, PNC agents in connection with the
 controversial 1995 death of medical student Adriano Vilanova. A December PDDH
 report concluded that a government autopsy that exculpated the police was botched
 and that Vilanova was beaten to death, not struck by a car or impaired by dru
 or alcohol as the authorities had claimed. The PDDH report suggested that PNC
 members were guilty of extrajudicial killing and that a judge had impeded inves-
 tigation of the case, but it did not contain any new evidence to support these allega-
 tions. The President, the Attorney General, and the Supreme Court president an-
 nounced that the Government would do everything in its power to identify and pun-
 ish the perpetrators. The case remained open at year's end.
 Prosecutions continued in the case of the so-called Sombra Negra (Black Shadow)
 vigilante group, which surfaced in San Miguel in 1994 and allegedly killed 20 people
 whom it claimed were criminals. However a court released several suspects from
 pretrial confinement when it determined that there was insufficient evidence
 against them. Nine suspects who were alleged members of the group still faced
 charges at year's end, including at least two of the four PNC members arrested in
 July 1995.
 There was little progress in cases from past years in which political motivation
 was a possibility, with the exception of the investigation of the 1993 murder of
 FMLN leader Darol Francisco Velis Castellanos. In that case, the authorities extra-
 dited a former PNC detective, Carlos Romero Alfaro, from the United States in
 March. Following his extradition, they arrested another former agent in connection
 with the murder and investigated two others. The case remained active at year's
 end.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no confi-med reports of politically motivated dis-
 appearances.
 Vague and unsubstantiated rumors of political motivation surrounded the kidnap-
 ing of Andres Suster, the 15-year-old son of a close associate of former President
 Alfredo Cristiani. Suster was kidnaped in September 1995 and released in Septem-
 ber. While political motivations cannot be ruled out, available evidence suggests
 that this was a criminal act for personal gain.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, lnhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits such practices, but complaints against the PNC for exces-
 sive use of force and denial of due process continued. Some of these complaints were
 investigated and found to be warranted, but most were not thoroughly explored due
 to institutional weaknesses of the PDDH and the PNC Inspector General's office.
 
 
 444
 The PNC continued to be the subject of more complaints of human rights viola-
 tions than any other government institution. This reflects their license to use force
 and carry out arrests, as well as their inexperience (the 1992 Peace Accords created
 the PNC as a replacement for the old, discredited security forces; the first PNC de-
 ployment occurred in March 1993). The majority of the complaints against the PNC
 continued to be for denial of due process. The authorities have investigated and dis-
 ciplined some PNC agents for misconduct, including human rights violations, and
 jailed a few for criminal activity.
 The PNC Inspector General briefly threatened to resign in June, claiming that the
 Deputy Director of the PNC and the Public Security Ministry were undermining his
 abiity to do his job. He withdrew his resignation after receiving public reassurances
 of the importance of his office.
 Despite the volume of human rights complaints, public opinion polls gave the
 PNC relatively high marks amidst general dissatisfaction with government institu-
 tions as a whole. In an August poll conducted by the Institute of Public Opinion of
 the Central American University the PNC came in second place in a ranking of
 those institutions that best defended human rights. A plurality of respondents, how-
 ever, stated no institutions effectively defended human rights or that they had no
 opinion. Two other separate polls by the Salvadoran Investigation Center for Public
 Opiion of the University of Technology also gave relatively high marks to the PNC.
 in the only terrorism-related arrests, the authorities detained four university stu-
 dents in June in connection with a car bombing in April and an explosion at an in-
 surance company in May. No one was injured in either incident, and the motives
 remain unclear. The four students allegedly belong to a leftwing terrorist group; one
 of the four was released for lack of evidence.
 Prison conditions remained poor, but the Government opened a new 2,000-inmate
 prison in September. This reduced severe overcrowding, although there were still
 3,000 excess prisoners. The prisons are filled with violent inmates, and guards exer-
 cise little control. Killings among prisoners are common. The Human Rights Om-
 budsman said in June that prison conditions constituted a systematic violation of
 human rights. She blamed judges for using pretrial detention too freely and trying
 cases too slowly. The Ombudsman recommended approval of pending criminal codes,
 the use of pretrial detention only as a last resort, acceleration of judicial procedures,
 seeking alternatives to imprisonment, and developing a policy on crime and prisons.
 Prison problems attracted public attention when protesting prisoners organized a
 "lottery of death" in which they randomly selected inmates for execution. No execu-
 tions were carried out, but other prisoners began hunger strikes, some with their
 mouths crudely sewn shut, to gain attention for their demands for better conditions,
 provisions for bail, speedy trials, and early release programs. The Government re-
 sponded by asking the courts to speed up trials (the Supreme Court began a nation-
 wide review of pending cases) and promising to relocate prisoners, measures which
 seemed to relax tensions.
 The Government permits prison visits by independent human rights monitors,
 NGO's, and the media.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution prohibits arbitrary ar-
 rest and detention, and the number of complaints of arbitrary arrest and detention
 continued to decline. Complaints that PNC officers violated due process rights of de-
 tainees also continued, but few of these complaints were fully investigated. The
 courts generally enforced a ruling that interrogation without the presence of a pub-
 lic defender amounts to coercion, and that any evidence so obtained is inadmissible.
 As a result, police authorities generally delayed questioning until a public defender
 arrived. However, since low salaries and insufficient supervision limit the number
 of cases that public defenders handle, they are not always available when needed.
 By law, the police may hold a person for 72 hours before delivering the suspect
 to court, after which time the judge may order detention for an additional 72 hours
 to determine if an investigation is warranted. Because of a lack of holding cells,
 such detainees are often sent to the prisons where they may be mixed with violent
 criminals. The law allows 120 days to investigate serious crimes and 45 days for
 lesser offenses before a judge must bring the accused to trial or dismiss the case.
 The Emergency Law Against Common and Organized Crime, passed in March and
 effective for 2 years, shortened these periods, but in practice the authorities rarely
 observed the time limits. The Assembly also considered a second measure in re-
 sponse to the crime wave, a sweeping vagrancy law that would have allowed the
 police to make arrests for a variety of only vaguely defined activities not heretofore
 criminal. However, the Assembly dropped this proposal after it was sharply criti-
 cized by human rights advocates.
 Although the law permits the release of detainees pending trial for crimes for
 which the maximum penalty does not exceed 3 years, many crimes (homicide, man-
 
 
 slaughter, rape and crimes against proprty) carry penalties in excess of 3 years,
 thereby precluding release pending tria. Because it may take several years for a
 case to come to trial, some prisoners have been incarcerated longer than the maxi-
 mum legal sentence for their crimes. Any detainee may request a review (habeas
 orpus) by the Supree Court, but the Court denies the overwhelming majority of
 such requests. Nearly 80 percent of all inmates are awaiting trial or sentencing.
 The Constitution prohibits compulsory exile, and it is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial-The Contiution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, and the Government respects this provision in practice.
 The court structure has four levels: JVusties of the peace, trial courts, appellate
 courts, and the Supreme Court. Judges, not juries, rule in many cases. A jury ver-
 dict cannot be overruled by a judge nor appealed by the defendant; however, defend-
 ants may appeal the sentence to the Supreme Court,
 Legislation passed in 1995 provided or oral trials and new rights for the parties,
 and it also established two new court systems for family and juvenile offenders.
 Both systems stress conciliation as an alternative to adjudication. The Juvenile
 Legal Code that went into effect in March 1995 included greater provisions for due
 process, raised the age of majority from 16 to 18 years, limited sentences to a mai-
 mum of 7 years, ani introduced alternatives to incarceration. However, the Emer-
 gency Law Against Common and Organized Crime lowered the age of minors to 14
 years and made imprisonment the remedy of choice. The new Juvenile Code contin-
 ues to suffer from the weaknesses of the institutions involved in its execution.
 Under the Constitution, defendants have the right to a presumption of innocence,
 protection from self-incrimination, legal counsel, freedom from coercion, and cm-
 penstion for damages due to judicia[ error. They also have the right to he present
 in court and to confront witnesses. While still far from satisfactory, compliance with
 these prvisions has improved, in large part due to judicial training programs and
 to evaluations of judges conducted by the National Council of the Judiciary (an inde-
 pendent body provided for in the Constitution to nomi .nate, train, and evaluate
 judges) and the Supreme Court. Although legal counsel is sup sed to be available
 at government expense for the indigent, there continued to be fa too few public de-
 fenders to make this a reality.
 On December 4, the Legislative Assembly approved a new Criminal Procedures
 Code, as called for by the Peace Accords. The new code replaces a criminal system
 based on civil law with one in which oral argument is the norm. The legislature is
 expected to take up other legal reforms mandated by the Peace Accords, including
 a new criminal code and a sentencing law, in early 1997.
 Problems of corruption and incompetence in the judicial system remain. The Su-
 preme Court, which has the authority to discipline judges, has moved slowly. Judi-
 cial salaries are now high enough to attract qualified judges, but are still inad-
 equate for prosecutors or public defenders. Training programs are insufficient to
 compensate for inadequate university training, low pay, and poor supervision. While
 new laws represent a marked improvement, they also add to the confusion. Impu-
 nity, especially of the politically, economically, or insitutiionally well-conneted, con-
 tinued to be a problem. The deficiencies of the judicial system contribute to this im-
 punity as well as to the increase in crime.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Accord-
 ing to the Constitution, the police must have the resident's consent, a warrant, or
 a reasonable belief that a crime is being or is about to be committed, before entering
 a private dwelling. Government authorities generally respected these rights. Wire-
 tapping of telephone communications by the Government, private persons, and polit-
 ical parties is illegal but oceurs.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of the
 press, and the Government respects this right in practice.
 There are 4 daily newspapers, 10 television stations, approximately 100 licensed
 radio stations, and 2 major cable television systems. Print and broadcast journalists
 regularly criticize the Government and report opposition views. According to most
 major media associations, in general the Goveent did not use direct or indirect
 means to control the media.
 h 1995 the Government's National Telecommunications Association (ANTEL)
 closed 11 low-power, unlicensed radio stations operating in small rural communities.
 These so-called community radio stations alleged an attempt to restrict free speech,
 while ANTEL claimed that the stations' sigala interfered with licensed users, a
 charge the community radio stations denied. In January the Supreme Court ruled
 that the Government had improperly confiscated the community radio equipment,
 
 
 446
 ordered its return, and overturned a rme levied by ANTEL. However, the Court said
 that the stations must get permits before broadcasting. In practice, it takes years
 to get licenses, and the spectrum is already over subscribed. ANTEL has offered the
 community stations various alternatives, all of which have been rejected. Of the 11
 stations, 10 have resumed unlicensed broadcasting. The community radio stations
 tried unsuccessfully to persuade the Legislative Assembly to grant them special reg-
 ulatory status under the new telecommunications law passed m September.
 In July the police arrested Francisco Elias Valencia, editor of a newspaper usually
 identified with the left, on libel charges after his newspaper accused a PNC official
 of corruption. Valencia was quickly released under bend, but journalists from across
 the political spectrum condemned his arrest as an attack on freedom of the press.
 The incident appeared to be unique (in part a result of the country's unusually strict
 libel laws) and not part of a larger effort to intimidate the press.
 Some media outlets accused the Government of favoritism in the apportionment
 of its advertising, but they did not produce any firm evidence to substantiate their
 complaints. In June some media figures received threats purportedly from a pre-
 viously unknown clandestine group, but the threats were never carried out.
 The Constitution provides for academic freedom, and the Government respects
 this right in practice.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 peaceful assembly and association for any lawful purpose, and the Government re-
 spects these rights in practice. There is no requirement for permits to hold public
 meetings, and public demonstrations are common. Incidents of alleged police brutal-
 ity in breaking up demonstrations in 1995 were not repeated.
 In November the Assembly passed a law giving the Ministry of Interior the au-
 thority to regulate, supervise, and financially oversee both domestic and inter-
 national nongovernmental organizations (N    s) and religious groups working in
 the country. The law exempts organizations such as unions, cooperatives, and the
 Catholic Church, and the Interior Minister stated it will not affect other churches.
 International NGO's had lobbied for regulation of their organizations to remain with
 the Foreign Ministry. Smaller and domestic NGO's and the FMLN opposed the law,
 arguing that it abridges freedom of association. The NGO community and others ex-
 pressed concern that the Interior Ministry will politicize registration and regulatory
 oversight decisions.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriaton.-The Constitution provides for these rights, and the Government re-
 spects them in practice.
 The Government cooperates with the office of the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees. The
 issue of the provision of first asylum did not arise in 1996 and has not arisen in
 recent years. There were no reports of forced return of persons to a country where
 they feared persecution.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens exercise the right to change their government peacefully through regu-
 larly scheduled elections. The President and Vice President are elected every 5
 rears; legislative and municipal elections are held every 3 years. The Constitution
 bars the President from election to consecutive terms. Voting is by secret ballot, and
 there is universal suffrage.
 In November the Assembly approved a package of reforms to the Electoral Code
 that make it more difficult for political parties to form and maintain official status.
 In addition, the reforms provide government funding only to parties that meet the
 minimum requirements for official status or that have at least one member serving
 in the Legislative Assembly. (There were eight political parties with a least one As-
 sembly deputy and four parties without a deputy and with membership insufficent
 to qualify for government funding.) The Assembly also voted to dismiss one of the
 members of the Supreme Electoral Tribunal. The Assembly's moves were criticized
 for creating the perception of manipulation of the electoral process or the electoral
 authorities during the sensitive period prior to the March 1997 national legislative
 and municipal elections.
 Although women represent 50.6 percent of the registered voters, the number of
 women active in politics is relatively small. In the 1994 elections, voters elected 9
 women to the 84-member Legislative Assembly, a slight increase from the number
 in the previous Assembly. The president and 1 of the 4 vice presidents of the Assem-
 bly are women, as are 2 of the 15 Supreme Court justices. One cabinet minister is
 
 
 447
 a woman, as are 31 of the country's 262 mayors. A woman serves as the Govern-
 ment's highly visible Human Rights Ombudsman.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government demonstrated a willingness to discuss human rights issues and
 problems with international, local, and nongovernmental organizations. Numerous
 ocalNGO's operate freely as do various international human rights groups, includ-
 ing migration and other humanitarian and technical assistance groups. However,
 several NGO's registered their concern that the Ministry of Interior could use its
 new regulatory powers under the NGO registration law passed in November to re-
 strict NGO activity (see Section 2.b.).
 The Peace Accords specifically provided for creation of the PDDH, which was for-
 mally established by a constitutional amendment that defined its role. The PDDH's
 investigative capacity remains limited, however, and the Assembly voted to reduce
 its budget by 10 percent in December, as part of government-wide reductions. None-
 theless, the Ombudsman continued to speak out on issues such as prison conditions
 and the emergency law, and polls indicate that the PDDH retains a high level of
 public trust.
 In A pril the U.N. General Assembly reduced the U.N. Mission to El Salvador to
 a small office of verification called ONUV, reflecting continued progress in imple-
 mentation of the Peace Accords. The UNGA further scaled back the U.N. presence
 in December and eliminated the position of Special Representative of the Secretary
 General. The U.N. Development Program office assists the police, the judiciary, and
 the PDDH.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution states that all people are equal before the law and prohibits dis-
 crimination based on nationality, race, sex, or religion. In practice, discrimination
 against women and the disabled occurs in salaries, in hiring, and in access to credit
 and education.
 Women.-Violence against women, including domestic violence, is widespread and
 a serious problem. Government institutions such as the PDDH, the Attorney Gen-
 eral's office, the Supreme Court, and the PNC coordinate efforts to combat family
 violence, and the National Secretariat for the Family maintains a hot line for vic-
 tim to report domestic abuse. From March 1995 to March 1996, there were 10,032
 reported cases of domestic violence against women, accrdina to the Institute for
 Women. The Institute of Legal Medicine, using different criteria, reported 441 cases
 from January to October. The Center for Women, a leading women's group, reported
 that out of the 571 women who requested legal advice on problems such as housing,
 alimony, sexual abuse, and child custody in the first 6 months of 1995, 451 said they
 had been mistreated by their spouse. The Attorney General's office received on aver-
 age 10 cases a day of family violence, women being the main victims.
 The authorities believe that cases of domestic violence and rape are underreported
 because of economic and societal pressures and the belief that cases are unlikely to
 be resolved. The PDDH says that in previous years hundreds of domestic abuse vic-
 tims who underwent psychotherapy refused to report their cases formally. One bene-
 fit of the controversial Emergency Law Against Common and Organized Crime en-
 acted in March was that it did away with a provision of the Penal Code that allowed
 a rapist to escape criminal liability by obtaining pardon from or by marrying the
 victim, a prvision that invited intimidation of the victim Reports of sexual abuse
 of women continued to rise. From January to October, the Institute for Legal Medi-
 cine received 367 reports of sexual abuse of women, compared with 375 reports for
 all of 1995. A main concern for women is that due to the lack of corroborating wit-
 nesses, only 10 percent of rape cases result in convictions.
 The Constitution grants women the same legal rights as men, but they suffer dis-
 crimination in practice. A new Family Legal Code went into effect in October 1994,
 which amended some laws that discriminated against women, most notably the
 large number living in common law marriages. The new law also established courts
 to resolve family disputes. Several NGO's are engaged in promoting women's rights
 and have conducted several rights awareness campaigns in the media.
 Women suffer from economic discrimination and in practice do not have equal ac-
 cess to credit and land ownership. Women are often paid less than men, and over
 25 percent of working women earn less than the minimum wage. Of the economi-
 cally active female population, 65 percent work in the informal economy. Training
 for women is generally confined to low-wage occupational areas where women al-
 
 
 448
 ready hold most positions, such as teaching, nursing, home industries, or small busi-
 nesses.
 Children.-Government concern for children's rights and welfare is reflected more
 in its efforts to reduce poverty and promote family stability through economic
 growth than in direct expenditure on children. The law requires education throu h
 the ninth grade, but tbis is only feasible in the country's larger urban centers. The
 Salvadoran Institute for the Protection of Children (ISPM), an autonomous entity,
 is responsible for protecting and promoting children's rights. The Emergency Law
 Against Common and Organized Crime negated many provisions of the 1995 Juve-
 nile Code by lowering the age of majority for juvenile offenders to 14 years.
 The Government works closely through state institutions and with the United Na-
 tions Children's Fund to promote protection and general awareness of children's
 rights. However, children continued to fall victim to physical and sexual abuse,
 abandonment, exploitation, and neglect. ISPM has an estimated 5,000 children in
 its shelters, some abandoned and others victims of mistreatment. ISPM received
 around 2,000 complaints of abuse during the year. Estimates of the numbers of chil-
 dren living on the streets of San Salvador run as high as 2,000. Many appear to
 be involved in substance abuse (glue and paint sniffing), and there are allegations
 that they suffer from police brutality. The PNC denies these charges; the PDDH has
 provided human rights training to those police units that have the most contact
 with juveniles. ThePDDH has also called for the creation of drug treatment centers
 for minors.
 The Institute of Legal Medicine recorded an increase in reports of sexual abuse
 of children under 14 years of age, with 315 reports in the first 9 months of 1996,
 compared with 313 for all of 1995. The Attorney General's office also registered an
 increase in offenses against children, nearly one half of which were sexual abuse
 cases. According to the PDDH, over 85 percent of all abuse occurs in schools and
 at home, with only a small percentage being reported. Out of the 1,857 children at-
 tended at San Salvador's largest children's hospital between 1989 and 1993, nearly
 one quarter were treated for sexual abuse carried out by family members or friends
 of the flamily
 The PDD&    estimates there are some 270,000 minors working, mostly as street
 vendors. Most of these are believed to come from single-parent families. Besides los-
 ing their opportunity for an education, these children often fall victim to sexual
 abuse and are exploited as prostitutes.
 Infant malnutrition is also a problem. Ministry of Health figures indicated that
 50 percent of infants under the age of 5 are undernourished. The Government has
 a National Plan for Infants designed to increase access to potable water, iodized
 salt, vitamins, and to encourage breast feeding, but all of these remain problem
 areas, especially among the rural poor.
 People With Disabilities.-Except for the war wounded, who have secured both
 government and international funding for rehabilitation and retraining programs,
 the Government has no program to combat discrimination against the disabled.
 There are no laws mandating provision of access to public or private buildings for
 people with disabilities. The Government has not enforced a decree passed in 1984
 stating that 1 of every 500 employees must be a person with disabilities. Access to
 basic education is limited due to lack of facilities and appropriate transportation.
 There is no provision of state services for the physically disabled. Only a few of the
 Government s community-based health promoters have been trained to treat the dis-
 abled, and they rarely provide such service, tending rather to focus on life-threaten-
 ing conditions and preventive care for mothers and children. It is estimated that be-
 tween 7 and 10 percent of the population is afflicted by some form of disability.
 There are few organizations dedicated to protecting and promoting the rights of
 people with disabilities. Foreign funds for bady needed rehabilitation services chan-
 neled through the Telethon Foundation Pro-Rehabilitation, a local private voluntary
 organization, help address numerous rehabilitation issues and provide alternatives
 for the education and rehabilitation of the disabled population. A semiautonomous
 institute, the Salvadoran Rehabilitation Institute for the Disabled (ISRI), also pro-
 vides assistance to the disabled. ISRI offers medical treatment and counseling, spe-
 cial education programs, and professional training courses. Founded in 1957, ISRI
 has 10 centers throughout the country and receives assistance from the Government
 and national and international private and nongovernmental organizations.
 There was continued unrest in a home for the blind. Members of the Association
 of the Blind of El Salvador (ASCES) denounced the school's director alleging corrup-
 tion and demanded his dismissal. They also complained that ISRI had failed to give
 them a voice in naming the school's director. Instead of the hunger strikes used in
 1995, ASCES staged a takeover of the school in January. However, the National As-
 sociation of Blind Salvadorans and the Independent Association of Blind Progres-
 
 
 449
 sives denounced the takeover as too radical a move. The PDDH moved students at
 the school to another location, and the takeover continued until March when, with-
 out modifying their demands, ASCES members left the school in what they called
 a gesture of good faith. Negotiations between ASCES and ISRI continue with the
 PDDH mediating.
 Indigenous People.-El Salvador is an ethnically homogeneous country, although
 a very small segment of the population claims to have descended solely from indige-
 nous people. In 1932 government forces killed approximately 30,000 mostly indige-
 nous people following an uprising. In the face of such repression, most remaining
 indigenous people aopted local customs and successfilly assimilated into the gen-
 er  poplation. There remain a few very small communities of indigenous people
 who stIll wear traditional dress and maintain traditional customs without repres-
 sion or interference. The Constitution makes no specific provisions for the rights of
 indigenous people.
 The indigenous population is believed to be the poorest group in the country. In
 a 1994 study, the Human Rights Ombudsman found that 90 percent of indigenous
 people lived in conditions of extreme poverty, with average monthly incomes one-
 half the legal minimum wage. Employment opportunities in rural areas are few; do-
 mestic violence is a problem. Indigenous people reportedly earn less than other agri-
 cultural laborers, and indigenous women in particular have little access to edu-
 cational and work opportunities since they head most of the households. Access to
 land is a growing problem confronting indigenous people. Few possess titles to land,
 and access to bank loans and other forms of credit is extremely limited.
 The leader of what is probably the largest indigenous association, the National
 Association of Indigenous Salvadorans (ANIS), remains involved in a long-running
 land dispute with a neighboring cooperative. The controversy has resulted in a law
 suit and may have been the motive for death threats received by ANIS leaders.
 ANIS sponsored the first meeting of the indigenous population in August 1995.
 Leaders at the event called for respect for indigenous rights, as well as for constitu-
 tional recognition of their existence.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution prohibits the Government from
 using nationality, race, sex, creed, or political philosophy as a means to prevent
 workers or employers from organizing themselves into unions or associations. Nu-
 merous and sometimes conflicting laws governing labor relations impede full realiza-
 tion of the freedom of association, although Labor Code amendments developed by
 the International Labor Organization (ILO) and approved in 1994 brought about
 some improvements. The Labor Code prohibits partisan political activity by unions,
 but they routinely ignore this prohibition.
 In the 1992 Peace Accords, the Government committed itself to seek consensus
 on revised labor legislation through the Socioeconomic Forum with equal represen-
 tation from labor (including groups aligned with the FMLN), the Government, and
 the private sector. The Assemly passed legislation in 1994 streamlining the process
 required to form a union, extending union rights to agricultural, independent, and
 small-business workers, and extending the right to strike to union federations. The
 legislation also established a tripartite National Labor Council to replace the Socio-
 economic Forum.
 There are approximately 150 active unions, public employee associations, and
 peasant organizations, which represent over 300,000 Salvadorans, approximately 20
 percent of the total work force. Only private sector workers have the right to form
 unions and strike; employees of nine autonomous public agencies may form unions
 but not strike. Nevertheless, many workers including those in the public sector form
 employee associations that frequently carried out strikes that, while technically ille-
 gal, were treated as legitimate.
 Negotiations between public employee associations and the Government generally
 settle public sector strikes, although the Labor Code provides for mandatory arbitra-
 tion of public sector disputes. Government downsizing and privatization efforts left
 public workers disgruntled and public workers' unions claimed that the Government
 failed to bargain in good faith.
 The law prohibits antiunion actions before a union is legally registered. However,
 under the previous labor code, there were credible charges that the Government im-
 peded union registration through exacting reviews of union documentation and
 strict interpretation of the Constitution, Labor Code, and union statutes. ILO-draft-
 ed changes have streamlined the process and it is now difficult for management to
 use bureaucratic inertia to impede the formation of a union.
 The Labor Code forbids foreigners from holding leadership positions in unions, but
 unions freely affiliate with international labor organizations.
 
 
 450
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Constitution and the
 Labor Code provide for collective bargaining rights, but only to employees in the pri-
 vate sector and in autonomous government agencies, such as utilities and the port
 authority. However, both private sector unions (by law) and public sector employee
 associations (in practice) use collective bargaining extensively.
 The Ministry of Labor oversees implementation of collective bargaining agree-
 ments and acts as conciliator in labor disputes in the private sector and autonomous
 government institutions. In practice, mimsters and the heads of autonomous govern-
 ment institutions ofen negotiate with labor organizations directly, relying on the
 Labor Ministry only for such functions as officially certifying unions. The Ministry
 often seeks to conciliate labor disputes through informal channels rather than at-
 tempting to enforce regulations strictly, leading to charges that the Ministry is bi-
 asedagainst labor. Corruption continues to be a serious problem affecting labor in-
 spectors and courts.
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination against unions. It provides that union
 officials at the time of their election, throughout their term, and for 1 year following
 their term shall not be fired, suspended for disciplinary reasons, removed, or de-
 moted except for legal cause. Employers generally observed this provision in prac-
 tice, but in the past they have in some cases fired those attempting to form unions
 before receiving their union credentials. The law requires employers to rehire em-
 ployees fired for any type of union activity, although the authorities sometimes fail
 to enforce this requirement. In many cases, employers convince fired employees to
 take a cash payment in lieu of returning to work.
 There are nine Export Processing Zones (EPZ's). Labor regulations in these zones
 are identical to those throughout the country. Companies operating in the EPZ's,
 whie providing higher salaries and benefits than companis outside the EPZ's,
 strongly dscourage organizing. In past years there were redible reports of some
 foreign-owned factories dismissing union organizers. In addition, unions accused
 some companies of physically abusing their workers. While labor inspectors and
 courts were ineffective in the face of such complaints, the Government formed inter-
 agency commi_ttees (onsisting of representatives of the Labor Ministry, Economic
 Ministry, and the PDDH) to investigate alleged violations.
 In January the Legislative Assembly passed laws reforming the Labor Ministry
 and giving the Government the power to take away free zone privileges from compa-
 nies bre ing labor regulations. The new Labor Minister began reorganizing his
 Ministry, aided by an April law modernizing the Ministry and increasing the num-
 ber of labor inspectors. The Labor Ministry also opened field offices in two EPZ's.
 In August the Government established a tripartite (government, business, and
 labor) commission to help resolve conflicts in free trade zones and bonded compa-
 nies. In addition, factory operators and owners continue efforts at setting up an in-
 dustrywide operating code defining internationally recognized labor standards, as
 well as a mechanism to monitor its enforcement.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor, except in the case of calamity and other instances specified by
 law. This provision is followed in practice.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Constitution prohibits the em-
 ployment of children under the age of 14. It provides for exceptions only where such
 employment is absolutely indispensable to the sustenance of the minor and his fam-
 ily. This is most often the case with children of peasant families who traditionally
 work during planting and harvesting seasons. Children also frequently work as
 street vendors and general laborers in small businesses, especially in the informal
 sector. Parents of children in circumstances such as these often do not allow their
 children to complete schooling through the ninth grade as the law requires, since
 the labor the children perform is considered vital to the family. Child labor is not
 usually found in the industrial sector. (One well-publicized 1995 case of child labor
 involved a minor who used forged identity papers to pass as an adult.) The Ministry
 of Labor is responsible for enforcing child labor laws.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The minimum wage for commercial, industrial,
 service, and agroindustrial employees is $4.40 (38.50 colones) per day for industrial
 and service workers, and $3.30 (28.60 colones) per day, including a food allowance,
 for agroindustrial employees. Full-time employees who are paid the minimum wage
 receive pay for 30 days a month. However, the minimum wage with benefits is not
 sufficient to provide a decent standard of living for a worker and family. Minimum
 wages did not keep up with the Ministry of Economy's estimate of the increase in
 the cost of living. The Labor Ministry is responsible for enforcing minimum wage
 laws and does so effectively in the formal sector.
 The law limits the workday to 6 hours for youths between 14 and 18 years of age
 and 8 hours for adults, and it mandates premium pay for longer hours. The Labor
 
 
 451
 Code sets a maximum normal workweek of 36 hours for youths and 44 hours for
 adults. It requires for all workers bonus pay for overtime and limits the workweek
 to no more than 6 days.
 The Constitution and the Labor Code require employers, including the Govern-
 ment, to take steps to ensure that employees are not placed at risk in their work-
 places and prohibit the employment of persons under 18 years of age and all women
 in occupations considered hazardous. Nevertheless, health and safety regulations
 are outdated, and enforcement is inadequate. Workers can remove themselves from
 dangerous work situations without jeopardizing their employment only in situations
 where they can present a medical certificate issued by a doctor or the Social Secu-
 rity Institute indicating that their health is at risk while using certain equipment
 or substances. The Ministry of Labor attempts to enforce the applicable regulations
 and conducts investigations which sometimes lead to fines or other findings favoring
 workers. The Ministry has very limited powers and only limited resources to enforce
 compliance.
