 EL SALVADOR
 El Salvador continues to consolidate the democratic system
 adopted in 1983 under a constitution drafted by a popularly
 elected assembly. The President, Legislative Assembly, and
 mayors have been chosen in elections which were pronounced
 open and fair by observers from some 40 countries. El Salvador
 is preparing for another round of elections for the Assembly
 and mayors' offices in March 1988 and for the presidency in
 March 1989.
 The economy is mixed. Export of major crops and banking are
 government controlled, and the price of food grains is
 subsidized. The Government continues to implement a major
 agrarian reform program. Poor market conditions and continuing
 sabotage by a Communist-led insurgency contributed to another
 year of very low economic growth in 1987. El Salvador is still
 recovering from the devastatinq 1986 San Salvador earthquake,
 with damage estimated at more than $1 billion. Severe droughts
 in 1986 and 1987 added to economic woes by causing major crop
 damage and a severe shortage of hydroelectric power.
 For 8 years, the Government has fought an insurgency supported
 by the Soviet Union, Cuba, and Nicaragua'. The Farabundo Marti
 National Liberation Front (FMLN), numbering between 6,000 and
 8,000 combatants, is formally allied with the Revolutionary
 Democratic Front (FDR), itself an alliance of several small
 political parties. Human rights in El Salvador have suffered
 as a result of this ongoing insurgency. The FMLN/FDR has
 continued to rely on the indiscriminate use of landmines,
 kidnaping, forced recruitment (including increasing use of
 children in combat), machine-gunning and burning of vehicles
 on the nation's roads, and generalized economic sabotage, in
 addition to attacks on military personnel and facilities.
 While abuses continue to be alleged and investigated, the
 conduct of the military and security forces continued to show
 improvement. The Government does not condone human rights
 abuses and is actively seeking to inculcate respect for human
 rights throughout society, including at all levels of the
 military. The Government's Human Rights Commission (CDH)
 plays an important role in this effort. Credible accusations
 of human rights abuses and of indiscriminate aerial bombing
 were fewer in 1987 than in previous years. Some members of
 the armed forces were arrested in 1987 for serious abuses,
 although several alleged abuses remained unresolved. The bulk
 of politically motivated killings appeared to have been
 committed by FMLN guerrillas. The infamous rightwing death
 squads which used to advertise their murders in the media have
 made no- claims of killings since 1984. In June death threats
 were issued by unknown persons in the name of a death squad.
 The threats were not carried out, and their authenticity
 remains in doubt. Some unexplained deaths may still be the
 work of extreme rightist elements, but there is no evidence
 that the Government is either linked to or condones these
 killings.
 The internal conflict is a major cause of the continued
 displacement of approximately 322,000 Salvadorans from their
 homes in conflict zones. As the Government has been able to
 restore its authority in contested areas, an increasing number
 of the displaced are returning home.
 The state of emergency instituted in 1980 expired in January
 1987, and all constitutional provisions were restored at that
 time. Special military courts established by the now-expired
 
 
 475
 EL SALVADOR
 Legislative Decree 50 processed captured guerrilla suspects
 under the' stateof 'emergency. Under interim legislation,
 these courts have'retained jurisdiction over those persons
 arrested during the state of emergency. Guerrilla suspects
 arrested since th7'state of'emergency~ended are processed
 through the'civiliaRicriminal courts'and have the right to
 full due process and constitutional protection. In November
 all prisoneri held 'for insurgency-rlafed offenses that"
 occurred before October 22,,1987, becanie eligible for the
 Government's'afnest Program, implemented in compliance with
 the August 7 Guatemala accords. All but a handful of
 guerrilla suspects,'whose amnesty grants hqve been individually
 appealed, were released. Two persons convicted of rightwing
 death squad killings were also released.
 A large backlog 6f'cases and prolonged incarceration before
 trial plague the criminal court system. The Government has
 undertaken a dompFehensive program to revamp court procedures,
 update laws, improve the investigative capacity and training
 of judges,'and protect witnesses and court personnel from
 intimidation. In December the Attorney General'established a
 new section in his office to concentrate on prosecuting major
 human rights cases.
 In fulfillment of its obligations under the Guatemala accords,
 the Government met with FMLN/FDR leaders in San Salvador on'
 October 4-5 for the third round of peace talks since the war
 began. The two sides,,agreed to form two joint commissions to
 continue discussions on a ceade'-fire and other steps toward
 national reconciliation. An dnsuccessful meeting of the
 commissions in Caracas on October 21-23 was to be'followed by
 renewed c~ase-fire'talks in'Mexico on October 30. However,
 following thb'Octbber 26 assassination of Herbert Anaya,
 director of the 6r6guerrilla-Human Rights Commission of El
 Salvador (CDHES), the FMLN unilaterally suspended the talks.
 The Government is unwilling to'acceptFILN/FDR demands that a
 political soiution include power-sharing before elections,
 territorialdemarcation, and integraCion of FMLN forces into
 the army.
 RESPECT FOR'HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section I -kespect for the Integrity of the-Person, Including
 Freedbm from:
 a. Political Killing
 The number of deaths reported in the Salvadoran press which
 appeared to.be. politically motivated averaged 28 per month
 through June 'this compares with a monthly average of 22 in
 1986, 28 in 1985, 64 in 1984, and 140"in 1983.
 On October 26, the'president of the nongovernmental Human
 Rights Commission of El Salvador (CDHES), Herbert Ernesto
 Anaya Sanabria, fais murdered outside his home. Anaya had been
 arrested ld.May 1986 and charged with membership in th6
 Peoples' ReVolutionary Army (ERP), one of the five guerrilla
 factions of the FMLN. He was among 57 prisoners released in
 February 1987 in exchange for the former dir.ector of civil
 aviation, kidnaped 15 months earlier by the FMLN. The
 Government promised a full and thorough investigation of the
 Anaya killing and assigned it to the Special Investigations
 Unit, a U.S.-trained criminal investigations unit under direct
 civilian control. A $10,000 reward was offered by the
 Government for information leading to the arrest of the
 
 
 476
 EL SALVADOR
 assailants. On January 4, 1988 Jorge Alberto Miranda Arevalo,
 a member of the ERP, confessed to First Criminal Court Judge
 Edgar Morales Joya that he had participated in the
 assassination of Anaya Sanabria along with two guerrilla
 comrades, on the orders of ERP leaders who, he said, suspected
 Anaya had become an informant. On December 9, the delegate of
 the CDH in San Miguel, Rene Joaquin Cardenas Vargas, was
 killed by gunfire as he was leaving his car in front of his
 home. Two persons arrested for auto theft in a separate
 incident on December 10 have now been charged with Cardenas'
 murder, based on forensic evidence. The motive remains
 unclear.
 Statistics on apparently politically-motivated killings
 compiled by the U.S. Embassy during 1987, principally from
 reports in the local press but also from guerrilla media and
 other publicly available sources, indicate that most were
 attributable to guerrilla insurgents. Of the 169 deaths
 ascribed to political motives during the first 6 months of
 1987, 53 appeared clearly to have been perpetrated by, and
 another 81 possibly committed by, the FMLN/FDR. In 7 cases
 there was insufficient evidence to designate the likely
 assailants. Five killings were attributed to military
 personnel. Finally, 23 civilians reportedly killed in combat
 action between the two sides are included among the 169
 victims.
 Collection and classification of information on political
 murders is necessarily inexact, and these numbers can only be
 interpreted as indicative of trends in violence over time and
 for comparison with past reports using the same methodology.
 Common criminal deaths, for example, are easily disguised as
 political killings by-perpetrators wishing to confound
 investigators; at the same time, political motivation in other
 murders may go undetected, causing them to be classified as
 common crimes. Finally, it is likely that the number of
 civilians killed in action by both sides in the context of the
 armed conflict is somewhat higher than reported in the press.
 There continue to be occasional reports of noncombat killings
 attributed to members of the armed forces. Five young men
 returning from carrying supplies for the guerrillas on May 21
 were killed by soldiers of the army's Arce Battalion, and
 their bodies were dumped into a well. The soldiers claim they
 killed the five in combat, while persons claiming to be
 witnesses say the men were murdered after capture. In another
 incident, unidentified army troops failed in a June 6 attempt
 to kill four farmworkers. Rightwing death squads which
 formerly publicized their murders did not claim responsibility
 for any killing during 1987, although a heretofore unknown
 organization claimed responsibility for the September 24
 assassination of a postal workers' union executive. The
 executive, however, was reportedly investigating corruption
 among postal workers, leaving doubt as to the authenticity of
 the claim. The Catholic Church's Tutela Legal attributed 9
 killings to rightwing death squads from January to May, as
 compared with 42 in all of 1986 and 136 in 1985. Tutela Legal
 does not count or consider murders by the FMLN in its death
 squad figures and frequently classifies as "death squad
 killings" murders that other observers view as criminal rather
 than political in nature. It occasionally gives no reason and
 provides no evidence for attributing a murder to death squads.
 Anonymous death threats against human rights workers continued
 in 1987. Members of the CDHES, identified by former guerrillas
 
 
 477
 EL SALVADOR
 as an FMLN front organization, charged.that a group of armed
 men attempted on May 30 to break into CDHES offices and
 subsequently reported receiving telephoned death threats.
 Members of the CDH have also received death threats.. On June
 15, a pprso4.using the name of a notorious death squad issued
 a death threat.-agaifist students and faculty members of the
 National University of El Salvador; the threat was never
 carried out; 'The Government and armed forces condemned the
 threats.and vowed to use the full force of the.Government to
 -prevent a resurgence of death squad activity. A Lutheran
 bishop received threats in September; The police offered to
 provide protection.
 b. Disappearance
 Government policy forbids unacknowledged detention by security
 or.armed services. However, there have been occasional
 credible reports of persons taken away by men thought to be
 members of the army or security forces, although positive
 proof has not been available. Miguel Angel Rivas, a
 17-year-old stuoent, was reported to have been picked up by an
 ,Air Force patrol near the Ilopango Air Base on November 29,
 1986 and then passed to the National Guard in January 1987.
 He has not.jeen found. The families of three young labor
 union memberswho disappeared from Santa Ana city after a May 1
 labor demonstration claimed to have been told the three were
 picked up by soldiers of the intelligence section of the
 Army's Sec'ond Brigade. Efforts to locate them-have been
 fruitless. Salvador Ubau, a university official, disappeared
 after being forced into a pick-up truck by armed men in San
 Salvador on September 1. The armed and security forces denied
 any part in the disappearances, and all these cases were
 referred to the civilian Commission for Investigations.
 Many persons reported missing by family members and human
 rights organizations were found later to have been legally
 arrested and duly entered in a security force register of
 detained persons. Some persons who desert their families,
 emigrate, or join guerrilla ranks are also reported as
 disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment-,or Punishment
 The Salvadoran security forces are required by arrest
 regulations to register detainees and have them examined by a
 doctor or nurse upon entry into police facilities. In
 insurgency-related cases, they are required to notify promptly
 the family of the detainee, Tutela Legal, the CDH, and the
 International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) of the
 arrest. The registration and notification procedures,
 together with the official prohibition on mistreatment of
 prisoners, have markedly reduced the incidence of torture by
 government-authorities. The Constitution requires that all
 persons arrested by the police be freed or turned over to the
 courts within 72 hours. Although this requirement is followed
 in the great majority of cases, on occasion arrestees are held
 for longer periods, most often when a military unit in the
 field is the arresting authority and when battlefield
 exigencies preclude the rapid transfer of the arrestee to the
 police.
 According to the U.N. Special Rapporteur for Human Rights in
 El Salvador, physical mistreatment is not systematically
 practiced nor condoned by government authorities. He
 
 
 478
 EL SALVADOR
 considered, however, some reports of mistreatment by individual
 personnel to be credible. The number and severity of reported
 cases of torture have declined, but allegations of abuse by
 the arresting forces continue. Most allegations involve
 abuses that leave no marks and-thus are extremely difficult to
 prove or disprove. Other alleged abuses include deprivation
 of food and sleep, threats against the detainee or his family',
 prolonged interrogation while blindfolded, being forced to
 stand for long periods of time, forced exercise, and blows to
 the ears. Some prisoners claim to have been forced to sign
 confessions without being permitted to read them. Some
 instances of severe beatings, rape, choking, and electric
 shock were reported. When a complaint of mistreatment appears
 credible, the CDH reports the incident to the commander of the
 unit responsible and to the Ministry of Defense.
 The Government continued to use disciplinary action to reduce
 abuses of authority by the military and police forces.
 Between October 1979 and December 1986 over 913 military and
 police were disciplined or turned over to the courts for
 abuses of authority. More than 130 were similarily treated in
 the first 9 months of 1987. Archaic judicial recordkeeping
 makes it difficult to determine the disposition of these
 cases. Human rights instruction is part of police recruit
 training and officers' classes. The CDH, the ICRC, and
 Catholicclergy participate in courses on human rights for
 police, military, and civil defense personnel. The security
 forces instituted a separate intensive human rights training
 program for all police.
 In recent years,-there have been few allegations of
 mistreatment of prisoners in El Salvador's prisons. There
 were no verifiable instances of torture occurring in the
 penitentiaries in 1987. Punishment cells are reportedly
 rarely used. In an isolated incident, inmates in Mariona
 Prison claimed the guards on August 28 fired into the
 cellblocks, causing the wounding of five prisoners by
 .ricochets. Prison officials say the gunfire came from a
 guerrilla attack on the prison. In December two Mariona
 inmates died under mysterious circumstances. The first died
 of internal injuries allegedly sustained during the time he
 was in police custody, prior to his declaration before a
 civilian magistrate and transfer to prison pending trial. The
 second death occurred as a result of a fall from a prison roof
 during the transfer of several prisoners to other facilities.
 The authorities claim he allegedly jumped from the building
 while attempting to elude security force personnel charged
 with effecting the transfer. Some nongovernmental
 organizations have alleged that he was thrown or pushed from
 the roof. Both incidents are being investigated by the
 authorities.
 Prison diet is inadequate, and many prisoners must supplement
 their diet with food brought by visitors. Some institutions
 have insufficient water supplies. Prisoners receive family
 and conjugal visits and have access to primary education and
 religious services. Many prisoners earn money by making
 articles for sale.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, Exile, or Forced Labor
 The criminal code contains statutes prohibiting terrorism,
 insurgency, and other actions against the stability of the
 State, and persons arrested under them have the same legal
 protection as common criminals. The Constitution permits the
 
 
 479
 EL SAtVADOR
 security (pdlice) forces to hold the arrestees incommunicado
 for periods up to 72 hours before releasing them or turning
 them over to the ourcs for' a determination as to whether
 continued detention is warranted.- Arrests without apparent
 sufficient'cause do occur, but detention beyond 3 days is-
 rare. An arrestee has the right to have a defense attorney
 present after being turned 'over to the courts.' Holding
 political views opposed to the Government is not justification
 for arirest if the suspect does not advocate violence. The
 courts have held that membership in a front organization
 controlled by insurgents iS'not by itself sufficient reason
 for holding an arrestee, although membership in one of the
 violent guerrilla groups is. From January to August, the
 security forces arrested 1,871 persons, including foreign
 nationdld, for  insurgency-related offenses. Of that number,
 1,577 were subsequently released by the.police or the courts,
 183 were bound over for trial, and 111 were hospitalized,
 deported, or sent to�the juvenile facility. An but 17
 persons determined to be held for politically motivated crimes
 committed before bctober-22 or membership in guerrilla
 organizations, were released from custody in November under the
 provisions' of the general aninesty.
 Salvadoran judges theoretically are constrained legally by
 time limits for investigating the case and bringing it to
 trial, but in practice these limitations ate not followed.
 The backlog bf caes Is 6ne major reason for delay. As a
 recourse against'illega'I detention, the subject can request,
 from the time -an -arest warrant is issued by a court until the
 trial is completed and a'sentence is being carried out, that
 the Supreme Court review the legal' merit of the detention.
 This appeal freezes action on the case until the Supreme Court
 has rendered its decision.
 Insurgency-related cases begun before the termination of the
 state of emergency in January 1987 remained in the military
 court system. Decree 50, the law detailing procedures for
 trying these cases, expired and was replaced by Legislative
 Decree 618, a iirtually identical, statute, to permit continued
 processing of pending Decree 50 cases. However, Decree 618
 does not apply ib new arrests unless a state of emergency is
 in place. There was a large backlog of these cases at the
 beginning of the year, but the situation changed considerably
 after the state of'emergency ended, and no new cases were
 added. "A backlogof more than 1,070 cases was reduced to 557
 by September, and inNofe'mber, most of the remaining Decree
 50/618 prisoners 'were released under the provisions of the
 amnesty.
 There are no provisions in the law for exile or for the
 revocation of citizenship. Some leaders of the FMLN/FDR claim
 to be in exile, but it is self-imposed. However, they could
 be subject to arrest in El Salvador for membership in guerrilla
 combatant organizations if they return. The amnesty law
 provided a 15-day period in November during which any
 guerrilla'could renounce armed conflict, giving those who
 claimed to be in exile an opportunity to return without having
 to face criminal charges.
 The'Government prohibits forced labor, and it is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Salvadoran law provides that a person accused of a crime may
 have a lawyer present after being remanded to the courts. At
 
 
 480
 EL SALVADOR
 present, court-appointed attorneys are not available to a
 defendant until the investigative phase is over and the judge
 determines there is sufficient evidence to enter the final, or
 plenary, stage of the trial. However, a bill to change the
 criminal procedural code to provide counsel from the beginning
 of the legal process has been submitted to the legislature.
 The defendant has a right to be present in court and to
 confront the witnesses against him. All court records of
 trials of adults are open to the public unless the judge rules
 the case is to be kept confidential. most major crimes in El
 Salvador are tried publicly with a five-person jury. Jury
 trials, however, resulted in only a 15 percent conviction rate
 in 1987, despite clear proof of guilt against the accused in
 many of the acquittals, probably because either jurors feared
 later reprisal or hoped for a later reward from the defendants.
 This led the Legislative Assembly to pass a law in March to
 eliminate jury trials in kidnaping, drug-trafficking, and
 extortion cases. Inordinate delays in processing cases,
 absences of attorneys, half-day work schedules, the
 destruction of many court buildings in the October 1986
 earthquake, and defects in the jury selection system result in
 an inability of the judicial system expeditiously to process
 cases. As a result, only about 10 percent of all prison
 inmates are serving sentences; the rest are awaiting
 adjudication of their cases. Bail is available for some
 offenses but is seldom used. Prisoners are usually
 incarcerated for 6 to 18 months between the time they are
 charged and the time they are brought to trial, and even
 longer waits are common. A bill before the Legislative
 Assembly aimed at alleviating this situation will free on
 their own recognizance many detainees until trial and will
 establish parole for some convicts.
 The Government continues to move forward with a comprehensive
 judicial reform program, including proposed legislation to
 revise portions of the penal, penal procedural, and civil
 codes. The Government is also working over the longer term to
 overhaul and update the entire system of laws and procedures
 in order to produce a modern and efficient judicial system.
 One key proposal would establish .a judicial career with minimum
 requirements for judges at each level of the judiciary.
 The Commission for Investigations, consisting of a Special
 Investigations Unit (SIU) and a fully equipped and staffed
 Forensic Unit, is investigating a number of sensitive cases of
 human rights abuse. It has, for example, dedicated a major
 part of its investigative capability to investigating the
 murder of Herbert Anaya.
 The Salvadoran judiciary, the Attorney General's office, and
 the Solicitor General's office are independent of the rest of
 the Government. Supreme Court justices, the Attorney General,
 and the Solicitor General are chosen by the Legislative
 Assembly after nomination by political parties. The judicial
 branch determines its own budget, which must be approved by
 the legislatuze. A new Attorney General took office in June
 and has shown a willingness to prosecute vigorously major
 human rights cases stalled during his predecessor's time in
 office.
 Historically, judicial authority has not extended to the
 military officer corps. Although low-ranking military and
 police officers have been discharged and turned over to the
 civilian courts for trial of criminal offenses, in practice
 the officers of the armed and security forces are treated
 
 
 481
 EL SALVADOR
 differently from other citizens before the law. Judges are
 frequently, reluctant to bring charges against them, and
 colleagues often cannot be relied upon to cooperate in the
 prosecution of crimes imputed.to a fellow officer..-
 While numerous enlisted personnel have been convicted, no
 military officer has been convicted of human rights violations.,
 in recent years. Several have been incarcerated pending
 trial. 'rhe-October amnesty has been.applied to some cases
 involving,militaxy and s9curity personnel. The judge hearing
 each case~mpst decide on-the applicability of the amnesty in
 individual..gases b�sed on-the.evidence available as of
 November 6, although the fipdings are subject to government
 appeal.
 f. Arbitraxy Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 -CorrespQndence
 The Government does not arbitrarily interfere in the personal
 lives of citizens,,.although it reserves the right to.intervene
 when it believes pational security is threatened. Both the
 Government and.the guerrillas use networks of informers. The,
 security forces need no warrant, to use forced entry to carry
 out arrests and investigAtions if they believe they have
 sufficient evidence:that a crime may have been committed. The
 constitutipnal protection. of the inviolability of
 correspondence is in-full force following the termination of
 the statje pf emergency..
 g. Violations of Humanitarian Law in Armed Conflicts
 As compared with previous years, few claims were made that the
 Air Force engaged.in indiscriminate bombing in 1987. Most of
 those allegations that did surface proved groundless. Many of
 the charges themselves appear to be part of the FMLN's
 strategy to manipulate human rights issues and organizations
 for tactical military and, political purposes. On at least two
 occasions,- however, the armed forces acknowledged that
 civilians were accidentally killed or wounded in aerial
 attacks, including an incident in Santa Marta, Cabanas
 Department, in which one civilian was killed and several
 wounded by a misdirected air strike. Fpllowing the guidelines
 set by President Duarte in 1984, the Air Force generally
 refrained, from attacking guerrilla concentrations and
 installations when civilians were nearby.
 The guerrillas frequently attack economic targets, which
 greatly affects the well-being of the population: e.g.,
 country-w'de transportation stoppages to hinder the flow of
 foodstuffs and consumer goods; destruction of bridges and the
 telephone and electric power grids; interference with the
 production, harvesting, and transportation of major export
 crops; hindrganpe of government sponsored repopulation of
 farmlands; and assassination and kidnaping of mayors and other
 local government officials. In addition, FMLN guerrillas
 mount periodic large-scale attacks against key government
 installations. There were no credible reports of government
 troops conducting comparable operations, such as burning crops
 or forcibly mqving inhabitants. The military has on occasion, -
 however, burned limited areas during military operations in
 order to detonate home-made guerrilla mines and thereby
 minimize casualties.
 Of the killings attributed to the FMLN, many victims were
 rural residents who refused to collaborate with the guerrillas
 
 
 482
 EL SALVADOR
 or were suspected of being government informers. Other
 victims were drivers or passengers of vehicles machine-gunned
 by the guerrillas during one of the seven "traffic bans"
 declared by the FMLN in the course of the year. There are
 eyewitness reports of soldiers on leave and civilians being
 pulled off buses and executed by guerrillas and of persons
 kidnaped by guerrillas who have never reappeared. In January
 the bodies of six coffee workers abducted the previous day by
 guerrillas were found with their thumbs tied together behind
 their backs, hacked with machetes, and shot. In February the
 guerrillas announced they had tried and executed three captives
 whom they accused of participating in the Government's "United
 to Reconstruct" campaign in Usulutan Department. The bodies
 were found shortly thereafter. On September 28, FMLN
 guerrillas forced the mayor of a small town out of her house
 and assassinated her in front of her daughter. On November
 12, a Salvadoran employee of the U.S. Embassy was murdered by
 an apparent FMLN assassination team.
 On October 1, the President of the Salvadoran Trial Lawyers
 Association was murdered in San Salvador. There has been
 speculation that an FMLN group had targeted him for his role
 as management representative in a labor dispute with an
 FMLN-controlled union. On October 27, three people were
 abducted by the FMLN from a cooperative farm in La Paz
 Department, where they were conducting'management training at
 a cooperative. On December 12-13, guerrillas attacked a
 coffee farm in Usulatan, killing 11 farm workers and 4 security
 guards. Several of the farm workers died inside a warehouse
 the guerrillas had set afire. The latter prevented the farm
 workers' escape by firing automatic weapons at the doors.
 A major cause of death and maiming is the guerrillas' use of
 indiscriminately placed landmines and booby traps. Planted
 along farm roads and paths, around guerrilla-downed electric
 poles, under railroad tracks, near water sources, in farmlands,
 and on coffee plantations to impede the harvest, these
 "revolutionary mines" (as the guerrillas call them) killed
 some 31 civilians in 1984, 55 in 1985, 62 in 1986, and 31 in
 the first 8 months of 1987. From January through August,
 another 135 civilians, many of them children, were injured by
 guerrilla mines. The military uses mines on the perimeters of
 their installations. There have been a few allegations that
 these areas were not properly marked, resulting in civilian
 injuries.
 Instances of military mistreatment of noncombatants and
 prisoners occur, as noted above.  There is no evidence they
 are widespread or that they are condoned by the high command.
 The Government does not recognize the insurgency as a
 belligerent power and thus does not accord prisoner-of-war
 status to captured guerrillas. The armed forces are required
 to turn captured guerrillas over to the civilian court system
 for criminal prosecution.
 In 1987 the FMLN greatly increased the use of children in
 combat, and many of'them appear to be victims of kidnaping.
 videotapes of an FMLN/FDR clandestine press conference in
 Morazan department before the October 4 dialog show'numerous
 armed 8 to 14-year-old boys keeping guard. A young boy, found
 with a pistol in his hand, was among several dead children
 left by guerrilla forces after an attack on a government
 communications installation in Morazan department on September
 30. Still other credible reports were received of children
 being kidnaped for forced recruitment into the FMLN and of
 
 
 483
 EL SALVADOR
 their use as couriers and spotters. According to press
 reports, 79 civilians disappeared between January and June,
 including nonpolitical disappearances such as lost or runaway
 children aged 10 orover... During the same period, the press
 reported 249 persons abducted by the guerrillas and 13 abducted
 by unknown assailants. A government report gave the ligher
 figure of 441 persons kidnaped by the guerrillas between
 January and July. Both the press and the government figures
 show a considerable increase over the 98 recorded for 1986,
 attributable primarily to a guerrilla campaign to fill their
 ranks by forced recruitment of both combatants and support
 personnel.
 Col. Omar Napoleon Avalos, the Director of Civil Aviation,
 kidnaped bythe,14LN in October 1985, was held for more-than
 15 months until-the guerrillas could negotiate what they
 considered a suitable exchange. Avalos was freed on February
 2 in exchange for the Government's release from prison of 57
 FMLN suspects. In the course of 1987, the guerrillas captured
 and exchanged or released seven mayors and several members of
 the armed forces. Guerrillas keep prisoners with them during
 their frequent- moves and expose, them to the danger of attack
 by the military. They often do not permit ICRC visits to
 prisoners.
 The FMLN clakms to respect the physical and psychological -
 integrity of-its captives. Nevertheless, the guerrillas
 occasionally torture captives and then killtfiem. On November
 6, the guerrillps abducted three peasants they claimed were
 members of the civ -l -defense. The bodies were found the next
 day with signs, of severe torture. The guerrillas reportedly
 perform executions in front of-otier kidnap victims.as a form
 of intimidation to persuade the captives to be cooperative.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 There are no governmental restrictions on freedom of speech
 and the.press., San Salvador, a city of l.million, has five
 daily papers, six television stations, and a multitude of
 radio sta.tions. There are three major evening and two morning
 newscasts,. ihich broadcast live interviews with a full range
 of political -figures, including guerrilla commanders and
 political leaders. Four leading daily newspapers in the
 capital are conservative, and they vigorously criticize the
 Government. The fifth,-while editorially conservative,
 reports on the press conferences of FMLN front groups and
 carries unedited pieces from the FMLN press agencies Notisal
 and Salpress. The views of the radical left continue to be
 expressed in a variety of journals, periodicals, newsletters,
 bulletins, and paid advertisements in the daily press, as well
 as television and radio interviews. The openly pro-FMLN/FDR
 National University of El Salvador and the leftist, Jesuit-run
 University of CentralAmerica publish weekly supplements in
 one of the.major dailies. Commercial radio stations
 frequently repeat reports broadcast by clandestine guerrilla
 radio stations. The Government owns no newspapers, but runs
 one radio station and two television stations with identical
 programming. The-Army operates another radio station,'which
 focuses on Latin music, sports, and pep talks to the troops.
 An 8-year-old decree forbidding'publication of anonymous
 communiques remains in effect and is  argely observed by the
 media. When it has been violated, the Government has taken no
 
 
 484
 EL SALVADOR
 action against the reporting media. Academic freedom is
 protected by the Constitution and respected by the Government.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Any associatibn not formed for criminal purposes is legal and
 permitted in El Salvador. Political, professional, religious,
 labor, and social organizations operate openly and freely.
 Various groups criticize the Government from both the left and
 the right, holding marches and demonstrations without
 interference from the Government. On January 22, the private
 sector called a shutdown to protest government economic
 policies. An estimated 90 percent of the businesses in San
 Salvador closed their doors. Marches by labor, displaced
 persons, and human rights front organizations of the FMLN are
 frequent. On October 3-5, some 2,500 persons, led by FMLN
 front groups, gathered in the vacant lot across the street
 from the Papal Nunciature to express their solidarity with the
 FMLN/FDR delegation during the dialog with the Government.
 The Constitution provides for the right of private sector and
 autonomous public institution employees to organize unions,
 bargain collectively, and strike. Under the antiquated labor
 code, however, the bureaucratic procedures required before a
 union can legally strike make such action extremely
 difficult. The labor code requires that labor disputes go
 through protracted stages of direct bargaining, conciliation,
 and arbitration before a strike or lockout can be declared.
 The law states that strikes may be called only to demand the
 implementation or review of the collective bargaining
 agreement, or in the defense of the common interests of the
 workers. A majority of the workers must agree before a strike
 is called. Unions often ignore these requirements, and many
 strikes are declared to be illegal. The labor ministry
 oversees the implementation of collective bargaining
 agreements and serves as conciliator in labor disputes in the
 private sector and in autonomous institutions. Government
 employees of nonautonomous public institutions are prohibited
 by the Constitution from forming unions and striking, but most
 of these employees are represented by associations which, in
 fact, act as unions by bargaining collectilely and calling
 work stoppages. Salvadoran unions draw up their own charters
 and elect their own officers. The Government has not acted
 upon a proposal which would extend collective bargaining
 rights to peasant organizations. Labor unions participated in
 numerous marches and demonstrations, both for and against the
 Government throughout 1987, often in cooperation with other
 nongovernmental organizations.
 Unions may join national and international federations. Part
 of the democratic trade union movement is affiliated with the
 International Confederation of Free Trade Unions, while
 Christian Democratic unions are affiliated with the World
 Confederation of Labor. Some leftist unions maintain
 association with the Communist-dominated World Federation of
 Trade Unions.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is provided for by the Constitution and is
 respected in practice. Although the country is predominantly
 Roman Catholic, an estimated 20 percent of the population
 subscribe to other faiths, mainly Protestant Fundamentalists.
 Foreign and Salvadoran missionaries .operate freely and without
 harassment. Church members and employees, both Catholic and
 
 
 486
 EL SALVADOR
 Protestant,-have on occasion been arrested, but these arrests
 were unrelatedto the person's religious beliefs or activities.
 The Cathojc-.Church continues tobe.one of the most influential
 institutions im the country - The Archbishop's Sunday homily
 is broadcast live from the Metropolitan Cathedral on one of
 the Government's television stations and on radio. The
 Archbishop was officially appointed as mediator in the dialog
 between the Government and the guerrillas. Church publications
 disseminat-  the church's position on human rights and the war.
 Church statement5 have become increasingly critical of the-
 leftist insurgency,,but-the church has not hesitated to
 criticize the Government.
 d. Fxeedgm of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, nnd Repatriation
 With the expiration of the state of emergency,.constitutional
 protection of the right of free movement is in force.
 Nevertheless, local military commanders have denied entry to,
 areas whire military operations are under way and require that
 foreign vinitors receive permission before entering combat
 zones. The Goyern~ent instituted a requirement that all .
 foreign visitors obtain a SalvadoXan visa before entering the
 country. On occasion it -ordered'out of the country foreigners
 who it consi-dered had involved themselves in internal
 political- affairs.
 An estimated 322,000 people-are displaced within El Salvador
 by the conflict, primrAily from the northern and eastern zones.
 Another.,X67,400 are refugees in other-Central American
 countries and in Mexico, and more than 500,000 arefestimated
 to be illegal immigrants in the United States. As the level
 of violence falls, an increasing number of-refugees are
 returning from Abroad. More than 4,833 had already returned
 from other Xentral American countries since 1984, according to
 the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees; on October 10,
 another 4,300 chose to leave the Mesa Grande-refugee camp -in
 Honduras, where some had been living since the.beginning of
 the war, to return-to their homes in El Salvador. The
 Intergovernmental Committee for Migration (ICM), which met and
 maintained-contact with some 9,530 returnees between December
 1984 and December. 1986 and continued to meet Salvadorans
 deported from the United States in 1987, reported no evidence
 of government-.harassment of individuals returning to El
 Salvador- from abroad, either from the United States or
 elsewhere. The Government imposes no control.on emigration
 and cooperatesowith international organizations that arrange
 Salvadorans' emigration to other countries.
 El Salvador has registered some 200 Nicaraguan refugees,
 although officials estimate there may be up to 1,000 residing
 in the far southeastern part of the country. Those refugees
 who are registered are free to travel within El Salvador.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 *to Change Their Government
 El Salvador is a representative democracy. The governing
 Christian Democratic Party (PDC) enjoys a 33-seat majority in
 the 60-member Legislative Assembly. In addition to one
 independent member, four other parties are also represented in
 the Assembly. Legislators are elected for 3-year terms. In
 preparation for the 1988 legislative/municipal elections and
 the 1989 presidential-election, the Central Elections Council
 (CCE) created a-new voter registry and began distribution of a
 
 
 486
 EL SALVADOR
 new voter's registration card to safeguard against fraud. The
 CCE, composed of one representative of each of the three major
 parties--the PDC, the National Republican Alliance (ARENA),
 and the National Conciliation Party (PCN)--is also'drafting a
 streamlined electoral law to present to the Assembly. The PCN
 presented its draft of an electoral reform law to the
 Assembly, which is how studying it.
 The Constitution allows the participation in the electoral
 process of all political parties that do not advocate armed
 opposition to the Government and protects the right'to
 membership in any legally recognized party. Although the
 National Revolutionary Movement (MNR) is a member organization
 of the FDR, the MNR remains a legally recognized party. The
 Popular Social Christian Movement (MPSC), though never
 inscribed as a legal party, has resumed political activity
 inside El Salvador, and its self-exiled Secretary General
 Ruben Zamora has publicly stated he will return to El Salvador
 permanently to participate in political activities. In 1987
 two new political parties, the Social Democratic Party (PSD)
 and the Liberation Party (PL), were inscribed as political
 parties and will participate in the upcoming legislative and
 mayoral elections. On November 29, the PSD formally signed an
 agreement with the MNR and the MPSC to form the "Democratic
 Convergence." This new organization has not decided whether
 it will contest the elections, although it could do so using
 the PSD's inscription.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 .of Human Rights
 The Government continues to be receptive to, visiting groups
 interested'in human rights. High-ranking government officials
 and military officers have briefed and been interviewed by
 U.S. Congressmen, church and labor groups, and others.
 Americas Watch maintains an office and a part-time
 representative in-San S'avador. The ICRC has an agreement
 with the Government that permits it to work in the conflictive
 areas to assist noncombatants and to make confidential reports
 to the Government on human rights issues. The ICRC, Tutela
 Legal, and the CDH groups are permitted visits to prisons. An
 Amnesty International delegation visited the country in March
 and met with a variety of groups. The U.N. Special Rapporteur
 on Human Rights in El Salvador made his seventh annual visit
 to the country from September 25 to October 5, during which he
 met with government representatives, including President Duaxte
 and the military high command; visited prison inmates; spoke
 with representatives of the Catholic Church and official and
 unofficial human rights organizations; and conducted personal
 interviews.
 Domestic human'rights organizations active in El Salvador
 include the governmental CDH, an agency which investigates
 complaints of human rights abuse by the Government and the
 FMLN, and Tutela Legal of the Catholic Archdiocese of San
 Salvador. The nongovernmental Human Rights Commission of El
 Salvador (CDHES), the Committee of Mothers of Political
 Prisoners, Disappeared and Assassinated of El Salvador
 (CO-MADRES), and the Christian Committee for the Displaced
 (CRIPDES) have been exposed by guerrilla defectors and
 captured documents as political fronts of the FMLN. These
 groups report only on perceived abuses by the Government and
 refuse to investigate, acknowledge, .or even record human
 rights abuses by the FMLN. Many of the government abuses they
 
 
 487
 EL SALVADOR
 report' moreover, appeir tb'be, fbrications. They continue to
 operate ffiw;'4hthough sbme individual.members were arrested
 during 1987- and chafged'with guerrilli membbership or
 activities.     "                             -
 The CDH receives testimonyabout human rights violations,
 conducts hhvestigations;'risits arre~ted-pdrobns; and reports
 to the local c6mm~hding officer and the Mihisiy of Defehse'
 when it discovers a case of  abuse . Its d6ctors examine
 detainees to determine the validity of complaints. The CDH
 keeps a register of persons injured by landmine explosions and
 is working in conjunction with aid organizations on a project
 to register civilian amputees and provide them with prosthetic
 devices.
 Tutela Legal's staff visits persons detained by the security
 forces, carries out some on-site investigations, receives
 testimony about human rights violations, and uses the press as
 a major source for its monthly reports. Tutela Legal's
 methodology in interpreting its statistical information,
 however, casts doubt on the organization's findings. Tutela
 Legal frequently counts victims as civilians even when they
 may be guerrillas, as noted by the UN Special Rapporteur in
 his 1986 report.
 In March a new human rights orgahization, the Salvadoran
 Association for Human Rights (ASPRODERH), was founded by a
 group of F14LN defectors who had worked in the CDHES and
 CO-14ADRES on behalf of the FMLN. The ASPRODERH founders
 stated their intention to have the organization fill the human
 rights middle ground between the Government's Human Rights
 Commission and the various pro-FMLN groups.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 El Salvador is ethnically homogeneous, and few ethnic Indians
 remain. There is no official discrimination against Indians,
 but there have been disputes over Indian land ownership.
 Under the Constitution, women enjoy the same legal rights as
 men. Although women are represented in all three branches of
 government, in business, and in the professions, their numbers
 are limited by cultural constraints. In the armed forces,
 women serve as nurses and in administration and intelligence;
 the security services have a limited number of policewomen. A
 high proportion of women in the lower economic strata are
 heads of single parent households, often providing for large
 families. In general, women tend to occupy jobs at the lower
 end of the economic scale, and outside the Government, women's
 wages tend to be lower than those of men for equivalent work.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 The Constitution permits employment of children under 14 years
 of age only when their employment is necessary to provide for
 their own or their families' subsistence. Children under age
 18 are prohibited from working at night or in dangerous
 occupations. In reality, however, teenage and even younger
 children work long hours. The minimum wage applies to persons
 working at least 5 hourb a day and is equivalent to about
 $3.00 per day. In practice, most workers are paid more than
 the minimum wage. The law entitles them to 15 days of annual
 paid vacation and extra pay for working at night or for more
 than 44 hours a week. Persons working less than 5 hours per
 day receive a proportion of the minimum daily wage equivalent
 
 
 488
 EL SALVADOR
 to the hours worked. The law also requires that those paid by
 piecework or commission receive a salary at least equivalent
 to the minimum wage. The minimum wage for farm workers is
 equivalent to about $1.60 per day plus food. Most farm
 workers receive only the minimum, but piece rates paid at
 harvest time net workers triple or quadruple the minimum
 wage. The Government requires that work sites be safe, and
 that drinking water, toilets, and adequate ventilation be
 provided workers, but enforcement is inadequate.
 
 
 489
