 EL SALVADOR
 Since the brief and ill-fated peasant uprising in 1932,
 political life in El Salvador has been dominated by
 the military, backed by the wealthy elite. The country
 has long been plagued by the problems of inequitable
 distribution of wealth and income, a high rate of popula-
 tion growth combined with extreme population density,
 high unemployment and unsatisfactory socio-economic de-
 velopment. The Government has made some attempts to
 deal with these problems, including the creation of
 a comprehensive development plan, but actual implementa-
 tion has been limited.
 Human rights abuses, diminishing faith in the electoral
 process and underlying economic and social ills have
 led to growing terrorism from both extreme right and
 left. In reaction to the terrorism, a "Public Order
 Law" severely abridging civil liberties was passed in
 late 1977. A Government-sponsored   para-military mass
 political organization, ORDEN, which operates largely
 in rural areas, has used violence in its conflicts with
 anti-Government peasant organizations and has engaged
 in active opposition to dissent in rural areas. Clashes
 in the countryside with anti-Government peasant groups
 have resulted in deaths. Salvadoran society is becoming
 increasingly polarized.
 Recent elections in El Salvador have been marred by
 fraud. The present Government of General Carlos Humberto
 Romero came to power following the elections of February,
 1977, in which fraud was again an issue. The Christian
 Democratic and allied opposition parties boycotted the
 the 1978 mayoral and National Assembly elections, leaving.
 only token opposition from a small conservative party.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 There have been numerous detailed allegations of torture
 of prisoners by security guards, many of which are
 
 
 248
 credible. Accusations against the National Guard and
 other security forces include denial of food and water,
 electric shock and sexual violation. Several apparently
 credible reports reaching foreign church and human
 rights organizations indicate that torture or the
 threat of torture were still being used by Government
 security forces in late 1978. There have been no public
 investigations of these charges.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 There is little doubt that certain elements of the security
 forces have subjected prisoners to "degrading treatment."
 There have been conflicting allegations as to who fired
 first in some confrontations which resulted in deaths.
 In March, one police officer was killed and another
 severely wounded in a clash with protestors. Nine demon-
 strators were killed or wounded in that incident.
 Several anti-Government peasants were killed by ORDEN or
 security forces and at least one member of ORDEN was
 killed during a major incident at San Pedro Perulapan.
 National Guard units occupied the area and arrested
 more than sixty anti-Government peasants but no members
 of ORDEN. Many of those arrested were physically
 mistreated. Allegations of serious abuses do not appear
 to have been investigated or targeted for Government
 corrective action.
 Private violence has been endemic in El Salvador. In
 late September 1978 police began a campaign to confiscate
 the hand-guns carried by many citizens, a measure aimed
 at a reduction in that societal violence. The Department
 estimates that 150 politically related deaths occurred
 in 1978, including those killed by Government security
 forces, by ORDEN, by private unknown parties or by
 terrorists. Increasing terrorist incidents have
 produced growing fears within the business community
 leading to the departure of a significant number
 of businessmen and their families, exacerbating
 political and economic tensions.
 
 
 249
 
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 The Government passed the Law of Defense and Guarantee
 of Public Order in November 1977, in response to strong
 pressure to control the increase in kidnappings, assas-
 sinations and terrorist incidents. Elements of the
 Catholic Church and all major opposition parties and
 groups have condemned the new law as unconstitutional,
 maintaining it is tantamount to a State of Seige. The
 law gives Government officials authority to arrest and
 hold alleged subversives, terrorists or even critics
 for 72 hours without specific charges. It requires
 that detainees be turned over to the judicial system
 within 72 hours. According to credible sources, this
 72-hour legal detention period itself has been exceeded
 in many cases with the reports of capture being adjusted
 when and if the detained person is turned over to the
 courts. The Government admits the law is imperfect,
 but asserts it has provided a legal basis to combat
 a substantially increased terrorist threat. An Inter-
 national Commission of Jurists report, following
 a June visit by that organization's representative,
 stated that the law "results in serious infringements
 of the right of free speech... reduces the independence
 of the judiciary... and invites an abuse of power
 on the part of the security forces." Terrorist incidents
 have occurred more frequently since promulgation
 of the law.
 Between December 15, 1977 and July 9, 1978, 715 persons
 were arrested under the law according to a report prepared
 by the socially-active Catholic Archdiocese of San
 Salvador. The report continued that of these, 590 were
 freed, most after being beaten, and stated also that
 two were assassinated and 21 "disappeared". In late
 August, the Salvadoran Commission on Human Rights
 said that the cases of about 200 persons detained
 under the Public Order law still were being ad-
 judicated. However, Salvadoran government records
 in October indicated that 283 had been arrested
 to date under the law and that most of those had
 been released.
 
 
 250
 The Archdiocese, Amnesty International and other groups
 maintain lists of persons they believe to be political
 prisoners, "disappeared persons", and persons murdered
 while in official custody.   The Congressional Research
 Service stated in a July report that "apparent arbitrary
 detentions", "disappearances" and "probably elimination"
 have become "an increasingly common pattern." The Arch-
 diocese published in September 1978 a list of one hundred
 "disappeared persons" with dates of their reported
 capture by the security forces. Earlier, Amnesty presented
 a list to the Government of 62 persons allegedly detained
 who then "disappeared". The number of persons currently
 detained for political activities is unknown. Most esti-
 mates range between 100 and 200. Despite pleas for habeas
 corpus, Government authorities generally do not respond
 to accusations that political prisoners are being held
 or they categorically deny that there are any political
 prisoners. However, there is evidence, corroborated
 in part by ex-prisoners, that some of those who continue
 to be listed as "disappeared" were in Government custody
 at one point. Reynaldo Cruz Menjivar's name, for example,
 had appeared on several political prisoner lists. Cruz,
 a member of the Christian Democratic party, with close ties
 to the leftist United Popular Action Front, after escaping
 from custody, sought asylum in October in the Venezuelan
 Embassy. He stated that he had been held by Treasury
 Police without charge since December 1977.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The judiciary is slow and over-burdened. After
 arraignment, long delays usually occur before trial.
 Trials are public and courts are believed to operate
 fairly and independently, at least in cases other
 than those involving security suspects or the
 wealthy.
 In some cases involving those accused of terrorism,
 both judges and witnesses are alleged to refrain
 from guilty verdicts for fear of terrorist retaliation.
 On November -7 the chief judge of one of two civilian
 courts that administers the Law of Public Order
 
 
 251
 was wounded in an assassination attempt which the
 leftist terrorist group, the Popular Forces of
 Liberation (FPL), claimed to have made. The police
 have been unable to apprehend the perpetrators of
 most of the kidnappings, assassinations and other acts
 of terrorism. In those few cases where alleged
 leftist terrorists have been apprehended and presented
 for trial, the prosecution has generally been
 unable to obtain a conviction.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 Government security forces armed with the Law of Public
 Order have increased their searches of private homes.
 Under the new law, searches require neither court
 authorization nor search warrant. There are credible
 allegations that persons are taken from their
 homes by the security forces without a warrant
 or specific charge; this allegedly occurs most
 frequently in the interior of the country.
 2. Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 Some Government policies and actions indicate a growing
 awareness of the country's critical social and economic
 problems. However, no Government programs under-
 taken to date have changed the basic socio-economic
 structure with its problems and historic inequities.
 These include serious overpopulation, rising
 unemployment, highly skewed income distribution,
 widespread poverty and concentration of land ownership
 in the hands of the wealthy. Although the Government
 has asserted its desire to solve these problems,
 steps taken thus far have been modest and the
 rate of progress has been slow. Measures taken
 include action in 1978 to initiate a regional
 development program in small-scale irrigation,
 basic skills training and technical education focusing
 on the depressed northern area of the country. A new
 property tax law designed to encourage the break-up
 
 
 252
 of unproductive large estates was passed and its
 implementation begun. The Government sells grain for
 less than the free market price. A recent across-the-
 board increase in the minimum wage was approved, but
 it did not fully offset the effects of inflation on
 lower income groups. Corruption involving public
 funds, though it does occur, is not notorious
 in El Salvador.
 According to Government statistics expenditures for
 vital human needs (education, health, social assistance,
 social security and housing) represent approximately
 forty percent of the national budget, fifteen percent to
 eighteen percent being currently allocated to health-
 related expenditures. Elementary school enrollment is
 expanding at the rate of 4.6 percent per year and
 high school enrollment at 12.5 percent, both
 considerably higher than the population growth
 rate.
 A natural population growth rate of 3.2 to
 3.3 percent is El Salvador's most serious long-run
 problem. The Government formulated and recently
 strengthened one of the most progressive national family
 planning programs in the hemisphere.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Includ-
 ing:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion
 and Assembly
 Freedoms of speech, press and assembly are sometimes
 restricted. An opposition newspaper (La Cronica) and
 several organs of the Roman Catholic Church are allowed
 to publish strong criticisms of the Government. Anti-
 Government commentary seldom appears in other newspapers,
 presumably because of the essentially pro-Government
 political beliefs and policies of their private owners.
 However, the Public Order Law provides up to three
 years' imprisonment for persons who disseminate,
 either inside the country or abroad, biased or false
 
 
 253
 information designed to disrupt the constitutional
 or legal order or the country's peace and security.
 While freedom of religion per se is not an issue in El
 Salvador, the Church's role in politics is. The constitu-
 tion prohibits political activity by the Church or clergy.
 The Government continued throughout 1978 to denounce
 those Church statements and activities which it considered
 anti-Government and unconstitutional. The number of
 physical threats against the so-called progressive
 elements of the Roman Catholic hierarchy by right-wing
 groups decreased in 1978. The Church made credible charges
 that some lay workers in rural areas continued to
 be intimidated, beaten and harassed as "subversives"
 by local police authorities and Government supporters.
 Some groups whose demonstrations previously have involved
 clashes with security forces have had their freedom
 of assembly selectively curtailed under the Law of
 Public Order. Government forces have forcibly broken
 up some of their meetings and arrested leaders. Permits
 have been issued for some anti-Government groups,
 however. The May 1, (Labor Day) 1978 demonstration
 was the calmest in many years.
 Urban labor unions are authorized by law, but they
 are fragmented and dependent to a large degree on
 government and/or foreign assistance. Ideologically-
 oriented labor unions have been harassed, while those
 concentrating on trade union questions have operated
 more freely, though they too have encountered sporadic
 harassment. Peasant or rural mass organizations, with
 the exceptions of the Union Comunal Salvadorena (USC)
 and the Government-dominated ORDEN, are considered
 by the Government to be subversive and extra-illegal.
 The International Commission of Jurists noted in its
 June 1978 report that "violations of the rights of
 political and trade union opponents of the government
 are not isolated incidents..."
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 
 
 Freedom of movement, though occasionally limited by
 road checks during periods of political tension, is
 generally respected. There is no restriction of
 the freedom to travel abroad and to emigrate except
 when judicial charges are pending against the intending
 traveler. Though the Romero Administration has on several
 occasions stated it would permit the return of political
 exiles, at least one was refused entry in late 1978.
 Others have returned but some important figures such
 as Christian Democratic leader Napoleon Duarte remain
 out of the country.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Although no direct legal restrictions are placed on
 participation in the political process, administra-
 tive improprieties, Government manipulation and fraud
 have impaired this freedom. The major opposition
 parties boycotted the March 1978 legislative and
 municipal elections, contending that despite President
 Romero's assurances of free and honest elections, he
 had taken no steps to ensure their free particpation in
 the political process and the honest functioning of the
 electoral machinery. Because of the opposition's with-
 drawal, all mayors and the great majority of legislators
 are members of the Government party. Individuals and
 interest groups find difficulty in influencing the
 political process except in alliance with the Government
 political party.
 women have legal equality with men but societal
 restraints often limit their practical possibilities.
 They do hold some important positions in the profes-
 sions, political parties and in the Government at
 the sub-secretary of cabinet level.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Inter-American Human Rights Commission visited El
 Salvador at President Romero's invitation in January 1978.
 
 
 255
 The Commission conducted an investigation with the
 cooperation of the Government, but the findings
 have not yet been officially released. The Government
 cooperated with a representative of the International
 Commission of Jurists who visited El Salvador in 1978
 to investigate the constitutionality of the Law of
 Public Order. In addition, the Government welcomed
 visits by United States Administration and Congres-
 sional officials interested in human rights, and also
 sought to be cooperative during the December visit
 by a group of three British Members of Parliament looking
 into the human rights situation in El Salvador. The
 Human Rights Commission of El Salvador (non-governmental)
 promotes human rights and has been active in defending
 those arrested under the Law of Public Order.
 The Government of El Salvador ratified the American
 Convention on Human Rights in June 1978.
 
 
 256
