 SAN MARINO
 San Marina is a democratic, multiparty republic. The popularly elected Par-
 liament (the Great and General Coun      G   ) selects two of its members to serve
 as the Captains Regent (Co-Heads of State). They preside over meetings of the GGC
 and of the Cabinet (Congress of State), which has ten other members, all also se-
 lected by the GGC. Assisting the Captains Regent are three Secretaries of State
 (Foreign Affairs, Internal Affairs, and Finance) and several additional secretaries.
 The Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs has come to assume many of the preroga-
 tives of a Prime Minister.
 Elected officials effectively control the centralized police organization (the Civil
 Police) and the two military corps (the Gendarmerie and the "Guardie di Rocca").
 The principal economic activities are tourism, farming, light manufacturing, and
 banking. In addition to revenue from taxes and customs, the Government derives
 much of its revenue from the sale of coins and postage stamps to collectors through-
 out the world and from payments of an annual budget subsidy by the Italian Gov-
 ernment under the terms of the Republic's Basic Treaty with Italy.
 The Legal Code extensively provides for human rights, and the authorities respect
 its provisions. Although the Parliament and the Government have demonstrated
 strong commitment to the protection of human rights, some laws discriminate
 against women, particularly with regard to transmission of citizenship.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Rllling.-There were no reports of political or
 extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of disappearance or abduction.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The law prohibits torture and other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or pun-
 ishment. There were no reports of violations.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-There were no reports of arbitrary ar-
 rests, detentions, or exile. The law requires judicial warrants for arrests.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The law provides for procedural safeguards for the
 rights of the accused, and the Government fully implements these provisions.
 Detainees may not be held more than a few days without being either formally
 charged or released. There is no legally prescribed limit on pretrial detention, but
 the courts hear most cases within days or weeks. The procedural law grants trial
 judges considerable discretion in this regard, but there were no indications in 1994
 of any abuse of this authority. Accused have the right to a public trial and legal
 counsel.
 For indigents, the State provides a court-appointed attorney at no cost. There is
 no incommunicado detention, and the accused cannot be compelled to answer ques-
 tions or make statements without having an attorney present.
 The judicial system delegates some of its authority to Italian magistrates, both
 in criminal and in civil cases. Cases of minor importance are handled by a local con-
 ciliation judge. Appeals go, in the first instance, to an Italian judge residing in Italy.
 The final court of review is San Marina's Council of Twelve, a group of judges cho-
 
 
 948
 sen for 6-year terms (four replaced every 2 years) from among the members of the
 GGC.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The au-
 thorities respect the concept of privacy of the home. The law requires judicial war-
 rants for searches, and provides also for protection of the privacy of correspondence,
 including telephonic communications.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The law provides for freedom of speech and
 press, and the Government does not restrict this freedom. It does not censor the
 media. Academic freedom is respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The law provides for freedom
 of peaceful assembly and association, and the authorities respect these provisions.
 Organizers of a public gathering need only notify the police in advance. They need
 no permit unless they plan to use a parking area as the site for the gathering;, the
 authorities routinely grant such permits.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Government fully respects freedom of religion.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Fore n Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Government fully respects the rights of all citizens to travel
 abroad, emigrate, and repatriate. Although it does not formally offer asylum to refu-
 gees, it has given a few individuals de facto asylum by permitting them to reside
 and work in San Marino. Refugees and other foreigners are eligible to apply for citi-
 zenship only after 30 years of residence.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 All citizens 18 years of age or older may vote in national elections, which take
 place every 5 years, or sooner if the GGC dissolves itself, and are free and fair. In
 recent election years the Government has offered to pay 75 percent of the travel
 costs for any expatriate to return to vote.
 Women gained the right to vote in the early 1960's, and voted in national elec-
 tions for the first time in 1964. There have been no impediments to women partici-
 pating in government or politics since the passage of a 1973 law eliminating all re-
 strictions. In 1974 the first woman was elected to the GGC. Since then, women have
 served in the Council as Secretary of State for Internal Affairs and as Captain Re-
 gent. All women's branches of the political parties have been integrated into the
 mainstream party organizations, and women hold important positions in the various
 parties.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no domestic human rights organizations, although the Government im-
 poses no impediments to the formation of such organizations. The Government has
 declared itself open to outsiders' investigations of alleged abuses. There have been
 no known requests of such a nature.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The law prohibits discrimination based on race, religion, disability, language, or
 social status, and the authorities respect these provisions. The law also prohibits
 some forms of discrimination based on sex, but there remain vestiges of legal as well
 as societal discrimination against women.
 Women.--Several laws provide specifically for equality of women in the workplace
 and elsewhere. In practice there is no discrimination in pay or working conditions.
 All careers are open to women, including careers in the military and police as well
 as the highest public offices.
 However, there is a law that discriminates against women in stipulating that a
 San Marinese woman who marries a foreigner cannot transmit citizenship to her
 husband or children, but that a San Marinese man who marries a foreigner can do
 so to both spouse and children.
 The law provides for protection of women from violence, and occurrences of such
 violence are unusual.
 Children.-Since 1974 a special service in the state health care system has been
 dedicated to fighting child abuse. The service had no cases in 1994 (and a total of
 only 14 since 1982).
 People With Disabiities.-Since 1990 the Government has passed a number of
 laws to safeguard the rights and promote the social integration of disabled people.
 A 1991 law regulates and encourages employment of disabled people. A 1992 law
 
 
 949
 
 established guidelines for easier access to public buildings; but implementation of
 this has not yet reached all buildings.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-By law, all workers in San Marino (except the mili-
 tay, but including police) are free to form and join unions. A 1961 law sets the con-
 ditions for establishment of a union. The unions may freely form domestic federa-
 tions or join international labor federations.
 Union members constitute about half of the country's work force (which numbers
 about 10,000 San Marinese plus 2,000 Italians, among the country's total population
 of about 24,000).
 Trade unions are independent of the Government and the political parties; but
 they have close informal ties with the parties, which exercise strong influence on
 them.
 Workers in all nonmilitary occupations have the right to strike. No strikes have
 occurred in at least the last 5 years.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The law gives collective bar-
 gaining agreements the force of law, and prohibits antiunion discrimination by em-
 ployers. Effective mechanisms exist to resolve complaints. Negotiations are freely
 conducted, often in the presence of government officials (usually from the Labor and
 Industry Departments) by invitation from both the unions and the employers' asso-
 ciation. For the last several years, all complaints have been resolved amicably by
 a "conciliatory committee" composed of judges and government officials.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced or com-
 pulsory labor. There were no known violations.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum working age is 16.
 The Ministry of    or and Cooperation permits no exceptions.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-In late 1994 the minimum wage was approxi-
 mately $1,000 (1.6 million lira) per month. This affords a decent living for a worker
 and his or her family. Wages are generally higher than the minimum.
 The law sets the workweek at 36 hours in public administration and 37Y2 hours
 in industry and private business, with 24 hours of rest for workers in either cat-
 egory.
 The law sets safety and health standards, and the *udicial system monitors them.
 Most workplaces implement the standards effectively, but there are some excep-
 tions, notably in the construction industries.
