 SAN MARINO
 San Marino is a democratic multiparty republic ruled by a coalition government.
 Legislative authority is vested in a unicameral parliament, the Great and General
 Council. Executive authority is exercised by the 11-member Congress of State (the
 Cabinet), composed of two Captains Regent and nine members chosen by the Great
 and General Council. The Captains Regent are assisted by three Secretaries of State
 (Foreign Affairs, Internal Affairs, and Finance) and by several additional secretar-
 ies. The Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs has come to assume many of the pre-
 rogatives of a Prime Minister.
 Police forces are centralized in one organization, the Civil Police which has three
 branches, including an investigative branch. Security and ceremonial representation
 are performed by two military corps, the Gendarmerie and the "Guardie di Rocca."
 These forces are controlled by and responsive to elected government officials.
 The principal economic activities in San Marino, whose population totals about
 22,000, are farming and light manufacturing. Tourism is a vital but seasonal indus-
 try. In addition to income, corporate, and sales taxes, the Government derives most
 of its revenue from the sale of coins and postage stamps to collectors throughout
 the world and from payments of an annual budget subsidy by the Italian Govern-
 ment under the terms of the Republic's Basic Treaty with Italy.
 Individual human rights are provided for in the legal code of the Republic and
 respected in practice. San Marino's legislature and Government have demonstrated
 a strong interest in and commitment to the protection of human rights. Some laws
 in the San Marino legal code, in particular with regard to transmission of citizen-
 ship, do not accord the same rights to women as to men.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Neither Government forces nor op-
 position organizations engaged in political or extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no cases of disappearance or abduction.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Torture and other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment are pro-
 hibited by law, and there were no reports of violations.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-There were no reports of arbitrary ar-
 rests, detentions, or exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The rights of the accused are protected by proce-
 dural safeguards which are guaranteed by law and observed in practice. Judicial ar-
 rest warrants are required. Detainees may not be held more than a few days with-
 out being formally charged or released. Although there is no legally prescribed limit
 on pretrial detention, San Marino's uncrowded criminal dockets ensure that the
 courts hear most cases within days or weeks. The procedural law grants trial judges
 considerable discretion in this regard, but there were no indications in 1992 of any
 abuse of this authority. The right to a public trial and legal counsel are provided
 for. The accused may request that a court-appointed attorney be provided at no cost.
 There is no incommunicado detention, and the accused may not be compelled to an-
 swer questions or make statements without having an attorney present.
 Judicial authority is turned over in part to Italian magistrates in both criminal
 and civil cases. Cases of minor importance are handled by a local conciliatory judge.
 Appeals go, in the first instance, to an Italian judge residing in Italy. The finalcourt
 of review is the Council of Twelve, a group of judges chosen for 6-year terms (four
 replaced every 2 years) from among the members of the Great and General Council.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 concept of privacy of the home is respected by the authorities; judicial warrants are
 required for searches.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Li'berties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Freedoms of speech and press are respected.
 There is no Government censorship. While there are no daily newspapers, periodi-
 cals are published irregularly by the Government, some political parties, the labor
 unions, and business associations. A private press publishes a weekly bulletin with
 local news; such news is also available in local editions of several Italian dailies.
 Daily television news coverage of San Marino is broadcast by a private Italian tel-
 evision station located in Italy. This program is financed both through advertising
 and a contribution by the San Marino Government. A recent Italy-San Marino bilat-
 eral agreement established a new television station financed jointly by the San
 
 
 896
 Marino Government and Italy's public television network in equal shares. This new
 station is expected to begin operations in 1993.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-There is freedom of peaceful
 assembly in San Marino. In order to hold a rally or demonstration, a San Marino
 citizen must inform the police. No permits are required unless parking areas are
 to be used. Permits are routinely granted.
 Freedom of association is respected, as is academic freedom.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Freedom of religion is respected in San Marino. The ma-
 jority of the population is Roman Catholic. Other denominations are entitled to
 practice their faiths and to hold religious services. Foreign clergy are free to perform
 their duties.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Foreign travel, emigration and repatriation are freedoms enjoyed by all
 citizens. San Marino has worked with the United Nations High Commissioner for
 Refugees in accepting a few refugee families, for example, from Chile, Vietnam, and
 Romania.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Legislative authority is vested in a unicameral parliament, the Great and General
 Council, consisting of 60 members who normally serve 5-year terms. The Council is
 also the body that would consider any basic changes to the system of government.
 Any group of 150 San Marinese citizens may petition the Great and General Council
 to propose a new law. In the week following installation of the Captains Regent, any
 San Marinese citizen may approach the Captains Regent at a special open forum
 to request the examination of any subject whatsoever. The Captains Regent are
 obliged by centuries-old custom to take up that subject in the Great and General
 Council during their term in office.
 Executive authority is exercised by the 11-member Congress of State (the Cabi-
 net), composed of two Captains Regent and nine members chosen by the Great and
 General Council. The Captains Regent are elected by the Council from among its
 members for 6-month terms. Their functions are largely honorary, although they
 also preside over meetings of the Council and the Congress and are empowered to
 propose legislation and to represent San Marino in its foreign relations. The Cap-
 tains Regent are assisted by three Secretaries of State (Foreign Affairs, Internal Af-
 fairs, and Finance) and by several additional secretaries entrusted with specific
 portfolios.
 The Congress of State is composed of executives who head the various administra-
 tive departments of the Government. These posts are divided among the parties that
 form the coalition Government. The Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs has come
 to assume many of the prerogatives of a prime minister.
 Membership in the Great and Genera Council is based on proportional represen-
 tation and is selected from nominee lists submitted by the political parties. Voting
 is open to all citizens 18 years of age or older. Women gained the right to vote in
 the early 1960's, voting in national elections for the first time in 1964.
 Elections in San Marino are free and fair. Elections are held every 5 years unless
 the Great and General Council votes to dissolve itself and hold early elections.
 There are 4 parties in the Parliament, allowing the voters to choose from multiple
 candidates. There are no impediments to women participating in government or pol-
 itics since the passage of a 1973 law eliminating all restrictions. In 1974 the first
 woman was elected to the Great and General Council. Since then, women have
 served in the Council as Secretary of State for Internal Affairs and as Captain Re-
 gent.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no domestic human rights organizations, although there are no govern-
 ment impediments to the formation of such organizations. The Government has de-
 clared itself open to investigations of alleged abuses by outsiders, but there have
 been no known requests of such a nature from international organizations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Language, or Social Status
 Discrimination based on race, sex, religion, language, or social status is not toler-
 ated by the law or by the Government.
 Refugees resettled in San Marino and other foreigners are eligible to apply for
 San Marino citizenship only after 30 years of residence.
 Several laws provide specifically for equality of women and equal pay. A San
 Marinese woman who marries a foreigner, however, may not transmit citizenship
 
 
 897
 to her husband or children, although a San Marinese man in the same situation
 does transmit citizenship to both wife and children.
 Discrimination against women is social and traditional. However, women recently
 have entered in significant numbers into fields previously dominated by men, in-
 cluding law and medicine.
 Violence against women is unusual, and women are protected by law in these
 cases. A national commission on women's rights in the law was disbanded (after the
 passage of favorable laws by the Great and General Council in the 1970's and
 1980's) as it was believed there was no further need for it. Women's branches of the
 political parties have all been integrated into the mainstream party organizations.
 omen hold important positions in the various parties.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association-All workers in San Marino (except the military but
 including police forces) are free to form and join unions. There are two trade union
 federations: the Democratic Federation of San Marinese Workers (affiliated with the
 International Confederation of Free Trade Unions), which has about 2,500 workers;
 and the General Federation of Labor with about 2,400 workers. Union members rep-
 resent ap proximately 50 percent of the country's work force (10,000 San Marinese,
 or 12,000 including Italian workers).
 Trade unions are independent from the Government. Formally, they are also inde-
 pendent from political parties. Political parties have close ties with and exercise
 strong influence on trade unions.
 Except for the military establishment, all categories of workers have the right to
 strike, including the civil police. No strikes have occurred in the last 3 years.
 Unions may f'reely join international labor federations. Since 1961 trade unions
 have been legally recognized by a law which sets the minimum conditions (member-
 ship number andnumber of federations affiliated) for their establishment.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain CoUectiely.--Collective bargaining is recog-
 nized and protected by the law. The law includes the prohibition of antiunion dis-
 crimination by employers and effective mechanisms exist to resolve complaints. Col-
 lective bargaining is freely practiced throughout the country; the collective bargain-
 ing agreements are published in the Government's bulletin and have the force of
 law.   egotiations are freely conducted, and the presence of government officials
 (usualily from the Labor and Industry Departments) is often requested by the unions
 and the employers' association. For the last several years, all complaints have been
 resolved amicably by a "conciliatory committee" composed of judges and government
 officials.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced or compulsory labor is pro-
 hibited by law and does not exist in practice.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum working age of 16
 years is strictly enforced by the Ministry of Labor and Cooperation, and there are
 no exceptions.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The legal minimum wage assures a decent liv-
 ing for a worker and family. According to trade unions, wages are generally higher
 than the minimum wage.
 The legal workweek in the public administration is 36 hours. In industry and pri-
 vate business it is 37  hours. At least 24 hours a week are dedicated to rest among
 all categories of workers. Trade unions report no problems on this issue.
 According to trade unions, San Marino has had advanced legislation on health
 and safety standards since 1987. However, the enforcement to date has been weak,
 due to employer resistance in some industries.
