 SAN MARINO
 San Marino is a democratic multiparty republic with a population of 24,000. Leg-
 islative authority is vested in a unicameral parliament, the Great and General
 Council (GGC). Executive authority is exercised by the 12-member Congress of State
 (the cabinet), composed of 2 Captains Regent and 10 members chosen by the GGC.
 The Captains Regent are assisted by three Secretaries of State (Foreign Affairs, In-
 ternal Affairs, and Finance) and by several additional secretaries. The Secretary of
 State for Foreign Affairs has come to assume many of the prerogatives of a Prime
 Minister.
 Police forces are centralized in one organization, the Civil Police, which has three
 branches, including an investigative branch. Security and ceremonial representation
 are performed by two military corps, the Gendarmerie and the "Guardie di Rocca."
 These forces are controlled by and responsive to elected government officials.
 The principal economic activities are tourism, farming, and light manufacturing.
 Tourism, a vital seasonal industry, provides nearly half of the country's revenues.
 In addition to income, corporate, and sales taxes, the Government derives most of
 its revenue from the sale of coins and postage stamps to collectors throughout the
 world and from payments of an annual budget subsidy by the Italian Government
 under the terms of the Republic's Basic Treaty with Italy.
 Individual human rights are provided for in the Legal Code of the Republic and
 respected in practice. San Marino's legislature and government have demonstrated
 a strong interest in and commitment to the protection of human rights, but some
 laws, in particular with regard to transmission of citizenship, discriminate against
 women.
 
 
 1035
 
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Neither government forces nor oppo-
 sition organizations engaged in political or extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no cases of disappearance or abduction.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Torture and other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment are pro-
 hibited by law, and there were no reports of violations.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-There were no reports of arbitrary ar-
 rests, detentions, or exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The rights of the accused are protected by proce-
 dural safeguards which are guaranteed by law and observed in practice. Judicial ar-
 rest warrants are required.
 Detainees may not be held more than a few days without being formally charged
 or released. Although there is no legally prescribed limit on pretrial detention, San
 Marino's uncrowded criminal dockets ensure that the courts hear most cases within
 days or weeks. The procedural law grants trial judges considerable discretion in this
 regard, but there were no indications in 1993 of any abuse of this authority. The
 right to a public trial and legal counsel is provided. The accused may request that
 a court-appointed attorney be provided at no cost. There is no incommunicado deten-
 tion, and the accused may not be compelled to answer questions or make statements
 without having an attorney present.
 Judicial authority is turned over in part to Italian magistrates in both criminal
 and civil cases. Cases of minor importance are handled by a local conciliation judge.
 Appeals go, in the first instance, to an Italian judge residing in Italy. The fmal court
 of review is the Council of Twelve, a gup of judges chosen for 6-year terms (four
 replaced every 2 years) from among the members of San Marino's Great and Gen-
 eral Council.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.
 The concept of privacy of the home is respected by the authorities. Judicial war-
 rants are required for searches. The privacy of correspondence, including telephonic
 communications, is also protected.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Freedom of speech and press is respected. There
 is no government censorship. While there are no daily newspapers, periodicals are
 published irregularly by the Government, political parties, labor unions, and busi-
 ness associations. A private press publishes a weekly bulletin with local news. Such
 news is also available in local editions of several Italian dailies.
 Daily television news coverage of San Marino is broadcast by a private Italian tel-
 evision station located in Italy. This program is financed both through advertising
 and a contribution by the San Marino Government. A recent Italy-San Marino bilat-
 eral agreement established a new television station (Telesanmarino) financed in
 equal shares by the San Marino Government and Italy's public television network.
 This station began operations in March. The television portion of San Marino Radio-
 Television broadcasts 3 hours of fiction and specialprogrars a day, generally pro-
 vided by the Italian government-owned RAI-TV Corporation. The radio station
 broadcasts news every hour, 12 hours a day, plus music and locally produced pro-
 grams.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-There is freedom of peaceful
 assembly. In order to hold a rally or demonstration, a San Marino citizen must in-
 form the police. No permits are required unless parking areas are to be used. Per-
 mits are routinely granted.
 Freedom of association is respected, as is academic freedom.
 c. Freedom of Religion. -Freedom of religion is respected. The majority of the pop-
 ulation is Roman Catholic. Other denominations are entitledto practice their faiths
 and to hold religious services. Foreign clergy are free to perform their duties.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation. -Foreign travel, emigration and repatriation are freedoms enjoyed by all
 citizens. San Marino is not a signatory to the 1951 Convention Relatin to the Sta-
 tus of Refugees, although officials on several occasions have expressed the country's
 intention to accede to the Convention. Although San Marino does not formally offer
 asylum to refugees, a few individuals have been given de facto asylum by being per-
 mitted to reside and work there. Refugees resettled in San Marino and other for-
 eigners are eligible to apply for citizenship only after 30 years of residence.
 
 
 1036
 
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Legislative authority is vested in a unicameral parliament, the Great and General
 Council (GGC), consisting of 60 members who normally are elected to serve 5-year
 terms. The Council is also the body that would consider any basic changes to the
 sstem of government. Any gup of 150 San Marinese citizens may petition the
 trpropose a new law. In the week following installation of the Captains Re-
 ent, any San Marinese citizen may approach the Captains Reit at a special open
 forum to request the examination of any subject whatsoever. Te Captains Regent
 are obliged by centuries-old custom to take up that subject in the GGC during their
 term in office.
 Executive authority is exercised by the 12-member Congress of State (the cabinet),
 composed of 2 Captains Regent and 10 members chosen by the GGC. The Captains
 Regent are elected by the Council from among its members for 6-month terms. Their
 functions are largely honorary, although they also preside over meetings of the
 Council and the Congress and are empowered to propose legislation and to rep-
 resent San Marino in its foreign relations. The Captains Regent are assisted by
 three Secretaries of State (Foreign Affairs, Internal Affairs, and Finance) and by
 several additional secretaries entrusted with specific portfolios.
 The Congress of State is composed of executives who head the various administra-
 tive departments of the Government. These posts are divided among the parties that
 form the coalition government. The Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs has come
 to assume many of the prerogatives of a prime minister.
 Membership in the GGC is based on proportional representation and is selected
 from nominee lists submitted by the political parties. Voting is open to all citizens
 18 years of age or older. Women gained the right to vote in the early 1960's, voting
 in national elections for the first time in 1964.
 Elections in San Marino are free and fair. Elections are held every 5 years unless
 the GGC votes to dissolve itself and hold early elections. Six parties are represented
 in the parliament. General elections, held in May, confirmed the Christian Demo-
 cratic Party (DCS) and the Socialist Party (PSS) coalition which has governed since
 March 1992. As in recent years, the Government offered to pay 75 percent of the
 travel costs for approximately 6,000 citizens living abroad to return to San Marino
 to vote in the election. There have been no impediments to women participating in
 government or politics since the passage of a 1973 law eliminating all restrictions.
 In 1974 the first woman was elected to the GGC. Since then, women have served
 in the Council as Secretary of State for Internal Affairs and as Captain Regent.
 Women's branches of the political parties have all been integrated into the main-
 stream party organizations, and women hold important positions in the various par-
 ties.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no domestic human rights organizations, although there are no govern-
 ment impediments to the formation of such organizations. The Government as de-
 clared itself open to investigations of alleged abuses by outsiders, but there have
 been no known requests of such a nature from international organizations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language or So-
 cial Status
 Discrimination based on race, sex, religion, disability, language, or social status
 is prohibited by the law and generally not practiced, but some vestiges of legal and
 societal discrimination against women remain.
 Women.-Several laws provide specifically for equality of women and equal pay.
 In practice, there is no discrimination in pay or working conditions. All careers, in-
 cluding military and police as well as the highest public offices, are open to women.
 A San Marinese woman who marries a foreigner may not transmit citizenship to
 her husband or children, although a San Marinese man who marries a foreigner
 may transmit citizenship to both wife and children.
 Some aspects of social and traditional discrimination against women remain.
 However, women recently have entered in significant numbers into fields previously
 dominated by men, including law and medicine. At present, there are no reports of
 discrimination cases brought to court by San Marinese women.
 Violence against women is unusual, and women are protected by law in these
 cases. After the passage of favorable laws by the GGC in the 1970's and 1980's, a
 National Commission on Women's Rights in the Law was disbanded as it was be-
 lieved there was no further need for it.
 
 
 1037
 Children.-An October 1992 law reforming the judicial system provided for the
 creation of a separate juvenile court, which was being organized in 1993.
 A special service to fight child abuse, which is part of the state medicare system
 has been active since 1974. The service provides for foster care of children separated
 from their families by the local tribunal. The service has had a total of 14 cases
 since 1982. The San Marino budget devoted over 1 percent of its 1994 budget to this
 pro gram.
 People With Disabilities.-In 1990 the Parliament issued a general law to safe-
 uard the rights and promote the social integration of disabled people, requiring
 arliament to prepare legislation on a list of specific issues. In May 1991, the GGC
 passed legislation regulating and encouraging the hiring of people with disabilities.
 A bill passed in September 1992 established a 2-year period to review architectural
 barriers to the handicapped in existing buildings and required that all new build-
 ings have no such barriers.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-By law all workers in San Marino (except the mili-
 tary but including police forces) are free to form and join unions. There are two
 trade union federations: the Democratic Federation of San Marinese Workers (affili-
 ated with the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions), which has about
 2 500 workers, and the General Federation of Labor with about 2,400 workers.
 Union members represent approximately 50 percent of the country's work force
 (10 000 San Marinese, or 12,000 including Italian workers).
 Wrade unions are independent from the government. Formally, they are also inde-
 pendent from political parties. However, political parties have close ties with and
 exercise strong influence on trade unions.
 Except for the military establishment, all categories of workers have the right to
 strike, including the civil police. No strikes have occurred in at least the last 4
 years.
 Unions may freely join international labor federations. Since 1961 trade unions
 have been lelgally recognized by a law which sets the minimum conditions (for exam-
 ple, the mininum number of members and affiliated labor federations) for their es-
 tablishment.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Collective bargaining is recog-
 nized and protected by law. The law prohibits antiunion discrimination by employ-
 ers, and effective mechanisms exist (including reinstatement of workers fires or
 union activities) to resolve complaints. Collective bargaining is freely practiced
 throughout the country-the collective bargaining agreements are published in the
 Government's bulletin and have the force of law.Negotiations are freely conducted,
 and the presence of government officials (usually from the Labor and Industry De-
 partments) is often requested by the unions and the employers' association. For the
 last several years, all complaints have been resolved amicably by a "conciliatory
 committee" composed of judges and government officials.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced or compulsory labor is pro-
 hibited by law and does not exist in practice.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum working age of 16
 years is strictly enforced by the Ministry of Labor and Cooperation, and there are
 no exceptions.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The legal minimum wage assures a decent liv-
 ing for a worker and his or her family. In November 1993 the minimum wage was
 approximately $1,000 (1,637,868 lire) per month. According to trade unions, wages
 are generally higher than the minimum wage.
 The legal workweek in the public administration is 36 hours. In inddstry and pri-
 vate business, it is 37  hours. At least 24 hours a week are dedicated to rest for
 all categories of workers. Trade unions report no problems on this issue. According
 to trade unions, San Marino has had advanced legislation on health and safety
 standards since 1987. However, enforcement to date has been weak, due to employer
 resistance in some industries. According to labor unions, health and safety stand-
 ards are often not fully implemented in the construction sector. For practical rea-
 sons and to reduce costs, employers and workers alike do not always follow all regu-
 lations. In the last national labor contract, unions obtained 2 hours of paid time for
 all constructions workers to be given instruction and training concerning safety
 standards. The judicial system is responsible for enforcement.
 
 
 1038
