 SAN MARINO
 San Marino is, a democratic, multip arty republic. The popularly elected Par-
 liament (the Great and General Council-GGC) selects two of its members to serve
 as the Captains Regent (co-Heads of State). They preside over meetings of the GGC
 and of the Cabinet (Congress of State), which has 10 other members (Secretaries
 of State), also selected by the GGC. The Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs has
 some of the prerogatives of a p rime minister.' The independent judicial system dele-
 gates some of its functions to Italian judges.  _.
 Elected officials effectively control the centralized police organization (the Civil
 Police) and the two military corps (the Gendarmerie and the Guardie di Rocca).
 The principal economic activities are tourism, farming, light manufacturing, and
 banking. In addition to revenue from taxes and customs, the Government also de-
 rives revenue from the sale of coins and postage stamps to collectors throughout the
 world and from an annual budget subsidy provided by the Italian government under
 the terms of the Basic Treaty with Italy.  .o
 The legal system extensively provides for human rights, and the authorities re-
 spect them in practie. Although the Parliament, and the Government have dem-
 onstrated strong commitment to the protection of human rights, some laws discrimi-
 nate against women, particularly with regard to the transmission of citizenship.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading' Treatment or Punishment.-
 The law prohibits such practices, and there -were no reports that officials employed
 them.
 Prison conditions. meet minimum international standards, and the Government
 permits visits by human rights monitors.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law prohibits arbitrary arrest, deten-
 tion, or exile, and the Government observes these prohibitions.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The law provides for an independent judiciary,
 and the Government respects this provision in practice. The judicial system dele-
 gates some of its authority to Italian magistrates, both in criminal and in civil cases.
 A local conciliation judge handles cases of minor importance. Appeals go, in the first
 instance, to an Italian judge residing in Italy. The final court of review is San
 Marino's Council of Twelve, a group of judges chosen for 6-year terms (four replaced
 every 2 years) from among the members of the GGC.
 The judiciary provides citizens with a fair and efficient judicial process.,
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The law
 prohibits such practices. Government authorities respect these prohibitions, and vio-
 lations are subject to effective legal sanction.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The law provides for freedom of speech and of
 the press, and the Government respects these rights in practice. An independent
 press, an effective judiciary, and a functioning democratic political system combine
 to ensure frdedom of speech and of the press, including academic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The law provides for these
 rights, and the Government respects them in practice-
 
 
 1473
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The law provides for freedom of religion, and the Govern-
 ment respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The law provides for these rights, and the Government respects them
 in practice.
 The Government cooperates with the Office of the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations. Although it does not for-
 mally offer asylum to refugees, the government has given a few individuals de facto
 asylum by permitting them to reside and work in the country. There is no normal
 process for acquiring citizenship; refugees and other foreigners are eligible to apply
 for citizenship only after enactment of infrequent, ad hoc naturalization bills. The
 last bill of this kind, enacted in 1984, granted the right to request citizenship at
 that time to those foreigners with at least 30 years of residence. The issue of the
 provision of first asylum did not arise during the year, nor were there any reports
 of the forced repatriation of refugees.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides citizens with the right to change their government
 peacefully, and citizens exercise this right in practice through periodic, free, and fair
 elections held on the basis of universal suffrage.
 Women who wish to participate in government or politics face no impediments.
 In 1974 the first female member was elected to the GGC. Since then, women have
 served on the Council as Secretary of State for Internal Affairs and as Captain Re-
 gent. All women's branches of the political parties have been integrated into the
 mainstream party organizations, where women hold important positions.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no domestic human rights organizations, although the Government does
 not impede their formation. The Government has declared itself open to outsiders'
 investigations of alleged abuses, but there have been no known requests.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The law prohibits discrimination based on race, religion, disability, language, or
 social status, and the authorities respect these provisions. The law also prohibits
 some forms of discrimination based on sex, but vestiges of legal as well as societal
 discrimination against women remain.
 Women.-Tbe law provides for the protection of women from violence, and occur-
 rences of such violence, including spousal abuse, are rare.
 Several laws provide specifically for the equality of women in the workplace and
 elsewhere. In practice there is no discrimination in pay or working conditions. All
 careers are open to women, including careers in the military and police as well as
 the highest public offices.
 However, one law discriminates against women by stipulating that a woman who
 marries a foreigner cannot transmit citizenship to her husband or children, but that
 a man who marries a foreigner can do so to both his wife and their children.
 Children.-The Government demonstrates its commitment to children's rights and
 welfare through its well-funded systems of public education and medical care. No
 differences are apparent in the treatment of girls and boys in educational or health
 care, nor is there any societal pattern of abuse directed against children.
 People With Disabilities.-There is no discrimination against disabled persons in
 employment, education, or in the provision of other state services. A 1992 law estab-
 lished guidelines for easier access to public buildings, but its implementation is in-
 complete.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-By law, all workers (except the armed forces, but
 including the police) are free to form and join unions. A 1961 law sets the conditions
 for establishment of a union. Unions freely may form domestic federations or join
 international labor federations.
 Union members constitute about half of the country's work force (which numbers
 about 10,300 San Marinese plus 4,000 Italians from the country's total population
 of about 25,000 persons).
 Trade unions are independent of the Government and the political parties, but
 they have close informal ties with the parties, which exercise strong influence on
 them.
 
 
 '1474
 Workers in all nonmilitary occupations have the right to strike. No general strikes
 occurred in at least the last 8 years. However, during this period some brief sector-
 wide and company strikes took place.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The law gives collective bar-
 gaining ageements the force of law and prohibits antiunion discrimination by em-
 loyers. Effective mechanisms exist to resolve comlaints. Negotiations are con-
 ucted freely, often in the presence of government ofcials (usually from the Labor
 and Industry Departments) by invitation from both the unions and the employers'
 association. For the last several years, all complaints have been resolved amicably
 by. a "conciliatory committee" composed of labor union and business association rep-
 resentatives and government officials.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsoy Labor.-The law prohibits forced and bond-
 ed labor, including by children, and the Government enforces this prohibition effec-
 tiely.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The law
 prohibits forced and bonded labor by children, and the Government enforces this
 prohibition (see Section 6.c.). The minimum working age and compulsory education
 age ceiling is 16 years. The Ministry of Labor and Cooperation permits no excep-
 tions. Most students continue in school until the age of 18.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Since January 1, the legal minimum wage has
 been approximately $1,200 (2.11 million Lira) per month, which affords a decent liv-
 ing for a worker and family. Wages were generally higher than the minimum.
 The law sets the workweek at 36 hours in public administration and" 37 2 hours
 in industry and private business, with. 24 hours of rest per week for workers in ei-
 ther category.
 The law stipulates safety and health standards, and the judicial system monitors
 them. Most workplaces implement the standards effectively, but there are some ex-
 ceptions, notably in the construction industry.
