 SAN MAUTNO
 San Marino is a democratic, multiparty republic. The popularly elected par-
 liament (the Great and General Councl-GGC) selects two of its members to serve
 as the Captains Regent (co-Heads of State). They preside over meetings of the GGC
 and of the Cabinet (Congress of State), which has 10 other members also selected
 by the GGC. Asisting the Captains Regent are three Secretaries of State (Foreign
 Affairs, Internal Affairs, and Finance) and several additional secretaries. The Sec-
 retary of State for Foreign Affairs has come to assume many of the prerogatives of
 a prume minister.
 Elected officials effectively control the centralized police organization (the Civil
 Police) and the two military corps (the Gendarmerie and the Guardie di Rocca).
 The principal economic activities are tourism, farming, light manufacturing, and
 banking. In addition to revenue from taxes and customs, the Government derives
 much o. its revenue from the sale of oins and postage stamps to ollectors through-
 out the world and from an annual budget subsidy provided by the Italian Govern-
 ment under the trms of the Basic Treaty with Italy.
 The Legal Code extensively provides for human rights, and the authorities respect
 its provisions. Although the parliament and the Government have demonstrated
 strong commitment to the protection of human right, some laws discriminate
 against women, particularly with regard to the transmission of citizenship.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The law prohibits such practices, and there were no reports that officials employed
 them.
 Prison conditions meet minimum international standards, and the Government
 permits visits by human rights monitors.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law prohibits arbitrary arrests, de-
 tention, or exile and the Government observes these prohibitions.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Tral.-The law provides for an independent judiciary,
 and the Government respects this provision in practice. The judicial system dele-
 gates some of its authority to Italian magistrates, both in criminal and in civil cases.
 Cases of minor importance are handied by a local conciliation judge. Appeals go, in
 the first instance, to an Italian judge residing in Italy. The final court of review is
 San Marino's Council of Twelve, a group of judges chosen for 6-year terms (four re-
 placed every 2 years) from among the members of the GGC.
 The judiciary provides citizens with a fair and efficient process.
 There were no reports of Political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The law
 prohibits such practices. Government authorities respect these prohibitions, and vio-
 lations are subject to effective legal sanction.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The law provides for freedom of speech and of
 the press, and the Government respects these rights in practice. An independent
 press, an effective judiciary, and a functioning democratic political system combine
 to insure freedom of speech and of the press, including academic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Asociation.-The law provides for these
 rights, and the Government respects them in practice.
 
 
 1104
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The law provides for freedom of religion, and the Govern-
 ment respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The law provides for these rights, and -he Government respects them
 m practice.
 The Government cooperates with the Office of the U.N. High Commissioner for
 Refugees and other humanitarian organizations. Although it does not formally offer
 asylum to refugees, it has given a few individuals de facto asylum by permitting
 them to reside and work in San Marino. Refugees and other foreigners are eligible
 to apply for citizenship only after 30 years of residence. The issue of the provision
 of first asylum did not arise in 1996; nor were there any reports of forced repatri-
 ation of refugees.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights" The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides citizens with the right to peacefully change their gov-
 ernment, and citizens exercise this right in practice through periodic, free, and fair
 elections held on the basis of universal suffrage.
 There have been no impediments to women participating in government or politics
 since the passage of a 1973 law eliminating all restrictions. In 1974 the first female
 member was elected to the GGC. Since then, women have served on the Council as
 Secretary of State for Internal Affairs and as Captain Regent. All women's branches
 of the political parties have been integrated into the mainstream party organiza-
 tions, and women hold important positions in the various parties.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no domestic human rights organizations, although the Government im-
 poses no impediments to the formation of such organizations. The Government has
 declared itself open to outsiders' investigations of-alleged abuses. There have been
 no known requests of such a nature.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The law prohibits discrimination based on race, religion, disability, language, or
 social status, and the authorities respect these provisions. The law also prohibits
 some forms of discrimination based on sex, but there remain vestiges of legal as well
 as societal discrimination against women.
 Women.-The law provides for protection of women from violence, and occurrences
 of such violence, including spousal abuse, are unusual.
 Several laws provide specifically for equality of women in the workplace and else-
 where. In practice there is no discrimination in pay or working conditions. All ca-
 reers are open to women, including careers in the military and police as well as the
 highest public offices.
 However, there is a law that discriminates against women in stipulating that a
 woman who marries a foreigner cannot transmit citizenship to her husband or chil-
 dren, but that a man who marries a foreigner can do so to both spouse and children.
 Children.-The Government demonstrates its commitment to children's rights and
 welfare through its well-funded systems of public education and medical care. There
 is no difference in the treatment of girls and boys in educational or health care, nor
 is there any societal pattern of abuse directed against children.
 People With Disabilities.-There is no discrimination against disabled persons in
 employment, education, or in the provision of other state services. A 1992 law estab-
 lished guidelines for easier access to public buildings, but implementation of its pro-
 visions has not yet reached all buildings.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Bry law, all workers (except the military, but includ-
 ing police) are free to form and join unions. A 1961 law sets the conditions for estab-
 ls   ent of a union. The unions may freely form domestic federations or join inter-
 national labor federations.
 Union members constitute about half of the country's work force (which numbers
 about 10,000 San Marinese plus 2,000 Italians, from the country's total population
 of about 25,000).
 Trade unions are independent of the Government and the political parties, but
 they have close informal ties with the parties, which exercise strong influence on
 them.
 Workers in all nonmilitary occupations have the right to strike. No strikes have
 occurred in at least the last 6 years.
 
 
 1105
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The law gives collective bar-
 gaining agreements the force of law and prohibits antiunion discrimination by em-
 ployers. Effective mechanisms exist to resolve complaints. Negotiations are freely
 conducted, often in the presence of government officials (usually from the Labor anid
 Industry Departments) by invitation from both the unions and the employers' asso-
 ciation. For the last several years, all complaints have been resolved amicably by
 a "conciliatory committee" composed of judges and government officials.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced or com-
 pulsory labor and is enforced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum working age and
 compulsory education age is 16 years. The Ministry of Labor and Cooperation per-
 mits no exceptions. Most students continue in school until age 18.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Since January 1, 1995, the legal minimum
 wage has been approximately $1,200 (1.88 million lira) per month. This affords a
 decent living for a worker and family. Wages are generally higher than the mini-
 mum.
 The law sets the workweek at 36 hours in public administration and 37Y hours
 in industry and private business, with 24 hours of rest per week for workers in ei-
 ther category.
 The law sets safety and health stndards, and the* udicial system monitors them.
 Most workplaces implement the standards effectively, but there are some excep-
 tions, notably in the construction industries.
