 SOMALIA
 Somalia's formal governmental structure includes the President,
 the Council'of Ministers, and the-National People's Assembly.
 For the past 18 years, Somalia has been ruled by President
 Mohamed Siad Barre, head of the armed forces and Secretary
 General of the Somali Revolutionary SocialistParty, the
 country's sole legal political party. Brought to power by a
 military coup in 1969, President Siad was. elected to.a 7-year
 term in Decemberlf986 in Somalia's first. direct presidential
 election-which gave the President 99.9 percent. of the vote.
 The Council of Ministersis appointed by President Siad. The
 members of the People's'Assembly were'last elected on a single
 slate in December 1984, with no provision for alternative or
 dissenting votes. -The President regulaily~convenes-the party
 Politburo, a close circle of advisers.composed pf-the Vice
 President and four of the most powerful ministers, who also,
 represent the major clan groups in Somalia. Informal and
 formal consultations between the leadership and clan groups
 also have a major impact on internal politics.
 Having risen to power on the-basis of his support in.the
 military, President Siad consolidated his authority by-forging
 a consensus among the clans through careful -balancing of Clan,
 representation in his Cabinet.- Militaryofficers remain key
 political players,. The police force maintains, civil order. -
 These two uniformed services are augmented by the National
 Security Service"(NSS), created in-1970, which has essentially
 unlimited powers of arrest, detention, and confiscation in
 matters deemed to involve national security. --.  ,
 Somalia has few natufal resources, and most of itsestimated
 population'of 5.-'milliontearn a bare subsistence as herdsmen
 or farfners.- The country s economy, has suffered from-periodic
 drought and overcentralization.>:Recurrent- conflict with
 Ethiopia has entailed heavy defense expenditures and a massive
 refugee problem. _Hbwever .since 1983 the Government-has been
 introducing new policies to encourage development of the small
 private sector and to initiate economic reforms with the
 assistance of a variety of donorsi including the International
 Monetary'Fund, the World-Bank,-and the Agency for International
 Development. These reforms have had salutary effects -on -
 production and exports and have also lowered the inflation
 rate; In August 1987, however, popular-riots'.occurred in
 protests against-fuel shortages and a rise in transportation
 fares. The President, in subsequent policy statements, -
 appeared to be having second thoughts about the reforms, seeing
 some liability in market-determined food prices and foreign
 exchange rates.
 There was no signi'ficant change in Somalia's human rights
 situation in 1987. Civil and political rights remain tightly
 circumscribed; however, while public criticism of the
 Government is not allowed, Somalis are less reluctant to speak
 openly in private conversations about dissatisfaction with
 government-policies. The Government shows little hesitation to
 imprison those it sees as a threat to security. Two antiregime
 organizations, the Somali National Movement (SNM) and the
 Somali Democratic Salvation Front (SDSF), operate out of
 Ethiopia and periodically conduct military attacks against
 Somali government and army establishments, primarily in
 northern Somalia.
 
 
 264
 SOMALIA
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 It is difficult to obtain information on possible political
 killings, especially in the wake of periodic fighting between
 antigovernment and government forces. Opposition groups were
 responsible for some deaths or woundings of civilians in the
 course of their attacks on government establishments,
 particularly in the North. A Somali National Security Service
 official was assassinated in December 1986 while sitting in a
 public cafe in Hargeisa. While the opposition's avowed targets
 are the military, tactics involve use of land mines, which have
 injured some civilians.
 Although a number of death sentences have been issued by the
 National Security Court, from whose decisions there is no right
 of appeal, there were no credible reports in 1987 that any of
 the defendants were actually executed. The Somali President
 can and has pardoned or reduced sentences of persons convicted
 by the National Security Court. There have been reports of
 extralegal or summary executions of alleged dissidents,
 especially in the North, but it is difficult to obtain
 corroborating information due to the periodic fighting.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reported cases of unexplained disappearance. SNM
 dissidents kidnaped 10 French doctors and an Ethiopian refugee
 in January from the Tug Wajale refugee camp but later released
 them in Ethiopia to French authorities.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 There are recurring reports of the use of torture by police and
 security officials, including immersion in sea water, beatings,
 rape, and placing prisoners in contorted positions for extended
 periods. Somali officials consistently deny that torture is
 practiced. Authorities routinely use rough treatment in order
 to obtain confessions from criminal suspects. Somali prisons
 are unsanitary and living conditions are difficult. Some
 political detainees are held incommunicado for various lengths
 of time, reportedly in harsh conditions in maximum security
 prisons where they are denied contact with their families, and,
 in some cases, kept in solitary confinement. However, upon
 release from prison, some political prisoners have been
 restored to their old government jobs or have had new jobs
 created for them. In its 1987 report, Amnesty International
 (AI) expressed concern about reports of ill-treatment and
 torture of political prisoners. Police behavior has sometimes
 been rough in other contexts. At the National Day parade in
 October, overzealous security forces beat some spectators and
 fired a few shots, but there were no casualties.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, Exile, or Forced Labor
 Despite constitutional provisions that accord Somali citizens
 the right to formal charges and a speedy trial, the criminal
 procedure code was modified in 1970 to exempt crimes involving
 national security from specific tirue limits and rules of
 procedure. Those arrested for expression of critical views of
 
 
 SOMALIA
 the Government may. be charged with crimes against the State,
 such as sedition and conspiracy against the State, and held
 indefinitely:without being brought to trial. The National
 Security Service is empowered to arrest without a warrant
 anyone silspected of a crime involving national security. There
 is no provision for bail in any but minor cases before the
 National Security Court.
 Estimates of the number of political detainees range from 300
 to 80, of whom at least 200 are being held without charge.
 Some reports indicate this number is much higher, allegedly due
 to mass arrests in the North in the wake of the conflict
 between the army and the SNM. AI's latest report recalls that
 among those held without charge are a politician and lawyer
 detained without trial since 1975 and several army officers
 detained since 1978. Several persons detained since 1982 will
 be tried early in 1988 (see below). Al's report, as well as
 other sources, claim that Somalia is holding without trial at
 Hawai prison several hundred Ethiopian civilians reportedly
 captured by Somali forcesin the 1977-78 Ogaden War. The
 Governnjent-provides no information about the number of
 detainees.
 Six former Members of Parliament arrested in 1982, including
 one former Vice President and four Cabinet members (two of whom
 were founders of the current regime), were formally charged in
 1987 with "high treason." The Government announced that these
 persons will be brought to trial in February 1988 and permitted
 legal-egugsel, A seventh Member of Parliament detained with
 this group died in prison in 1983 allegedly due to medical
 neglect. There are reports that other political detainees will
 also be tried in,1988.
 The Government does nqt practice exile. In 1986 President Siad
 Barre publicly ,offered amnesty to dissidents abroad who wished
 to return to Somalia. Compulsory labor is not permitted under
 Somali law. ..However,-the Government and the party occasionally,
 organize campaigns in which "voluntary" labor is used in strpet
 cleaning:or temporarily in state-run factories. Prisoners may
 perfqxm labor as part of their penal servitude.
 e.. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Somali judicial system includes civil and criminal courts,
 headed by the Supreme Court and a separate National Security
 Court, which is not independent from the executive and is in
 session almost weekly. Lawyers are permitted to represent
 suspects before the National Security Court, but proceedings
 are nog always open to the public. In contrast, the civil and
 criminal courts are conducted openly. Although nominally
 independent, the judiciary is in fact not distinguishable as an
 institution from the executive, which reviews and controls
 judicial decisions. All judges in the Supreme Court and lower
 courts are appointed by the President with the advice of the
 Higher Judicial Council, of which the President is the chairman.
 The right to appeal exists in criminal and civil cases, but not
 in cases heard by the National Security Court. In the civil
 and criminal courts, legal assistance is provided, and there
 are,established xules of evidence. There are no religious
 courts in Somalia. In certain civil proceedings relating to
 family matters, such as marriage and inheritance, the judge may
 cite prevailing Islamic Sharila law in rendering decisions.
 In 1986 there were some arrests of Islamic religious figures,
 made on the basis of the Government's suspicions that they were
 
 
 266
 SOMALIA
 dissidents, not because of their religious activities. In
 particular, the Government arbitrarily arrested nine Islamic
 clerics and accused them, among other things, of using religion
 to incite people against the security of the State. The nine
 were tried and sentenced to death by the National Security
 Court, but their sentences were commuted to life imprisonment
 in August 1987. While these clerics were reported to be
 radical Shi'a, they were more likely Sunni fundamentalists.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 "Mobilization campaigns" are organized by the Somali
 Revolutionary Socialist Party to promote public participation
 in, and enthusiasm for, various civic and national programs, as
 well as general support for government policies. Participation
 in these campaigns is urged but not strictly enforced.
 Military press gangs are often used to provide "recruits" for
 the army. The National Security Service uses its authority to
 search homes without warrants. This authority extends to
 monitoring communications and opening mail, although there is
 no evidence that such practices are broadly used. The NSS can
 effectively track the movements of persons through its
 comprehensive network of informants.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Government does not allow public expression of dissenting
 views and owns and operates the media. There is one weekly
 newspaper, published in Arabic and Italian, which is privately
 owned but hews to the government line by practicing self-
 censorship. The press disseminates only information and
 opinion acceptable to the Government. The Central Censorship
 Board retains control over all media (foreign and local),
 including publications circulated within the country--films,
 plays, concerts, lectures, and other means of communication,
 such as videotapes, whether imported or produced in Somalia.
 Members of the press exercise self-censorship, and there have
 been no reports of detention of journalists. In the past, some
 Italian publications have been banned, as well as the quarterly
 journal Horn of Africa published in New Jersey by expatriate
 Somali and Ethiopian intellectuals.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 All nonreligious organizations and public gatherings are
 subject to government control or supervision. Protest meetings
 against government policies are not permitted. In April 1986,
 a short-lived rally in favor of the imposition of the Islamic
 Shari'a law resulted in the arrest of nearly 100 participants.
 The country's single labor confederation, the General
 Federation of Somali Trade Unions (GFSTU), is government
 controlled. The head of the GFSTU is appointed by the
 Government. Its members do not have the right to strike.
 There have been no strikes since the 1969 revolution.
 Organizing a strike is legally punishable by the death
 penalty. However, no trade union official has been punished by
 fine, imprisonment, or death for violating the antistrike law.
 The GFSTU's main function is to monitor the work force and
 provide a conduit for worker grievances. The GFSTU is a member
 of the Organization of African Trade Union Unity and the
 
 
 267
 SOMALIA-
 International Confederatibn of Arab Trade Unions, and
 participates in the International'Labor Organization.
 c. Freddom of. Religion
 Islam is the state-religion, and nearly 100 percent of the
 population is Muslim, 'predominantly of 'the Sunni sect. The
 Government'monitors the topics of sermons preached in the
 mosques and' occasionally will arrest a religious leader whose
 text strays too far into political areas. Since 1986 the
 Government has appointed all imams. Activities of those who
 openly-wear conservative Islamic dress or who were educated in
 religicus" schools in Saudi Arabia are closely monitored by
 Somali secur-ity forces.
 The Government has arrested Somalis and deported expatriates
 for Muslim'Brotherhood activities, but contends that the
 Brotherhood, which seeks to apply Islamic tenets'to'politics,
 is a secular, not a religious, organization' Somalis are free
 to participate in the haji, and many do so annually. Members
 of other-feligions may practice their faiths freely, but
 proselytizing is not permitted."
 d..-F-eedom'bf Movement Within the Country, Foreign.
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Internal travel is not fdrmally restricted but is controlled
 through police and military checkpoints in towns, border areas,
 and regions noted for interclan violence. Since the December
 1986 mu'der of the chief 'ecurity officer of the northern
 region, -thJe Goiernment has imposed travel restrictions on
 Somali ditizens, in that region including an 8: p.m.to 5 a.m.
 curfew in 'argeisa. There have been reports that Somali
 soldiers and police freguently'harass traVelers in and out of
 the capital city.
 Although any Somali citizen ca-obtailn a passport, the
 Government denies-exit gisas to categories of young people,
 such as young men of military age and those under police
 surveillance. Emigration is permitted for all but government
 employees. Somalis who have'gone abroad aie not prevented from
 returning. Thosed who havg been' involved in  'dissident
 activities agaihst the regime may face questining or
 imprisonment 'upon their return. However, some dissidents who
 have renounced their opposition to the regime have been
 welcomed' back and provided with government jobs.
 Somalia provides a home to a much-disputed number of refugees
 from Ethiopia. The Somali Government officially welcomes
 refugees to stay or to return to Ethiopia as they wish.
 Estimates range from the Government's figure of 800,000 down to
 350,00. A'majority 'are ethnic Somalis, but Oromos (both
 Muslim and Christian) constitute an important minority. The
 Oromos who fled to Somalia generally stated that they were
 fleeing from the Ethiopian Government's "villagization" and
 collectivization policies.* These recent arrivals, like other
 non-S6malis displaced into Somalia, are not allowed to
 assimilate into the Somali population. Logistics and
 resettlement problems present obstacles to voluntary
 repatriation. As of August 30, 3,137 refbgees had officially
 returned to Ethiopia under the auspices of the United Nations
 High Commissioner for Refugees, although mayy-more may have
 returned dn their own.
 
 
 268
 SOMALIA
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 President Siad Barre rules Somalia and controls political
 participation through the single legal political party, the
 Somali Revolutionary Socialist Party. Citizens cannot change
 the one-party system, and therefore cannot change the party in
 power. The party directs participation in Somali political
 affairs through organizations such as the General Federation of
 Somali Trade Unions, the Somali Women's Democratic Organization,
 and the Somali Revolutionary Youth Organization. Voting for the
 People's Assembly entails only a vote for or against the party's
 national slate, although one need not necessarily be a member of
 the party to be included as a candidate pn the slate. President
 Siad Barre was the sole candidate for the presidency in the
 election held on December 23, 1986. There is no legal
 opposition to the Government, and public criticism of its
 policies is forbidden.
 Somalia has only one indigenous ethnic group, the Somali, which
 is subdivided into clans and clan-groups. Although the country
 is ethnically and linguistically homogeneous, clan divisions
 have a great impact on domestic politics. While officially
 outlawing "tribalism," President Siad recognizes the continuing
 strength of the traditional, clan-based political coalitions
 and uses clan politics as a means of maintaining his rule.
 Government officials frequently hold formal and informal
 consultations with various clan leaders. Clan identification
 is very strong, and for many Somalis, the traditional clan
 system is the accepted vehicle of political expression. Clan
 politics and clan rivalries occasionally erupt into violence.
 Tension was high in May 1987 between Marehans and Ogadenis in
 Kismayo when a Marehan army officer shot and killed an Ogadeni
 youth. Some members of the Issak clan of the North actively
 support the insurgency of the antigovernment SNM. Other Issaks
 are themselves members of the government bureaucracy or the
 military. Loyalty or opposition to the Government can thus cut
 across clan lines and create complex political patterns.
 Women and minorities participate in politics and government,
 but they wield little power. A number of women are members of
 the People's Assembly, and several are vice ministers. Other
 women occupy relatively senior positions in various ministries,
 and one holds an ambassadorship. The Somali Women's Democratic
 Organization has in the past advocated greater political
 participation and mobilization for women, although it has been
 dismissed by some Somalis as a vehicle of the party for
 mobilizing women in support of government policies and the
 status quo on issues involving women.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 In the past, the Government has generally not replied to
 inquires by human rights organizations such as Amnesty
 International, although it responded to an inquiry on prisoners
 from the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) Committee on Human
 rights. It also permitted a visit of inquiry (first requested
 in 1985) by the NAS Human Rights Committee in October 1987.
 NAS will publish a report of its findings in 1988. The
 Government has not responded to international requests, e.g.,
 from the International Parliamentary Union, to release the six
 parliamentarians who have been detained without charge since
 1982, but it set a trial date for them in February 1988.
 
 
 269
 SOMALIA
 The Government has refused requests by foreign officials and
 human rights organizations.to visit political prisoners, but it
 permits the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
 representative in Mogadishu to visit to some Ethiopian prisoners
 of war from the 1977-78 Ogaden conflict. However, there are
 many Ethiopian prisoners of war to whom the Government has not
 permittbd access. The Somalis require that government witnesses
 be present at. ICRC interviews. There has been no repatriation
 or exchange of these prisoners of war, although Somalia proposed
 a modest exchange with Ethiopia in 1986.
 There are no Somali organizations which actively address human
 rights issues. In international forums, official Somali remarks
 on human rights are usually restricted to general statements and*
 critictsm of practices.in Ethiopia. There are indications that
 discreet local inquiries may have a positive impact in
 encouraging the Government to improve its record in this regard.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 While there is no overt discrimination in the distribution of
 economic benefits among the various clans and clan-groups in
 Somalia, members of certain clans and some .individuals
 capitalize on their political connections in the Government.
 There is.no discrimination regarding access to education and
 health services on clan or ethnic bases, although these social
 services are generally available only in larger urban areas of
 the country.
 While they have considerable inheritance and ownership rights,
 Somali women suffer from traditional discrimination in work and
 family matters. Long-established practices, such as female
 circumcision, remain prevalent despite government opposition.
 The payment of dowry and bride wealth are common in marriage
 rituals. Divorce laws and practices strongly favor-the male
 partner.,
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 Somalia has comprehensive labor legislation which establishes
 minimum-safety and health conditions for the workplace. These
 are applicable to the small modern, or cash, sector of an
 economy that is predominantly pastoral and agricultural. The
 minimum age for employment of children is 15, and persons under
 18 years of age are not permitted to work at night or in
 certain hazardous occupations. However, the legislation is not-
 effectively implemented. Also, on the margins of the formal
 economy, children sell cigarettes on the street, carry bags in
 the market, and watch and clean cars to support themselves and
 supplement family incomes. The established workday.is 8 hours
 a day, with a total of A8 hours per week, and-over-time hours
 can be limited. Workers are entitled to paid holidays, annual.
 leave, and holiday bonuses. However, the salary scale is
 extremely low, especially in the public sector. The average
 salary of 'a civil servant is roughly $1,5 per month. Morkers
 resort to second jobs, corruption, assistance from other family
 members, and remittances from abroad to support themselves and
 their families. Productivity in the public sector is extremely
 low, and many civil servants make minimal appearances in their
 offices. A civil service reform program, aimed at reducing
 public sector-jobs by attrition and boosting salaries, has been
 initiated.
 
 
 270
