 SOMALIA
 Somalia has been ruled since 1969 by President Mohamed Siad
 Barre, who controls the Government through the presidentially
 appointed Council of Ministers, the National People's Assembly
 which is subordinate to the executive, and a single political
 party, the Somali Revolutionary Socialist Party (SRSP).
 Members of the President's clan, the Marehan, held many key
 positions. However, in late December, an outbreak of fighting
 between rival clans in the capital, Mogadishu, created a state
 of anarchy and brought into question the Government's ability
 to continue in control.
 During 1990 the Government was under increasing internal and
 international pressures to seek political reform and help stop
 human rights abuses committed by all parties to the 3-year-old
 civil conflict. Responding to these pressures, the Government
 introduced a new, provisional Constitution, effective for
 1 year from October 12, 1990. The Constitution and its
 related statutes, if fully respected by the Government, would
 repeal a series of repressive security laws; permit free,
 multiparty elections; guarantee a number of individual rights;
 and transfer considerable power from the President to the
 Prime Minister; Cabinet, and Parliament. At the end of 1990,
 the heavy fighting that engulfed Mogadishu cast grave doubt on
 whether the new Constitution would have any practical impact.
 At year's end, only portions of the capital city, Mogadishu,
 and a few other places where troops were garrisoned, remained
 in government hands. During the last 3 months of the year,
 massacres by government forces and other politically related
 as well as criminal violence escalated dramatically even in
 the capital, resulting in many deaths, injuries, and the
 widespread evacuation of most foreigners. The main
 opposition, the Isaak-based Somali National Movement (SNM),
 controlled much of the north, and the Hawiye-based United
 Somali Congress (USC) was active in central Somalia, including
 Mogadishu. The Government's.arming of a number of clan
 militias exacerbated the conflict and encouraged general
 lawlessness.
 The Somali armed forces number not more than 35,000 troops.
 Internal security responsibilities, including coping with the
 civil conflict, are shared by the National Army, the military
 police, the Defense Intelligence Security Agency ("Hangaash"),
 the National Police, and the National Security Service (NSS).
 In all, nine different entities have arrest powers, an
 organizational situation which has exacerbated human rights
 abuses.
 Most of Somalia's estimated 8 million people manage a bare
 subsistence as herders or farmers. The modern sector of the
 economy consists mainly of banana plantations in the south;
 the chief exports are livestock, bananas, and hides and
 skins. Mogadishu has a population approaching 2 million, many
 of whom are unemployed migrants and displaced persons from the
 countryside. In 1990 further economic decline, made worse by
 sharply reduced support from foreign donors, contributed to
 increasing crime.
 Widespread severe violations of human rights occurred in
 Somalia in 1990, most of them attributable to the Government
 and its security forces. There were repeated, credible
 reports of army units attacking villages and murdering
 suspected opponents, and presidential guards (Red Berets)
 
 
 SOMALIA
 were implicated in robberies and killings. In July
 presidential guards shot and killed 60 to 100 people fleeing a
 Mogadishu stadium after fans at a soccer match booed the
 President. There is no evidence of serious attempts by the
 Government to investigate these abuses or to punish those
 responsible. Other areas of human rights abuses included
 torture and other mistreatment of prisoners and detainees,
 arbitrary detention, denial of fair trial, massive abuses of
 civilians by both government and rebel forces, restrictions on
 freedom of speech, press, assembly, and association, and the
 denial of the right to change the government as well as the
 denial of worker rights and pervasive discrimination against
 women.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom front:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 In addition to the July killing of 60 to 100 persons in the
 Mogadishu stadium, Red Berets in December, without apparent
 motive, massacred from 10 to 20 persons (primarily from the
 Hawiye clan) at the animal market in Mogadishu. There are
 frequent but unverified claims that certain "criminal"
 killings in Mogadishu are actually carried out by agents of
 the Government for political purposes. For instances of
 excessive use of force and killings of civilians, see Section
 1.g.
 There were no known instances of the Government punishing
 those who committed political killings or other abuses. One
 Marehan general, the chief of airport security, who shot
 several bystanders at the Mogadishu airport in December, was
 subsequently transferred to another high-ranking position in
 the police. An investigation ordered by President Siad intor
 the reprisal killings of Isaak-men in Mogadishu by government
 troops in July 1989 has yet to produce indictments or any
 other known result.
 b. Disappearance
 Disappearances were hard to distinguish from arbitrary arrests
 and detentions (see Section l.d.) and extrajudicial killings,
 because these were not acknowledged by the authorities. The
 number of disappearances during the year was unknown.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 The new Constitution prohibits mental and physical torture.
 There were no confirmed instances of torture in Somalia in
 1990. However, there is strong evidence that prisoners held
 by the security forces were tortured. Screams of pain were
 frequently clearly audible in the night to those living near
 an NSS prison in Mogadishu. Since the Government almost never
 investigates charges of torture and as detainees are often
 held incommunicado, it is difficult to judge the frequency of
 torture.
 Harsh treatment of prisoners remained commonplace. In one
 extreme example, in June a visiting Italian professor strayed
 on foot into a sensitive area of Mogadishu. He was detained
 by soldiers, beaten, and died in his cell.
 
 
 346
 SOMALIA
 Prominent political prisoners were, by comparison, well
 treated. Forty-five prominent politicians and clan elders who
 were detained for about 1 month at Lanta Bur maximum security
 prison for signing a manifesto critical of the Government (see
 Section 2.a.) were allowed one visit each from family
 members. Their wives brought food to them daily at the
 prison, although they were not allowed to give the food
 directly to the prisoners. For ordinary prisoners, however,
 conditions are harsh: sanitation is poor, cells are
 overcrowded, diet is inadequate and must be supplemented by
 family members or friends, and there is a lack of clean water
 and medical care.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Although the former constitution accorded citizens the right
 to be formally charged and to receive a speedy trial, national
 security laws enacted in 1970 exempted crimes involving
 security from time limits and rules of procedure. As the
 Government struggled to suppress increasingly bold and
 numerous opponents, reliable sources reported that the jails
 were filling with detainees arrested under the security laws.
 In practice, the concept of "national security" has sometimes
 been stretched to mean almost anything. Persons detained for
 various periods of time included both the composer and the
 singer of a popular song critical of the Government, 9
 prominent Isaak businessmen or their sons, a Somali employee
 of the U.S. Embassy who came to the aid of a Marine security
 guard who had been wounded by robbers, 45 persons who had
 signed a political manifesto, and a contractor providing heavy
 equipment for petroleum exploration companies. The contractor
 was detained apparently because powerful people wanted to take
 over his business. Other wealthy people were apparently
 detained for purposes of extortion. In some cases,
 authorities held people for 1 to 2 weeks with little or no
 attempt to interrogate them, then released them suddenly, with
 as little explanation as when they were arrested.
 The number of political detainees still in prison at year's
 end was unknown; the Government does not disclose such
 information. Among those still in detention were Major
 General Aden Abdullahi Nur, a former Minister of Defense, and
 General Mohamed Abdullahi Ba'adleh, a former Minister of
 Interior. Both were arrested in July 1989.
 The Government does not practice exile as a means of political
 punishment. However, the Government's arbitrary use of legal
 powers to silence its critics has the effect of forcing many
 persons into exile, e.g., the editor of the party newspaper in
 1990 (see Section 2.a. and 2.d.).
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Somali judicial system includes civil and criminal
 courts. Members of the public are usually barred from
 trials. There are no religious courts, but in civil
 proceedings judges are reportedly under instructions to
 disregard statute law regarding women's inheritance rights and
 to follow the more conservative Shari'a law instead. In the
 civil and criminal courts, legal assistance is provided, and
 there are established rules of evidence. The right to appeal
 exists in criminal and civil cases but until October 12 not in
 cases heard by the National Security Court.
 
 
 347
 SOMALIA
 The National Security Court was abolished then, and its
 pending cases transferred to the ordinary courts.- Lawyers
 were permitted to represent suspects before the National
 Security Court but usually were granted very little time to
 prepare their cases. For example, lawyers for the 45
 manifesto defendants had about 48 hours from the time of their
 appointments until the trial began. For persons formerly
 convicted by the National Security Court, the only avenue for
 clemency was through the Politburo of the ruling party.
 Although the judiciary is nominally independent, the executive
 reviews and controls judicial decisions. For example, the
 order to acquit the 45 manifesto defendants "for lack of
 evidence" came directly from President Siad. All judges are
 appointed by the President with the advice of the Higher
 Judicial Council, of which the President is chairman. Judges
 of the National Security Court were usually military officers
 posted to the Court.
 The only National Security Court trial that received publicity
 in 1990 was that of the 5 manifesto signers in July, which
 lasted only 4 hours and resulted in the acquittal and release
 of all defendants.
 Until the new Constitution went into effect on October 12,
 there were a number of severe security laws. The status of
 these laws was unclear at the end of 1990. Law No. 54 of 1970
 provided the death penalty for political offenses "against
 national security," defined as behavior "which may be
 considered prejudicial to the maintenance of peace, order and
 good government." Among the 20 offenses punishable by death
 were "organizing a subversive association," "exploiting
 religion for creating national disunity," and "publishing
 antistate propaganda." The manifesto signers and other
 advocates of reform recommended to the Government in 1990 that
 the National Security Court and the 1970 security laws,
 including Law No. 54, be abolished.
 At the end of 1990, the number of political prisoners, as
 distinguished from political detainees who had never been
 brought to trial, was unknown and difficult to estimate
 because of government secrecy. However, one credible estimate
 placed the number of such political prisoners at several
 hundred, with at least 200 being held in Mogadishu's central
 prison. Most of the latter had been arrested on the pretense
 of having committed common crimes.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The-telephone conversations and mail of-suspected persons are
 sometimes monitored, and informants keep watch on the
 movements of people at embassies, mosques, and other sensitive
 locations.
 In June and July, security services conducted repeated raids
 in Mogadishu neighborhoods in search of weapons and material
 critical of the Government, including cassette tapes of Somali
 songs and poetry. These searches were carried out without
 warrants or the consent of the searched. No probable cause
 was required.
 
 
 348
 SOMALIA
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian
 Law in Internal Conflicts
 Sporadic, low-intensity warfare continued and gradually
 escalated in many regions of Somalia during 1990, with
 government authority eroding throughout the country.
 Government forces and, to a lesser extent, their opponents,
 e.g., the Isaak-based SNM and the Hawiye-based USC, continued
 a pattern of killing unarmed and unresisting civilians. To
 counter the growing threat, the Government further armed
 clan-based civilian militias, particularly Marehan in
 southwestern and central Somalia and Gadaboursi in the north.
 They also continued to arm.Ethiopian refugees in northern
 camps, and there were some reports that refugees in the Belet
 Weyne and Jalalaqsi camps in the south were also armed by the
 Government. Such groups, once armed, were under no effective
 control. Extrajudicial killings fell most heavily on Hawiye
 (especially Habr Gedr Sa'ad) in the central regions, Isaaks in
 the north, and Issas in the far northwest.
 The U.S.-based human rights group, Africa Watch, issued a
 report in early 1990, "Somalia: A Government at War With Its
 Own People," charging the Said Barre regime with
 responsibility for the deaths of 50,000 to 60,000 civilians
 since the conflict with the SNM began in May 1988.
 Among the most serious extrajudicial incidents in 1990 in
 which civilians were killed were: in March government troops
 in a major offensive near the Djibouti border rounded up and
 killed more than 100 civilians of the Issa clan, which had
 formed an alliance with the SNM; in May in Belet Weyne
 (central Somalia), following a USC attack on government
 installations, government troops massacred about 100
 civilians, including women and children, and confiscated most
 of their livestock; in August, following an SNM guerrilla
 attack near Berbera which killed 5 workers, government troops
 rounded up 21 young Isaak men in Berbera, killing 18; in
 November, after USC forces left Johar (having sacked
 government installations), government troops arrived and
 summarily executed 10 to 20 civilians for suspected rebel
 sympathies.
 In addition to killing civilians, government soldiers and
 opposition forces looted and destroyed property. Government
 troops in particular dynamited artificial reservoirs to deny
 water to local inhabitants. There were reports of soldiers
 raping women and girls. Among many examples, in August USC
 forces attacked the district police station in the town of
 Jalalaqsi, then looted the compounds of the United Nations
 High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and of three private
 charitable organizations. A few days later, Somali army
 forces retook Jalalaqsi, destroying much of what remained in
 the town and killing any local inhabitants in their path. In
 September government forces looted a German-supported hospital
 and the compound of a private voluntary organization in Belet
 Weyne.
 By the end of the year, clan-related violence between security
 forces and armed opponents escalated considerably in
 Mogadishu, resulting in hundreds of civilian deaths.
 Both government and opposition forces have hindered delivery
 of food to refugees, resulting in periodic suspension of
 feeding programs and subsequent malnutrition. With the
 completion of the U.N.'s Extraordinary Interim Emergency
 
 
 349
 SOMALIA
 Program for refugees in late August, the International
 Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) became increasingly involved
 in relief operations for victims of the northern conflict,
 both refugee and nonrefugee. However, in October an ICRC
 worker was killed in an SNM ambush, casting doubt on the
 practicability of future relief operations in the area. Of
 the three others abducted in the ambush, one expatriate and
 one Somali national were later released, while another Somali
 national escaped confinement and returned to safety on his own.
 There is little information on the fate of prisoners taken in
 Somalia's civil conflict. In general, it seems that few
 prisoners are taken. All sides welcomed deserters from
 opposing forces and civilian returnees from enemy-controlled
 territory.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech is provided for in the constitution of 1979
 and theoretically by the revised Constitution enacted on
 October 12, 1990. However, under the new Constitution.
 freedom of speech "must not contravene the discipline and
 stability of the nation."
 In practice, freedom of speech was not tolerated in 1990.
 Events, however, suggested that Somalis were increasingly
 determined to exercise freedom of speech, even at considerable
 personal risk.
 In January, for example, the editor of the ruling pdrty's
 newspaper published a series of articles critical of the
 Government, and a leading entertainment troupe performed a
 satirical program in the presence of President Siad. One of
 their-songs, "The Landcruiser Song" (named for the vehicle
 favored by wealthy Somalis and the security services),
 ridiculed the corruption and extravagance of the ruling elite,
 including by implication the President's family. The song
 gained instant popularity and was widely circulated in the
 black market for audio tapes. President Siad reacted
 angrily: the composer and the singer of the "Landcruiser
 Song" were detained for about 2 months, and the acting
 Minister of Information was fired. Police prohibited the
 printing of the party newspaper, and the editor fled to Kenya.
 In May a group of former politicians, businessmen,
 intellectuals, and clan elders published an open letter to
 President Siad, which came to be called the "Somali
 Manifesto." It combined bitter criticism of Siad Barre with a
 call for a transitional government to lead Somalia into a
 post-Siad era. The manifesto became a test of whether the
 Government, which had announced its intention to permit new
 political parties and open political discussion, was willing
 to permit free speech in practice. At first, the Government
 appeared to tolerate the manifesto signers but eventually
 charged 45 of them with antigovernment propaganda (an offense
 requiring the death penalty). On July 15, when the defendants
 were brought to trial, demonstrations broke out in Mogadishu.
 Within 4 hours, the National Security Court announced that the
 45 defendants had been released "for lack of evidence."
 Government ownership of radio and television, and its monopoly
 of the country's newspapers, had little practical effect on
 Somalis' access to information. City dwellers and nomads
 
 
 350
 SOMALIA
 listened to the British Broadcasting Corporation's Somali
 Service, by far the most influential news service in the
 country. The security services were unable to stem a lively
 traffic in audio tapes and photocopies of antigovernment
 writings. It remains to be seen whether the Government will
 tolerate independent media, which are to be allowed under the
 new Constitution.
 The question of academic freedom hardly arose, because there
 was only one university, staffed primarily by Italian
 professors who were careful not to stray into controversy.
 Some law school professors, however, made serious, uncoerced
 contributions to the technical committee appointed to revise
 the Constitution.
 In early 1990, the Government allowed several foreign
 journalists to visit Somalia. Two of them interviewed
 President Siad, after which visas for journalists once again
 became difficult to obtain. Eight Western journalists were
 invited to Mogadishu in September but were given access to
 only one top government official. In November and December,
 visas were issued more freely, and journalists' access
 improved somewhat.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Despite constitutional safeguards, throughout most of 1990 the
 authorities attempted to prevent peaceful assembly and to keep
 independent associations from forming. Nevertheless, several
 times in 1990 politically active Somalis asserted these
 rights, and in some cases the Government acquiesced, e.g., a
 public procession and funeral was held in July for the lawyer
 and human rights activist Ismail Jumale Ossoble, whose body
 was flown in from Rome.
 Also, the signers of the Somali Manifesto continued political
 activities after their trial and release. This group is
 considered by many to be a political party in all but name.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Islam is the state religion and nearly 100 percent of the
 population is Muslim, predominantly of the Sunni sect. The
 old and new Constitutions state that every person shall be
 entitled to profess any religion or creed. Members of
 religions other than Islam, however, may not proselytize.
 Mogadishu has a Roman Catholic community numbering 2,000,
 which was established during the period of Italian colonial
 rule. Both Protestant and Catholic houses of worship operate
 openly. No other religious group has significant
 representation in Somalia. Christian charitable organizations
 operate in Somalia but confine their activities to
 humanitarian and technical assistance.
 The Government is sensitive to the threat of disparate
 opposition groups uniting under the banner of Islam. Since
 1985, the Government has licensed all mosques and Koranic
 schools, and since 1986 it has approved all imams and paid
 them a salary.
 Ethiopian Christian refugees sometimes claim to face
 persecution in Somalia, but that persecution seems to be based
 more on nationality than on religion.
 
 
 SOMALIA
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The new Constitution provides the right to move freely within
 Somalia and to leave and return to the country at will. Most
 Somalis are nomads, and the nomadic tradition remains strong.
 Travel within Somalia is a freely practiced right.
 While most citizens who can afford it are able to travel
 internationally, the Government has sometimes restricted the
 travel of former detainees and political prisoners by denying
 them passports or stopping them at the airport. For example,
 the singer of the "Landcruiser Song," Sado Ali, was twice
 turned back at the airport. After the new Constitution came
 into effect, guaranteeing the right to travel, the Foreign
 Minister personally refused Ms. Ali the return of her
 passport. After the manifesto incident, most of the manifesto
 signers' names were added to the list of those not allowed to
 leave the country. A few, however, received special
 permission from the head of the NSS to travel out of Somalia.
 Somalis who have emigrated are generally permitted to return.
 Nevertheless, some Somalis remained abroad in 1990 because
 they feared possible imprisonment for opposition activity if
 they returned.
 There have been massive displacements of persons as a result
 of the civil conflict. At the end of 1990, the best estimates
 indicated that there were 370,000 displaced persons and
 refugees from Somalia (mainly Isaaks) in Ethiopia and 30,000
 in Djibouti
 The Government reports there are 837,000 Ethiopian refugees in
 Somalia, but outside observers, including those from the
 United Nations, indicated that fewer than half that number
 remained in refugee camps at the end of 1990. Conscription of
 refugees into the Somali army continued in 1990, in violation
 of international covenants.
 In late August, the United Nations suspended assistance to
 refugees in northern Somalia due to continued lack of security
 and the inability to monitor food distributions. Both
 organized and spontaneous repatriation of refugees to Ethiopia
 continued from the north and the south. The UNHCR completed
 registration of ration card holders in southern Somalia for
 voluntary integration or repatriation and also registered
 approximately 54,000 refugees for repatriation in the Borama
 area in the north. More than 4,000 refugees were repatriated
 from Borama to eastern Ethiopia-under the auspices of the ICRC
 and UNHCR. The repatriation was temporarily halted in October
 when the governor of Borama closed the road to the border.
 However, the ICRC repatriation convoys resumed in late
 December.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 In 1990 citizens had neither the legal right nor the ability
 peacefully to change their government or the form of their
 government. For most of the year there was only one legal
 party, the SRSP. Opposition groups and criticism of the
 Government were illegal. However, in December a new law was
 passed permitting the formation of multiple political
 parties. Under the new Constitution, the SRSP is to be
 removed from its leading role in the State and society, and
 
 
 352
 SOMALIA
 the President did resign as chairman of the SRSP when the new
 Constitution was provisionally implemented on October 12. The
 first multiparty elections were tentatively scheduled for late
 1991. As 1990 drew to a close, however, fighting in Mogadishu
 escalated, and serious doubts emerged as to whether the new
 Constitution would have any effect.
 For many Somalis, the traditional clan system is the accepted
 vehicle of political expression. President Siad Barre and
 other officials consult frequently with clan elders. Since
 1982, however, President Siad has been widely perceived as
 relying on and furthering the interests of his family and his
 Marehan subclan by playing off other clans against one
 another. Although members of the Marehan clan did not
 dominate the Cabinet--the Prime Minister, for example, was an
 Isaak--many key decisionmaking roles were filled by Marehan.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There are no human rights organizations as such in Somalia,
 but the Association of Somali Lawyers concerns itself with
 human rights issues. A governmental human rights commission
 chaired by the Foreign Minister (and including senior
 officials responsible for security) advised the President on
 tactics for dealing with the issue of international concern
 over human rights practices. Although proclaiming the
 Government's desire for better relations with human rights
 groups and improved international understanding of human
 rights conditions in Somalia, the commission produced few
 practical results. During 1990 there were no visits by human
 rights organizations. The Government postponed the visit by
 Amnesty International indefinitely following the arrests of
 the manifesto signers.
 In September, the European Community condemned human rights
 violations in Somalia, specifically mentioning the killing of
 Isaaks in Berbera by Somali military forces. Several
 governments successfully pressed the Somali Government to
 release those arrested for having signed the May manifesto.
 The Government cooperated with the ICRC's operations in
 government-controlled territory in the north. The Government
 and the SNM were not as cooperative in allowing the ICRC to
 assist conflict victims in nongovernment-controlled areas.
 The ICRC was able to gain access to these areas for the first
 time in early December. In addition to food relief
 operations, the ICRC's emergency hospital in Berbera and
 medical evacuation flights provided practically the only
 medical care in the northern portion of the country.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Because Somalia is racially homogeneous, there is little
 racial discrimination as such. Animosities and rivalries
 based on bloodline and clan affiliation, however, are a
 fundamental cause of the country's continuing civil conflict.
 Many persons continued to capitalize on their clan and family
 affiliations to gain economic advantage or privilege. The
 President's Marehan clan, for example, enjoys disproportionate
 access to bank loans, often unsecured, as well as preferential
 admission to the Somali National University.
 
 
 353
 SOMALIA
 The new Constitution specifically guarantees equal rights for
 all citizens, including the right of women to participate in
 the political system. However, in practice, Somali women
 suffer discrimination in education, work, and family matters.
 Female enrollment in schools remains far below that for males
 at all levels of education for traditional and cultural
 reasons. Almost 96 percent of female Somalis cannot read.
 The payment of dowry and bride wealth are common marriage
 customs. Divorce laws and practices still strongly favor the
 male partner. Despite conservative opposition, the Siad Barre
 Government long supported women's rights, ensuring
 constitutional equality, rewriting some laws to permit women
 to inherit and own property, and taking a strong stand against
 such practices as female circumcision. During 1990, however,
 judges were instructed to apply Shari'a law in cases involving
 inheritance (see Section i.e.).
 Violence in the form of female circumcision is still
 commonplace. it is performed in state-run hospitals.
 Pharaonic circumcision (the most extreme and dangerous form of
 female genital mutilation) is widely practiced, particularly
 in the north. The less extreme "Sunna" form of circumcision
 is, however, growing more popular among members of the
 educated elite.
 Excepting female circumcision, domestic violence against women
 is not a significant social problem in Somalia. Wife beating
 is uncommon because the wife's family is prepared to enforce
 the marriage contract that she should not be abused and
 because wife beating carries a stigma which makes it difficult
 for the husband to remarry. Furthermore, the present
 generation of young men treat their wives with greater respect
 since economic realities render them unable to practice
 polygamy.
 Women's rights groups, including those associated with
 opposition groups, were forming in 1990. In part, these
 groups aimed at countering fundamentalist pressures to set
 back previous gains in women's rights and ensuring that
 opposition groups included women's rights in their political
 programs. In July Somalia hosted a conference that examined
 women's issues such as family health and planning.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The new Constitution promises workers the right to form
 independent unions, a right not available in practice before
 October 12. So far, no unions have been organized under the
 new Constitution. There is a single labor confederation, the
 government-controlled General Federation of Somali Trade
 Unions (GFSTU), which is run by government-appointed
 officials. The GFSTU's main function is to monitor the work
 force and provide a conduit for worker grievances. The GFSTU
 is a member of the Organization of African Trade Union Unity
 and the International Confederation of Arab Trade Unions.
 Somalia has been a member of the International Labor
 Organization since 1960.
 Until October 1990, strikes were outlawed, and organizing a
 strike was legally punishable by death. Nevertheless, there
 were wildcat strikes by transportation workers in 1987 and by
 quarry workers in 1989. The Government took no action against
 the striking workers
 
 
 354
 SOMALIA
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The right to organize does not appear to be infringed by
 employers. Because the GFSTU speaks for the Government, its
 dealings with employers on wages, hours, and working
 conditions tend to resemble binding arbitration rather than
 collective bargaining. Some negotiation between employers and
 employees goes on outside the union framework. Given the
 official status of the GFSTU, antiunion discrimination appears
 to be a moot question. Labor courts adjudicate employer-
 employee disputes with relative impartiality. There are no
 export processing zones in Somalia.
 c. Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced or compulsory labor is prohibited by law, as well as by
 the new Constitution, but the Government and party
 occasionally organize campaigns of "voluntary labor" to clean
 streets or boost production of state-owned factories.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The minimum age for the employment of children is 15, and
 persons under 18 are not permitted to work at night or in
 certain hazardous occupations. However, the law imposing
 these requirements is not effectively implemented, and there
 is considerable child labor on the margins of the wage economy,
 e.g., selling cigarettes on the street and carrying bags in the
 market to support themselves and to supplement family incomes.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 There is no legal minimum wage, and salaries are extremely
 low, especially in the public sector. The average salary of a
 civil servant is equivalent to about $5 per month and is not
 adequate to maintain a decent standard of living. Productivity
 in the public sector is correspondingly low, and many civil
 servants make only minimal appearances in their offices.
 Workers resort to second jobs, corruption, assistance from
 other family members, and remittances from abroad to support
 themselves and their families.
 In theory, the workday is 8 hours per day, 6 days per week,
 with limits on overtime hours. Workers are entitled to paid
 holidays, annual leave, holiday bonuses, and a variety of
 fringe benefits.
 Somalia has comprehensive labor legislation setting minimum
 safety and health standards for the workplace. In theory
 inspectors from the Ministry of Labor carry out enforcement.
 However, these are only applicable to the small, modern wage
 sector of an economy that is predominantly pastoral and
 agricultural and are not normally enforced.
 
 
 355
