 SOMALIA
 Real authority in Somalia, which has one legal
 political party, is in the hands of President Siad and
 a few close associates. 1980 was the first full year
 for Somalia under its new constitution, but in
 October a state of emergency was declared. The
 constitution confirmed the existing institutions of
 government and provided for some guarantees of
 individual Tights. Despite this, most human rights
 are restricted by the government. The first major
 development under the new constitution was the
 establishment, in December 1979, of the People's
 Assembly, but it has not yet functioned as a real
 legislature. Somali leaders have stated that the aim
 of socialism in Somalia is to mobilize the population
 to overcome poverty and ignorance. Individual
 liberties have been subordinated to these economic
 and social goals. The Somali Revolutionary Socialist
 Party (SRSP) is responsible for the promulgation and
 implementation of policies which have been decided on
 by the Somali leadership. It is the only legal
 political party. The government has sought to
 overcome clan divisions and has greatly improved
 the status of women despite opposition from tradi-
 tional elements of Somali society. Women now legally
 enjoy the same economic and political rights as do
 men and hold several prominent government Positions.
 Although the government's security apparatus remains
 pervasive, a more relaxed atmosphere has developed
 gradually over the past three years. The goyernment
 has shown concern for the well-being of hundreds of
 thousands of refugees who have fled the Ogaden
 because of warfare between Ethiopiq and Somalia. A
 significant amount of its slender resources has been
 devoted to the care of refugees.
 In declaring a state of emergency in October, the
 government cited as primary reasons domestic economic
 inefficiency and corruption, as well as external
 threats. All provisions of the constitution which
 might conflict with the state of emergency were
 suspended. The People's Assembly was suspended.
 The declaration of emergency was not accompanied by
 repressive measures and has had little impact on the
 status of human rights as described in the following
 paragraphs.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person,
 Including Freedom Prom:
 a. Torture
 No credible reports that torture was practiced in
 Sonalia in 1980 were received. Exiled dissidents
 
 
 232
 however, have claimed that torture is used to obtain
 confessions in security cases. The constitution
 provides that prisoners shall not be subjected to
 physical or mental torture.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 In the spring of 1980 perhaps as many as several
 dozen military personnel, all members of the
 Majertain clan, were executed secretly for allegedly
 having supported the Somali Salvation Front, an
 anti-government guerrilla movement. It has not been
 determined whether these individuals were tried be-
 fore the national security court, or simply executed
 without trial. Several middle-level government
 officials were executed early in 1980 on the grounds
 that they had embezzled large sums of money.
 Conditions in prisons and detention camps are spartan
 but there is no evidence of intentionally degrading
 treatment of prisoners, nor is there evidence that
 treatment varies by social class, race, sex or re-
 ligion. Amnesty International Report 1980 expresses
 concern regarding poor prison conditions. Some
 political prisoners are held in solidary confinement
 in small, permanently lit basement cells. Diet
 is poor and adequate medical treatment is difficult
 to obtain. They are denied access to family and
 legal counsel.
 c. Disappearances
 There have been no reported cases of disappearances.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 The constitution provides that every person deprived
 of political liberty "shall forthwith be informed of
 the offense of which he is accused" and that anyone
 detained on security grounds shall "without delay" be
 brought before a competent judicial authority within
 the limit prescribed by law. Despite this provision,
 arbitrary arrests and imprisonment continue. The
 1980 Amnesty International report stated that at
 least 100 people were believed to be held on political
 grounds, without charge or trial. Some officials of
 the previous government, which was overthrown in
 1969, remain in detention. Their number has been
 estimated at 30, and includes a former prime minister
 and a former police chief who are among Amnesty
 International's thirteen adopted prisoners of
 conscience. Many others who had once been detained
 have since been released.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Political dissenters are not always accorded a public
 trial. The former Prime minister and police chief
 
 
 referred to above are being held without trial. The
 national security court operates outside the regular
 legal system and has jurisdiction over a broad range
 of crimes, including attacks against the state, public
 administration, members of the government, the military
 force or public order. Under the Somali system of
 government no institution, including the court, is
 independent. The national security court in particular
 appears to be a political instrument of the government.
 Defendants before this court, as well as the regular
 courts, are supposed to be given the right of legal
 counsel. Another of Amnesty International's concerns in
 Somalia is "unfair trials" by the national security
 court.
 f. Invasion of the Home
 Homes of political dissidents and those suspected of
 political dissent are subject to arbitrary searches. In
 these cases, Somali law protecting sanctity of the home
 is superseded by search and seizure authority of the
 National Security Service. The national security
 service carries out "bugging" of ptivate homes, but such
 actions as demolition of homes or sealing doors and
 windows are not practiced.
 2. Government Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education:
 The government's efforts to fulfill the vital needs of
 its people are hampered by stringent resource limitations.
 Somalia is in the United Nations register of the 28 least
 developed countries and has an estimated per capita
 annual income of $110. It has a largely rural, nomadic
 society and is poor in natural resources. The economy
 is mixed with the emphasis on the public sector. The
 constitution guarantees that "every citizen shall be
 entitled to work." The government stresses an equitable
 distribution of income. In practice this has meant a
 leveling of incomes, which, together with the disadvantaging
 of the private sector, has resulted in the exodus of a
 large number of the country's managerial and skilled
 persoinel to nearby Arab countries. Somalia's inadequate
 trained manpower is a major obstacle to development.
 Over the past decade, the government has adopted a script
 for its previously unwritten language, launched massive
 campaigns to raise literacy, fought a devastating drought
 by resettling 200,000 destitute nomads in farming and
 fishing communities, implemented a public health program
 that reduced the incidence of malaria and eradicated
 smallpox, narrowed disparities in salaries, and channeled
 foreign aid into projects directed at the needs of the
 poorest'sections of the population. Through government
 efforts, the number of people per doctor has declined
 from 21,000 to 14,000. Available clean water has
 increased from 15 to 30 perbent of the population and
 life expectancy has risen from 28 years to 41 years
 
 
 234
 during this same period. In 1970 only 7 percent of
 primary school age children were enrolled in classes; in
 1978 it was 28 percent. Primary and secondary school
 attendance rose from 56,000 in 1970 to 243,000 in 1978
 and the proportion of females in school rose from 20 to
 35 percent.
 Corruption exists in varying degrees in the governmental
 and business sectors, but senior government officials,
 including the President, show considerable austerity in
 their private lives. There appears to be relatively
 little difference between the lifestyles of civil
 servants and ranking government officials.
 While the government has made earnest efforts to improve
 the economic lot of its citizens, its bureaucratic in-
 efficiency and doctrinaire approach to problem-solving,
 and the nomadic nature of much of the population, have
 weakened significantly the impact of these efforts.
 The large increase in refugees from nearby regions of
 Ethiopia has created enormous additional burdens for the
 Somali economy. As of October 1, 1980, an estimated
 800,000 refugees were in camps in Somalia--one of the
 largest concentrations of refugees in the world. With
 considerable international help the government has done
 fairly well in meeting the immediate needs of these
 refugees.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties,
 Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 The press is entirely government-controlled. It does
 not air opposition views or fundamental criticism of the
 government. Foreign publications are subject to censor-
 ship before they can be sold or otherwise offered to the
 public.
 The constitution provides for freedom of assembly,
 speech, and press, but adds that the exercise of these
 freedoms should not contravene the 'laws of the land,
 general morality and public order." Freedom of assembly
 is severely circumscribed. Most meetings and all
 rallies are organized by the government. The labor
 movement is part of the unitary political system and is
 subordinate to the control of the party. Thus the
 unions have no right or authority to take any independent
 action. Strikes are not permitted.
 The constitution provides that the state religion is
 "Islam, which is the religion of the overwhelming
 majority of the Somali population. Adherents of other
 religions are allowed to worship freely, but may not
 proselytize for new members. Muslims in Somalia are
 
 
 .235
 
 allowed to practice their faith freely as long as
 their religious leaders do not challenge the political
 orientation and legitimacy of the government. Members
 of minority religions do not suffer persecution or
 harrassment; however, non-Muslims do not rise to the
 top levels of the government.
 b. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Repatriation and Emigration
 Although there are no legal restrictions on movement
 within the country for Somali citizens, the military
 and police monitor movement along main roads, particu-
 larly near larger urban areas and military emplacements
 and sensitive border areas. Complete government
 control or monitoring is impossible in a country where
 an estimated 70 percent of the population lead nomadic
 or semi-nomadic lives. Air travel on domestic flights
 is controlled and monitored for both Somali citizens
 and foreigners. Issuance of passports was almost
 completely halted early in 1980. The government now
 issues laissez-passers valid for travel to specific
 countries if the prospective travelers can make
 convincing cases for travel. This change was ap-
 parently designed to prevent emigration of trained
 Somalis to the Arab world. Fewer Somalis were per-
 mitted to make the annual pilgrimage to Mecca this
 year than in the past. Previously issued passports
 are not being recalled. Movement by land across the
 Kenyan, Ethiopian and Djiboutian frontiers cannot be
 effectively controlled and nomadic groups cross these
 frontiers frequently.
 Most Somalis who are abroad are there by choice,
 primarily because of economic opportunities. Some,
 however, are abroad because they oppose the government.
 The government has offered amnesty to Somalis abroad
 who return, (it being understood that they would not
 be allowed actively to oppose the government if they
 returned). Few Somali expatriates are believed to
 have tested this offer.
 Rules concerning travel, emigration, etc., apply
 equally to both sexes and all social and ethnic
 groups.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Citizen participation in public affairs is centrally
 directed. The Somali Revolutionary Socialist Party,
 all the leaders of which are appointed by President
 Siad, is the supreme political organ. The major
 institutions which mobilize the public are the local
 units of the Somali Socialist Revolutionary Party and
 the mass organizations which are subordinate to the
 party--The General Federation of Somali Trade Unions,
 
 
 236
 The Somali Women's Democratic Organization, and the
 Somali Revolutionary Youth Union. The scope of
 popular participation expanded marginally with the
 election of a People's Assembly and local assemblies
 in December, 1979. Somalia's first election in ten
 years consisted merely of a yes/no vote for or against
 the single party's candidates. The role of the
 People's Assembly and the local assemblies in the
 political system is a very limited one, since the
 party, according to the constitution, remains the
 supreme organ of political authority.
 On October 21 President Siad declared a state of
 emergency in accordance with Article 83 of the
 constitution and suspended the People's Assembly. Under
 Article 83 the President has the authority to suspend
 those articles of the constitution which are incompatible
 with the emergency situation. Under provisions of the
 state of emergency the Supreme Revolutionary Council,
 which had been abolished when the party was created in
 1976, has been re-established. The council, which is
 composed of military officers, advises the President on
 policy matters in an effort to improve economic condi-
 tions in Somalia.
 No overt opposition groups exist; they are not permitted.
 All political activity is carried out under the direction
 of the party, and organized criticism of basic'government
 policies is forbidden. No one is denied participation
 or suffrage on the basis of sex, race or social back-
 ground. The Somali government has advanced the status of
 women considerably in recent years. The constitution
 explicitly confers legal equality on women. It has
 sought to ensure, mainly through The Somali Women's
 Democratic Organization, greater participation by women
 in areas previously closed to them, notably in education
 and employment.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding Interna-
 tional and Non-governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no organizations in Somalia concerned with
 human rights violations.
 In 1979 Amnesty International sought permission to
 visit Somalia, but it received no reply from the
 government. Local Amnesty International chapters in
 the United States have sought information from the
 Somali government regarding the status of certain of
 Amnesty's "prisoners of conscience," but received no
 response.
 
 
 237
 
 UoS.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (UoS.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: SOMALIA
 1978     1979     1980
 t.ECON, ASSIST.-TOTAL...        19.1     28.9     67.3
 LOANS,..o.o ..  7. 7.0            10.7     17.7
 GRANTS....ooo..oo         12.1     18.2     49o6
 AoAID      o                    3.3     10.9     17.3
 LOANS...*ooeooo.o         0.0      0.0      00
 GRANTSo..o..o.. o,        3.3     10.9     17.3
 (SEC*SUPP.ASSIST.)...         00     0.0      5.0
 BoFOOD FOR PEACE,.o..oo        15.8     18.0     50.0
 LOANSo~o...o..ooo.o         7.0     10.7     17.7
 GRANTS.o...o......o         8.8      7.3     32.3
 TITLE I-TOTAL.....,..,.         7.0     10.7     177
 REPAY, IN S-LOANS.....         7o0     10.T     17.7
 PAY. IN FOR. CURRoo...o        00       0.0      00
 TITLE II-TOTAL...o....o         8.8      7.3     32.3
 E*RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.        88       7.3     32.3
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY..*..         0.0      0.0      00
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.o........o..         0.0      0.0      0.0
 CONTR. TO IFI....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS....o..        00       0.0      0.0
 OTHER.. . *. .o.oo      0.0      0.0      0.0
 li.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         00      0.0     20.0
 LOANS* ......,.....0.0              0.0     20.0
 GRANTS.............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS..........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 BvCREDIT SALES-FMS...,.        0.0      00     20.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED#TRNG.o..         0.0      0.0      0.0
 DoTRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0      0.0      00
 E.OTHER GRANTS........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL.ECON. & MIL,..        19.1     28.9     87.3
 LOANS..............         7.0     10.7     37.7
 GRANTS    NT..........    12.1     18.2     49.6
 OTHER US LOANS..........         0.0      00      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS.....o.         0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 l'-- li---- l- I- l- l----------- lll-- i- ----- i- ..------ -l---ilt-.
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1978     1979     1980     1946-80
 TOTAL...o....     24.4     34.6     32.2    324.0
 IBRD               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IFC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDA               14.5     18.5     18.0    146.7
 IO                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADS                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFDB               6s2      9.7      9.7     43.1
 UNDP               1.2      6.4      3.1     44.7
 OTHER-UN           2.5      0.0      1.4     11.0
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0     78.5
 
 
 238
