Somalia
Somalia’s people continue to endure one of the world’s worst human rights
catastrophes. Hopes of peace following the installation of a new Transitional
Federal Government (TFG) under President Sheikh Sharif Ahmed in early 2009
have been dashed. The capital Mogadishu is wracked by indiscriminate warfare in
which all parties are implicated in war crimes or other serious human rights abuses.
Much of the rest of the country is now under the control of local administrations
linked to armed opposition groups. In many of these areas the population
has suffered abusive application of Sharia law and forced conscription of civilians,
including children, as militia fighters.
A humanitarian crisis of enormous proportions is unfolding, fueled by years of
drought and insecurity that has often prevented the effective delivery of aid.
Some 3.75 million people— roughly half of Somalia’s remaining population—are
in urgent need of humanitarian assistance. More than a million people are displaced
from their homes within Somalia and tens of thousands fled the country
as refugees in 2009.
Indiscriminate Warfare in Mogadishu
In 2009 Mogadishu continued to be torn apart by indiscriminate warfare. Its
dwindling civilian population continues to bear the brunt of fighting between
armed opposition groups, and the TFG and African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) forces. Ethiopian forces withdrew from Somalia at the end of 2008,
leading thousands of people to return to the capital in hope of peace. But many
were forced to flee anew when the fighting resumed with familiar patterns of
deadly violence.
All parties to the conflict in Mogadishu have been implicated in war crimes in
2009. TFG and opposition forces have both recruited children into the ranks of
their fighting forces, though the practice has been more widespread and coercive
where practiced by opposition groups. Opposition forces including al Shabaab
and Hizbul Islam have launched regular indiscriminate mortar attacks on areas of
Mogadishu under TFG and AMISOM control. The use of civilians as human shields
for indiscriminate attacks, often with the apparent intention of attracting reprisals that claim still more civilian lives, is a common opposition tactic. Hizbul Islam
leader Sheikh Hassan Dahir Aweys has publicly acknowledged using civilians as
human shields.
On the other side of the lines, the TFG’s capacity to field fighting forces in
Mogadishu was weak throughout 2009. It relied on notoriously abusive officials
such as police chief Abdi Qeybdid, whose forces were responsible for serious
human rights abuses throughout 2008.
The TFG is almost entirely reliant on the 5,000-strong AMISOM force for its protection
and survival. AMISOM forces have come under sustained attack, including
deadly suicide bombings, and have on some occasions responded by firing mortars
indiscriminately into opposition-controlled neighborhoods, including the
area around Bakara market. In February 2009, AMISOM forces were accused of firing
indiscriminately into crowds of civilians after coming under attack in
Mogadishu. AMISOM opened an inquiry into the incident—the only time it has
apparently done so—but no final report was produced.
Abuses in Opposition-Controlled Areas
Most of south-central Somalia was under the control of local administrations
linked to al Shabaab and other opposition groups throughout 2009. A level of
peace and stability prevailed in some opposition-controlled areas, but many of
their administrations carried out serious abuses against the populations they
control.
Al Shabaab in particular has grown notorious for abusive and often arbitrary
applications of Sharia law, which in at least a few cases have seen alleged crimes
punished with amputations, beheadings, and, in October 2008 in Kismayo, the
stoning to death of a young woman on charges of adultery. Residents of the
southern town of El Wak told Human Rights Watch that in early 2009 the local al
Shabaab militia forced women to stop working as tea sellers and also beat
women illicitly selling the mild narcotic qat, which al Shabaab has sought to ban.
In some areas al Shabaab and other opposition groups have forcibly recruited
men and boys into militia forces. In Jowhar, for example, al Shabaab militiamen
reportedly press-ganged men into military service in 2009. Many opposition militias include children within their ranks; in at least some parts of Somalia al
Shabaab has deliberately targeted children for recruitment through a mix of promises,
threats, and indoctrination.
Attacks on Journalists, Human Rights Defenders, and
Humanitarian Workers
Somalia’s once-vibrant independent press and civil society have been decimated
by violence and threats over the course of the past three years. At least six journalists
were reportedly killed in 2009, some targeted for assassination and others
killed by the stray gunfire that has claimed so many civilian lives. TFG and opposition
forces alike have been implicated in threats directed at journalists who produce
reporting they dislike.
Attacks targeting human rights defenders were much less frequent in 2009 than
in 2008. But in part this reflects the fact that many of Somalia’s most prominent
human rights defenders have fled the country. Those who remain have seen their
capacity to operate effectively dramatically diminished by the prevailing insecurity
and by specific threats against them.
The delivery of humanitarian assistance to Somalia has been severely hampered
by the prevailing insecurity and by threats specifically targeting humanitarian
agencies. Most of the humanitarian agencies operating in Somalia have had to
dramatically curtail their operations or have been driven out of south-central
Somalia altogether. In opposition-controlled areas where millions of Somalis are
in need of assistance, humanitarians have come under regular threat by al
Shabaab and other groups who accuse them of colluding with international
efforts to back the TFG in its war effort. In October 2009 leaflets circulated in
Mogadishu accused hospitals of collaborating with the TFG and threatened them
with violence.
Democracy under Threat in Somaliland
The self-declared republic of Somaliland has maintained a remarkable degree of
peace and stability since 1991. Despite the fact that its independence has not
been recognized by any country in the world, Somaliland laid the foundations for democratic institutions of governance and has held its people apart from the pervasive
abuses affecting Somalis further south. But Somaliland’s achievements in
the areas of governance and human rights are now under threat, largely due to
the repeated postponement of a key presidential election originally scheduled for
April 2008. Those polls should have consolidated progress toward democracy;
their postponement now calls into question the Somaliland government’s commitment
to democracy and could threaten the territory’s stability. Somaliland’s
government has also failed to address a range of systemic human rights problems
such as the government’s use of illegal security committees to imprison people,
including children, without trial for a range of criminal offenses.
Key International Actors
All too often the involvement of a number of international actors in Somalia has
been destructive. Western government and African Union policy has been to provide
unequivocal support to Somalia’s beleaguered transitional government. To
this end the AU has deployed the AMISOM force of 5,000 Ugandan and
Burundian troops to protect key TFG installations and officials in southern
Mogadishu, with UN Security Council backing. In 2009 donors pledged over
US$200 million in mostly security sector support to AMISOM and the TFG; at this
writing less than one third of that assistance has materialized. The United States
government has provided money and bilateral transfers of weapons to the TFG—
including mortars, weapons that no side has made any effort to use in accordance
with the laws of war. Many of the weapons acquired by the TFG have ended
up on the open market.
The strong international backing of the TFG is driven largely by concerns over the
links some of al Shabaab’s leaders maintain to al Qaeda. Several hundred foreign
fighters, including some Somalis with foreign passports, are estimated to be in
Somalia fighting against AMISOM and the TFG alongside al Shabaab and other
groups. At least one and possibly two suicide bombings have been carried out by
Somali-Americans in Somalia since the end of 2008—the first time such attacks
have ever been carried out by a US citizen.
Ethiopia withdrew its military forces from Somalia at the end of 2008 after a twoyear
intervention in the country. The Ethiopian military has continued to conduct operations inside Somalia in support of its security interests, but no longer plays
a central military role in the conflict. The government of Eritrea continues to play a
destructive role in Somalia, funneling arms and other assistance to armed opposition
groups with the primary aim of undermining Ethiopia’s interests in Somalia.
Kenya and Yemen each host large numbers of Somali refugees. Kenya’s desperately
overstretched Dadaab refugee camps, built for 90,000 people, are now
home to some 300,000 mostly Somali refugees. Negotiations for the land
required to build a badly needed new refugee camp near Dadaab stalled in 2009.
Yemen’s government has generally welcomed the at least 100,000 Somali
refugees who reside in the country.