 SOMALIA*
 Somalia has been in a state of nearly unceasing civil war since 1988. Its last
 president, dictator Mohamed Siad Barre, fled the country in 1991. The fighting be-
 tween factional clan leaders resulted in massive killing, dislocations, and starvation
 of thousands of citizens and led the United Nations to intervene militarily in 1992.
 There continued to be no central authority in Somalia. Despite U.N. Operations
 in Somalia (UNOSOM) efforts, the Somalis have not been able to reestablish tradi-
 tional means of social control and administration of justice. The clans and subclans
 that had dominated all important aspects of life lost influence to a variety of politi-
 cal factions and armed militias. Larg numbers of persons remained displaced and
 continued to live in fear for their lives and property
 The Hawiye clan's United Somali Congress USC), which controlled much of
 southern and central Somalia, including Mogadishu, continued to be split between
 General Mohammed Farah Aideed of the Somali National Alliance (SNA) and Ali
 Mahdi Mohammed of the Somali Salvation Alliance (SSA). Attempts to reach rec-
 onciliation failed. In the extreme south, where Darod clans are strong, remnants of
 Siad Barn's Somalia National Front (SNF) vie for control with other groups, includ-
 ing a divided Somali Patriotic Movement (SPM). The Isaak-dominated Somali Na-
 tional Movement (SNM) continued to control the northwestern "Somaliland" area,
 and in the northeast, the divided Somali Salvation Democratic Front (SSDF) con-
 trolled the traditionally Majertain homelands. In both areas, violent intrafactional
 conflicts developed during the last months of 1994. The fighting in Hargeisa, capital
 of the Somaliland region, was particularly intense and resulted-in numerous civilian
 casualties and the suspension of almost all humanitarian assistance programs.
 In response to worsening conditions, the U.N. Security Council    SC) passed
 several resolutions concerning Somalia and UNOSOM. Resolution 897 scaled back
 the number of peacekeepers and the goals of the U.N. mission. In November, in the
 absence of political reconciliation and a deteriorating security situation, the UNSC
 ordered a total withdrawal of UNOSOM from Somalia by March 31, 1995. At year's
 end close to 10,000 peacekeepers from Pakistan, Egypt, Bangladesh, Malaysia, and
 Zimbabwe remained on the ground.
 When UNOSOM was forced to abandon the development of a national police force,
 local law and order remained highly arbitrary and largely in the hands of factions
 and clan-based Islamic courts, some of which applied strict Islamic (Shari'a) law.
 Somalia's economy improved in 1994, compared to 1992 when US. and other for-
 eign troops intervened to halt mass starvation. UNOSOM was initially successful
 in facilitating the flow of food to the starving population, and, despite the deteriorat-
 ing security situation, agricultural production revived in many parts of the country.
 Excellent rains during the principal growing season resulted in a bountiful har-
 *The absence of progress toward reconciliation and a continued decline in security led to the
 relocation of the U.S. Liaison Office from Mogadishu to Nairobi on September 15. U.S. diplomats
 based in Kenya nude periodic visits to Somalia after that date.
 
 
 228
 vest-close to 75 percent of prewar levels. Thousands of displaced people and refu-
 gees returned to their homes. Flooding in the fall of 1994 caused extensive damage
 to crops in the Juba valley, apparently without causing too much harm to reserve
 food stocks. Commercial exports of livestock and fruit increased in 1994, including
 an estimated 13,000 metric tons of bananas.
 The human rights situation deteriorated throughout the year as calls for military
 restraint went unheeded. Intraclan conflict worsened as rival groups, including
 those of Aideed and Ali Mahdi jockeyed for power and control of strategic areas.
 There were continuing reports that factional militia, bandits and clan militias com-
 mitted extrajudicial illings and also intimidated, detained, raped, and kidnaped
 persons in order to gain or maintain power in areas under their control. It was im-
 possible to investigate these charges in most instances. Violence and social discrimi-
 nation against women and abuse of children remained widespread.
 There were few reports of abuses by UNOSOM troops in 1994, in part because
 of the changes in UNOSOM's mission and the withdrawal of a significant percent-
 age of foreign troops.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political or Other Extra judicial Killing.-Political violence and banditry have
 been endemic to Somalia since the overthrow of Siad Barre. Tens of thousands of
 Somalis, mostly noncombatants, have died in interfactional and interclan fighting
 in the past 6 years since the revolt against Siad Barre (see Section 1.g.). Somali fac-
 tions also targeted UNOSOM peacekeepers, resulting in the deaths of 37 soldiers
 by year's end. In one of the most brutal attacks, SNA militia murdered five Nepa-
 lese soldiers in May during an ambush outside the UNOSOM compound in
 Mogadishu.
 Although civilians were routinely killed during the fighting, politically motivated
 killings appeared to be less common. However, in one incident in August, three In-
 dian medical officers were killed at their hospital in Baidoa. The attack may have
 been in retaliation for the deaths of several armed Somalis killed by Indian troops
 a few days earlier during an ambush of a U.N. convoy. In early December, pro-
 Aideed gunmen killed two Somalis demonstrating against General Aideed's efforts
 to form an interim government under his leadership. In August unidentified
 interfactional crossfire killed a Swiss reporter in the south, where he was visiting
 an aid project.
 In June the U.N. Security Council issued a report of the findings of a Special In-
 vestigatory Commission established late in 1993 to investigate armed attacks on
 UNOSOM personnel, including the June 1993 incidents that sparked the unsuccess-
 ful effort to apprehend General Aideed. While acknowledging that General Aideed
 refused to cooperate with its investigation, the Commission harshly criticized
 UNOSOM in several ways, including UNOSOM's apparent policy of arbitrary deten-
 tion. The Commission also criticized-inadeuate command-and-control arrangements
 for UNOSOM peacekeeping troops. It concluded that the United Nations should re-
 frain from further peace enforcement actions along the lines of its Somalia mission.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no known reports of unresolved politically moti-
 vated disappearances, although kidnaping remained a major problem, particularly
 for relief workers (see Section 1.d.).
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 There continued to be credible but unconfirmed reports of the use of torture by var-
 ious warring factions against each other and against civilians.
 Several unofficial Islamic courts were established late in the year, filling the vacu-
 um created by the absence of normal government authority. These courts, following
 strict Islamic (Shari'a) law, meted out particularly severe punishments on persons
 detained in connection with robbery an other crimes (see Section i.e.). For exam-
 ple, in October, following the decision of an Islamic court in Mogadishu, authorities
 operating in the area controlled by Ali Mahdi amputated one hand each of two teen-
 agers, allegedly for stealing the equivalent of less than $20. UNOSOM and inter-
 national human rights monitors expressed concern about the decisions of the Islamic
 courts, but UNOSOM took no action to interfere with their operations.
 There were no credible allegations of abuse of Somali civilians by foreign peace-
 keeping forces. In March, a Canadian national peacekeeper was triedin Canada and
 found guilty of torture and manslaughter for his involvement in the March 1993
 death of a Somali detained on suspicion of theft, Shidane Abukar Arone. The peace-
 keeper is being held without bail pending appeal. There was no reported progress
 in the investigation by Belgian authorities into alleged abuses committed by their
 forces, which left Somalia early in 1994.
 
 
 229
 The status of prison conditions was unknown but believed to be harsh and poten-
 tially life threatening. There was no independent monitoring of prisons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-All Somali factions reportedly held pris-
 oners arbitrarily, but there were no known estimates of the number held at any one
 time. The various Somali factions and armed bandits engaged in large-scale hostage
 taking of foreign citizens, in particular personnel from the international relief agen-
 cies, including the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). In most in-
 stances, the Somali gunmen held their hostages for short periods, often demanding
 large ransoms. Those taken hostage included American, British, Italian Swedish,
 Nepalese, Sudanese, and other nationalities. For example, on February 9,
 Somalilanders kidnaped two British Members of Parliament, three British aid work-
 ers, and a journalist in Erigavo in northwest Somalia. Subsequently, a local Somali
 doctor rescued the group and drove them to a safe area on February 11. These at-
 tacks, led humanitarian organizations either to withdraw from the country or sub-
 stantially reduce their activities.
 On January 17, UNOSOM released the last 8 of 750 Somalis detained in connec-
 tion with its 1993 attempt to apprehend General Aideed and persons suspected of
 attacking U.N. peacekeepers. UNOSOM denied the detainees access to relatives but
 permitted the ICRC to visit all U.N. detainees. Several of those held complained of
 ill-treatment at a press conference on January 20, but the conditions of their con-
 finement met international standards.
 UNOSOM held no prisoners at years end.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-There was minimal progress toward reestablishing
 a system of justice in Somalia. The three-tier national judicial system based on the
 1962 Criminal Code and the 1963 Penal Code that was prepared by UNOSOM in
 1993 could not be implemented because of the poor security situation. Although
 local authorities have attempted to administer some type of justice, few Somalis feel
 confident of protection from retaliation based on clan loyalties. By the end of the
 year, no civil courts functioned.
 The vacuum created by the lack of a functioning government led to the expansion
 of the role of traditional clan-based Islamic courts. While in the past Islamic courts
 were used to settle property disputes, these courts increasingly heard criminal
 cases. Anecdotal evidence suggests that the Islamic courts are applying a very strict
 interpretation of Shari'a law, as evidenced by the amputation sentence against two
 teenagers (see Section 1.c.). These informal courts are not standardized and do not
 provide for procedural safeguards that meet accepted international standards for a
 fair trial. There is no right to appeal the verdict of the Islamic courts, and defend-
 ants reportedly are not provided with legal counsel.
 Only in Somaliland, under "President" Mohammed Egal, was there a functioning
 legal system, based on the 1962 Penal Code. The current system replaced Islamic
 law and includes a supreme court. There was no information available on the ability
 to receive a fair trial in Somaliland or on the independence of the judiciary. Contin-
 ued fighting during the latter part of the year in the part of Somaliland claimed
 by Egal brought a halt to the work of many civil institutions, including the courts,
 as territory changed hands repeatedly.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-These
 rights were regularly violated by the warring factions. During fighting in
 Mogadishu, heavily armed bandits systematically looted the property of rival
 groups. Similar incidents occurred after the fighting in Kismayo i February. Dur-
 ing military operations, the major factions have conducted home searches and evic-
 tions, and homes and property belonging to the former government and inter-
 national bodies have been looted and destroyed. Although there has been some dis-
 cussion about property claims, the continued fighting has rendered the issue moot.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitrian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-The warring factions continued to commit numerous violations of humani-
 tarian law throughout the year, including the killing of many civilians, particularly
 in Mogadishu and Kismayo. In February heavy interfactional fighting between the
 forces of Colonel Omar Jess and General Mohammed Hersi Morgan in Kismayo
 killed at least 60 civilians. In April fighting between General Aideed's SNA militia
 and the Hawadle, a rival Hawiye subelan, in Merca and southern Mogadishu, killed
 another 32 civilians. At year's end, with the approaching departure of UNOSOM,
 heavy factional fighting in Mogadishu over access to the port area reportedly killed
 20 persons and wounded hundreds more.
 Armed Somali factions continued to target UNOSOM peacekeeping troops, begin-
 ning in January with the wounding of two Indian soldiers in an ambush near
 Kismayo. Subsequent attacks resulted in deaths of peacekeepers from India, Egypt
 Nepal, Malaysia, Pakistan, and Zimbabwe. Armed bandits and militia often targeted
 
 
 230
 oeacekeepers in order to seize supplies or to retaliate against actions by UNOSOM
 International humanitarian nongovernmental organizations (NGO's) and others,
 including journalists (see Section L.a.), increasingly became targets for attacks by
 Somali factions and bandits. These attacks were widespread and often without clear
 motivation, although in some cases warlords sought to extort money from NGO's in
 exchange for providing security. After 50 armed Somalis looted 340 tons of food from
 a World Food for Peace (WFP) warehouse in January, more than 15 relief organiza-
 tions decided to reduce or cease operations for a time in various parts of the country
 because of the lack of security. The few NGO's that remained in operation at year's
 end had exprienced continuous harassment and disruption of their operations at
 the hands of the warring factions.
 There were several instances in which UNOSOM forces killed Somalis, but these
 incidents decreased sharply compared to 1993. In January Pakistani peacekeepers
 killed five Somalis in Mogadihu, and on January 9, U.S. Marine snipers firing at
 a man with a machine gun inadvertently killed a pregnant woman. Although the
 Pakistanis claimed that they had been fired on, General Adeed's faction sad the
 Pakistanis fired without cause. On January 31, U.S. Marines responding to an at-
 tack on a relief convoy killed 3 Somalis and wounded 13 others. A subsqent
 UNOSOM investigation fully exonerated the Marines involved. UTNOSOM frces
 fred on Somali crowds on several occasions during the year, notably after troops
 began to withdraw from the country. In October a crowd rampaged through the
 UNOSOM compound over the loss of jobs. UNOSOM quelled the rot by firig tear
 gas into the molb. The last USq. forces departed in Marchn, and at year's end approxi-
 mately 10,000 foreign peacekeeper remained in Somalia.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Most Somalia obtain news from foreign news
 broadcasts, notably the British Broadcasting Corporation, which transmits a daily
 Somali-langage program. The major political factions also operate radio stations.
 UNOSOM has its own broadcasts and newspaper (Maanta), publicizing its activities,
 but its radio signal is not strong enough to reach all over Somalia.
 The print media are small and consit largely of brief news broadshets published
 by the various factions. Several of these are nominally independent publications
 published anonymously and are critical of the faction leaders.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-General Aideed's and Ali
 Mahdi's factions held regular rallies in Mogadishu until fighting resumed in April.
 Although Somalia are free to assemble, the lack of security effectively limits this
 right. Despite the insecure environment, several political factions held conferences
 and congrsses in various parts of the country. A few professional groups operate
 in Mogadshu as the security situation permits.
 c. Freedom of Relgio.--malis are overwhelmingly Sunni Muslim, but the vio-
 lnce and chaos, prmncipally in Mogadishu, made it difficult for them to practice
 their religion in some locations in a mosque or other formal setting. Local tradition
 and past law make it a crime to proselytize for any religion except Islam. Non-Sunni
 Musimss oare often looked on with suspiion by more main-
 stream Somalis. There is a small Christian community, but its members often find
 it necessary to conceal their beliefs. Foreign Christians generally practice their reli-
 gion without persecution as long as it is private and does not include attempts to
 ridicule or undermine Islam.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Most Somalia do not have access to documents or resources needed for
 international travel. Domestic travel continued to be dangerous, but this did not
 deter movements of displaced persons and refugees back into the country. By No-
 vember (the last month for which there were figures), over 57,000 refugees had re-
 turned to various regions from camps outside Somalia's borders, and the relocation
 of displaced persons continued at year's end. There were about 200,000 officially
 registered Somali refugees in Kenya (and around 40,000 nonregistered). In Ethiopia,
 there were 185,000 registered and 25,000 nonregistered Somali refugees.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right  Citizens to Change Their Goern-
 ments
 Citizens did not have this right. Somali factions met periodically during the year,
 but all efforts to reestablish a national government foundered on the ambitions of
 the two major leaders, General Aided and All Mahdi, both from opposing subelans
 of the Hawiye clan. Under heavy pressure from UNOSOM, the two leaders signed
 a joint communique on March 24 that pledged the major factions to the maate-
 nance of peace prior to two reconciliation conferences to be held in Mogadishu by
 
 
 231
 mid-May; neither reconciliation conference took place in 1994. The Imam of the
 Herab attempted unsuccessfully to convene a conference of the Hawiye clans in Sep-
 tember. At year's end, General Aideed continued to work to establish an interim
 government under his leadership, but Ali Mahdi still refused to participate, and,
 with the approaching departure of UNOSOM troops, factional maneuvering for stra-
 tegic positions began to accelerate.
 Although several women are important behind-the-scenes figures in the various
 factions, women as a group remain outside the political process. No women hold
 prominent, public positions; and few participated in the reconciliation process.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There were no local human rights organizations in operation.
 International humanitarian NGO's continued to operate, but the poor security sit-
 uation limited their activities. UNOSOM'A own human rights office was not oper-
 ational.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Societal discrimination against women and widespread abuse of children contin-
 ued to be serious problems.
 Women.-Women are harshly subordinated in Somalia, which has an overwhelm-
 ingly patriarchal culture. Women suffered disproportionately in the Somali civil war
 and in the strife that followed. However, during the past year, there were no reports
 of systematic attacks on women in connection with the continuing civil strife. The
 imposition of new security measures in Kenyan refugee camps led to a sharp decline
 in the instances of rape, where the crime was considered to be an insult to the vic-
 tim's clan. The Islamic courts acted in at least one instance to execute a man con-
 victed of raping a woman outside Mogadishu.
 Children.-Children remain among the chief victims of the continuing violence in
 Somalia. Although many youths are members of the marauding gangs known as
 "Morian,3 the factions also are directly responsible for involving young people in the
 interclan and interfactional violence. Boys as young as 14 or 15 years of age have
 participated in militia attacks.
 Female genital mutilation (FGM), which is widely condemned by international ex-
 perts as damging   physical and mental health, is acepted in  omali culture and
 society and is widely practied FGM is carried out at an early age, and an inde-
 pendent expert in the field estimates that 98 percent of Somali females have under-
 gone this operation
 National/Racial/Ethinic Minorities-More than 80 percent of Somalia's people
 share a common ethnic heritage, religion, and nomadic-influenced culture. The larg-
 eat minority group consists of "Bantu" Somalia. These people are descendants of
 slaves brought to Somalia about 300 years ago. Many oniginated in an identifiable
 area in the interior of Tanzania, and spea a dialect which mixes Somali with a
 native version of KiSwahili. These minorities suffer discrimination in many forms,
 even in refugee camps. Many "Bantu" refugees in Kenya are afraid to return to So-
 malla, feeling that they would become still more vulnerable as a result of the politi-
 cal instability. Similar views are expressed by the Barawanese, another minority in
 Somalia.
 People With Disabilities.-There were no laws mandating accessibility to public
 buildings, transportation, or government services for the disaled before the collapse
 of the State. No functioning government is yet in place that could address these is-
 sues.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The 1990 Constitution provided workers with the
 right to form unions, but the civil war and factional fighting negated this provision
 and shattered the single labor confederation, the then government-controlled Gen-
 eral Federation of Somali Trade Unions. Given the extent of Somalia's political and
 economic breakdown and the lack of legal enforcement mechanisms, trade unions
 could not function freely in the country at this time.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Wages and work require-
 ments in traditional Somali culture are largely established b, ad hoc bartering,
 based on supply, demand, and the influence of the clan from which the worker origi-
 nates.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor-There was no information avail-
 able on this topic.
 
 
 d. Minimum age for Employment of Children .Formal employment of children
 was rare; but armed adolescents participated in various militias (see Section 5) and
 youth are commonly fully employed in herding, agriculture, and household labor
 across Somalia from an early age.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There was no organized effort by any of the
 factions to monitor acceptable conditions of work in Somalia during 1994.
