 SOMALIA *
 Somalia has been without a central government since its last president, dictator
 Mohamed Siad Barre, fled the country in 1991. Subsequent fighting among rival fac-
 tion leaders resulted in the killing, dislocation, and starvation of thousands of Soma-
 lis and led the United Nations (U.N.) to intervene militarily in 1992. In a conference
 in Cairo, E gpt, in December 1997, all parties except two signed the so-called "Cairo
 Declaration.' The Declaration provided for a 13-person council of Presidents, a
 Prime Minister, and a National Assembly. A national reconciliation conference was
 held early in the year in Baidoa to negotiate further details, including appoint-
 ments, but produced no significant results. After months of detailed negotiations,
 Hussein Aideed, leader of the city's southern zone, and Ali Mahdi Mohammed, the
 dominant leader in the north, agreed on July 30 to form a joint provincial adminis-
 tration. However, this agreement did not lead to a more permanent settlement.
 Nominal supporters of both Aideed and Ali Mahdi objected to the agreement, gen-
 erally on grounds of personal self-interest or the interests of their clan. In one brief
 instance, an opponent of the agreement launched a violent attack to undermine one
 of the agreement's key elements, the reopening of Mogadishu harbor. There is no
 national judicial system.
 Serious interclan fighting occurred only in part of the country, notably in the cen-
 tral Somali regions of Bay and Bakool, in the southern regions of Gedo and Lower
 Juba, and around Kismayo. International efforts to forge a peace accord achieved
 little during the year. Leaders in the northeast proclaimed the formation of the
 "Puntland" state in July. Although the Puntland's leader publicly announced that
 he did not plan to break away from the remainder of the country, suspicions lin-
 gered. Puntland's leadership banned all political parties for 3 years, starting in Au-
 gust. The northwest continued to proclaim its independence within the borders of
 former British Somaliland, which had obtained independence from Britain in 1960
 before joining the former Italian-rled Somaia. The "Republic of Somaliland" has
 sought international recognition since 1991. Somaliland's government includes a
 parliament and functioning civil court system.
 After the withdrawal of the last U.N. peacekeep ers in 1995, clan and factional mi-
 litias, in some cases supplemented by local police forces established with U.N. help
 in the early 1990's, continued to function with varying degrees of effectiveness. Re-
 peated intervention by Ethiopian troops helped to maintain order in Gedo region,
 a base of support for a local radical Islamic group called Al'Ittihad. Police and mili-
 tia committed numerous human rights abuses.
 Insecurity, bad weather, and crop-destroying pests helped worsen the country's al-
 ready dire economic situation. The continuation of a ban against the export of live-
 stock to the Gulf states and to Saudi Arabia worsened matters. During some times
 of the year, livestock exports accounted for far more than half the trade from some
 Somali ports. The country's economic problems caused a serious lack of employment
 opportunities and led to pockets of malnutrition in Mogadishu and some other com-
 munities.
 Human rights abuses continued throughout the year. Many civilians citizens were
 killed in factional fighting, especially in the Bay and Bakool regions between sup-
 porters of Hussein Aideed, most of whom came from the Habr Gedr subclan, and
 members of the Digil and Mirifle community. There were numerous reports of
 human rights abuses by the Aideed forces. Key human rights problems remained
 the lack of political rights in the absence of a central authority; the reliance of some
 communities particularly in north and south Mogadishu, the Middle Shabelle, and
 parts of the Gedo and Hiran regions; on harsh Shari'a punishments, including pub-
 lic whippings, amputations, and stoning; harsh prison conditions; the judicial sys-
 tem's reliance in most regions on some combination of traditional and customary
 * The United States does not have diplomatic representation in Somalia. This report draws
 in part on non-U.S. Government sources.
 
 
 375
 justice, Islamic (Shari'a) law, and the pre-1991 penal code; infringement on citizens'
 privacy rights; some limits on religious freedom; restrictions on freedom of move-
 ment; and the abuse of women and children, including the nearly universal practice
 of female genital mutilation (FGM). Abuse and discrimination against ethnic minori-
 ties in the various clan regions continued. There is no effective system for the pro-
 tection of worker's rights, and there were isolated areas where minority group mem-
 bers were forced to labor for local gunmen. Forced labor also reportedly was dis-
 cussed by local partners of multinational fruit export firms.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Political violence and banditry have
 been endemic since the revolt against Siad Barre, who fled the capital in January
 1991. Since that time, tens of thousands of Somalis, mostly noncombatants, have
 died in interfactional and interclan fighting (see Section 1.g.). It is believed that a
 number of persons were killed during the year, but there were no reliable statistics.
 Although many civilians died as a result of fighting during the year, politically
 motivated extrajudicial murder was uncommon. The numerous extrajudicial killings
 during the year generally centered on conflicts over land or over job disputes. For
 example fighting in December between two clans competing for jobs with a Swedish
 relief agency in the southwest left at least 60 persons dead and over 150 injured.
 In September militia fighters attacked a World Food Program convoy in
 Mogadishu and killed two guards.
 The investigation into the 1997 killing of a Portuguese doctor was still pending
 at year's end.
 In 1997 a War Crimes Commission in Hargeisa began investigating the murder
 in 1988 of at least 2,000 local residents, including women and children, by Siad
 Barre's troops. Heavy rains in 1997 revealed numerous mass graves in the Hargeisa
 area. During the year, the War Crimes Commission continued to record eyewitness
 accounts and other evidence.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no known reports of unresolved politically moti-
 vated disappearances, although cases easily might have been concealed among the
 thousands of refugees, displaced persons, and war dead. Kidnaping remained a
 problem, particularly for relief workers (see Section 1.d.) and for critics of faction
 leaders. For example in April a clan splinter group kidnaped 10 foreign aid workers
 at gunpoint in Mogadishu and held them for 2 weeks before releasing them
 unharmed (see Section 1.d.). In September an armed group kidnaped six basketball
 players in southern Mogadishu; they were subsequently released. Kidnaping also
 was a major concern in the northeast, where gunmen hijacked a number of vessels
 on the high seas and, in some cases, kidnaped the crews (see Section 1.d.).
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 There were no reports of the use of torture by warring militiamen against each
 other or against civilians. Many incidents of torture probably are unreported.
 On May 27, three policemen in Hargeisa shot and injured Keise Yusuf Ali, a So-
 mali national who also holds a foreign passport, and Abdi Abdillahi Said, a local
 resident, after they and clan elders tried to attend a hearing related to the detention
 of the editor of Jamhuriya newspaper (see Section 2.a.). Keise received three gun-
 shot wounds, including two in the head, and was paralyzed for several months. The
 policemen responsible never were charged; instead, reportedly they received a bonus
 for their actions and were commended publicly by the "President" of Somaliland.
 The Somaliland judicial authorities charged Keise with disorderly conduct and re-
 fused to pay for his medical treatment or permit him to leave the country for medi-
 cal treatment.
 Islamic (Shari'a) courts continued to operate in several regions of the country, fill-
 ing the vacuum created by the absence of normal government authority. Shari'a
 courts traditionally ruled in cases of civil and family law, but extended their juris-
 diction to criminal proceedings in some regions beginning in 1994. In north
 Mogadishu, parts of south Mogadishu, the Mddle Shabelle, and parts of the Gedo
 and Hiran regions, these courts regularly sentenced convicted thieves to public lash-
 ings and, far less frequently, to the amputation of their hands (see Section I.e.).
 Prison conditions varied by region. Although conditions at the south Mogadishu
 prison controlled by the Aideed forces improved markedly in 1997 after the start of
 visits by international organizations, conditions at the north Mogadishu prison of
 the Shari'a court system remained harsh and life-threatening. Conditions elsewhere
 reportedly were less severe, according to international relief agencies. In many
 areas, prisoners are able to receive food from family members or from relief agen-
 cies.
 
 
 376
 
 A visiting Amnesty International delegation toured Hargeisa's-main prison during
 its October visit.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-In the- absence of constitutional or other
 legal protections, Somali factions and armed bandits continued to engage in arbi-
 trary detention, including the kidnaping of relief workers. Among the most notable
 incidents was the abduction of 10 relief agency staff members and aircrew from the
 north Mogadishu airport on April 15. The kidnaping had the clear support of power-
 ful local leaders. It was resolved 2 weeks later with the release of the aid workers,
 allegedly after the payment of a substantial ransom (which the agencies involved
 denied paying). This kidnaping prompted the Red Cross to pull its remaining aid
 workers out of the country. A second incident occurred on June 24 when gunmen
 in the Bari region hijacked a Taiwanese fishing boat. Clan elders charged the fisher-
 men with violating Somalia's territorial waters. They "fined" the boat's owners
 $320,000 and released the crew unharmed 3 months later. Gunmen also kidnaped
 two French sailors on June 2 in the Barn region. They were held until the end of
 July, when they were released into the custody of the U.N. Development Program.
 In the northwest, a special security committee that includes the mayor of
 Hargeisa and local prison officials can order an arrest without a warrant and sen-
 tence persons without a trial. According to human rights groups, this procedure was
 used on approximately 100 individuals during the year, including businessman
 Ahmed Farah Jire, who was detained in the middle of the night on October 13. Jire
 later was sentenced to 1 year in prison for "national security reasons." Human
 rights groups stated that Jire came under suspicion when he brought his clansmen
 together for a road construction project, but that the project did not pose a threat
 to the authorities.
 Five times during the year authorities in Somaliland detained the editor of
 Jamhuriya newspaper (see Section 2.a.).
 None of the factions used forced exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.--There is no national judicial system.
 Some regions have established local courts that depend on the predominant local
 clan and associated faction for their authority.
 The judiciary in most regions relies on some combination of traditional and cus-
 tomary law, Islamic Shari'a law, the penal code of the pre-1991 Siad Barre govern-
 ment, or some combination of the three. For example in Bosasso and Afmedow
 criminals are turned over to the families of their victims, that then exact blood com-
 pensation in keeping with Somali tradition.
 In the northwest, the self-proclaimed Republic of Somaliland adopted a new con-
 stitution based on democratic principles, but continues to use the pre-1991 Somali
 Penal Code. There is a shortage of qualified judges in Somaliland. In Bardera courts
 apply a combination of Islamic Shari'a law and the former penal code. In north
 Mogadishu, a segment of south Mogadishu, the Middle Shabelle, and parts of the
 Gedo and Hiran regions, court decisions are based solely on Shari'a law. In those
 areas and parts of the Gedo and Hiran regions, where Shari'a culture is particularly
 entrenched, harsh punishments-including public whippings, amputations and ston-
 ing-are meted out for certain offenses.
 The right -to representation by an attorney and the right to appeal do not exist
 in those areas that apply traditional and customary judicial practices or Shari'a law,
 These rights more often are respected in regions that continue to apply-the former
 Government's penal code, such as Somaliland. However, Somali human rights orga-
 nizations note that proceedings in the north Mogadishu Shari'a court often con-
 travene the norms of Shari'a law. In one serious incident in 1997, the court denied
 basic rights, including the right to counsel and to face witnesses, to a group sus-
 pected of plundering a local marketplace. Public protest led to the postponement of
 the planned mass trial. The trial was still pending at year's end.
 In November an appeal court in Hargeisa overturned a 1997 lower court decision
 that sentenced to 1 year in prison Faysal Ali Sheikh, general manager of the Na-
 tional Printing'Publishing Company (NPP), and Abdulkanim Omer Odowa, NPP pro-
 duction manager. NPP is-the publisher of Jamhuriya newspaper (see Section 2.a.).
 Sheikh and Odowa, who were charged by Hargeisa municipality with printing false
 vouchers, already had completed their 1-year in prison when their case was over-
 turned: Theappeal court ruling stated that insufficient evidence had been pre-
 sented, and that a conviction was not justified.
 There was an unverified press report that the various factions held and killed po-
 litical prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Looting
 and forced entry into private property continued, with the Bay and Bakool regions
 being especially hard hit. In addition clan militias in Lower Juba reportedly disman-
 
 
 fled a major sugar factory during the summer months. They sold the parts to their
 rivals in the neighboring Lower Shabelle region.
 Most properties that were occupied forcibly during militia campaigns in 1992-93,
 notably in Mogadishu and the Lower Shabelle, remained in the hands of persons
 other than their prewar owners.
 Approximately 40 percent of the population has been internally displaced as a re-
 sult of interfactional and interclan fighting.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The print media consist largely of short,
 photocopied dailies, published in the larger rties and often linked to one of the fac-
 tions. Several of these papers are nominally independent and are critical of the fac-
 tion leaders.
 Somaliland has two independent daily newspapers, one government daily, and an
 English language weekly. In March, May, an   eptember, Hassan Said Yusuf, the
 editor of Jamhuriya newspaper, was detained five times, twice for 15 days, after he
 published articles that criticized the corruption and incompetence of the authorities
 in Hargeisa. Yusuf had been arrested twice in 1997 for similar reasons. He also was
 q uestioned by the poice at least 14 times regarding information published in
 Jamhuriya between March and November.
 Most citizens obtain news from foreign news broadcasts, chiefly the British Broad-
 casting Corporation, which transmits a daily Somal-language pro  . The major
 faction leaders in Mogadishu, as well as the authorities of the self-declared Republic
 of Somaliland, operate small radio stations.
 There is no organized higher education system in the country.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Many clans and factions held
 meetings during the year without incident, although usually under tight security.
 Although citizens are free to assemble in public, the lack of security effectively lim-
 its this right in many parts of the country. Few public rallies took place during the
 year without the sponsorship of an armed group.
 Some professional groups and local NGO's operate as security conditions permit.
 The 1997 Somaliland Constitution established the right of freedom of association
 and this is respected by the Hargeisa authorities in practice.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-There are some limits on religious freedom. Somalis are
 overwhelmingly Sunni Muslim. Local tradition and past law make it a crime to
 proselytize for any religion except Islam. Some local administrations have made
 Islam the official religion in their regions, in addition to establishing a judicial sys-
 tem based on Shari'a law (see Section I.e.). Non-Sunni Muslims often are viewed
 with suspicion by members of the Sunni majority. There is strong social pressure
 to respect Islamic traditions, especially in fundamentalist enclaves such as Luuq in
 the Gedo region. There is a small, low-profile Christian community. Christian-based
 international relief organizations generally operate without interference, so long as
 they refrain from proselytizing.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Freedom of movement continued to be restricted in most parts of the
 country. Checkpoints manned by militiamen loyal to one clan or faction inhibit pas-
 sage by other groups. In the absence of a recognized national government, most So-
 malis do not have the documents needed for international travel.
 As security conditions improved in many parts of the country, refugees and inter-
 nally displaced persons continued to return to their homes. Approxmately 50,000
 Somali refugees were returned from Ethiopia under the auspices of the U.N. High
 Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) during the year. Despite sporadic harassment
 including the theft of UNHCR food packages by militiamen and attacks on World
 Food Program convoys (see Section l.a.), repatriation generally took place without
 incident. However, despite the relative stability in many parts of the country, many
 Somalis still flee to neighboring countries, often for economic reasons. During the
 year, most migrants left from the northeast and traveled via boat to Yemen. Hun-
 dreds of such migrants drowned during the year in accidents at sea.
 The number of Somali refugees in Kenya remained at approximately 125,000 at
 year's end, down from more than 400,000 at the height of the humanitarian crisis
 in 1992. In Ethiopia the number of Somali refugees fell to 200,000 by October from
 over 250,000 a year earlier. Djibouti hosted approximately 20,000 Somali refugees
 in camps at year's end and about 2,000 in its capital city.
 As there is no functioning central government, there is no policy of first asylum
 nor any laws with provisions for the granting refugee or asylee status in accordance
 with the 1951 U.N. Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees and its 1967 Pro-
 tocol. However, a small number of Ethiopian refugees remained in the country,
 mostly in the northeast near Bosasso. The authorities in Somaliland have cooper-
 
 
 378
 ated with the UNHCR and other humanitarian assistance organizations in assisting
 refugees. There were no reports of the forced expulsion of those having a valid claim
 to refugee status.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 In the absence of a widely supported effective national government, recognized ei-
 ther domestically or internationally, citizens cannot exercise this right. In most re-
 gions, local clan leaders function as de facto rulers. Although many such groups de-
 rive their authority from the traditional deference given clan elders, most face oppo-
 sition of varying strength from political factions and radical Islamic groups. In the
 Republic of Somaliland, the existence of which was endorsed by clan elders in 1991
 and 1993, a clan conference led to a peace accord early in 1997. This accord demobi-
 lized militia groups, established a Constitution and bicameral Parliament with pro-
 portional clan representation, and elected a President and Vice President from a
 slate of candidates. The Hargeisa authorities have established finctioning adminis-
 trative institutions in virtually all the territory they claim, which equals the bound-
 aries of the Somaliland state that achieved international recognition in 1960. In
 Kismayo the dominant faction leader seized the town militarily in 1993 but is de-
 pendent on elders from several subclans in order to govern the community.
 Although several women were important behind-the-scenes figures in the various
 factions, women as a group remained outside the political process. No women held
 prominent public positions and few participated in regional reconciliation efforts.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Several local human rights groups were active during the year. They investigated
 the causes of conflict in the Mogadishu area, protested the treatment of prisoners
 before the Shar'a courts, and organized periodic peace demonstrations.
 In April the Red Cross evacuated its remaining staff from the country following
 the kidnaping of 10 aid workers (see Sections 1.b. and 1.d.).
 In October the authorities in Hargeisa permitted a visit by an Amnesty Inter-
 national delegation. Amnesty International conducted a seminar for local human
 rights nongovernmental organizations (NGO's). The local NGO's appeared to operate
 freely and without harassment during the year.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Societal discrimination against women and widespread abuse of children contin-
 ued to be serious problems. The 1997 Somaliland Constitution contains provisions
 that prohibit discrimination on the basis of sex and national origin.
 Women.-Violence against women exists, although there are no reliable statistics
 on its prevalence. Women suffered disproportionately in the Somali civil war and
 in the strife that followed. However, during the past year there were no reports of
 systematic attacks on women in connection with the continuing civil violence.
 Women are systematically subordinated in the country's overwhelmingly patriarchal
 culture. Polygyny is permitted, but polyandry is not. Under laws issued by the
 former government, female children could inherit property, but only half the amount
 to which their brothers were entitled. Similarly, according to the tradition of blood
 compensation, those found- guilty in the death of a woman must pay only half as
 much to the aggrieved family as they would if the victim were a man.
 Several women's groups in Hargeisa actively promote equal rights for women and
 advocate the inclusion of women in responsible government positions.
 Children.-Children remain among the chief victims of the continuing violence.
 Boys as young as 14 or 15 years of age have participated in militia attacks, and
 many youths are members of the marauding gangs known as "morian," or "parasites
 or maggots." Even in areas with relative security, the lack of resources has limited
 the opportunity for children to attend school. There are only three secondary schools
 in Somaliland, and only 10 percent of those few children who enter primary school
 graduate from secondary school. Schools at all levels lack textbooks, laboratory
 equipment, and running water. Teachers are poorly trained and poorly-paid. The lit-
 eracy rate is less than 25 percent.
 Female genital mutilation which is widely condemned by international experts as
 damaging to both physical andpsychological health, is a near-universal practice. Es-
 timates place the percentage of women who have been subjected to FGM at 98 per-
 cent. Infibulation, the most harmful form of FGM, is practiced. The practice was il-
 legal in 1991, when the Siad Barre government collapsed; and in Somaliland it re-
 mains illegal under the Penal Code (see Section l.e.); however, the law is not en-
 
 
 379
 forced. While U.N. agencies and NGO's have made intensive efforts to educate per-
 sons about the danger of FGM, no reliable statistics are available on their success.
 People With Disabilities.-In the absence of a functioning state, no one is in a po-
 sition to systematically address the needs of those with disabilities. There are sev-
 eral local NGO's in Somaliland that provide services to the disabled.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-More than 80 percent of citizens share a
 common ethnic heritage, religion, and nomadic-influenced culture. The largest mi-
 nority group consists of "Bantu" Somalis, who are descended from slaves brought
 to Somalia about 300 years ago. In most areas, members of groups other than the
 predominant clan are excluded from effective participation in governing institutions
 and are subject to discrimination in employment, judicial proceedings, and access
 to public services.
 Members of minority groups are subjected to harassment, intimidation, and abuse
 by armed gunmen of all affiliations.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The 1990 Constitution provided workers with the
 right to form unions, but the civil war and factional fighting negated this provision
 and shattered the single labor confederation, the then government-controlled Ger-
 eral Federation of Somali Trade Unions. In view of the extent of the country's politi-
 cal and economic breakdown and the lack of legal enforcement mechanisms, trade
 unions could not function freely in the country.
 The new Constitution of Somaliland established the right of freedom of associa-
 tion, but no unions or employer organizations yet exist.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Wages and work require-
 ments in traditional Somali culture are established largely by ad hoc bartering,
 based on supply, demand, and the influence of the clan from which the worker origi-
 nates. As during past years, labor disputes sometimes led to the use of force or kid-
 naping (see Section 1.d.).
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Unlike past years, there were no
 reports that local partners of multinational fruit export firms used forced labor in
 some areas of the Lower Shabelle and Lower Juba, including forced labor by chil-
 dren in some areas of Lower Shabelle. Local clan militias generally forced members
 of minority groups to work without compensation.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-Formal
 employment of children was rare, but youths commonly are employed in herding,
 agriculture, and household labor from an early age. The lack of educational opportu-
 nities and severely depressed economic conditions contribute to child labor.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There was no organized effort by any of the
 factions or de facto regional administrations to monitor acceptable conditions of
 work during the year.
