 SOMALIA
 Following 2 years of civil war and total anarchy, Somalia continued in 1993 to
 be without central authority of any kind. In the 2 years since the fall of Siad Barre
 in January 1991, traditional means of social control and administration of justice
 have not been reestablished. Even with the presence of United Nations peace-
 keepers, many Somalis remain beyond the rule and protection of recognized law and
 social order. Almost 20 percent of the population is displaced or has sought refuge
 abroad. Communities, ravaged by war and famine have disappeared in some re-
 *ons. Somalis of every clan and faction live in fear for their lives and property. Tra-
 Mtional authorities, unable to cope with the unprecedented conditions of the coun-
 try, have often withdrawn from their historical function, leaving the clans and
 subclans without the restraints that would serve to protect human rights.
 The United Nations Operations in Somalia (UNOSOM) and its predecessor the
 United Nations Task Force (UNITAF) have attempted to protect the lives and prop-
 erty of both Somalis and foreign relief workers. However, in doing so and in at-
 tempting to carry out its mandate to support a broad agreement by Somalis in
 March, 1993 in Addis Ababa, U.N. forces were attacked and drawn into violent con-
 frontations in which they and Somalis were killed, creating an atmosphere of wari-
 ness between the peacekeepers and some of those they were sent to protect. Some
 foreign forces were accused of mistreatment, even murder, of Somalis and in several
 instances from June to October, 1993, U.N. peacekeepers were attacked and killed
 by Somalis. In response, under the authority of the United Nations, U.S. forces at-
 tacked and apprehended Somalis believed to be responsible for the attacks upon
 U.N. peacekeepers. UNOSOM detained these Somalis without trial. All but eight
 were released by year's end.
 In the months before the attacks on the peacekeepers, the United Nations was
 largely successful in ensuring the flow of food to the starving population by ending
 large-scale looting of relief supplies and extortion of humanitarian agencies by ban-
 
 
 dits and warlords. The early months of 1993 saw a rapid drop in death and mal-
 nutrition rates measured by international relief agencies. Despite this amelioration,
 lawlessness continued in parts of Somalia. Conditions varied widely. In some towns,
 a semblance of civic order remained, with local populations respecting the tradi-
 tional authority of clan elders. However, no central authority was acknowledged;
 power rested in the hands of clan-based warlords and heavily armed gangs of
 looters; more than half a million refugees fled to neighboring countries over the past
 few years; and there was no functioning network of police, courts, or civil adminis-
 tration. In the second quarter of 1993, the United Nations made a start in address-
 in these problems.
 Re Addis Ababa accords, which the 15 major Somali faction leaders signed in
 March, outlined steps toward political reconciliation and the formation of a Transi-
 tional National Council (TNC). The accords committed all signatories to disar-
 mament and the reconstruction of Somali society in a fashion consistent with the
 Geneva Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
 Building on the March accords the U.N. Security Council (UNSC) passed several
 resolutions establishing and defning UNOSOM II. UNOSOM II, created under
 UNSC Resolution 814, had broad responsibilities, including the basic reconstitution
 of Somali civic society and the creation of preconditions for the observance of human
 rights. It was tasked with creating a secure environment; promoting political rec-
 onciliation; disarming clan factions; re-establishing the police and judiciary; and
 prosecuting those responsible for serious violations of international law.
 Informaltalks held among faction leaders in Addis Ababa in November and De-
 cember did not produce agreement on how to implement the Addis Ababa accords,
 but did not repudiate their commitments to these accords.
 As UNOSOM H began the task of disarmament in Mogadishu, it met sudden, vio-
 lent resistance from one of the signatories of the Addis Ababa accords. In response
 to a UNOSOM arms sweep, the SNA (Somali National Alliance, led by Mohamed
 Farah Aideed) reportedly organized an ambush of UNOSOM Pakistani troops on
 June 5, killing 24 and wounding another 50. On June 6, the UNSC passed Resolu-
 tion 837, condemning the armed attacks upon U.N. peacekeepers and authorizing
 the U.N. Secretary General, under Chapter VII of the U.N. Charter, to take all nec-
 essary measures against those responsible for the attacks, including arrest, deten-
 tion, trial, and punishment. In November the UNSC created a commission of inquiry
 to investigate this and other incidents.
 Throughout June, July, August and September, UNOSOM 11 forces, including
 U.S. forces working with UNOSOM contingents, made efforts to capture Aideed and
 other key SNA personnel in accordance with UNSC Resolution 837. SNA forces
 countered by conducting ambushes of UNOSOM forces in which armed attackers
 were shielded by civilians, especially women. Peacekeepers from Italy, Pakistan, Ni-
 geria, the United States, anc Morocco, as well as hundreds of Somalis, died during
 such incidents. In September and October, SNA rocket and mortar attacks on the
 U.N. facility and U.S. Liaison Office in South Mogadishu became more frequent.
 SNA forces unlawfully detained two peacekeepers, a Nigerian and an American (see
 Section 1.d.), the American after an attack October 3 on an SNA stronghold in
 Mogadishu.
 Outside Mogadishu, progress was made in reestablishing local police forces and
 courts and wit the establishment of new district and regional councils.
 Faction militia, bandits, and clan militia are routinely charged with using intimi-
 dation, detention, rape, kidnaping, murder, and looting to gain or maintain power
 over the Somali population but these charges have been difficult to investigate. Re-
 lations between UNOSOM forces and local populations varied widely from region to
 region, and were often dependent on relations between UNOSOM and local faction
 or traditional leaders. In general, the forces enjoyed good relations with the people,
 but there were some complaints that Belgian, Canadian, and U.S. forces used ex-
 treme or inappropriate force against Somalis, including incidents which resulted in
 deaths. The governments involved launched investigations, some of which continue,
 of these incidents.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Political violence and banditry have
 been endemic to Somalia since the overthrow of Siad Barre. Levels of violence were
 significantly reduced with the establishment of UNITAF, followed by UNOSOM II.
 Within areas controlled by UNITAF, the efforts of volunteer, unpaid former police-
 men appear to have aided the return of stability. However, in the past year, at-
 tempts have been made on the lives of several politically active Somalis. Although
 
 
 large scale interclan clashes in Mogadishu diminished with an interclan cease fire
 in October, gun fights between rival factions were still common and lethal attacks
 by bandits in the city increased, as did interclan fighting outside Mogadishu.
 Some foreign forces were accused of extrajudicial killings. Canadian peacekeepers
 stationed at Belet Weyne were alleged to have been responsible for two civilian So-
 mali deaths. On March 4, a Somali attempting to break into the Canadian base was
 shot while fleeing, and allegedly shot again while lying on the ground. While in Ca-
 nadian custody on March 16, Shidane Omar Aroni was allegedly beaten to death
 . Canadian authorities conducted a full investigation and launched judicial proceed-
 ings which had not been concluded by year's end. In April, a U.S. Marine was con-
 victed in a military court of use of excessive force in an incident in which one Somali
 was killed.
 On July 7, at the height of the conflict between Aideed and UNOSOM forces, six
 Somali distributors of the UNOSOM newspaper were assassinated in Mogadishu. It
 is alleged this took place at SNA or Aideed instigation.
 On June 5, forces loyal to Aideed reportedly launched an ambush against Paki-
 stani peacekeepers, who had just completed a search for arms at Aideed's radio sta-
 tion and other locations in Aideed-controlled territory. Twenty-four Pakistanis were
 killed, two of them executed after being taken captive. Women were combatants in
 the attack and reportedly participated in mutilating the bodies of the dead. The
 arms search had ben initiated after written notification to the SNA, and was in
 accordance with the disarmament provisions of the Addis Ababa agreement. Follow-
 ing the deaths of the Pakistani peacekeepers, UNSC Resolution 837 authorized
 UNOSOM to take all necessary measures against those responsible for the attack.
 Fighting on June 17 between the SNA and UNOSOM began with an ambush of
 Moroccan troops; women among the attackers reportedly pulled grenades from
 under their clothes and threw them among the Moroccan troops. Similar tactics
 were reportedly used to ambush Nigerian troops on September 5.
 b. Disappearance.-Reliable information concerning politically motivated dis-
 appearances was not available. Most observers assumed that it was a frequent phe-
 nomenon, masked by massive displacement of the population.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Reports of torture in the aftermath of clan fighting cannot be confirmed.
 In  ar eisa on January 8, five women suspected of prostitution were stoned to
 death, after having been buried up to the neck. The instigator was a local religious
 leader, Sheikh Dahir. The Sheikh reportedly acted without convening a formal Is-
 lamic tribunal. No other incidents of this nature were recorded in 1993.
 Independent sources alleged that Somalis held in Belgian custody in Kismayo suf-
 fered mistreatment. Doctors who examined released detainees found marks of burns
 on their bodies. The Belgian Ministry of Defense launched an investigation, and an-
 nounced that military authorities had taken appropriate action in cases of apparent
 misconduct. Thirteen cases were still under investigation at years's end.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-All Somali factions reportedly held pris-
 oners arbitrarily in 1993. The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) ne-
 gotiated the release of 348 persons, mostly detained by the United Somali Faction
 (SC), but some by the Somali Salvation Democratic Front (SSDF), and the Somali
 National Force (SNF). The SNA has accused the United Nations of violations of the
 rights of the accused. Under the authority of UNSC Resolution 837, UNOSOM de-
 tained, but did not try, Somalis suspected of complicity in the attack on Pakistani
 peacekeepers. For reasons of security, the location and condition of the detainees
 was not revealed to their families or the Somali public, although regular visits by
 ICRC representatives were permitted. The last of these detainees were released in
 January 1994. When the SNA unlawfully detained a captured U.S. pilot and one
 of the Nigerian peacekeepers, the ICRC visited the detainees and assisted in their
 release.
 Former National Police Commander Ahmed Jams Mousa claimed in a deposition
 to UNOSOM that, during a military operation on September 13, U.S. forces shot
 and wounded him outside his home, invaded his home, beat, and detained him and
 three unarmed members of his family for 5 days. Mousa has filed a claim for com-
 pensation to UNOSOM. The U.S. Department of Defense is investigating the inci-
 dent.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-There is little structure for the administration of
 justice in Somalia. UNOSOM has declared the Somali Penal Code to be the law of
 the land, and in the few functioning UNOSOM-administered courts that law is ap-
 plied. It is impossible to judge the impartiality of the administration of local justice.
 Throughout the country local authorities have attempted to administer some type
 of justice. Islamic law and traditional mediation have been used to settle property
 crimes. However, these methods are not governed by any universal code or adminis-
 
 
 tration. A high proportion of Somalia's educated elite has fled the country. The fear
 of renewed anarchy hampers impartial justice; few Somalis feel confident of lasting
 protection from retaliation based on clan loyalties.
 Prosecution of Somalis for war crimes committed during the past 2 years is dif-
 ficult. In April when humanitarian operations in Baidoa were under the protection
 of Australian forces, one such prosecution resulted in the conviction and execution
 of Hassan Gutaale Abdul. He was tried under the Somali Penal Code for 31 mur-
 ders. Eleven eyewitnesses testified. Both trial and appeal were conducted by former
 Somali judges. However, contrary to Somali law, the appeals panel sat the day after
 the trial, instead of giving the defense the legally required 15-day preparation
 riod. Court officials purportedly feared they could not hold Hassan Gutaale Abdul
 in jail for the prescribed period. He was executed by gunshot immediately after the
 handing down of the a ppeal verdict.
 At the time of the Addis Ababa accords in March, an interim, three-tier judicial
 system was planned, with courts of appeal, regional courts, and district courts. It
 was envisaged that these courts would operate under the 1962 Somali Criminal Pro-
 cedure Code and the 1963 Penal Code. Drafting of a new constitution was to be dele-
 gated (see Section 3) to the Transitional National Council (TNC).
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-These
 rights were constantly violated by the warring factions. The civil conflict resulted
 in huge displacements of people and the destruction of the infrastructure of the
 country. Although these rights have not been systematically violated by a central
 authority, there is no right of privacy in Somalia. Military operations by the major
 factions have led to home searches and evictions. Militia in Mogadishu, Kismayo,
 and other urban centers occupy private homes and buildings without the permission
 of the owners. Homes belonging to former government members have been de-
 stroyed and the contents looted. Somalis have been forced to flee their homes be-
 cause of violence directed at them. The relatively peaceful northwest and northeast
 of the country suffered less disruption. At year's end, no action had been taken to
 deal with property claims, a problem that looms large as refugees and the displaced
 prepare to return.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-Violations of humanitarian law in internal conflicts by Somalis have been
 common since the civil war began in 1991. The use by factions of women and chil-
 dren as human shields or combatants in conflicts is well-documented. The brutal-
 ities of armed looters who continue to roam Somalia are unlikely ever to be com-
 pletely catalogued. Humanitarian convoys and base camps were the targets of these
 andits. The Geddo region on the border with Kenya, unprotected by UNOSOM de-
 ployment, suffered severely. When the remnants of Somalia's judiciary formed an
 association, they particularly wanted inquiries into war crimes to focus on the
 looting of relief supplies. Except in regions with UNOSOM protection, humanitarian
 aid workers were constantly under threat, often in pay disputes with their armed
 Somali employees. Three non-Somali humanitarian aid workers were murdered in
 incidents of random violence.
 In attempting to enforce the disarmament agreements reached in the Addis ac-
 cords, UNOSOM Pakistani peacekeepers were attacked without warning, reportedly
 by the forces of the Somali National Alliance, which controls south Mogadishu.
 UNOSOM's efforts to capture key SNA leaders resulted in confrontations with ele-
 ments of the south Mogadishu population. Although UNSC Resolution 837 author-
 ized the U.N. to "take all necessary means" against those responsible for the June
 5 attack, Medecins Sans Frontieres and the human rights group, Africa Watch, al-
 leged that UNOSOM forces, including U.S. forces, violated international humani-
 tarian law and that UNOSOM had itself become a party in an internal conflict. The
 charges included:
 -that U.S. missile-firing helicopters on July 12 attacked without warning the
 Abdi House, an SNA control center, killing participants in a political meeting. In
 other incidents, UNOSOM forces had issued warnings and called for evacuation be-
 fore striking at an inhabited target. UNOSOM apparently did not issue a warning
 before this attack.
 -that UNOSOM forces did not take adequate care to minimize noncombatant
 casualities in a firefight at the Digfer Hospital on June 17, during which five Somali
 Fatients died. UNOSOM forces were pursuing SNA militia who had fired on them
 from within the hospital, which turned out to be used by the SNA to house troops
 and store arms, and as a intermittant command center.
 The 1994 Human Rights Watch World Report charges General Aideed's forces
 with apparently using civilians to shield troops and with violating the neutrality of
 
 
 262
 hospitals on two occasions, including the one noted above. Africa Watch notes also
 reports that General Aideed's forces conducted summary executions.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Most Somalis obtain news from British Broad-
 casting Corporation and Voice of America Somali-language radio broadcasts. Brief
 news broadsheets continued to be printed. UNOSOM has its own broadcasts and
 newspaper (Maanta), but its radio signal is not strong enough to be heard through-
 out the country. The major factions also have radio stations. There has been a re-
 cent increase of journals in Somalia. These publications are most often pamphlets
 for one faction or another, but some are developing a journalistic independence new
 in Somalia's recent history. There have been no obvious attempts to restrict the dis-
 tribution of these local papers.
 Aideed monopolized use of the national radio. His faction took control of the sta-
 tion and used it and mobile transmitters to broadcast harsh anti-UNOSOM themes.
 UNOSOM allowed Aideed to broadcast without interference until the June attack
 on peacekeepers, when the radio station was destroyed. Aideed continues to broad-
 cast freely from a mobile transmitter.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Periodically, pro-Aideed forces
 held anti-UNOSOM rallies in the Aideed-controlled area of south Mogadishu. Sup-
 porters of Aideed-rival Ali Mahdi also held demonstrations, usually in favor of
 UNOSOM actions in north Mogadishu. Similar demonstrations have been held
 wherever UNOSOM has offices, mostly in urban centers. UNOSOM often monitored
 these demonstrations, but did not interfere with unless violence broke out.
 UNOSOM was accused of firing on protesters in an incident in June following the
 attack on Pakistani peacekeepers. The incident was under investigation at year's
 end.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Somalis are overwhelmingly Sunni Muslim, but the vio.
 lence and chaos principally in Mogadishu, in 1993 made it difficult for them to
 practice their religion in some locations in a mosque or other formal setting. Local
 tradition and past law make it a crime to proselytize for any religion except Islam.
 Non-Sunni Moslems or orthodox Moslem sects are often looked on with suspicion by
 more mainstream Somalis. Somalia has a small Christian community, but these
 men and women often find it necessary to conceal their beliefs. Foreign Christians
 generally practice their religion without persecution as long as the practice is pri-
 vate and does not include attempts to ridicule or undermine Islam. Christian
 churches and cemeteries have been desecrated, but these acts seemed to be more
 often the work of looters and thieves than of zealots.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The collapse of the Government has left the Somali people without
 travel documents needed for international travel. Those Somalia who remain in the
 country have difficulty leaving as neighboring countries often refuse to accept their
 passports or restrict entering Somalis as suspected immigrants. Travel within So-
 malia continued to be dangerous in 1993, but this did not deter huge movements
 of displaced people. Some left the country as refugees; some moved within Somalia
 to feedng centers; others returned to Somalia as repatriates.
 After UNITAF's deployment it was expected that massive numbers of refugees
 would return. Repatriation from neighboring Kenya was slower than the UNHCR
 anticipated. A few thousands, out of tens of thousands, have been repatriated by the
 UNH CR. An undetermined but probably equal number repatriated themselves with-
 out assistance. Unassisted repatriation is relatively easy because many Somali refu-
 gees in Kenya and Ethiopia are nomads, and borders in the region do not cor-
 respond to ethnic boundanes. Though repatriation has been slow, the massive out-
 flow of population recorded in 1991-92 was halted, evidence of the broad improve-
 ment of conditions in the southern 40 percent of Somalia in 1993.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Addis Ababa accords contained provisions for the reintroduction of a political
 structure. The election of district and regional councils, followed by establishment
 of a Transitional National Council, and the drafting of a new constitution, was the
 agreed process to bring about a political consensus and reconciliation. More than 50
 district councils and 6 regional councils were established by Somalis with the help
 of UNOSOM
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 No local human rights organizations could function normally under the conditions
 that prevailed during the year. But international humanitarian organizations were
 
 
 263
 generally welcome in all parts of Somalia, regardless of local clan dominance. The
 ICRC had access to prisoners held by the major factions and by UNOSOM in urbal
 and some rural areas.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Women.-Women are harshly subordinated in Somali society. Somali culture is
 overwhelmingly restrictive and patriarchal. Women suffered disproportionately in
 the Somali civil war and in the strife that followed. Traditional rulers have reported
 systematic rape and abduction of young women to serve as sexual slaves to roving
 gangs. The population of Brava, an ethnic minority, was especially hard hit. In Feb-
 ruary women from Brava were still being held by SNA militia as far from their
 homes as Baidoa. The same fate befell the women of Hamar Weyne in Mogadishu,
 another minority group, when marauding Hawiya reportedly raped scores of women
 inside a city mosque where they had taken refuge Women were often used as spoils
 of war and denigrated to humiliate their clan or family.
 Children.-Female genital mutilation (circumcision), which has been condemned
 by international health experts as damaging to both physical and psychological
 health, is commonly inflicted at an early age. An independent expert in the field
 estimates that 98 percent of Somali females have undergone this operation.
 Other forms of abuse stem from the civil conflict. Children were pushed by Somali
 factions into armed conflict with foreign troops and other Somalis. In the conflict
 with UNOSOM in south Mogadishu, Aideed's forces used civilians as human shields
 and deliberately involved women and children in combat to reap propaganda advan-
 tages from casualties and protection from UNOSOM military action. In February
 Somali children were given water pistols that looked very much like real guns. Chil-
 dren claimed they were told to squirt U.N. soldiers with these toys. This practice
 led to many near shooting incidents.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-More than 80 percent of Somalia's people
 share a common ethnic heritage, religion, and nomadic-influenced culture. However,
 clan affiliation has always been more important than political and cultural unity.
 Under the pressures of social breakdown and civil war, clan and subclan loyalties
 grew ever stronger.
 The largest minority group consists of "Bantu" Somalis. They are victims of visible
 discrimination even in refugee camps. They fall into two major groups; those who
 claim to be aboriginal Somalis, and those who are descended from east African
 slaves brought to Somalia by Arab traders in the 14th century. Somalis also practice
 a caste/subordinate clan system. The Tumal and Mitgan are Somali clans despised
 for their professions (leather and metal workers) and forbidden to marry or mix
 with other Somalis. Educated Somalis have refused to eat at the same table with
 members of these groups. In fact, Somalis will often hesitate to discuss the existence
 of these two groups. No Tumal or Mitgan organization has emerged to champion
 their rights. Many "Bantu" refugees in Kenya fear to return to Somalia, feeling that
 as a threatened minority they would become still more vulnerable.
 In Kismayo in July, two Bantu Somalis, members of one of Somalia's minority
 populations, were killed by townspeople for their part in assisting UNOSOM to re-
 settle the displaced. Townspeople feared the resettlement program threatened local
 food distributions.
 People with Disabilities.-No reliable information was available on this topic.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Nothing remains of the General Federation of So-
 mali Trade Unions. Given the extent of the country's economic breakdown and the
 lack of legal enforcement mechanisms, trade unions were not able to function in
 1993.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Wages and work require-
 ments in traditional Somali culture are largely established by ad hoc bargaining,
 based on supply and demand. There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-No information on this topic was
 available.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The reestablishment of schools is
 only beginning. Formal employment of children is unlikely; but children often par-
 ticipate in armed militias.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There was no organized effort to monitor ac-
 ceptable conditions of work during 1993.
 
 
