 SOMALIA
 President Mohamed Siad Barre, who seized power in a bloodless
 coup in 1969, is also head of the armed forces and Secretary
 General of the Somali Revolutionary Socialist Party (SRSP),
 the sole legal political party. Somalia's formal governmental
 structure includes the President, the Council of Ministers,
 and the National People's Assembly. The Council of Ministers
 is appointed by President Siad. The members of the People's
 Assembly were last elected on a single slate in 1984, with no
 provision for alternative or dissenting votes. Informal and
 formal consultations between the leadership and clan groups
 have a major impact on internal politics. Conflict among
 Somalia's five major clans and numerous subclans has broken
 out repeatedly over the centuries.
 The Somali armed forces number over 35,000 troops and are
 supported by the military police, the uniformed regular
 police, and the National Security Service (NSS) in internal
 security responsibilities, including in the civil conflict.
 The NSS has essentially unlimited powers of arrest, search,
 and confiscation and over the years has detained thousands of
 people for political or unspecified reasons, often for years
 without charge or trial. Soldiers, police, and government
 employees are poorly paid and disciplined and sometimes misuse
 their authority to extort money from citizens. The antiregime
 Somali National Movement (SNM), which finds support among the
 northern Isaak clan, launched armed attacks in northern
 Somalia in May, killing non-Isaaks and suspected opponents and
 destroying their property. In responding, the Somali National
 Army inflicted additional casualties and heavy damage on
 Hargeisa, the principal city of the north, and on Burao.
 Somalia has few proven natural resources, and most of its
 estimated 5.9 million people manage a bare subsistence as
 herdsmen or farmers. The capital city, Mogadishu, now has a
 population exceeding a million, many of whom are unemployed
 migrants from the countryside. In September 1987, the
 Government suspended its economic reform program, thereby
 seriously weakening the export sector, drying up essential
 imports, and forcing up prices in urban markets (inflation
 reached 13 percent per month in August). In mid-1988, the
 Government renewed its commitment to the International
 Monetary Fund-proposed structural reforms, including steep
 currency devaluation.
 The fighting in the north produced civilian casualties as well
 as serious human rights abuses. The Somali armed forces used
 artillery extensively in urban areas of Hargeisa and Burao,
 where insurgents had barricaded themselves, and bombed and
 strafed zones populated by civilians. Both sides summarily
 executed suspected opponents. About 300,000 to 500,000
 Somalis fled the fighting into Ethiopia, Djibouti, Mogadishu,
 or the Somali countryside. At the end of 1988, the towns of
 Hargeisa and Burao had less than a tenth of their former
 inhabitants. The remoteness of the displaced persons and
 donors' reluctance to operate in an insecure environment
 combined to make relief work difficult or impossible.
 Confiscation of relief agencies' vehicles--by the Somali
 National Army and SNM forces--inhibited relief operations.
 For several months the Government limited the access of the
 International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), but by the
 end of 1988 it had agreed to substantial ICRC presence in the
 north. Civil and political rights, including freedom of
 expression and association, remained tightly controlled, and
 
 
 309
 SOMALIA
 the Government continued to use detention as a primary tool
 for limiting them. The Government detained large numbers of
 Isaaks from the military and civil service but had begun to
 release many of them by the end of the year. The fate of many
 others detained before the outbreak of fighting was unknown,
 and the Government continued to refuse to release information
 about other political detainees and prisoners, including some
 who have been in custody for years. The Government finally
 held the trial in February of 22 persons, including 6 former
 parliamentarians, who had been detained under brutal
 conditions without charge since 1982 and who had become the
 focal point of international concerns over human rights abuses'
 in Somalia. The National Security Court sentenced 8 of the
 defendants to death, but the President commuted the death
 sentences, and at the end of the year 11 of the 22 were out of
 prison. In 1988 the Government moved to improve relations
 with Ethiopia, and the two Governments exchanged and
 repatriated under ICRC auspices several thousand Ethiopian
 prisoners of war held by Somalia and several hundred Somali
 prisoners of war held by Ethiopia since the 1977-78 Ogaden
 war. In an effort to improve women's rights, health, and
 social conditions, the Government began enforcing a policy
 prohibiting female circumcision.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 . Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 When the SNM attacked cities in northern Somalia in May, it
 executed government officials, suspected opponents, wavering
 supporters, and non-Isaaks. One mass grave in Burao contains
 the bodies of 71 such victims. When the Government
 counterattacked, soldiers and security agents summarily
 executed dozens and perhaps hundreds of persons, either
 because they were suspected rebels or because they were
 members of the Isaak clan who encountered government patrols.
 Prior to the outbreak of fightihg, there had been occasional
 random killings by security forces, particularly by curfew
 patrols. The allegations of executions by both government and
 antigovernment forces are credible, but the number of such
 political killings is difficult to estimate and fluctuates in
 direct proportion to the intensity of fighting.
 b. Disappearance
 Unexplained disappearances have'increased since late May when
 the fighting in the north broke out. As with political
 killings, there were no reliable estimates, but government
 security forces as well as insurgents were undoubtedly
 responsible for many disappearances. Hundreds of civilians
 had to leave Hargeisa and Burao along with the insurgent
 forces--at least some of them involuntarily--when the
 insurgents fled those two towns. At the end of 1988, there
 were credible reports that the rebels were still forcibly
 preventing many of them from returning home. Also,
 disappearances attributable to the Government are hard to
 distinguish from arbitrary arrests and detentions (see Section
 l.d. below) since detentions are not acknowledged by the
 authorities. Because many people detained by the NSS over the
 past 18 years have never again been heard from, it is assumed
 that at least some of them were killed.
 
 
 310
 SOMALIA
 In some cases, the whereabouts of political prisoners are not
 known. For example, Mohammed Barud Ali, a chemist who was
 director of the Pepsi Cola plant in Hargeisa at the time of
 his arrest, was convicted of antirevolutionary activities and
 sentenced by the National Security Court on March 6, 1982 to
 life imprisonment. He is believed to be held in
 Labaatan-Jirow prison but has not been seen by his family or
 others for more than 5 years.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Recurring credible reports, sometimes supported by medical
 examinations, indicate that the NSS and the military police
 often torture detainees. Methods of torture include
 submersion in water, electric shock, placing prisoners in
 contorted positions for extended periods, severe beating,
 wounding with knives, and rape. Somali officials consistently
 deny that torture is practiced; and the National Security
 Court has refused to admit into evidence allegations of
 torture.
 Prison conditions are harsh, especially in NSS maximum
 security prisons such as Labaatan-Jirow. Political detainees
 in these prisons are denied contact with their families and,
 in some cases, kept in solitary confinement in cells as small
 as 2 square meters. Medium security prisons for common
 criminals are also unsanitary, but family visits are allowed.
 Lack of adequate medical treatment is a major problem. Wounds
 inflicted during torture sometimes fester because of
 unsanitary prison conditions and denial of medical care, and
 result in permanent damage to the health of detainees. Kidney
 ailments are common among long-term prisoners. In 1988 human
 rights groups expressed special concern about the health of
 several prisoners, including Abdi Ismail Yunis and Suleiman
 Nuh Ali (see Section I.e. below) and Safia Hashi Madar.
 Hashi, arrested in 1985, and sentenced to life imprisonment
 following a trial before the National Security Court in which
 she was denied legal representation, is reported to be
 suffering from a kidney infection, severe depression, chronic
 tooth pain, and malnutrition. She was 9 months pregnant at
 the time of her arrest and delivered a son the second day of
 her detention. She has reportedly been beaten and raped while
 in detention. The Ministry of Health recommended immediate
 treatment for her kidney ailment in September, but since then
 the Government has released no news about her condition.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Although the Somali Constitution accords citizens the right to
 be formally charged and to a speedy trial, the criminal code
 was modified in 1970 to exempt crimes involving national
 security from time limits and rules of procedure. Persons
 suspected of a seditious intent, or perceived as a political
 threat, are frequently held indefinitely without being charged
 or brought to trial. Detentions by the security services may
 not be reviewed or overturned by the courts.
 The precise number of political detainees and prisoners is
 difficult to estimate because the Government does not disclose
 such information. However, they probably numbered in the
 thousands in midyear at the height of the conflict in the
 north. The majority were Isaaks. After the heavy fighting
 subsided in August, the Government began releasing detainees
 taken into custody during the fighting. The first releases
 
 
 311
 SOMALIA
 were without publicity and included the mayor and vice mayor
 of Berbera, the chief pilot for Somali Airlines, and several
 Isaak businessmen. The official press then began publishing
 lists of persons whom the President had amnestied: They
 totaled 11 on November 14 and 92 on November 19. Of these
 over 80 were military personnel, including a number with the
 rank of colonel. In all, 116 released detainees are known by
 name. The presidential announcement indicated that the
 amnestied persons would resume the duties which they had held
 at the time of their arrest.
 Also among the detainees were five military cadets (four
 Isaaks and one Hawiye) who had been training in Egypt. They
 were forcibly returned .to Somalia after applying for refugee
 status with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
 (UNHCR). Reportedly the Government considers the cadets
 military deserters, and it has released no information about
 their fate although there is a report that one of the cadets
 died while in detention.
 The release of detainees at the end of 1988 included few if
 any of the hundreds of political detainees from previous years.
 The Government does not use exile as a form of punishment. In
 July and September, President Siad Barre offered amnesty to
 dissidents abroad who wished to return to Somalia. The
 Government uses forcible conscription to provide the military
 with conscripts. After the outbreak of fighting in the north,
 the Government's impressment activities increased greatly. In
 some instances, press gangs and groups posing as press gangs
 reportedly abducted people in order to extort money from their
 families.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public trial
 The Somali judicial system includes civil and criminal courts,
 headed by the Supreme Court, which are open to the public.
 There is a separate National Security Court, affiliated with
 the National Security Service, where proceedings are usually
 held in camera. Although nominally independent, the judiciary
 is in fact not distinguishable from the executive, which
 reviews and controls judicial decisions. All judges in the
 Supreme Court and lower courts are appointed by the President
 with the advice of the Higher Judicial Council, of which the
 President is the chairman. Judges of the National Security
 Court generally are military officers posted to the Court.
 Law No. 54 of 1970 provides the death penalty for political
 offenses "against national security," defined as behavior
 "which may be considered prejudicial to the maintenance of
 peace, order and good government.* The law does not
 distinguish between offenses involving violence and those
 involving nonviolent criticism or opposition to the Government.
 In the civil and criminal courts, legal assistance is
 provided, and there are established rules of evidence. There
 are no religious courts in Somalia. In civil proceedings
 relating to family matters, such as marriage and inheritance,
 the judge may cite prevailing Islamic Shari'a law in rendering
 decisions.
 The right to appeal exists in criminal and civil cases, but
 not in cases heard by the National Security Court. For
 
 
 312
 SOMALIA
 persons convicted by the National Security Court, the only
 avenue for clemency is through the Politburo of the SRSP.
 The trials of 22 political detainees, including 6 former
 parliamentarians detained since 1982, finally took place in
 February in the National Security Court. The Court sentenced
 former Vice President Brigadier General Ismail Ali Abokor,
 former Foreign Minister Omar Arteh Ghalib, and six others to
 death for plotting to overthrow the Government. Five
 defendants received sentences ranging from 5 years and 4
 months to life imprisonment. Nine defendants were acquitted,
 but four of them nevertheless were later placed under house
 arrest. Subsequently, the President commuted the eight death
 sentences to 24 years. Ismail and Omar Arteh were permitted
 to serve~their terms under house arrest, the other six were
 imprisoned. In October the Government announced the release
 from house arrest of Ismail and Omar Arteh and the four who
 had been acquitted. They were still, however, restricted to
 Mogadishu.
 Although a few of the defendants' relatives were permitted to
 attend the trial, human rights groups, foreign journalists,
 and diplomats were excluded. Observers felt that the trial
 was procedurally correct, and the Court was responsive when
 handling defense objections and motions. There appeared to be
 no link, however, between the proceedings and the verdicts.
 The Court conducted no investigation into the allegations of
 several of the defendants that they had been tortured.
 In September a U.S. Consul was permitted to attend a trial of
 the National Security Court for the first time. The
 defendant, an American citizen, was sentenced to 5 years in
 prison. The proceedings were systematic; attorneys for the
 defense appeared competent, and they argued their case with
 vigor; witnesses did not appear under duress, but some
 witnesses alleged to be important to the defense were
 excluded. The activity for which the defendant was tried,
 possession of poetry considered critical of the Government,
 appeared to constitute the receipt of information and ideas,
 the freedom to which is recognized under the Universal
 Declaration of Human Rights.
 Two examples of political prisoners are:
 (1) Suleiman Nuh Ali, an architect who studied at
 Allegheny College in Pennsylvania and graduated in 1971 from
 Howard University in Washington, D.C. He was arrested on
 September 12, 1982, by the NSS and charged under Law No. 54
 with "creating a subversive organization" and "establishing an
 armed group" which carried out an assault on a prison and
 attempted to assassinate a major general of the Somali
 National Army. According to a report prepared by the U.S.
 National Academy of Sciences, Suleiman Nuh Ali "is not known
 to have been involved in antigovernment political activities
 nor to have ever practiced or advocated violence." Suleiman
 was reportedly mistreated during the early days of his
 detention; he has eye problems because he was kept
 continuously in artificial light; his cell measured only 1.2
 by 1.8 meters. Suleiman was 1 of the 22 defendants brought to
 trial before the National Security Court in February. He was
 found guilty under Law No. 54 and sentenced to death.
 Subsequently, the sentence was commuted to 24 years'
 imprisonment by President Siad Barre.
 
 
 313
 SOMALIA
 (2) Abdi Ismail Yunis, a mathematician who earned an
 M.A. degree in 1972 from the State University of New York
 (SUNY) at New Paltz. He was arrested in 1982 while visiting
 his parents in Hargeisa and later charged with the same crimes
 as Suleiman Nuh Ali under Law No. 54. Abdi Ismail Yunis was
 tortured during the early period of his confinement, and
 testicular wounds led to infections. He also suffered from
 skin irritations caused by insects, probable rheumatoid
 arthritis, and severe back pain. For much of his long
 detention period, he was held in solitary confinemient at the
 NSS prison in Mogadishu. In February he was also one of the
 defendants sentenced to death by the National Security Court;
 he later had his sentence commuted to 24 years' imprisonment
 by the President. Abdi Ismail Yunis is reportedly in
 Labaatan-Jirow maximum security prison, where he is not
 permitted visitors. Reports indicated that his health
 seriously deteriorated during 1988 and that he might be
 suffering from hepatitis or leptospirosis. Despite
 international concern that his medical condition, if
 untreated, could be fatal, the Government released no news of
 his condition.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The NSS searches homes without warrants and monitors the
 activities of people through a comprehensive network of
 informants. It also monitors communications and opens mail,
 although there is no evidence that such practices are
 extensive. The SNM and some human rights grcups allege that
 the Somali army has responded to SNM attacks in the past 2
 years by poisoning water supplies and destroying the homes and
 livestock of civilians in the area. These allegations could
 not be confirmed.
 "Mobilization campaigns" are organized by the Somali
 Revolutionary Socialist Party to promote public participation
 in, and enthusiasm for, various civic and national programs,
 as well as general support for government policies. Though
 these campaigns are becoming less common, they are especially
 evident during the annual preparations for National Day.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Government does not allow public expression of dissenting
 views. Most Somalis get their daily news by word of mouth
 or--consistent with Somalia's strong oral tradition--by
 transistor radio. Except for radio, the modern media do not
 play a significant role in Somali society. The Government
 owns and operates the radio and television as well as the
 country's six newspapers. The Central Censorship Board
 retains control over all media (foreign and local), including
 publications circulated within the country--films, plays,
 concerts, lectures, and other means of communication, such as
 videotapes, whether imported or produced in Somalia, and
 strictly forbids any expression of views considered
 inconsistent with those of the Government. Members of the
 local press exercise self-censorship. One editor was
 reportedly detained in 1988 after he reprinted an article that
 was no longer consistent with government policies. The
 Government frequently denies visas to foreign journalists and
 strictly controls the movements of journalists who are
 permitted to enter Somalia. Despite numerous requests, the
 
 
 314
 SOMALIA
 Government allowed only one Western journalist to visit
 northern Somalia in the wake of the fighting. Many foreign
 publications have been banned, including some Italian
 publications, as well as the quarterly journal Horn of Africa
 published in New Jersey by expatriate Somali and Ethiopian
 intellectuals.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Although politics is a common topic at informal gatherings of
 Somalis, more formal meetings are permitted only with
 government sponsorship to advance government purposes.
 Political protest meetings are not permitted. In March, for
 example, 5 high school students were arrested in Burao for
 participating in demonstrations protesting the convictions of
 13 northern Somalis in the February trial of the
 parliamentarians. Two unauthorized demonstrations reportedly
 took place in Mogadishu in November, one involving former
 prisoners of war repatriated by Ethiopia in August, and the
 other involving soldiers wounded in the fighting in the north,
 both groups apparently seeking more government assistance.
 Both demonstrations were joined by onlookers. Police broke up
 the demonstrations without using excessive force, but some
 reports indicated that a number of people were detained on
 suspicion of instigating the first demonstration.
 Professional and civic organizations may be formed only with
 government sponsorship and participation. In the past, the
 Government has been particularly suspicious of nongovernmental
 civic organizations in northern Somalia. Several people who
 were reportedly active in 1981 in a community self-help
 project to improve Hargeisa Hospital were arrested then and
 are still serving sentences for participation in a subversive
 organization. The SRSP is the only legal political party.
 Under Law No. 54, membership in an opposition group is
 punishable by death.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Islam is the state religion of Somalia, and nearly 100 percent
 of the population is Muslim, predominantly of the Sunni sect.
 Members of other religions may practice their faiths but may
 not proselytize.
 Since 1985 the Government has licensed all mosques and Koranic
 schools, and since 1986 it has appointed all imams. The NSS
 monitors sermons and occasionally detains religious leaders
 whom it considers too outspoken. The Government is suspicious
 of Shi'ites, whether Somali or foreign, and is anxious to
 prevent the development of radical Islamic movements. Law No.
 54 provides the death penalty for "exploiting religion for
 creating national disunity or subverting or weakening state
 authority." In 1987 the death sentences of nine Islamic
 teachers convicted by the National Security Court were
 commuted to life imprisonment. Those nine and several other
 religious persons remained in prison at the end of 1988.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Police and military checkpoints control travel between towns,
 in border areas, and in areas of interclan violence. The
 
 
 315
 SOMALIA
 northern region has been under an 8 p.m. to 5 a.m. curfew
 since 1986. In May, when fighting broke out in the north,
 mass migrations overwhelmed these travel controls.
 Significant shifts of population continued throughout 1988, as
 cities such as Berbera lost inhabitants while Mogadishu
 absorbed war victims and economic migrants in increasing
 numbers. About 300,000 Somalis fleeing the fighting went to
 Ethiopia, where they are now in UNHCR-sponsored refugee
 camps. There were credible reports that Somali military
 planes strafed fleeing civilians. The Government fn July
 referred to the Somali refugees in Ethiopia as "only the
 remnants of the armed bandits," but later in the year
 announced an "amnesty" and appealed to Somalis who fled across
 the borders into Ethiopia and Djibouti to return to their
 homes. There have been reports that the SNM is trying to
 prevent their return.
 Somali citizens intending to travel abroad need to obtain a
 letter from the immigration department. Such letters
 frequently seem obtainable through connections or bribes. At
 the height of the fighting the Government prohibited all
 Somali citizens between the ages of 15 and 40 from leaving the
 country. The policy was not enforced uniformly and for
 practical purposes is no longer in force. Somalis who have
 emigrated are generally permitted to return; twice in 1988
 President Siad promised amnesty to antigovernment Somalis
 returning from foreign countries. Nevertheless, based on the
 experience of previous years, some Somalis fear possible
 imprisonment for opposition activity if they return.
 Somalia hosts an unknown number of refugees from Ethiopia.
 The UNHCR provides foodstuffs for 870,000, but most observers
 agree that only about 350,000 persons are full-time residents
 of the refugee camps. The program of supporting refugees from
 Ethiopia continues despite the war in the north and the exodus
 of Somalis into Ethiopia. The Government has supplied arms to
 an undetermined number of refugees to fight the SNM insurgents
 in the north. Some refugees have been conscripted; others
 have apparently joined the Government's side voluntarily, at
 least in part because of longstanding enmity between the
 Ogadeni and Isaak clans.
 A major Somali achievement in 1988 was the reestablishment of
 diplomatic relations with Ethiopia, the signing of what
 amounts to a nonaggression pact, and an exchange of prisoners
 of war. Between August 23 and September 1, the ICRC
 repatriated by air 3,543 Ethiopian, 246 Somali, and 1 Cuban
 prisoner of war held since the 1977-78 Ogaden war. Among the
 repatriated Ethiopians were several hundred Ethiopian
 civilians who had been detained at Hawai detention camp; an
 additional 22 Ethiopian civilians held in other prisons were
 repatriated through the ICRC in November.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The SRSP is the only legal party; opposition groups and
 criticism of the Government are illegal. Thus, the people
 have neither the legal right nor the ability peacefully to
 change their government or the form of their government.
 Somalia has only one indigenous ethnic group, the Somali,
 which is divided into clans and subclans. For many Somalis
 the traditional clan system is the accepted vehicle of
 political expression. President Siad Barre and other
 officials consult frequently with clan leaders. Since 1982,
 however, President Siad has been widely perceived as relying
 
 
 316
 SOMALIA
 on and furthering the interests of his family and his Marehan
 subclan rather than balancing the interests of all clans.
 Faced with difficulties in placating other clans, the
 President has also increasingly relied on his role as
 Commander of the Armed Forces and Secretary General of the
 SRSP to maintain himself in power.
 Voting for the 171-member People's Assembly entails only a
 vote for or against the SRSP's national slate, although
 candidates need not necessarily be party members to be
 included on the slate. President Siad Barre was the sole
 candidate for President in 1986, and, in Somalia's first
 direct presidential election, was reelected to a 7-year term
 with 99.9 percent of the vote.
 Somalia's traditional and modern politics are dominated. by
 males. There are a few female members of the People's
 Assembly and party Central Committee, two female vice
 ministers, and a female ambassador. The Somali Women's
 Democratic Organization, though subordinate to the party, has
 advocated greater political participation and mobilization for
 women.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 In contrast to the past, the Government has shown increased,
 if still limited cooperation with international and other
 human rights organizations. It cooperated with the ICRC in
 the prisoner exchange and allowed the ICRC to visit the north
 as part of government-organized trips for donors in connection
 with emergency assistance. The ICRC, however, has not been
 permitted to meet with Somali political prisoners.
 The Government did permit a visit of inquiry in 1987 by the
 Committee on Human Rights of the U.S. National Academy of
 Sciences. However, the Government granted only one of the
 delegation's requests for appointments with Somali officials
 and did not allow the delegation to visit 11 imprisoned
 scientists as requested. The Government did not respond to
 the NAS report, "Scientists and Human Rights in Somalia,"
 published in January 1988, although the Government
 persistently denied reports of torture of political prisoners.
 In September, after the publication by Amnesty International
 (AI) of a critical report entitled "Somalia: A Long-Term
 Human Rights Crisis," President Siad said he would welcome an
 AI delegation visit to Somalia. AI accepted the offer, and
 arrangements for the visit were being made at the end of the
 year.
 There are no Somali organizations which address human rights
 issues. In trials before the National Security Court,
 however, individual lawyers have argued that their clients'
 human rights were violated.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 For several years, and especially since the outbreak of
 fighting in May, there have been allegations of government
 discrimination against Isaak businessmen. Isaaks' bank
 accounts and other assets have been seized on suspicion that
 they were collaborating with the SNM. Members of other clans
 
 
 317
 SOMALIA
 and some persons capitalize on their political connections to
 gain economic advantage or privilege. There is no
 discrimination in access to education and health services on
 clan or ethnic grounds, but these services are available only
 in larger urban areas of the country. The fighting in the
 north has closed schools there and severely limited access to
 medical care.
 Although they have considerable inheritance and ownership
 rights, Somali women suffer from traditional discrimination in
 education, work, and family matters. Female enrollments in
 school remain far below those for males at all levels of
 education for traditional and cultural reasons. The payment
 of dowry and bride wealth are common marriage customs.
 Divorce laws and practices strongly favor the male partner.
 The Somali Women's Democratic Organization has campaigned
 vigorously to mobilize public opinion against the widespread
 practice of female circumcision, and has successfully
 generated the support of the Government, the party, and Somali
 religious leaders for its efforts. In 1988 the Government
 officially prohibited female circumcision.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Workers are not free to form independent unions. There is a
 single labor confederation, the General Federation of Somali
 Trade Unions (GFSTU), which is government-controlled, with
 government-appointed officials. The GFSTU's main function is
 to monitor the work force and provide a conduit for worker
 grievances. The GFSTU is a member of the Organization of
 African Trade Union Unity and the International Confederation
 of Arab Trade Unions. It participates in the International
 Labor Organization.
 Strikes are outlawed, and organizing a strike is legally
 punishable by death. Nevertheless, there was a short
 transportation strike in 1987; and the Government took no
 action against the striking workers.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The right to organize does not appear to be infringed by
 employers. Because the GFSTU speaks for the Government, its
 dealings with employers on wages, hours, and working
 conditions tend to resemble binding arbitration rather than
 collective bargaining. Some negotiation between employers and
 employees goes on outside the union framework. There seem to
 be no acts of antiunion discrimination. Labor laws and
 regulations are applied uniformly throughout the country.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced or compulsory labor is prohibited by law.
 Nevertheless, the Government and party occasionally organize
 campaigns of "voluntary labor" to clean streets or boost
 production of state-owned factories.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The minimum age for the employment of children is 15, and
 persons under 18 are not permitted to work at night or in
 
 
 318
 SOMALIA
 certain hazardous occupations. The legislation, however, is
 not effectively implemented, and there is considerable child
 labor on the margins of the economy. Children sell cigarettes
 on the street, carry bags in the market, and watch and clean
 cars to support themselves and to supplement family incomes.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Somalia has comprehensive labor legislation setting minimum
 safety and health standards for the workplace. These are
 applicable to the small modern sector of an economy that is
 predominantly pastoral and agricultural and are not normally
 enforced. In theory the workday is 8 hours per day, 6 days
 per week, with limits on overtime hours. There is no legal
 minimum wage. Workers are entitled to paid holidays, annual
 leave, holiday bonuses, and a variety of fringe benefits. In
 reality, however, the salary scale is extremely low,
 especially in the public sector. The average salary of a
 civil servant is about $10 per month and is not adequate to
 maintain a decent standard of living. Productivity in the
 public sector is correspondingly low, and many civil servants
 make only minimal appearances in their offices. Workers
 resort to second jobs, corruption, assistance from other
 family members, and remittances from abroad to support
 themselves and their families. A program of civil service
 reform has made little headway because inflation has nullified
 salary increases.
 
 
 319
