SOMALIA
The 21 years of Siad Barre's brutal regime came to an end in January 1991. Unfortunately, his legacy of fomenting clan and sub-clan rivalry resulted almost immediately in civil war between two factions of the United Somali Congress (USC). More than a year later, the two factions continue fighting in Mogadishu; the city has been totally destroyed; civilian casualties in Mogadishu alone have conservatively been estimated at 30,000, most of whom are women and children; public health services in the capital are nonexistent; all foreign embassies are closed; and heavily armed, uncontrolled bands of desperate teenage fighters roam the streets. In the interior, the International Committee of the Red Cross estimates that 4.5 million Somalis are in danger of death from starvation. While some areas of the country are relatively stable, sporadic clan fighting has erupted at various times in Burao, Berbera, Galcaiu, Brava and Chisimayu, Siad Barre is still a threatening force in the Gabreharre area in the south, foreign relief workers have been killed in Bosasso and Mogadishu and relief flights and ships attempting to reach Mogadishu have either been fired upon and forced to turn back, or the supplies have been looted after delivery. In May, what was the former British Somaliland declared itself the independent Somaliland Republic. To date, it has not been recognized by any foreign government.
Essentially, Somalia in 1991 ceased to exist as a nation. Its people, who were among the most unified in all of Africa at the time of independence in terms of a common culture, language and religion, in 1991 divided along tribal, clan and sub-clan lines, fomenting a senseless orgy of killing, rape and violence marked by extreme brutality. Large numbers of Somalis fled the country, uncounted thousands became internal refugees, others died of wounds, starvation or disease and the survivors are in grave danger of dying from neglect by the international community.
The State Department's standard approach fb reporting, while laudable in its attempt at consistency, is largely irrelevant in the face of such a fundamental breakdown in governance and widespread violence. It is ludicrous to talk of denial of human rights in this state of anarchy
319
Somalia
in a territory populated by refugees seeking the basic necessities of food and shelter. The normal human rights categories of political and extrajudicial killing, arbitrary arrest and detention, denial of fair public trial, telephone tapping and interference with mail, use of excessive force, freedom of speech, assembly and travel and government attitude toward investigations of violations of human rights simply are not adequate to convey the breathtaking scale of violence and lack of accountability. For example, the section on torture notes that there were probably fewer instances of torture because the jails had been emptied in the chaos and fighting. There was and is no government in Somalia to either persecute opponents or prosecute violators of human rights. There was and is no government to protect human life, let alone human rights. Moreover, the U.S. embassy in Mogadishu was evacuated on January 5, 1991 as an armed assault was launched against its perimeter. For most of 1991 there was no U.S. presence in Somalia. Semi-official listening posts in Nairobi and Djibouti received information whose reliability could generally not be attested to.
The report dutifully proceeds through the categories and follows the instructions to embassies for the preparation of country reports. In a clear example showing the futility of the standard approach to human rights reporting in Somalia in 1991, the State Department's instructions note that the "Department understands that human rights reporting is often fraught with ambiguity, that while reporting must be based on the facts, it is often difficult to ascertain what the facts are. ..." The report acknowledges that there were widespread clan killings in Mogadishu, revenge killings against Siad Barre's hated Red Berets, attacks by Hawiye armed bands on Darood neighborhoods in Mogadishu and retaliation killings by Darood armed groups. It also duly records the pillage, rape and destruction of Brava by USC Hawiye units and attacks on Galcaiu and Chisimayu in the south, the refugee camp at Jalalaqsi north of Mogadishu, and Boorama in the north. Many of the report's sections contain comments such as "corroboration of numbers is lacking" or "it is unclear whether [those killed] were deliberately targeted or were random victims." The extent of the death and destruction and the number of people who simply disappeared in this Somali holocaust may
320
Somalia
never be fiilly known. The basic fact is that no government exists to condone or prevent the violence, mayhem, death and destruction.
The situation in Somalia calls for a different kind of analysis, particularly in the absence of any viable governmental authority. Somalis have lost their basic human rights to exist free from fear, hunger, disease and violence. The responsibility for this fundamental attack on Somali human rights lies first and foremost with Siad Barre. Twenty-one years of misrule have left their mark on Somali culture and character. Siad Barre fostered clan rivalry to stay in power. He destroyed the traditional Somali reluctance to wage war on women and children. He broke down the lines of clan authority by killing clan elders. He undermined Islam by executing religious leaders. He armed various factions of the population so that when he was forced to flee, there were heavily armed bands in position to commit murder.
Blame for the wholesale violation of human rights also lies with the leaders of the two USC factions, Ali Mahdi and Mohamed Farah Aideed, two power-hungry sub-clan leaders who have managed to destroy Mogadishu, cause thousands of civilian deaths and create havoc within much of the country.
However, the neglect by the United Nations, the United States and most of the international community of the plight of the Somali people at their time of greatest need also constitutes an institutional denial of human rights. In 1991, the United Nations, the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the Arab League have all either failed or made half-hearted efforts to alleviate the misery of the Somali people. The United Nations has not appointed a special envoy to attempt to negotiate a ceasefire in Mogadishu nor has the United States pressed for such an appointment. The OAU was mostly inactive and the Arab League did nothing.
Moreover, humanitarian assistance which could be safely and effectively provided to areas of the country which are relatively stable, such as parts of the north, east of Burao, and the northeast south of Bosasso to Galcaiu, has been minimal or nonexistent. It is this failure
321
Somalia
to provide massive humanitarian assistance in the form of food and medicine, by airlift, boat or land transport, which condemns the Somali people to starvation. It makes no sense to discuss whether Somalis have the right of freedom of travel when they are too weak from hunger to move; whether they have the right of association when they are internal refugees; whether they have freedom of the press when their most crucial need is food and security.
While the Siad Barre regime and its ruthless petty warlord successors are directly responsible for much of the misery, the neglect and inaction of the international community condemned the Somalis in the post-Barre era of 1991, their first year of freedom from Siad Barre, to hell in a land no longer a nation.
322
