 SOMALIA
 Somalia has been ruled for the past 16 years by President
 Mohamed Siad Barre, head of the armed forces and Secretary
 General of the Somali Revolutionary Socialist Party, the
 country's single political party. The formal government
 structure includes a Supreme Revolutionary Council formed in
 1969, the Somali Revolutionary Socialist Party formed in 1976,
 a People's Assembly established in 1980, and a 45-member
 Council of Ministers. The President also regularly convenes
 the party politburo, a close circle of advisers composed of
 the most powerful four or five ministers.  Informal and formal
 consultations between the leadership and Somali clans and clan
 groups also have a major impact on internal politics.
 However, the ultimate source of the President's political
 authority is the military, which brought him to power in
 1969. The primacy of the military in Somali society is
 reinforced by continuing conflict between Somalia and Ethiopia
 in the Ogaden frontier region, an area within Ethiopian
 territory but populated largely by ethnic Somalis. The army's
 occasional role, in collaboration with the police, as keeper
 of civil order further underscores the importance of the
 military in Somali society.
 Ethiopia and Somalia support armed dissident activity against
 one another. Dissident activity against the Somali
 Government, led by the Democratic Front for the Salvation of
 Somalia and the Somali National Movement, both based in
 Ethiopia, flared up during the winter of 1984-85 and the fall
 of 1985. Somali incursions into Ethiopia are more difficult
 to monitor than Ethiopian activities directed against
 Somalia. Many ethnic Somalis live in the neighboring states
 of Kenya and Djibouti, as well as Ethiopia. Both external and
 internal security are thus major concerns of the Government.
 The principal arm of the internal security apparatus is the
 National Security Service, which can arrest and detain people
 indefinitely pursuant to the comprehensive National Security
 Act.
 Somalia is a poor country with few natural resources, and most
 of its 7.6 million people earn a bare subsistence living as
 herdsmen or farmers. The country's economy suffers from
 frequent drought, and recurrent conflict with Ethiopia has
 brought about heavy defense expenditures and a massive refugee
 problem. Most of the modern sector of the economy is
 government-controlled and plagued by bureaucratic
 inefficiencies, excessive patronage, and a lack of adequately
 trained personnel. In recent years, new government policies
 have encouraged development of the private sector, foreign
 investment, and financial reform with the assistance of the
 International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank which
 have had salutary effects on production, exports, and lowering
 of inflation.
 There was no significant change in the human rights situation
 in Somalia in 1985. Although the 1979 Constitution has been
 reinstated, civil and political rights remain tightly
 circumscribed, and organized criticism of the Government is
 not permitted. The Government shows little hesitation in
 imprisoning those whom it sees as a threat to security.
 Political prisoners occasionally have been held for several
 years, then released and rehabilitated, with some of them
 assuming responsible positions in the Government. The exact
 number of political detainees is unknown but is estimated at
 350 to 500, with new prisoners being incarcerated as others
 
 
 284
 SOMALIA
 are released. Periodic discussions continued in 1985 with the
 International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) regarding the
 welfare and repatriation of Ethiopian prisoners of war and the
 status of Somali prisoners of war held in Ethiopia.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no reported political killings by the Government in
 1985. However, during the winter of 1984-85 when rebel
 dissidents staged attacks in the northwest region of Somalia,
 38 persons suspected of being dissident sympathizers
 reportedly were killed in the fighting.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reported cases of disappearance during 1985.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment
 or Punishment
 There are periodic but unsubstantiated allegations of the use
 of torture. There is evidence that Somali police authorities
 apply rough treatment in order to obtain confessions from
 criminal suspects. Living conditions in prison can be harsh.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Despite a constitutional provision that accords Somali
 citizens the right to formal charges and a speedy trial, the
 Government frequently makes arrests without warrants and
 detains indefinitely persons whom it views as a threat to
 national security. Habeas corpus or its equivalent does not
 exist in national security cases. In some instances,
 political prisoners are held incommunicado and denied access
 to lawyers prior to being formally charged. Delays in
 bringing charges can be lengthy in criminal cases as well as
 political cases.
 At least 200 of the 350-500 political prisoners are being held
 without charge, including 6 high government officials arrested
 in June 1982. A seventh ranking official arrested at the same
 time died in prison. Seven youths were arrested in the autumn
 of 1984 for antiregime activities and later sentenced to
 death, although their death sentences have not been carried
 out. In 1985, the Government arrested and detained without
 charge 22 members of the Muslim Brotherhood. It has released
 only two of them, who departed Somalia upon their release.
 In July 1985, the Government detained 90 youths for
 antigovernment activity that included poster/slogan
 manufacturing, group meetings, and conspiracy to subvert the
 current regime. These youths were not formally charged but
 subsequently were inducted into the army. In August 1985,
 approximately 30 businessmen in Mogadishu were arrested and
 detained without charge. Most were released within 1 week
 with the remainder being released in October 1985. These
 arrests had a demoralizing effect on the private business
 community.
 
 
 285
 SOMALIA
 Compulsory labor is expressly prohibited under the Somali
 labor code.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Somali judicial system, in both criminal and political
 cases, is subject to review and control by the executive
 branch of government. Since 1970, the Supreme Revolutionary
 Council has nominated all judges, and Council members occupy
 all positions on the Higher Judicial Council, the highest body
 of judicial review. The 1979 Constitution designated the
 President as Chairman of the Higher Judicial Council and added
 amnesty matters to its jurisdiction.
 The National Security Court, established in 1969, has
 authority over cases involving crimes against the State, the
 Government, or public order and is subject to control by the
 Government. There is no right of appeal in these cases. The
 Court's deliberations are secret. Presidential consideration
 of amnesty is still pending for the seven youths in Hargeisa
 sentenced to death in 1984 by the National Security Court for
 antigovernment activity. In the northwest region, where
 dissidents remain active, there have been reports of the
 regional military commander prevailing over the court system.
 For example, in July 1985, a Tanzanian-born Somali was
 executed for antigovernment activity following a summary trial
 presided over by the regicnal military commander. This trial
 occurred at the same time that 90 youths were being detained
 for antigovernment activity and presumably was intended to
 serve as a warning to other citizens who harbored
 antigovernment sympathies.
 In civil courts, judges refer to the Koran io rendering legal
 decisions pertaining to family matters such as marriage and
 inheritance.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 "Mobilization campaigns" are organized by the Somali
 Revolutionary Socialist Party to promote public participation
 in, and enthusiasm for, various civic and national programs as
 well as general support for government policies.
 Participation in these campaigns is urged but not strictly
 enforced.
 The National Security Service (NSS) has the authority to
 search homes without warrants and detain anyone suspected of
 being a political dissenter. This authority extends to
 wiretapping and opening of mail although there is no evidence
 that such practices are broadly used. The NSS can effectively
 track the movement of persons through its comprehensive
 network of informants. The NSS is widely feared for its
 ability to collect detailed information on private citizens
 and detain suspects without charge.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Government forbids public expression of dissenting views.
 The media are owned and operated by the Government. They are
 devoted to disseminating information and opinion that is
 acceptable to the Government. The Central Censorship Board
 
 
 286
 SOMALIA
 retains control over publications, foreign and local,
 circulated within the country, films, plays, concerts, and
 other means of communication such as videotapes imported into
 the country.
 Currently, the only publication subject to frequent censorship
 is the magazine Africa Report, published in New York, but in
 the past some Italian publications have been banned, as well
 as the quarterly journal, Horn of Africa, published in New
 Jersey by Somali and Ethiopian intellectuals who reside in the
 United States.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 All nonreligious organizations and public gatherings are
 subject to government control or supervision. Rallies or
 meetings of a direct political nature are organized only by
 the Government, usually to promote its own programs.
 The country's single labor confederation, the General
 Federation of Somali Trade Unions (GFSTU), is
 government-controlled, and its members do not have the right
 to strike. The GFSTU's main function is to monitor the work
 force and provide a conduit for worker grievances. The GFSTU
 is a member of the Organization of African Trade Union Unity,
 the International Confederation of Arab Trade Unions, and the
 International Labor Organization.
 The Union of Somali Cooperatives Movement is controlled by a
 bureau of the Somali Revolutionary Socialist Party. Other
 state-controlled associations are taking small and tentative
 steps toward privatization.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Islam is Somalia's state religion and is followed by over 95
 percent of the population. There is little government
 interference in religious matters. Other religious groups
 such as the Sufi orders enjoy religious freedom, but they have
 learned from past experience not to involve themselves in
 political matters. The Government has kept radical Muslim
 sects in check by detaining members without bringing charges.
 Members of religions other than Islam may freely practice
 their faith but may not proselytize.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Internal travel is not formally restricted but is controlled
 through police and military checkpoints in towns, border
 areas, and regions noted for interclan violence. Although any
 Somali citizen can obtain a passport, the Government denies
 exit visas to categories of people it prefers to keep in
 country, such as young men of military age. Emigration is
 permitted for all but government employees. The Somali
 Government does not exile its opponents. Somalis who have
 left the country to reside abroad have done so voluntarily,
 usually in search of greater economic opportunities or because
 of political disaffection. The Government allows repatriation
 and in some cases provides former dissident exiles with
 official government or military positions. In other cases,
 the Government has interrogated returnees and detained them
 indefinitely without trial for alleged antigovernment
 activities.
 
 
 287
 SOMALIA
 Over 500,000 refugees from Ethiopia, most of whom are ethnic
 Somalis, live in Somalia. The Somali Government purports to
 encourage repatriation of these refugees, but many unofficial
 obstacles are placed in the path of those who wish to return
 to their native regions. There has been considerable
 controversy over the number of refugees, with many living in
 camps suspected of being local Somalis seeking food
 assistance. Conditions in the camps are often better than
 conditions among the local inhabitants. There have been
 reports that some ethnic Somalis with ties to the Ogaden
 region have agitated to receive preferential treatment in
 third-country resettlement programs. This agitation included
 an episode in early 1984 when a Canadian immigration
 inspector, who was interviewing Amhara refugees for
 resettlement in Canada, was harassed by a number of Somali
 refugees. InMay 1985, four Amharic refugees who were
 scheduled for resettlement in Canada were arrested and
 detained without charge.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 President Siad Barre rules Somalia and controls political
 participation through a single legal political party, the
 Somali Revolutionary Socialist Party. The party directs
 participation in Somali political affairs for individuals and
 organizations, such as the General Federation of Somali Trade
 Unions, the Somali Women's Democratic Organization, and the
 Somali Revolutionary Youth Organization. Elections for the
 People's Assembly in December 1984 entailed only a vote for or
 against the party's designated national slate of candidates.
 The Constitution stipulates that elections be held every 5
 years, but the President has the power to delay elections.
 There is no legal opposition to the Government, and public
 criticism of its policies is forbidden. Somalia has only one
 ethnic group, the Somali, which is subdivided into clans and
 clan groups. Although the country is ethnically and
 linguistically homogeneous, clan divisions exert a major
 impact on domestic politics. President Siad recognizes the
 continuing strength of the traditional, clan-based political
 coalitions, and government officials frequently hold formal
 and informal consultations with various clan leaders.
 President Siad has used clan politics to maintain his rule by
 placing members of his own clan, the Marehan, in key
 positions. He is conscious of clan constituencies, and
 members of other clans also occupy important positions. Clan
 .identification is very strong, and for many Somalis, the
 traditional clan system is the accepted vehicle of political
 expression. Clan politics and clan rivalries occasionally
 erupt into violence.
 Women and minorities participate in politics and government.
 The Somali Women's Democratic Organization, though subordinate
 to the party, has advocated greater political participation
 and mobilization for women. A number of women are members of
 Parliament. -Other women occupy important positions within the
 party and in various ministries. Several vice ministers and
 one ambassador are women.
 
 
 288
 SOMALIA
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Somali Government has refused requests by foreign
 officials and human rights organizations to visit political
 prisoners. Although the Government has occasionally allowed
 an ICRC team to inspect facilities for prisoners-of-war from
 the conflict with Ethiopia, including in 1985, there has so
 far been no repatriation of these prisoners. There are no
 Somali organizations that actively address human rights
 issues. In international forums, official Somali remarks on
 human rights are usually restricted to general statements and
 criticism of human rights practices in Ethiopia. The
 International Parliamentary Union has approved resolutions
 calling on the Somali Government to release the six
 Parliamentarians who have been detained without charge since
 1982.
 Amnesty International, in its 1985 Report, expressed concerns
 over prisoners of conscience, some of whom had been detained
 without trial for more than 6 years; and the indefinite
 detention without trial of other political prisoners or their
 conviction after unfair trials. Freedom House rated Somalia
 "not free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Somalia is one of the poorest nations in the world, with a per
 capital gross national product of about $250. Its population
 of more than 7.5 million is growing'at the rate of 3 percent a
 year. Its economy is pastoral and agricultural, the main
 forms of wealth being livestock--principally camels, cattle,
 sheep, and goats. The modern sector of the agricultural
 economy consists primarily of plantations along the rivers
 utilizing widespread irrigation and up-to-date farm
 machinery. Approximately 60 percent of the Somali population
 is nomadic; another 20 percent lives in small villages, and
 the remaining 20 percent lives in urban areas. Estimates in
 1978 showed that 40 percent of urban dwellers and 70 percent
 of rural dwellers lived below the absolute poverty level.
 The health of the Somali people is poor. Life expectancy at
 birth is slightly more than 43 years, and the infant mortality
 rate is 163 per 1,000 live births. About 33 percent of the
 population has access to safe water (58 percent in urban
 areas, 22 percent in rural areas). The principal causes of
 morbidity and mortality are malnutrition and infectious
 disease including diarrhea, malaria, measles, whooping cough,
 and respiratory infections. Somali nomads in particular
 suffer limited access to education, health, and social
 services. The livelihood of this group is also subject to the
 greatest degree of risk because of recurrent drought.
 The literacy rate is estimated at slightly more than 6 percent
 (male 10.6 percent, female 2.7 percent). Primary school
 enrollment is about 35.5 percent (45 percent of males are
 enrolled and 25 percent of females).
 Somalia has comprehensive labor legislation which establishes
 for the modern or cash sector of the economy minimum
 conditions for safety and health in the work place. The
 minimum age for employment of children is 15, and persons
 under 18 years are not permitted to work at night or in
 
 
 289
 SOMALIA
 certain hazardous occupations. Even though child labor is
 prohibited, children often find odd jobs such as selling
 cigarettes on the street corner or watching and cleaning
 parked cars to support themselves or supplement family
 income. The work day is 8 hours or a total of 48 hours a week
 with stipulations on the amount of overtime that can be
 worked. Workers are entitled to paid holidays, annual leave,
 and holiday bonuses. However, the salary scale is extremely
 low, especially for civil servants. Workers resort to second
 jobs, bribes, misuse of public funds, assistance from other
 family members, and remittances from abroad to support
 themselves and their families.
 President Siad has long been an advocate of greater rights for
 women, despite Muslim opposition to this policy. In this
 respect, Somali culture remains overwhelmingly traditional,
 based around extended clan families.. Long-established
 practices such as female circumcision remain prevalent despite
 government opposition. The Somali Government has improved the
 legal and political status of women in recent years. For
 example, in 1975, women weregiven equal rights in several
 respects, including equal inheritance rights. The Government
 also promotes universal coeducational schooling, to the extent
 resources allow, which is mostly limited to urban centers.
 
 
 290
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: SOMALIA
 1983     1984     1985
 ..........................................................
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL,..        69.7     81.7    82.7
 LOANS ..............   ... 15.0     16.0    20.0
 GRANTS ................    54.7     65.7    62.7
 A.AID ...... .............    47.9    50.6     51.0
 LOANS .................    0.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS .............   ...  47.9    50.6    51.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.) ...       21.0    35.0     30.0
 B.FOOO  FOR  PEACE .......     21.8     31.1    31.7
 LOANS ..............    ... 15.0    16.0    20.0
 GRANTS ...............      6.8     15.1    11.7
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ..........      15.0    16.0     20.0
 REPAY.  IN  $-LOANS .....     15.0     16.0    20.0
 PAY.  IN  FOR.  CURR .....     0.0     0.0      0.0
 TITLE  II-TOTAL .........       6.8     15.1    11.7
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV  &  WFP.       6.8    15.1     11.7
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY.....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...        0.0      0.0     0.0
 LOANS .................     0.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS ................     0.0      0.0     0.0
 PEACE CORPS ......        0.0      0.0     0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0     0.0
 OTHER ..............     0.0      0.0     0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        30.6    33.0     34.1
 LOANS ..............    ... 10.0     0.0     0.0
 GRANTS ................   20.6     33.0    34.1
 A.MAP  GRANTS ..........  .  20.0     32.0    33.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....       10.0     0.0      0.0
 C.INTL  MIL.ED.7RNG ....       0.6      1.0     1.1
 O.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0     0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........        0.0     0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL  ICON.  &  MIL...    100.3   114.7    116.8
 LOANS ..............   ... 25.0     16.0     20.0
 GRANTS .............   ...  75.3    98.7    96.8
 OTHER  US  LOANS ..........      0.0     0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......        0.0     0.0      0.0
 ALL  OTHER .................   0.0     0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1983     1984     1985     1946-85
 TOTAL .........   33.0     38.3     49.1   495.2
 IBRD               0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 IFC                0.0      0.0     0.6      1.0
 IDA               23.0     31.5    20.6    255.0
 108                0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 ADS                0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 AFOB               3.2      0.0     27.9    83.9
 UNDP               6.8      1.8      0.0     58.0
 OTHER-UN           0.0      5.0     0.0     18.8
 EEC                0.0      0.0     0.0     78.5
 
 
 291
