SOMALIA
The 1988 report on Somalia is a dramatic improvement over previous reports and especially over last year's report. The U.S. Embassy in Mogadishu and the State Department deserve credit for making a genuine effort to report human rights abuses in a critical fashion. The report avoids, for the most part, the blatantly pro-government bias of the 1987 report. It is evident that U.S. Embassy personnel are in touch with a greater variety of sources and are therefore better informed. A particularly welcome aspect of the report is that criticisms of government policies are no longer couched exclusively in terms of "allegations" and "imconfirmed reports from human rights groups." The State Department does not hesitate to speak in its own voice and to draw its own conclusions, especially with regard to torture. While last year's report was strikingly thin on detail, the 1988 report contains substantial detail about broad policy issues and specific cases.
The result is a devastating account of the massive abuses of human rights which Somalis have suffered for the past 19 years. The review correctly notes that the government of Mohamed Siad Barre arbitrarily arrests and detains people, tortures prisoners, has subordinated the judiciary to the executive on political questions, and has severely restricted freedom of movement, association and the press. By far the most important event in 1988 was the outbreak of a major civil war in northern Somalia between the government and the guerrilla movement, the Somali National Movement (SNM), which the report has attempted to treat accurately and fairly. There are, however, a few points that warrant comment.
We pointed out in last year's critique our objection to the efforts by the State Department to portray President Barre as a leader who has genuinely tried to "balance" Somalia's clan system. This year's report repeats the same error. "Faced with difficulties in placating other clans," the report states, "the President has also increasingly relied on his role as Commander of the Armed Forces and Secretary General of the SRSP [the Somali Revolutionary Socialist Party, Somalia's only legal party] to maintain himself in power." This statement
155
Critique
creates the illusion that the President has been forced to pursue these methods of retaining power because of the difficulties created by Somalia's other clans. This is misleading. From the time he assumed power in a military coup in 1969, President Barre has pursued a policy of divide and rule, manipulating Somalia's dan structure and deliberately persecuting or favoring particular clans at the expense of others, so as to foster competition and mutual hostility. From the outset, he surrounded himself with dose family members and those belonging to his clan or related clans. The accumulated results of these polides have triggered the civil war and the current political turmoil.
The statement that "there have been allegations of government discrimination against the Isaak businessmen" is a serious understatement. There have been numerous credible reports which the State Department could easily have confirmed for itself. These indude reports about frozen bank accounts, refusal to gjve bank loans and credit, contracts won by and then denied to Isaak businessmen, and the arrest and detention of Isaak businessmen in order to deny them the opportunity to pursue their business.
The report comments that "[m]embers of other clans [i.e., non-Isaaks] and some persons capitalize on their political connections to gain economic advantage or privilege." It then goes on to say that "[t]here is no discrimination in access to education and health services on dan or ethnic grounds." This is a contradiction and is simply inaccurate. The "economic advantage or privilege" to which the report refers is important precisely as a means of facilitating access to education and health services, both within Somalia and, more important, abroad. There are nimierous substantiated reports of ministers, senior government ofHcials and those belonging to the President's own dan claiming exclusive rights to scholarships for their families and obliging the government to pay for their medical expenses abroad. This is an important [)oint which has had a direct political impact. The monopoly that the relatives and dan members of the President have had over education, health, employment and business opportunities has bred deep-rooted grievances and has had an important political effect in alienating other dans.
In the section on "Mobilization Campaigns," the report merely states that their objective is to "promote public participation in, and enthusiasm for,
156
Somalia
various dvic and national programs, as well as general support for government poUdes." It does not add, as it should have, that an essential part of these "campaigns" is political control. They are organized by neighborhood watchdog committees which conduct political surveillance and report to the Party. They have the right to arrest and detain people. Failure to show suffîdent "enthusiasm" has frequently resulted in arrest, interrogation and detention, as well as problems at work and constant harassment.
In the section on freedom of speech and press, the report states that "the government frequently denies visas to foreign journalists." It would have been more correct to say that the government has almost always refused visas to foreign journalists. The report comments that "the government allowed only one Western journalist to visit northern Somalia in the wake of the fighting." It should have mentioned that the journalist in question, Graham Hancock, was invited because of his dose ties \sith the Somali government, that he was escorted by the army, and that he later wrote articles that can only be described as a shameful whitewash of government atrocities against imarmed dvilians.
In commenting on the government's suspicions toward civic organizations, the report refers to the arrest and sentences imposed against a group in Hargeisa in 1982. They had established a self-help group to improve facilities in the community. The report should have mentioned the severity of their sentences to illustrate the government's hostility to such initiatives. The twenty defendants were accused, among other things, of belonging to subversive organizations, and were given sentences ranging from life imprisonment to 20 years.
The section on freedom of religion does not convey any sense of the government's long-standing hostility to reli^ous leaders. The statement that "[t]he NSS [National Secwity Service] occasionally detains religjous leaders" is an understatement; many religious leaders have been detained, intimidated and subjected to constant surveillance. The report states that nine religious leaders ori^nally condemned to death and "several other religious persons remained in prison at the end of 1988." This is a reference to about 70 people; the report should have stated this in clear terms.
157
Critique
In several instances the report states, without producing any evidence, that the SNM is tryii^ to prevent refugees in Ethiopia and Djibouti from returning home. Unless the State Department can substantiate this and say something conclusive, it should resist from making unfounded allegations.
In the section on arbitrary arrest and detention, the report states that "[pjersons suspected of a seditious intent, or perceived as a poUtical threat, are frequently held indefinitely without being brought to trial." The report does not note, as it should, that the government has shown an exceptionally broad and arbitrary view of what constitutes sedition or a political threat.
The report states that "[sjoldiers, police, and government employees are poorly paid and disciplined and sometimes misuse their authority to e^aort money from citizens." This leaves the impression that only economic motives are at play while ignoring the poUtical dimension, namely, that extortion has been used to persecute individuals and clans perceived as critics of the government.
In the section on arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home and correspondence, the report states that the NSS "monitors communications and opens mail, although theit is no evidence that such practices are extensive." (Emphasis added.) We disagree. Interference with mail and telephones is widespread in Somalia. In particular, the NSS closely monitors the contents of cassettes, the most common form of communication within Somalia and especially \^ith Somalis abroad. Many Somalis have been arrested, detained and harassed after the NSS confiscated their cassettes.
The re[}ort states, \nthout any critical commentary, that "[t]bere are no SomaU organizations which address human rights issues." It should have made clear that the climate of fear created by persecution and intimidation makes the establishment of a human r^ts organization extremely dangerous.
Aside from these comments, the 1988 report is a marked improvement over last year's report. We hope the Embassy and the State Department will continue their efforts to monitor closely Somalia's appalling human rights record and to reflect the facts fairly and accurately, irrespective of poUtical considerations.
158
