 SOMALIA
 Somalia, a nominally constitutional democracy in which civil
 and political rights are very limited, has been ruled for the
 past 14 years by President Mohamed Siad Barre, as Head of the
 Armed Forces. The formal government structure includes a Supreme
 Revolutionary Socialist Council formed in 1969, the Somali Revolu-
 tionary Socialist Party formed in 1976 and an Advisory People's
 Assembly established in 1980. However, the ultimate source of
 President's political authority is the military. The importance of
 the military in Somali society is reinforced by the continuing
 conflict between Somalia and Ethiopia over the area of Ethiopia
 occupied by ethnic Somalis. There has been no settlement to the
 dispute and in 1982 Ethiopian troops attacked Somalia and occupied
 territory at two locations inside the country. These locations
 continue to be occupied and both Ethiopia and Somalia support armed
 dissident activity against the other. Much of Somalia's resources
 and energy are devoted to this conflict.
 Significant numbers of ethnic Somalis live in the neighboring
 states, Kenya, Djibouti, and Ethiopia. Reunification of all
 Somalis has been a national political aspiration since before
 independence, although there are no active territorial disputes
 between Somalia, Kenya, or Djibouti.
 The country's Constitution was adopted in 1979 after a nation-
 wide referendum and provides some guarantees of political and
 civil rights. However, the Constitution contains provisions
 allowing for its selective suspension, and these were invoked
 by President Siad during a state of emergency between October
 1980 and February 1982. While the Constitution has been rein-
 stated, civil and political rights are~tightly circumscribed and
 open criticism of the Government is not permitted.
 The dominant culture in Somalia is pastoral and places a high value
 on individualism and egalitarianism. Somalia has only one ethnic
 group, the Somali, which is subdivided into clans and clan groups.
 Although the country is ethnically and linguistically homogeneous
 the clan divisions have a major impact on internal politics.
 Siad's 1969 coup ended Majertain domination of the Government.
 Many in the Government and military are members of the President's
 clan, the Marehan. Political opposition to Siad tends to coalesce
 around clans that are dissatisfied with the treatment they have
 received from the Government. The two armed opposition groups,
 supported by Ethiopia are the Somali Democratic Salvation Front
 which draws support from the Majertain clan and the Somali National
 Movement which is mainly Issak-supported. Both continue to engage
 in periodic attacks inside Somalia.
 Somalia is a very poor country with few natural resources.
 Most Somalis earn their living as herdsmen or farmers. Fre-
 quent droughts complicate the country's development process.
 The war with Ethiopia has resulted in heavy defense expendi-
 tures and a massive refugee problem. Somalia has received sub-
 stantial international assistance in trying to cope with this
 problem. The modern sector of the economy is mostly government
 controlled and plagued by bureaucratic inefficiencies and a lack
 of adequately trained personnel. In recent years the Government
 has acted to encourage the development of the private sector and
 attract foreign investment. Change has been slow, but Somalia has
 made considerable economic and financial progress in consultation
 with the International Monetary Fund and the International Bank for
 Fund and the International Bank.for Reconstruction and Development.
 
 (315)
 
 
 316
 The principal arm of the security apparatus is the National
 Security Service, which can arrest and detain people indefin-
 itely; the Government has shown no hesitation in imprisoning
 those whom it sees as a threat to security. At the same time,
 political prisoners have in the past been released and rehabil-
 itated, with some of them taking responsible positions in the
 Government. The exact number of detainees is unknown, but esti-
 mated to be 350 to 500. Many of them have not yet been charged.
 Individual rights and freedoms are severely circumscribed in
 Somalia. The citizen has little protection if he openly opposes or
 is suspected of opposing the policies of the Government. Such
 action is likely to result in indefinite imprisonment and applies
 to all sections of the population. In 1983 the only clearly
 visible signs of liberalization on human rights were a limited
 amnesty for political prisoners in March, and conclusion of a
 formal agreement between the Somali Government and the Interna-
 tional Committee of the Red Cross on Ethiopian prisoners of war.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section I Respect for Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Unlawful or Arbitrary Deprivation of Life.
 There were no reported instances of arbitrary deprivation of life
 for political reasons in Somalia in 1983.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reported cases of disappearance in 1983.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, and Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 There were allegations of torture in 1983, but they have not
 been substantiated. Prisoners are sometimes treated roughly by
 police upon arrest but there is no evidence of systematic
 beatings or other treatment designed to elicit confessions.
 Living conditions in prisons can be harsh, but are not exces-
 sively so in comparison to the normal living conditions of many
 Somalis. In at least some cases, political prisoners are
 denied visitors and access to lawyers prior to being formally
 charged.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 In spite of a constitutional provision guaranteeing formal
 charges and a speedy trial, the Government does detain defend-
 ants indefinitely without charge in cases involving national
 security. Delays can be lengthy in criminal cases as well.
 Arrests without warrants do occur in cases involving dissenters
 and others viewed by the Government as a. threat to national
 security. The detainees are held as "political criminals" and
 this is openly admitted by government officials. Six high
 government officials arrested in June 1982 have still not been
 charged but remain in prison. An estimated 200 political
 prisoners are being detained without charge. Habeas corpus
 
 
 317
 does not exist in cases having to do with security and persons
 being investigated for security reasons can be detained indef-
 initely.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Somali court system, in both criminal and political cases,
 is subject to review and control by the executive. Before the
 1969 revolution an examination was required to become a judge.
 Since 1970, judges have been nominated by the Supreme Revolu-
 tionary Council and all positions of the Higher Judicial Council,
 the highest judicial review body, were taken over by Supreme
 Revolutionary Council members. The 1979 Constitution made the
 President Chairman of the Higher Judicial Council and added amnesty
 matters to its jurisdiction, thereby compromising the independence
 of the judiciary. In regular courts, judges refer to the Koran in
 rendering legal decisions pertaining to family matters such as
 marriage and inheritance. Prisoners can be held indefinitely
 without charge and in some cases they can be tried without a lawyer
 in a closed session. The National Security Court, established in
 1969, has authority with no right of appeal in cases of crimes
 against the state, the Government, or public order. Its delibera-
 tions are secret, and it is directly subordinate to the Government.
 Total number of political prisoners is estimated to be 350 to
 500.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 There is not a widespread system of social control or regiment-
 ation evident in Somalia. The Government's concern is with
 suppressing opposition, not with forcing constant demonstra-
 tions of support from the populace or with intervention into
 the non-political aspects of the lives of citizens.
 The National Security Service has the authority to search without
 warrants the home of anyone suspected of being a political dis-
 senter. This authority extends to wiretapping and opening of mail
 as well, though there is no evidence such practices are broadly
 used.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The media are owned and operated by the Government. They are
 devoted to disseminating information and opinion acceptable
 to the Government. Dissenting views are not allowed to be ex-
 pressed in public. Opposition groups are silenced in Somalia
 and members are subject to indefinite imprisonment for critici-
 zing the Government publicly. Officials refrain from criticiz-
 ing the Government in the media. Foreign publications are subject
 to sporadic censorship.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 All non-religious organizations and public gatherings in the
 country are subject to government control or close supervision.
 Rallies or meetings of a direct political nature are organized
 only by the Government to promote its programs and ideas.
 The country's single labor union is government controlled and
 
 
 318
 has no right to strike. The main role of the union is to
 strengthen government control of the work force by monitoring
 its mood and providing a conduit for worker grievances.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Islam is the state religion and is adhered to by over 95 percent of
 the population, but there is little government interference in
 religious matters. The Government has appealed for national
 consolidation that cuts across tribal and religious power groupings.
 Religious groups such as the Sufi orders, a distinct current in
 Islam, enjoy religious freedom, and do not try directly to in-
 fluence the political process. Members of religions other than
 Islam may freely practice their faith but may not proselytize.
 Members of minority religions do not suffer discrimination, perse-
 cution, or harassment.
 d. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign Travel,
 Emigration, and Repatriation
 Internal travel is not restricted in Somalia, but there are
 numerous police and military checkpoints in the towns, border
 areas, and places where inter-clan violence is occurring. Pass-
 ports can be obtained by any Somali citizen, but international
 flights are closely monitored. The Government prevents the depart-
 ure of people it does not wish to leave the country, especially
 young men of military age, by denying exit visas. Emigration is
 permitted for some, but not for government employees. Somalis who
 have left the country to reside abroad have done so voluntarily,
 either because of economic opportunities or because they oppose
 President Siad. The Somali Government does not exile its opponents.
 It does allow repatriation, and in some cases provides former
 dissident exiles with official positions. In other cases, returnees
 have been interrogated and detained indefinitely without trial for
 anti-Government activities under the National Security Law of
 September 1970.
 There are at least 500,000 ethnic Somali refugees from Ethiopia
 in Somalia. They are not being forced to return to Ethiopia.
 In fact, there have been reports of the military periodically
 preventing the departure of groups of refugees. In addition,
 there have been cases of the Government conscripting refugees
 from a few camps into the armed forces.
 Section 3   Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 President Siad Barre rules Somalia, controlling political partici-
 pation through the single legal party. The Somali Revolutionary
 Socialist Party directs participation in Somali political affairs
 for individuals and organizations such as the General Federation of
 Somali Trade Unions, the Somali Women's Democratic Organization,
 and the Somali Revolutionary Youth Union. The last elections were
 for the People's Assembly in December 1979, consisting of a vote at
 the national level for or against the Party's candidates running
 uncontested. Direct elections of candidates to the district
 councils were combined with the national election and a single list
 of candidates nominated by the Somali Revolutionary Socialist Party
 was presented. The Constitution stipulates that elections be held
 every five years, but the President has the power to delay elections.
 
 
 319
 There is no legal opposition organization, and criticism of
 government policies in forbidden. In keeping with Somali tradition
 the Government's official policy is to"discourage clan differences.
 Somalis are united by their common language and culture, which
 may diminish the autocratic character of the Government. However,
 recognizing the continuing strength of the traditional, clan-based
 political system, President Siad and members of his Government
 frequently hold formal and informal consultations with various clan
 leaders. President Siad has used clan politics to consolidate and
 maintain his rule by drawing upon his own clan, the Marehan, for
 key decisions, but members of other clans are also allocated
 responsible positions in government. Clan identification is
 very strong and, for many Somalis, the traditional system is
 the accepted method of political expression. Clan politics and
 clan rivalries can erupt into violence.
 Women and minorities can and do participate in politics and
 government to the extent this is possible for anyone. The Somali
 Women's Democratic Organization, though subordinate to the party,
 has advocated greater political participation and mobilization for
 women. President Siad also has long been a forceful advocate of
 greater rights for women, despite the presence of Islamic opposi-
 tion to this policy.
 Section 4   Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights-
 The Somali Government is willing to discuss specific human rights
 cases and has communicated with Amnesty International. However, it
 has refused permission for foreign officials or human rights
 organizations to visit political prisoners. In 1983, however,
 Somalia did allow an International Committee of the Red Cross
 (ICRC) team to visit and inspect facilities for prisoners of war
 from the conflict with Ethiopia and to visit a number of prisoners.
 An ICRC representative is now accredited to Somalia. Reports of
 conscription of refugees which the United Nations High Commission
 for Refugees discussed with the Somali Government in 1983 resulted
 in the return to the camps of a number of refugees. There are no
 Somali organizations which are actively concerned with human rights
 issues. Somalia does not participate in international or regional
 human rights bodies. It has not been the subject of resolutions,
 investigations, or other human rights actions by official human
 rights organizations. In addressing itself to human rights issues
 at international fora, Somalia usually limits itself to general
 statements and to criticism of human rights practices in Ethiopia.
 Amnesty International in its 1983 report expressed concern about
 allegations of ill treatment of prisoners and harsh prison condi-
 tions. Amnesty was also concerned about the detention without
 trial of political opponents of the Government. Freedom House terms
 Somalia "not free.*
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Statistics on Somali economic and social conditions are limited,
 contradictory, and often inaccurate. According to World Bank
 data, the country's population is 6.248 million and the growth
 rate 2.3 percent. The correct figure is probably closer to 5
 million with a growth rate of 2.7 percent. Sixty percent of
 the population are nomads, 20 percent are settled rural dwel-
 lers, and 20 percent are urban. Per capita Gross National
 
 
 320
 Product is about $281, making Somalia one of the poorest countries
 in the world. Life expectancy at birth is 43.5 years and the
 infant mortality rate is 171.8 per one thousand births. The adult
 literacy rate in Somali is estimated at 60 percent and about 5.2
 percent in other languages such as Arabic, Italian, English, and
 Russian; the percentage of population with access to safe water is
 33 percent; primary school enrollment is 50 percent, and the ratio
 of calorie supply available for consumption relative to nutritional
 requirements is 88 percent.
 The health of the Somali people is poor, with the principal
 causes of morbidity and mortality being malnutrition and infectious
 disease including diarrhea, malaria, measles, whooping cough, and
 respiratory infections. Health service facilities are largely
 located in urban areas, but even there they are poor. The few
 rural health clinics are not easily accessible to the nomadic
 population. Urban inhabitants benefit from a wider range of
 government social services which are concentrated in cities and
 towns. Somali nomads are poorer than the urban population, with
 limited access to social services. The livelihood of this group is
 also subject to the greatest degree of risk because of recurrent
 droughts.
 The Somali Government, in cooperation with the International
 Monetary Fund, has made some economic reforms and is discussing
 further measures to lessen centralized control, encourage the
 private sector, and generate more income for farmers and nomads.
 Progress, while slow, is continuing.
 The Somali Government promotes universal and coeducational school-
 ing to the extent resources allow. Women are allowed to study at
 all levels, and can secure employment in the Government and
 private sector, although only a few hold influential positions in
 these sectors and in the People's Assembly. The unavailability of
 health care and other social services is due to the country's
 poverty and focus on security issues, rather than any government
 policy to deny help to the population or any part of it. In spite
 of government policies, Somali culture remains overwhelmingly
 traditional. This allows a degree of social support for indivi-
 duals, but also permits the continuation of practices such as
 female circumcision. Under customary law and in practice a woman
 was under the legal protection of a male and only a few girls were
 permitted to attend school. The revolutionary Government changed
 the legal and political status of women and encouraged participa-
 tion in Government. In 1975 women were given equal rights in
 several respects, including equal inheritance rights. The Govern-
 ment also insisted that girls be sent to school up to the secondary
 and university levels. The dominance of traditional cultures
 is giving way slowly, but will remain for the foreseeable future,
 no matter what the social policies of the Government.
 
 
 321
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: SOMALIA
 1981     1982    1983
 
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...
 LOANS ..............
 GRANTS .............
 A.AID ..................
 LOANS ..............
 GRANTS .............
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......
 LOANS ..............
 GRANTS .............
 ITLE lTOTA....,
 RtPAY. iN iL0AN� .....
 PAY. IN  FOR. CURR .....
 TITLE  I -TOTAL .........
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...
 LOANS ..............
 GRANTS .............
 PEACE CORPS ......
 NARCOTICS ........
 OTHER ............
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...
 LOANS ..............
 GRANTS .............
 A.MAP  GRANTS ..........
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....
 C.INTL  MIL.ED.TRNG ....
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...
 E.OTHER  GRANTS ........
 
 57.0
 15.0
 42.0
 12.1
 0.0
 12.1
 0.0
 44.9
 15.0
 29.9
 !5,0
 0.0
 29.9
 29.9
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 20.4
 20.0
 0.4
 0.0
 20.0
 0.4
 0.0
 0.0
 
 55.8
 14.5
 41.3
 34.4
 0.0
 34.4
 20.0
 21.4
 14.5
 6.9
 14,5
 14.5
 0.0
 6.9
 6.9
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 25.4
 10.0
 15.4
 15.0
 10.0
 0.4
 0.0
 0.0
 
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...         77.4     81.2
 LOANS .............. ......35.0     24.5
 GRANTS ................ 42.4        56.7
 OTHER US LOANS ..........         0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......         0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER ..............  .... 0.0       0.0
 
 69.7
 15.0
 54.7
 47.9
 0.0
 47.9
 21.0
 21.8
 15.0
 6.8
 15.0
 15.0
 0.0
 6.8
 6.8
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 30.6
 10.0
 20.6
 20.0
 10.0
 0.6
 0.0
 0.0
 100.3
 2S.0
 75.3
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1981      1982      1983      1944-83
 . .. . . . . - --.. .. .- - --... . . .. - --.. . . .. . . . . .. . .. . .. .. - -. . . . . - -
 
 TOTAL ........
 IBRD
 IFC
 IDA
 IDB
 ADB
 AFDB
 UNDP
 OTHER-UN
 EEC
 
 26.4   16.5
 0.0    0.0
 0.4    0.0
 10.2   15.0
 0.0    0.0
 0.0    0.0
 9.7    0.0
 3.3    1.5
 2.8    0.0
 0.0    0.0
 
 26.2
 0.0
 0.0
 23.0
 0.0
 0.0
 3.2
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 
 401 .1
 0.0
 0.4
 202.9
 0.0
 0.0
 56.0
 49 5
 1318
 78.5
 
 
