 SOMALIA*
 The 21-year dictatorship of Mohamed Siad Barre ended in January 1991, and
 throughout 1992 Somalia was in a state of anarchy. There is no national govern-
 ment warring clans have ripped the country's social fabric to shreds and the econ-
 omy has been destroyed. The effects of clan warfare and banditry, which prevented
 international relief supplies from being delivered, and severe drought have induced
 a famine that has placed 1.5 million Somalis at risk of death by starvation. More
 than 2,0     Somalis have already died from famine, and over 5 million out of a
 total 6.5 million population have been displaced. In late 1992, the Center for Dis-
 ease Control estimated that 3,000 people, most of them women and children, were
 dying every day in Somalia from starvation and hunger-related diseases.
 Clan rivalries have long been a factor in Somali history and continued after the
 country's creation in 1960, even though almost all of the population are members
 of one ethnic family with a homogeneous culture. Following the fall of Said Barre,
 clan allegiances and conflicts have dominated the country. In the northwest, in an
 area roughly comprising the territory of the former British Somaliland protectorate,
 the Issaq-dminated Somali National Movement (SNM), although sometimes in-
 volved in subelan fighting, controls the self-declared but unrecognized 'Somaliland
 Republic." In the northeast, the Somali Salvation Democratic Front (SSDF) controls
 the traditionally Majertain homelands. In the southern and central regions, which
 include Mogadishu the United Somali Congress (USC) dominates. The USC is split
 into two warring Hawiye factions, one led by Ali Mahdi Mohammed and the other
 by General Mohamed Farah Aideed. In the south, where Dared clans are strong,
 remnants of Siad Barre's Somali National Front (SNF) have been engaged in combat
 with other groups, including the Ogadeni Somali Patriotic Movement (SPM) headed
 by Omar Jess.
 On January 23, 1992, responding to world opinion, the United Nations adopted
 the first of a series of Security Council resolutions seeking to provide humanitarian
 assistance to the people of Somalia and to assist them in the process of national
 reconciliation and reconstruction. In this connection, the Security Council approved
 a plan to send a U.N. peacekeeping force of 3,500 troops to Somalia to protect relief
 operations there, but only 500 members of the force (a Pakistani contingent) were
 actually deployed. The United States airlifted these troops into Mogadishu in late
 September, but they became virtual hostages pinned down at the airport by vastly
 superior forces loyal to Ali Mahdi and General Aideed.
 On December 3, the Security Council adopted Resolution 794, authorizing a multi-
 lateral, humanitarian, military enforcement action led by the United States to cre-
 ate a "secure environment" for humanitarian relief operations in Somalia. By year's
 end, the US.-led United Task Force (UNITAF) had succeeded in bringing about a
 tenuous truce between the main USC factions and in securing safe routes to major
 feeding sites in central and southern Somalia. The clans remained heavily armed;
 at year's end, there were reportedly up to 180,000 Somalis under arms, with good
 ammunition reserves. The problem of clan disarmament remained a central obstacle
 to achieving, in U.N. Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali words, "a lasting
 peace.'
 *Therc was no U.S. Embassy staff in Somalia for almost all of 1991 and 1992. In addition,
 many sections of the country were involved in factional fighting. Accordingly, access to informa-
 tion on the human rights situation was limited during the reporting period.
 
 
 236
 The acute human crisis in Somalia has been exacerbated by the destruction of
 much of the country's physical infrastructure, including housing, water, communica-
 tions systems, schools, and health care facilities. Drought and war severely reduced
 agricultural production and the livestock trade, ordinarily the twin pillars of the So-
 mali economy. Grave damage was done to irrigated banana plantations which were
 important foreign exchange sources. However, good rains in late 1992 held the
 promise of a partial agricultural revival if political stability could be restored.
 The unprecedented suffering and wanton violation of human rights in Somalia re-
 flect the lractiousness of Somalia political culture, Siad Barre's legac of misrule,
 and his would-be successors total disregard for the sanctity of human life. The lead-
 ers of the warring clans violated the most basic tenets of humanitarian law. Their
 indiscriminate shelling of Mogadishu between November 1991 and March 1992
 killed or injured more than 30,000 persons, mostly civilians. In all areas of the coun-
 try, there were summary executions of many combatants and civilians who belonged
 to rival clans. Warring clans and bandit activity forced mass migrations of millions
 of innocent Somalia and, by blocking humanitarian relief operations, condemned
 hundreds of thousands, espcialy women and children, to death by starvation.
 Many factional leaders permitted their forces to loot humanitarian supplies and
 medicines and prevented the assertion of local authority which might have curbed
 the roving armed bandits who further terrorized local populations and their leaders.
 RESPECT' FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Inuding Freedom from
 a. Political or Other Extraeudicial Killing.-International human rights organiza-
 tions characterized Somalia in 1992 as a place of random violence and unpredictable
 death. There was no national government to enforce basic laws or to prosecute viola-
 trs of human rights. The country's contending clans summarily executed hundreds
 of their foes without even the pretense of judical proceedings (see Section 1.g.).
 b. Disappearances.-Amid the chaos gripping Somalia in 1992, it was impossible
 to identiy pople who were the victims of calculated disappearances because of their
 olitical or clan affiliations. Some people were reported missing when they were in
 act displaced from their homes because of fighting or had joined migrations in
 search of food.
 c. Torture and Other Cru, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.--
 There were numerous instances of torture and inhuman  punishment inflicted on
 people solely because of their membership in a rival clan. One human rights organi-
 zation notedthat Hawiye and Rahanwein clansmen had their noses and ears muti-
 lated or their genitals burned with acid when loyalists of Siad Barre's SNF attacked
 communities around Baidoa and Afgei. In turn, General Aideed's Hawiye forces
 were accused of systematic roundups of members of Siad Barre's Dared clan-family
 in which the victims were reportedly tortured and then executed. (See also Section
 tioany credible sources reported that clan militiamen frequently raped the women
 of opposing clans.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-All factions reportedly held prisoners be-
 longing to rival clans. Some were held as hostages to be exchan ed in swaps of pris-
 oners, while others were detained as insurance against attacks  rival clans. There
 were reports from various sources that General Aided's SomaiNational Alliance,
 which includes Aideed's wing of the uSC, held the largest number of military pris-
 oner in 1992.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Triat.-There was no functioning modern judicial system
 in Somalia in 1992. In the northwest, the SNM reportedly adopted Shari'a law, but
 it was unknown how this law was applied in practice. According to all reports, clan-
 administered hustice" was both arbitrary and summary and lacked the most basic
 elements of fair process. In many instances, the only evidence required to establish
 guilt was a person's clan afitliation. Given the intense clan hostilities, it is doubtful
 at traditional, local-level dispute resolution mechanisms, i.e., a meeting of the el-
 ders of the clans to set and collect compensation for lost lives and property, operated
 effectively in 1992.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, rpor  rrespondence.-These
 rights were constantly violated by the warring factions in Somalia. The civil conflict
 resulted in the destruction of most urban homes, caused the forced displacement of
 nearly 80 percent of the country's population, and reduced communications infra-
 structure to rubble.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-The leaders of the warring clans, particularly in southern Somalia, violated
 the most basic tenets of humanitarian law. There were reports of summary execu-
 
 
 tions of women and their children because they were members of a rival clan. Ac-
 cording to a French nongovernmental organization, famine caused largely by war-
 fare has killed one in four children under the age of 5. In the camps or displaced
 persons in Baidoa, experienced relief workers estimated that as many as 70 percent
 of the children under 5 had died between May and December.
 The rival factions of the United Somali Congress (USC), one led by Ali Mahdi Mo-
 hammed and the other by General Mohamed Faa Aideed, engaged in brutal war-
 fare in Mogadishu from November 1991 until March 1992, when the United Nations
 brokered a tenuous cease-fire. The factions shelled areas of the city inhabited by ci-
 vilians belonging to the rival's subclan, despite the fact that they were all members
 of the larger Hawiye clan family. An estimated 30,000 people, mostly civilians, were
 killed or wounded by indiscriminate violence. Mogadishu's population was reduced
 from an estimated 1.25 million to approximately 750,000, as inhabitants fled to tra-
 ditional homelands or to refugee camps in neighbo  countries.
 Warfare, death, and destruction were not confined to Mogadishu in 1992. In the
 southwest, remnants of Siad Barre's army, under the leadership of the Somali Na-
 tional Front (SNF), launched attacks that at one point brought the SNF within 30
 miles of Mogadishu. In the process, the SNF slaughtered USC supporters belonging
 to Hawiye and Rahanwein communities in the vicinity of Baidoa. The victims were
 reportedly singled out for no reason other than their clan affiliation. Aideed rallied
 his forces and counterattacked, committing atrocities against Darod populations in
 the Gedo region in southern Somalia. Siad's forces were finally routed, and the
 former President forced to flee Somalia in April 1992. In October Siad's son-in-law,
 General Mohamed Said Hersi Morgan, reportedly with support from Kenya despite
 the U.N. Security Council's declaration of an arms embargo, rallied SNF remnants
 and recaptured Barder, disrupting relief efforts.
 In the north the Somali National Movement (SNM), which had waged war
 against Siad Barre's regime since 1981 and declared the independence of
 Somaliland in May 1991, became engaged in subclan conflict from late 1991 to early
 1992. Hundreds of rival Issaq militiamen were killed in clashes around the town
 of Burao in January 1992. In the relatively peaceful northeast, fighting erupted in
 the spring of 1992 between forces loyal to the ruling Somali Salvation Democratic
 Front (SSDF) and fighters belonging to an Islamic fundamentalist organization. De-
 spite this violence, the situation in the north was relatively stable in comparison
 with the rest of the country and food supply conditions were less acute.
 U.N. Secretary General houtros Boutros Ghali's first Special Representative for
 Somalia, Ambassador Mohamed Sahnoun, attempted to arrange a negotiated settle-
 ment of the conflict that would permit the establishment of regional governmental
 structures. Ambassador Sahnoun's efforts were largely unsuccessful. Widespread
 looting and fighting between the competing groups prevented food from reaching at
 least half the population threatened with starvation, thus undercutting a massive
 international relief effort under U.N. leadership.
 The clan-induced crisis also produced bands of armed "security guards," as well
 as other outlaws, largelyyouths, without any pretext of legitimacy, who robbed and
 pillaged with impuny. The security guard~disrupted relief operations by using
 thetheatofviolence to reinforce demands for increased cash payments or larger
 percentages of relief supplies. Throughout the year, these groups engaged in sum-
 mary executions and extorted payments from relief agencies attempting to bring in
 humanitarian cargoes through Mogadishu's port and airport and operatilng distribu-
 tion sites in the Somali interior.
 In what could be one of the most blatant violations of humanitarian law in Soma-
 pa in 1992, the international press and other sources allege that troops loyal to So-
 mal Patriotic Movement (SPM) leader Omar Jess conducted systematic roundups
 of members of the Ogadeni Harti community in Kismayo in early December and
 summarily executed their captives. The killings reported occurred 3 days prior to
 the arrival of U.N. coalition forces in Kismay'o. US. military forensic teams sent to
 investigate the reports discovered 15 bodies in a mass grave near Kismayo's airport
 in early January. Military investigators were still conducting an inquiry into this
 case at year's end.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Inluding
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Violent anarchy made civil iberties, nding
 freedom of speech and press, moot in Somalia. Although at least a dozen unews-
 papers" operated in Mo~adiahu in 1992, they were predominately twoor three-page
 photocopy pamphlets with limited circulation. Most Somalia who had access to a
 radio kept informed about developments in their country and elsewhere through
 broadcasts of the British Broadeasting Corporation's Somali-ain   servie. Mos-
 cow Radio's Somali service was also an important source of inforagation. The Na-
 
 
 238
 
 tional Somali University remained closed; its buildings were destroyed in the vio-
 lence.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-There were sporadic dem-
 onstrations in supprt of peace and reconciliation in Mogadishu during 1992, but
 large-scale rallies or these causes were not possible in a climate of intimidation and
 violence. There were no political organizations independent of the armed factional
 militias.
 c. Freedom of Religion.--Somalis are overwhelmingly Sunni Muslim, but the vio-
 lence and chaos in 1992 made it difficult for them to practice their religion in a
 mosque or other formal setting. Christian churches and graveyards were desecrated
 by religious extremists.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Movement within Somalia itself was angerous particularly in the
 south and to a lesser extent the northwest, given the likelihood of encountering
 armed bandits or clan militias.. In the south especially, roadblocks were manned by
 armed gangs which extorted bribes or fees to permit travel. According to the Amer-
 ican Red Crss, approximately 75 percent of Somalia's population of 6.5 million has
 been displaced internally. Displaced persons clustered near feeding stations in
 Baidoa, Oddur, Belet Weyne, and Bardera. More than 950,000 Somalis fled the
 country, most ending up in refugee camps located over the borders in Kenya and
 Ethiopia. There are 320,000 Somali refugees in Kenya and 375,000 in Ethiopia.
 Other countries with significant numbers of Somali refugees include Djibouti,
 90 000; Yemen, 62,000; and Saudi Arabia, 150,000.
 iens of thousands of Ethiopians who had been longtime refugees in Somalia also
 fled back into Ethiopia in 1992. By year's end, small numbers of Somalis began to
 return to Somalia as "Operation Restore Hope" secured towns and food convoy
 routes in the interior to permit the safe delivery of humanitarian assistance. Thou-
 sands more signed up with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
 (UNHCR) in Kenya for voluntary repatriation. In the northwest, Isaak refugees con-
 tinued to return from Ethiopia as conditions generally improved. However, the
 UNHCR was unable to undertake an organized repatriation program due to continu-
 ing insecurity and intraclan fighting.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The fall of Siad Barre's government in January 1991 ended all semblance of a
 functioning national government. Conferences of Somalis in Djibouti in June and
 July 1991 led to the announcement of an interim government. However, it was not
 accepted by several factional militia commanders, and throughout 1992 the country
 was under the marginal control of clan-based factional leaders to the extent it was
 not in a state of anarchy. Because of the prevailing anarchy, it was not possible to
 hold elections during 1992.
 In the northwest, members of the Somali National Movement who earlier declared
 a "Somaliland Republic," comprising the territory of the former British Somaliland
 protectorate, fought among themselves. The northeast is controlled by the Somali
 alvation Democratic Front (SSDF) in traditionally Majertain homelands. Both
 groups have attempted to establish local governmental structures based upon popu-
 larly recognized traditional leaders and clan councils but both continue to face re-
 sistance fom groups contesting their authority. There was progress, nevertheless,
 in northwest Somalia toward restoring a large measure of the authority of clan el-
 ders. This resulted from the "pace conference" in Sheikh at which the Isse Musa
 and Habr Yunis subclans of the Isaaq agreed to terms to end their 6-month "civil
 war" in October. The peace conference at Sheikh established a "Constitutional Com-
 mittee of Elders," which was given the authority to enforce the peace agreement and
 arbitrate any future disputes between the Issa Musa and Habr Yunis. Moreover, it
 was also agreed that a "traditional court of justice" would be empowered to look into
 the causes of the war and set the amount of damages to be paid by both sides. Pun-
 ishment, if any, would be detirmined by the Committee of Elders.
 Following the arrival of UNITAF forces in early December 1992, U.N. Special
 Envoy Ismat Kittani launched intensive discussions with Somali factional leaders
 to give new impetus to initiatives on national reconciliation. With the support of
 U.S. Special Envoy for Somalia, Ambassador Robert Oakley, Kittani succeeded in
 convincing Ali Mahdi and Aideed to meet to discuss their differences. Following a
 2-hour private session on December 11, Ali Mabdi and Aideed issued a joint state-
 ment that included a call for an immediate end to hostilities between their forces,
 the removal of their heavy weapons from Mogadishu, and the merging of their re-
 spective wings of the USC. The actual implementation of the agreement took place
 in fits and starts, but by the end of December there was significant progress toward
 
 
 239
 compliance with its terms. Ali Mahdi and General Aideed later ageed to participate
 in a U.N.-sponsoredpreliminary conference on reconciliation in Addis Ababa in
 early January. The t.N. also succeeded in attracting bread participation of other
 Somali factions and leaders. This conference would mark the first time that Somalis
 would be brought together to discuss the terms of negotiations on national reconcili-
 ation after mere than a year of violent conflict.
 The role of women in political events during 1992 was minimal (see Section 5).
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 National civil authority totally collapsed in Somalia in 1991. Nevertheless, amid
 the chaos and anarchy a number of international nongovernmental organizations,
 such as CARE, the IRC, Save the Children, Doctors Without Borders, and the
 U.N.'s Department of Humanitarian Affairs did outstanding work in bringing hu-
 manitarian assistance to the people of Somalia. International human rights organi-
 zations, such as Amnesty International and Africa Watch, visited Somalia in 1992
 and reported the gross violations of human rights by generally every party to the
 conflict.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion. Language, or Social Status
 More than 80 percent of Somalia's people share a common ethnic heritage, reli-
 gion (Sunni Muslim), and nomadic-influenced culture. However, clan affiliation has
 always been more important than Somali political and cultural unity. Like other
 successful national leaders, Siad Barre manipulated clan rivalries to maintain
 power. In the conflict and anarchy following his fall, clan discrimination and loyalty
 provided the only semblance of order or structure beyond brute force.
 Somali women, who have been victimized because of traditional discrimination in
 work and family matters, ironically saw some improvement in their circumstances
 in 1992 despite the anarchy in Somalia. Of particular note was the important role
 Somali women played in organizing and largely controlling the barest of economic
 activity in Somalia. Loose networks of Somali women gained a virtual monopoly
 over the barter trade, setting the prices on commodities ranging from food to gold
 and the traditional drug khat. Women ran relief agencies and hospitals and, in the
 capital of Mogadishu, they were the most powerful landords and moneychangers.
 Female gemtal mutilation (circumcision) is practiced in Somalia and, according to
 an independent expert in the field, the percentage of Somali women who have un-
 dergone female circumcision may be as high as90 perent. In 1992 the last vestiges
 of protection for Somali women under the traditional system largely disintegrated
 in the spiraling violence. By all authoritative accounts, rape became commonplace
 in the villages and towns that changed hands in factional fighting.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a: The Right of Association.-In 1992 worker rights were totally nonexistent amid
 Somalia's turmoil and chaos. So far as is known, the General Federation of Somali
 Trade Unions which had been run by the Siad Barre regime as well as its member
 unions, ceasea to function with. the collapse of the Government. Moreover, the clan
 warfare which caused Somalia's economy to disintegrate made the development of
 a genuinely free trade union movement an impossibility.
 b.The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Wages and work require-
 ments in traditional Somali culture are largely established by ad hoc bartering,
 based on supply and demand. There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-There were reports that rival
 clans forced some of their captives to perform hard labor, usually associated with
 building defensive bulwarks around villages and towns captured during fighting.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-  malia s warring clans reportedly
 recruited children as young as 8 years of ag to join their militias in 1992. It was
 commonplace to see 10-, 11-, and 12-year-old children armed with AK-47 assault ri-
 fies in Mogadishu. Children under the age of 15 were also used to load and unload
 relief supplies. The desperate conditions resulting from the civil conflict led many
 children into thievery.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There was no organized effort to monitor ac-
 ceptable conditions of work in Somalia during 1992.
