 SOMALIA
 Somalia has been without a central government since its last president, dictator
 Mohamed Siad Barre, fled the country in 1991. Subsequent fighting among rival fac-
 tion leaders resulted in the killing, dislocation, and starvation of thousands of Soma-
 lis and led the United Nations to intervene militarily in 1992.
 Widespread interclan fighting subsided in 1995, apart from occasional skirmishes
 in Mogadishu, Baidoa, and the lower Juba, and an ongoing conflict in the northwest.
 There was no progress, however, in reconciling the rival faction leaders and creating
 a new national government. In Mogadishu, faction leader Mohamed Farah Aideed
 was elected by his supporters to head a putative national government, while in the
 northwest, the breakway "Republic of Somaliland" continued to proclaim its inde-
 pendence. Neither administration, however, was recognized internationally.
 The persistent absence of a central government led most regions to establish rudi-
 mentary local administrations, most based on the authority of the predominant clan
 and faction in the area. Local authority remained contested, however, in the lower
 Juba, parts of the northwest, and Mogadishu.
 The United Nations Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM) ended in March, when the
 last peacekeeping forces were withdrawn. Security is provided by clan-based militias
 that report to the dominant clan elders and faction leaders in each region. In some
 cases, these militias are supplemented by local police forces that were established
 under UNOSOM and continue to function with varying degrees of effectiveness. In
 the continued absence of national institutions, the judiciary in most regions of the
 country relies on some combination of traditional and customary justice, Islamic
 (Shari a) law, and the pre-1991 Penal Code. In north Mogadishu, the middle
 Shabelle, and parts of Gedo and Hiran regions, where Shari'a is particularly en-
 trenched, harsh punishments-including amputations-are meted out for certain of-
 fenses.
 While still a desperately poor country, Somalia's economy continued to improve
 in 1995 in comparison to the period of mass starvation in 1992. Relative peace in
 much of the country, coupled with the increased income resulting from the excellent
 1994 harvest, contributed to this recovery. Livestock and fruit exports continued to
 revive, although the latter were disrupted by the closure of Mogadishu seaport dur-
 ing the final 3 months of the year. Somalia remains a chronic food deficit country,
 however, and poor rains produced a disappointing harvest in 1995 whose effects are
 likely to be felt by mid-1996. In some urban areas, the departure of UNOSOM dealt
 a severe blow to local economies that had benefited from U.N. contracts and employ-
 ment. Lack of income opportunities led to pockets of malnutrition in Mogadishu and
 some other communities.
 Human rights abuses continued throughout the year. Due to the decrease in
 interclan fighting, however, there were fewer incidents of extrajudicial killing, rape,
 and violations of humanitarian law than there had been in previous years. Other
 key problem areas remained the lack of political rights in the absence of a central
 authority, the reliance of some communities on harsh Shari'a punishments, societal
 discrimination against women, and the mistreatment of women and children, includ-
 ing the near universal practice of female genital mutilation.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political or Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Political violence and banditry have
 been endemic to Somalia since the revolt against Siad Barre, who fled the capital
 in January 1991. Tens of thousands of Somalis, mostly noncombatants, have died
 in interfactional and interclan fighting (see Section 1.g.).
 
 
 Although many civilians were killed in the course of the fighting during the year,
 politically motivated extrajudicial murder was less common. In April a foreign busi-
 nessman was killed   ya small fundamentalist group in Burgavo, apparently be-
 cause of his business ealings with General Mohamed Said Heri "Morgan," apoliti-
 cal rival of the fundamentalists. In July, six members of the Marehan Somali Na-
 tional Front (SNF) were reportedy murdered in south Mogahu by members of
 the Habr Gedr subclan linked to General Mohamed Farah Adeed's wing of the So-
 mali National Alliance (SNA).
 Partly as a result of the 1993 murder of a 16-year-old Somali youth by Canadian
 airborne soldiers assigned to UNOSOM, the Government of Canada disbanded the
 regiment in January. The previous year, Canadian soldiers accused in the case were
 tried and convicted.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no known reports of unresolved politically moti-
 vated disappearances, although cases might easily have been concealed among the
 thousands of refugees, displaced, and war dead. Kidnaping remained a problem,
 particularly for relief workers and critics of the faction leaders (see Section Ld.).
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 There were no reports of use of torture by warring militiamen against each other
 or against civilians.
 Islamic (Shari'a) courts continued to operate in several regions of the country, fill-
 ing the vacuum created by the absence of normal government authority. Shari'a
 courts traditionally ruled in cases of civil and family law, but their jurisdiction was
 extended to criminal proceedings in some regions beginning in 1994. In north
 Mogadishu, the middle Shabelle, and parts of the Gedo and Hiran regions, these
 courts meted out severe punishment to persons found guilty of robbery and other
 crimes (see Section .e.).
 For example, in May the Shari'a court in Jowhar amputated the right hands and
 left feet of three men convicted of armed robbery. The severed limbs were displayed
 in the public square of the town. Court officials in Jowhar confirmed that criminals
 convicted of looting were sometimes stoned to death, although no specific cases were
 cited. In September a court in the Hiran region ordered a hand and a foot ampu-
 tated from each of three convicted bandits.
 Prison conditions varied by region. Mogadishu's prison was overcrowded, with a
 significant percentage of prisoners suffering from malnutrition, according to the
 International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). Prisons in Baidoa, Bardera, and
 Kismayo were rudimentary but not unhealthy or overcrowded. Prisoners were per-
 mitted daily outdoor exercise and received food rations either from the community
 or from the World Food Program (WFP). In Bosasso conditions were similar, al-
 though male prisoners were chained together at the ankles.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exie.--Somai factions and armed bandits con-
 tinued to engage in arbitrary detention, including the kidnaping of international re-
 lief workers. In some cases, the detention was politically motivated. For example,
 Mohamed Farah Aideed's wing of the SNA pld     adija Abdi Fandhe under house
 arrest for 1 week in July after she urged Somali women to support Aideed's rival,
 Osman Hassan Ali "Atto."
 Foreigners were frequently the target of kidnapers. A French employee of Action
 Internationale Contre La Faim (AICF), was seized near Mogadishu on December 17,
 1994, and held for more than a month by Somalis demanding compensation for
 clansmen who were killed-allegedly, while working as security guards for AICF.
 Two Italian aid workers were kidnaped on February 28 near Garoe as part of a con-
 tractual dispute but were released within a week. A German veterinarian was kid-
 naped in the northwest in late May and held for 19 days for unspecified reasons.
 In -December an Italian agronomist was kidnaped near Mogadishu and held for sev-
 eral days before being turned over to representatives of General Aideed. In all cases,
 intervention by local clan elders and the donor community resulted in the detainees'
 release.
 In late August, five foreigners, including two Scandinavian diplomats were de-
 tained in the breakaway Republic of Somaliland for landing at an airfield without
 authorization. They were charged in a Somaliland court, but the charges were
 dropped, and all six were released after 8 days. Twelve Pakistani fishermen were
 detained by General Aideed's forces at the end of January and held for more than
 8 months. An Aideed court found them guilty of illegal fishing, but they were subse-
 quently pardoned and released October 6. On September 17, General Mohammed
 Farah Adeed and members of his militia seized the southwestern city of Baidoa.
 Aideed's forces occupied the compounds of U.N. and nongovernmental organization
 (NGO) agencies operating in Baidoa and held 21 expatriates, including 5 Americans,
 for 5 days. Through negotiations by U.N. officials with Aideed, all the expatriates
 were released by September 22.
 
 
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-There is no national judicial system. Some regions
 have established local courts that depend on the predominant local clan and associ-
 ated faction for their authority. These courts render judgments based on traditional
 and customary law, Islamic Shari'a law, the Penal Code of the defunct Siad Barre
 government, or some combination of the three. In Bosasso, for example, criminals
 are turned over to the families of their victims, who exact blood compensation in
 keeping with Somali tradition. In the northwest, the self-proclaimed Republic of
 Somaliland continues to use the former Somali Penal Code, pending adoption of a
 new constitution and related laws. In Bardera, courts apply a combination of Islamic
 Shari'a law and the former Penal Code. In north Mogadishu, the middle Shabelle,
 and parts of the Cedo and Hiran regions, court decisions are based solely on Shari'a
 law.
 The right to representation by an attorney and the right to appeal do not exist
 in those areas applying traditional and customary judicial practices or Shari'a law.
 These rights are more often respected in regions that continue to apply the former
 government's Penal Code.
 Following the capture of Baidoa by Aideed's forces in September, at least five sen-
 ior members of the local Rahanweyn community were detained and taken to
 Mogadishu. Some of them reportedly remained in custody as of year's end. There
 were no reports of political prisoners being held by the various other factions.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Looting
 and forced entry into private property continued but at levels reduced from previous
 years when large urban areas were forcibly occupied by invading militiamen. Such
 looting occurred in January and May, however, during heavy fighting between mili-
 tia forces of the Abgal and Murosade subelans in Mogadishu. U.N. properties in
 Mogadishu were looted in January by the Abgal and in February by both the Habr
 Gedr and Abgal. A hospital operatedby Indian peacekeepers in Baidoa was looted
 in January, soon after their withdrawal. The premises of a Dutch NGO in
 Garbahare were forcibly entered on February 25 by nine armed Somalis who shot
 and seriously wounded one international staff member and stole $16,000. All but
 one of those responsible were subsequently arrested, and the money was recovered
 by community leaders. NGO warehouses in Kismayo and Baidoa were also looted
 during the year.
 Most properties that were forcibly occupied during militia campaigns in 1992-
 1993, notably in Mogadishu and the lower Shabelle, remained in the hands of per-
 sons other than their prewar owners.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-Warring factions continued to commit violations of humanitarian law, in-
 cluding the killing of civilian noncombatants. In early January, fighting between
 Abgal and Murosade militiamen led to scores of civilian dead and hundreds wound-
 ed. Both sides resorted to shelling in densely populated neighborhoods, and there
 was heavy fighting around one hospital. Also in January, following an abortive
 Hawadle attack on Beletweyn, Habr Gedr militiamen burned several Hawadle vil-
 lagos in retaliation. Fighting in Burao between forces loyal to self-styled Somaliland
 resident Mohamed Ibrahim El and those of a rival militia led to hundreds of
 deaths as well as significant civilian displacement, with an estimated 80,000 to
 150,000 people forced from their homes. The town was subsequently mined, imped-
 ing the civilians' return. In May renewed clashes between the Abgal and Murosade
 in Mogadishu again led to noncombatant casualties, with 17 killed and 54 injured,
 mostly civilians. Indiscriminate shelling in late August, during hostilities in
 Mogadishu between Habr Gedr and Abgal militiamen, led to dozens killed and
 scores wounded. Aideed's capture of Baidoa was achieved with little fighting but re-
 sulted in displacement of up to half the town's population according to some esti-
 mates.
 During the year the ICRC was permitted to visit and verify that both the 534
 prisoners of war held by the self-declared Republic of Somaliland as well as pris-
 oners held by the opposition militia were well-treated.
 The last of the UNOSOM peacekeeping troops were withdrawn without incident
 on March 3 under rearguard cover provided by U.S. forces.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Most Somalis obtain news from foreign news
 broadcasts, notably the British Broadcasting Corration, which transmits a daily
 Somali-langue pro    am. The major faction leaders in Mogadishu, as well as the
 authorities of   sel -declared Republic of Somaliland, operate small radio stations.
 The print media consist largely of short, photocopied dailies, published in the larg-
 er cities and often linked to one of the factions. Several of these papers are nomi-
 nally independent and are critical of the faction leaders.
 
 
 239
 Two journalists were detained in south Mogadishu during the year after writing
 stories critical of General Mohamed Farah Aideed's administration. In July, Adan
 Mohamed All, a stringer for the Reuters News Agency, was held for nearly 2 weeks
 under house arrest and then later in the Mogadishu Central Prison, which is con-
 trolled by Aideed. A U.N. agency successfully negotiated Adan's release on condition
 that he leave Mogadishu. In September Aideeds forces detained Ali Musa Abdi, a
 stringer for the Agence France Presse News Agency and the British Broadcasting
 Corporation. He was seized while en route to cover an announcement by opponents
 of Aideed. All Musa Abdi escaped from Aideed in September. Aideed's adininistra-
 tion announced plans in August to register all foreign journalists and began issuing
 press passes by late September.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Many clans and factions held
 meetings during the year without incident, albeit usually under tight security.
 Lengthy conferences were organized by local clan leaders in Baidoa, Afmadou, and
 Gardo. In Mogadishu both Aideed and Mohammed All Mahdi held conferences of
 their respective allies early in the year.
 Although Somalis are free to assemble in public, the lack of security effectively
 limits this right in many parts of the country. Few public rallies took place during
 the year. In the weeks prior to UNOSOM withdraw al, supporters of General Aideed
 held several demonstrations against plans to deploy a U.S.-led rearguard force to
 protect the departing peacekeepers. At least one of these rallies was forcibly dis-
 persed by miitiamen loyal toOsman Hassan All Atto, a rival to Aideed. In May
 a group of Aideed supporters sought unsuccessfully to disrupt a meeting of the So-
 mali National Alliance Central Committee, convened by Atto in a further challenge
 to Aideed's leadership.
 Some professional groups and local NGO's operate in Somalia as security condi-
 tions permit.
 c. Freedom o Religion.-Somalis are overwhelmingly Sunni Muslim. Local tradi-
 tion and past law make it a crime to proselytize for any religion except Islam. Some
 local administrations in Somalia have made Islam the official religion in their re-
 gions, in addition to establishing a judicial system based on Shari'a law (see Section
 .e.). Non-Sunni Muslims are often looked on with suspicion by more mainstream
 Somalis. There is strong social pressure to respect Islamic tradtions, especially in
 fundamentalist enclaves such as Luuq, in the Gedo region. There is a small, low-
 profile Christian community. Christian-based international relief organizations oper-
 ate without interference.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Freedom of movement continued to be restricted in most parts of Soma-
 lia. Checkpoints manned by militiamen loyal to one clan or faction inhibit passa e
 by other groups. In the absence of a recognized national government, most Somais
 do not have documents needed for international travel. As security conditions im-
 proved in many parts of the country, refugees and internally displaced persons con-
 tinued to return to their homes. Despite sporadic harassment-e.g., theft of United
 Nations High Commissioner for Refugees food packages by militiamen-repatriation
 generally took place without incident.
 The number of Somali refugees in Kenya dropped to a pproximately 140,000 as of
 the end of the year, down from more than 400,000 at the height of the humanitarian
 crisis in 1992. In Ethiopia, however, the number of Somali refugees increased by
 some 90,000 during 1995 to a total of approximately 275,000, due to the influx of
 persons who fled fighting in the northwest. A small number of Ethiopian refugees
 remained in Somalia, mostly in the northeast near Bosasso.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens To Change Their Gov-
 ernment
 Citizens did not have this right. There was no national government recognized do-
 mestically or internationally. In most regions, however, local clan and faction lead-
 ers function as de facto rulers. They derive their authority in a variety of ways. In
 most of the Gedo region, the dominant Marehan subclan's faction, the Somali Na-
 tional Front, rules through regional and district councils established under
 UNOSOM auspices. In the northwest, the self-declared Republic of Somaliland was
 endorsed by clan elders in 1991 and 1993 and has since created functional adminis-
 trative institutions, albeit in only a small portion of the territory it claims to rule.
 In Kismayo the dominant faction leader seized the town militarily in 1993 but is
 dependent on elders from several subclans in order to govern the community. In
 June allies of General Mohamed Farah Aideed elected him as president of a puta-
 tive central government, which functions as the de facto authority in parts of south
 Mogadishu and the lower Shabelle. Ali Mahdi and his Abgal subclan supporters, in
 cooperation with leaders of the Islamic Shari'a courts function as the governing au-
 
 
 240
 thorities in north Mogadishu and the middle Shabelle. In Baidoa, formation of a
 "Supreme Governing    uncil" was agreed consensually in May after lengthy nego-
 tiations among members of the Rahanweyn clan and its associated faction, the So-
 malia Democratic Movement. Aideed's forces ousted the "Supreme Governing Coun-
 cil," however, when he captured Baidoa in September.
 Although several women are important behind-the-scenes figures in the various
 factions, women as a group remain outside the political process. No women hold
 prominent public positions and few participated in regional reconciliation efforts.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitudes Regarding International and Nongovernmental
 Investigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There were no local human rights organizations active during the year. ICRC del-
 egates were permitted to visit prisons in some parts of the country, as were Western
 diplomats. A representative of Africa Watch traveled to Somalia several times dur-
 ing the year to document human rights conditions, and Amnesty International also
 published a report during the year. International humanitarian NGO's and U2.
 agencies continued to operate, but the poor security situation limited their activities
 in some areas.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Societal discrimination against women and widespread abuse of children co'xtin-
 ued to be serious problems.
 Women.-Women suffered disproportionately in the Somali civil war and in the
 strife that followed. During the past year, however, there were no reports of system-
 atic attacks on women in connection with the continuing civil strife.
 Women are systematically subordinated in Somalia, which has an overwhelmingly
 patriarchal culture. Polygyny is permitted, but polyandry is not. Under laws issued
 by the former government, female cildRen ould inherit proprty, but oniy half the
 amount to which their brothers were entitled. Similarly, according to the Somali tra-
 dition of blood compensation, those found guilty in the death of a woman pay only
 half as much (50 camels) to the aggrieved family as they would if the victim were
 a man (100 camels).
 Children.Children remain among the chief victims of the continuing violence in
 Somalia. Boys as young as 14 or 15 years of age have participated in milita attacks,
 and many youths are members of the marauding gangs known as "Morian."
 Female genital mutilation (FGM), which is widely condemned by international ex-
 perts as damaging to physical and mental health, is widely practiced in Somali cul-
 ture and society. An independent expert in the field estiate that 98 percent of
 Somali females have been subjected to FGM.
 People With Disabilities.-There were no laws mandating accessihility to public
 buildings, transportation, or government services for the disabled before the collapse
 of the state. No functioning government is yet in place that could address these is-
 sues.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-More than 80 percent of Somalia's people
 share a common ethnic heritage, religion, and nomadlic-hiluenced culture. The larg-
 est minority group consists of "Bantu" Somalis, who are descended from slaves
 brought to Somalia about 300 years ago. In virtually all areas of Somalia, members
 of groups other than the predominant clan are excluded from effective participation
 in governing institutions and are subject to discrimination in employment, judicial
 proceedings, and access to public services.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The 1990 Constitution provided workers with tbe
 right to form unions, but the civil war and factional fighting negated this provision
 and shattered the single labor confederation, the then government-controlled Gen-
 eral Federation of Somali Trade Unions. Given the extent of Somalia's political and
 economic breakdown and the lack of legal enforcement mechanisms, trade unions
 could not function freely in the country.
 b. The Right To Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Wages and work require-
 ments in traditional Somali culture are largely established by ad hoc bartering,
 based on supply, demandandn the influence of the clan from which the worker origi-
 nates.
 Labor disputes sometimes led to use of force or kidnaping. For example, during
 a contractual dispute in the northwest region, security guards who had been dis-
 missed by a French NGO worker respondedby firingshots and throwing a grenade
 at their former employer. In another case, workers blockaded the World Food Pro-
 gram compound in Mogadishu for 3 days to press demands for severance pay (see
 also Section 1.d.).
 
 
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Local partners of multinational
 fruit export firms reportedly used forced labor in some areas of the lower Shabelle.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Formal employment of children
 was rare, but youths are commonly employed in herding, agriculture, and household
 labor from an early age.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There was no organized effort by any of the
 factions or de facto regional administrations to monitor acceptable conditions of
 work during the year.
