 SOMALIA
 Somalia has one legal political party and an advisory parliament,
 but real authority rests in the hands of President Mohamed Siad
 Barre, who has the support of the nation's armed forces. Siad
 came to power through a coup d'etat in 1969 and established the
 Supreme Revolutionary Council. President Siad continues to cite
 the revolution as the source of his Government's legitimacy.
 Despite the initial decision to-play the predominant role in the
 economy, the new Government had neither the financial nor the
 skilled human resources necessary to implement a public sector-
 dominated economic and development strategy. The Government has
 come to recognize the practical limitations of state control of
 the country's economic life, and there is increased willingness to
 experiment with approaches based on market forces and encouraging
 the private sector. Somalia is working with the International
 Monetary Fund and International Bank for Reconstruction and De-
 velopment but only the first steps toward economic recovery have
 been taken.
 A Constitution which provides some guarantees of political and
 civil rights was adopted in 1979, and a parliament with tightly
 circumscribed functions was elected in 1980. In October of 1980,
 President Siad decreed a state of emergency and suspended
 constitutional guarantees, citing as primary reasons: domestic
 economic inefficiency, corruption, and external threats. That
 state of emergency was lifted in February 1982. Individual
 liberties continue to be subordinated to the needs of the state,
 however, and the Government places tight controls on civil and
 political rights. Open criticism of the Government is not per-
 mitted. Dissenters risk arbitrary arrest.
 Somalia is inhabited essentially by one ethnic group, the Somali,
 who conducted their affairs democratically over a long history.
 Division into clans and clan-families, often competing, has not
 prevented a sense of shared Somali nationhood. All major Somali
 clans are represented in the Government, military and Somalia's
 single political party. However, President Siad's small clan,
 the Marehan, enjoys disproportionate representation and political
 influence. He also has solid support from the Ogadeni clan,
 which like the Marehan is strongly represented. Opposition to
 Siad extends across clan lines but only Majertain and Issak.
 dissidents have fielded active resistance units. Siad's 1969
 coup ended Majertain domination but many members have continued
 to prosper under the Siad Government. The Issak have greater
 cohesion than the Majertain but also are not unified in opposing
 the Government.
 Two organized opposition groups, the Somali Salvation Democra-
 tic Front (SSDF) and Somali National Movement (SNM) are based
 outside of the country. The SSDF is a Majertain-based clan group
 from the south central area. It was founded in 1978 and set up
 its headquarters in Addis Ababa. The SNM is an Issak-based group
 from the north that was created in London 3 1/2 years ago and
 recently established its new headquarters in Addis Ababa in June
 1982. The SSDF espouses a radical leftist ideology while the SNM
 uses democratic and pro-Western language. These oppositionist
 groups have carried out insurgent acts within Somalia.
 Ethiopian regular and Somali dissident forces launched an
 attack across the central Ethiopian-Somali border in late June
 of 1982 and are still holding two villages which they captured
 at that time. This attack prompted the Government to reimpose
 a state of emergency, limited this time only to the central
 
 
 273
 region which is under attack. The Government also decreed
 authority to conscript recruits for the armed forces and to
 confiscate property needed for the war effort.
 Somali officials acknowledge that the Government detains persons
 for political crimes. The exact number of such detainees is uncer-
 tain, but probably declining. In early 1982, the Government began
 releasing prominent political prisoners. Among those released were
 former Prime Minister Ibrahim Haji Egal, former Commandant of the
 Somali National Police, General Abdullahi Farah Ali Holif, and
 Religious Leader Sheikh Mohamed Moalim. However, in June 1982,
 former Finance Minister Mohamed Yusuf Weirah, released in February,
 and six other high government officials were arrested. The seven
 are still in custody. No charges have been filed, and all are
 being investigated for crimes against the State.
 In the northern city of Hargeisa, riots took place in February and
 March 1982 during which several protestors died and several thou-
 sand anti government rioters were arrested. The demonstrators,
 released over the next seven months, were protesting the trial of
 28 Hargeisa dissidents arrested in November 1981 for anti-govern-
 ment activities. These comprised circulating anti-government
 pamphlets and attending meetings in which the Government's treat-
 ment of northern Somalia was attacked. Twenty were sentenced in
 March to prison terms ranging from three years to life. Their
 sentencing sparked a second round of riots in March and April
 during which seve'al hundred additional persons were briefly
 detained. Although rumors abound that the twenty will be released
 soon, all remain in prison.
 Basic freedoms in Somalia have long been, and continue to be,
 circumscribed. The opening of some economic activity to the pri-
 vate sector and the limited nature of the current state of emer-
 gency are encouraging signs, but it is too early to determine if
 they constitute a long-term trend.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Killing
 There have been no reported instances of killing for political
 motives by the Government.
 b. Disappearance
 There have been no reported cases of disappearances in 1982.
 c. Torture
 No credible reports that torture was practiced in Somalia by
 either the Government or organized groups were received in 1982.
 There were allegations that persons detained in the northern re-
 gion were tortured to obtain confessions, but these charges are
 unsubstantiated. The Constitution provides that prisoners shall
 not be subjected to physical or mental torture.
 d. Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 Conditions in prisons and detention camps are spartan. Diet is
 poor, and adequate medical treatment is difficult to obtain.
 While there are sporadic allegations of abuse, there is no evi-
 dence of intentionally degrading treatment of prisoners by
 reason of social class, race, or religion.
 
 
 274
 e. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 The Constitution provides that every person deprived of political
 liberty "shall forthwith be informed of the offense of which he
 is accused" and that anyone detained on security grounds "shall
 without delay be brought before judicial authority within the
 limit prescribed by law." Despite this provision, the Government
 does detain defendants without charge in cases involving national
 security. The seven high government officials arrested in early
 June have not yet been charged. Following the February and March
 demonstrations in Hargeisa during which several thousand per-
 sons were arrested, several hundred demonstrators were detained,
 but not tried, for approximately seven months (most were released
 in July). Habeas corpus does not exist in cases having to do with
 security and persons being investigated for security reasons can
 be detained indefinitely.
 f. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Under the Somali system of government no institution, including
 the civil court, is independent of executive review. Moreover,
 political dissenters are not always accorded a public trial. The
 national security court operates outside the regular legal system
 and has jurisdiction over a broad range of crimes, including
 attacks against the state, public administration, members of the
 Government, the military forces or public order. This court is a
 political instrument of the Government and its deliberations are
 never public. Defendants before it, as well as occasionally the
 civil and criminal courts, are often denied the right of legal
 counsel.
 g. Invasion of the Home
 Homes of political dissidents and those suspected of political
 dissent are subject to arbitrary searches. In these cases,
 Somali law protecting the sanctity of the home, is suspended by
 the search and seizure authority of the National Security Service.
 There is no evidence that other violations of the home, such as
 "bugging", demolition, or sealing doors and windows, are practiced.
 2. Respect for Civil and Political Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The media are entirely Government-owned. Opposition views or
 fundamental criticism of the Government are not allowed. Foreign
 publications are subject to systematic censorship before they can
 be sold or otherwise offered to the public. In August 1982, a
 portion of a "Newsweek" article which was critical of the Siad
 Government was cut out of each issue before the magazine was
 allowed to be sold.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly is severely restricted. Most public meetings
 and all rallies are organized by the Government. The one labor
 union in the country is organized and controlled by the Govern-
 ment and has no right or authority to strike or take any inde-
 pendent actions. The union is permitted and encouraged to
 maintain relations with recognized international bodies, however.
 The Government is the major employer in the small modern sector
 and the union serves as a conduit through which worker grievances
 may be channeled to the Government for decision regarding salaries
 and benefits.
 
 
 275
 The Government's official policy strongly discourages clan dif-
 ferences. Nonetheless, traditional institutions continue to
 function and clan differentiation and solidarity remain salient
 ingredients of Somali social structure and life. Siad has used
 clan rivalries to consolidate and maintain his rule. While not
 averse to playing one clan off against another, Siad and his
 Marehan clansmen cannot stand alone and, therefore, are careful
 not to overtly discriminate against other clans. The Marehan
 are reaping the benefit of their dominance of the Somali govern-
 ment but this is a function of political status rather than
 discrimination.
 c.. Freedom of Religion
 The Constitution provides that the state religion is Islam,
 which is the religion of over 95 per cent of the Somali population.
 Sufi religious orders, such as the Salihiya, enjoy religious ,
 freedom but play no direct role in the Government or politics of
 Somalia. Adherents of religions other than Islam are allowed to
 worship freely, but may not proselytize for new members. Members
 of minority religions do not suffer overt discrimination, persecu-
 tion or harassment, but neither do they rise to the top levels of
 the Government.
 d. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Although there are no legal restrictions on domestic travel for
 Somali citizens, the military and police monitor movements along
 main roads, near larger urban areas, and military emplacements.
 Any Somali citizen can obtain a passport, but air travel on in-
 ternational flights is controlled and monitored. Persons whom the
 Government does not wish to leave the country, especially young
 men of military age, are denied permission to travel.
 Most Somalis who are abroad are there by choice, either because of
 economic opportunities or because they oppose the Government.
 However, should they wish to repatriate, President Siad has stated
 that they would be allowed to do so. There is no evidence of an
 influx of returnees, however, and in some instances, persons
 returning have been detained.
 Refugees are not forced to return to their homelands. Following
 the recent outbreak of hostilities between Somalia and Ethiopia in
 Somalia's central border region, some refugees were conscripted
 into the armed forces.
 e. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Somalia is ruled by its President. Participation in Somalia's
 political affairs is centrally directed by the country's only
 political party, the Somali Revolutionary Socialist Party (SRSP).
 Real power rests with those party members who have demonstrated
 loyalty to Siad. "Mass organizations" such as the General Federa-
 tion of Somali Trade Unions, the Somali Women's Democratic
 Organization, and the Somali Revolutionary Youth Union are
 subordinate to the party. Elections were last held in December
 1979, when a People's Assembly was chosen. The election process
 consisted of voters casting a yes/no vote for or against the
 single party's candidates. Positions were not contested.
 No overt opposition groups exist, and organized criticism of go-
 vernment policies is forbidden. In keeping with Somali traditions,
 however, both formal and informal consultations do occur among the
 President, prominent leaders of the Government, and various clan
 
 
 276
 leaders, thereby providing a mechanism for voicing dissent.
 Somalis are united by their common language and culture and by
 their perceived descent from two brothers said to have been
 members of the prophet Mohammed's tribe. Although clan rivalry
 persists and is manipulated by Siad for political purposes, and
 the Marehan have a disproportionate presence in the Government and
 military, there is no evidence of total disenfranchisement of any
 clan. No one is denied participation or suffrage on the basis of
 sex, race or social background. The status of women has been
 advanced considerably in recent years. The Constitution expli-
 citly confers legal equality on women, although the Government
 does permit harsh customs such as female circumcision and infi-
 bulation. The Somali Woman's Democratic Organization is a mecha-
 nism which has achieved greater participation of women in areas
 previously closed to them. There are no problems of nationality,
 citizenship or statelessness.
 3. Government Attitude Regarding International and Non-govern-
 mental Investigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights:
 Somalia does not participate in international and regional human
 rights bodies. It has not been the subject of resolutions,
 investigations or other human rights actions by official .interna-
 tional organizations.
 Amnesty International (AI) has communicated with the Somali Go-
 vernment, but no Amnesty International group has been permitted
 to visit Somalia. There are no organizations in Somalia con-
 cerned with human rights violations. AI's major concerns are
 the detention without trial of government opponents, the allega-
 tions of ill-treatment of prisoners, and harsh prison conditions.
 Since the outbreak of border fighting with Ethiopia in July, the
 Somali Government has rejected International Committee of the Red
 Cross (ICRC) requests for permission to inspect prisoner of war
 (POW) camps. Although evidence is scanty, it does not appear that
 POWs in Somalia are subjected to systematic abuse.
 4. Economic, Social, and Cultural Situation
 Data on Somalia are limited and largely unreliable. Somalia has a
 population of about 4.2 million. 60 percent of the population are
 nomads, 20 percent are settled rural dwellers, and 20 percent are
 urban. The population growth rate is an estimated 2.8 percent.
 Somalia is one of the poorest countries in the world. According
 to World Bank data, the per capita gross national product was only
 $383 in 1980, but even that figure may be overstated. Life expec-
 tancy at birth is 43.5 years, and the infant mortality rate is
 146.2 per thousand births. The adult literacy rate is 60 percent;
 the percentage of population with access to safe water 38 percent;
 the primary school enrollment is 50 percent; and the ratio of
 calorie supply available for consumption relative to nutritional
 requirements is 88 percent.
 The health of the Somali people is poor, with Che principal causes
 for morbidity and mortality being malnutrition and infectious
 disease, diarrhea, malaria, measles, whooping cough, and respira-
 tory infections. Health services are largely located in the urban
 area. There are a few rural health clinics, but these are not
 easily accessible to the majority of the nomadic population.
 Urban inhabitants benefit from a wider range of government social
 services, such as health and education, for these tend to be con-
 centrated in the cities and towns. Somali nomads are less
 
 
 277
 affluent than the urban population, and given their mobile life-
 style, have limited access to the services the Government is able
 to provide. The livelihood of this group is also subject to the
 greatest degree of risk because of recurrent droughts.
 While the Government has made efforts to meet the social and
 economic needs of its population, genuine resource constraints,
 restrictive economic policies, bureaucratic inefficiency and
 corruption have hindered its efforts. Recently, Somalia entered
 into an agreement with the IMP, and in keeping with the provisions
 of that agreement and other liberalizing measures, the Government
 has generated renewed economic activity among and greater income
 for farmers and nomads. Government attempts to meet the needs of
 its population are generally provided on a non-discriminatory
 basis.
 
 
 278
 U.$.OVcRStAS -L AN; AN) GANTS- 03LI'AT3NDS ;kl' LOAN .JTOORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL Y.A S  MILLIGNS3 Or OLLARS)
 LOUNTRY: SOUMAL:A
 19013    1? 1     17ez
 i.cCCN. ASIIST.-TTL          1..3     57.0     55.8
 LOANS .....                 17.7     15.      14.5
 GAANTS ............           .6     47..     41.3
 A.A D  ........".........      17.3      12.1     34.4
 LJANS ....... .......       I.o       0.0      a.0
 GkANTS............. .17.3           12.1     34.4
 (SEC.SUPP.A3ST.).            5.3       ).0     20.0
 B.FUO0  FR  PEACF .......      j),L     44.9     21.4
 LOANS ..............    ... 17.7     15.0     14.5
 GRANTS ................... 2.3    2.9       6.9
 TITLL  :-T TAL .........       17.7     15.3     14.5
 A. IN -LONS .....            17.7      15.u     14.5
 PAY. IN FRJ. CtU...           0.11      0.0      '2.0
 TITLc  iI-TOTAL .........       3Z.3     -,.9      6.9
 S.RzL   F.cC.IEV  "  WFP.     3 .3      29.9      6.9
 VOL.RZLi:F AGENCY .....        0.0      0.U       0.0
 C.OJ h:R  tCUN.  ASSIST.. .     U.0      0. 0     0.0
 LOANS .......... .........  0..0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0       1.0      0.0
 P=CAZ  CORPS ......       0.3      3.0       0.0
 NAR  JTICS ........        2.0      1.0      0.0
 OTm R ............ .  .  .. .       .3      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TUTAL. ..0.0             20.4     25.4
 LOGANS ..............   ....20.0     10.0     10.0
 GRANTS ...............    0.     I.'     15.4
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........        0.0       1.0     15.0
 5.CR!OIT $ALOS-F$...        "20.0      Z1.0    10.0
 C.INTL .IL.ED.TRNG ....        0.0       0.4      0.4
 U.TRAN-EXLESS STICK..          .0.1 3     .0      0.0
 E. THER  G*iSNTS ........     0.0       0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL  6CON.  a  M:L .. .    67.3     17.4     11 .2
 LOAN .............. ......  37.7     35.0     24.5
 ANTS .............      .. 49.1     42.4     56.7
 ----------------------------------------------------------
 OTHER US LOANS ..........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LX-IM 6ANN LOANS .......        0.0       0.0      0.0
 ALL (ThE.R ..............     .. 3.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCc FROM :NTERNATI)NAL AGiNCIHS
 193U     1911     19d2     194,-82
 TOTAL......... .3.2        15.z       0.0    341.9
 13RD               3.3  0..1         0.0       0.0
 IFC                0.0      0.&      0.3       0.4
 IA               15.0      3.0      0.0     141.4
 iOB                 .0      O.0      0.0       0.0
 AD5                '.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 AF.7.'                        0.0      52.t!
 UNDP               3.1      3.-       0.0     48.0
 0TmeR-JN           1.4       z.       0.0     13.8
 EC                 0.        .       0.0     78.5
 
 
 279
