SOMALIA
The 1989 State Department report on Somalia provides a detailed account of the substantial human rights abuses committed and tolerated by the government of President Mohamed Siad Barre. This year's report is a slight improvement on previous ones, which often greatly understated Somali government human rights abuses and tended to question rather than attempt to confirm reports of massive human rights violations from private human rights organizations.
The report, however, is deficient in appearing to take at face value the government's claims that it is committed to a genuine reform of the political and administrative system it originally put in place in 1969. In this regard, the report includes scattered references to government reform measures, but provides no details on these efforts. While the situation in Somalia remains unsettled, there have not been any meaningful reforms.
The report relies greatly on the State Department-sponsored Gersony report, released in August 1989, which notes detailed "massive human rights violations" committed by the Somali government and the anti-government Somali National Movement (SNM), during the outbreak of fighting between May 1988 and March 1989 in northern Somalia. The Gersony report described the systematic nature of government abuses, while refuting any claim that whatever abuses occurred were in situations in which the armed forces found themselves in imminent danger. Indeed, Gersony noted that his interviews with refugees and displaced persons focused on violence against "unarmed civilian non-combatants."
The report also cites accounts of independent human rights groups, including Amnesty International. However, some of the report's estimates of casualties inflicted by the government differ substantially from the higher figures provided by human rights groups. For example, Amnesty International noted that estimates of the total number killed through government shelling and aerial attacks range up to 50,000. And Africa Watch, in its January 1990 report, estimates that at least 12,000 civilians may have been killed by the Somali Army since May 1988, while at least 25,000 other civilians have been killed by government aerial bombings or artillery shellings.
The report notes several of the best-known incidents of major human rights abuses by government forces in 1989, including:
193
Somalia
•	the summary execution by armed forces of 46 or 47 mainly Isaak men at Gezira Beach after July rioting in the capital of Mogadishu;
•	the killings in March of an estimated 200 Isaak civilians from Erigavo after the SNM had been driven out of the village;
•	the killings of large numbers of civilians near Galcaio in central Somalia in November and in the southern village of Dobleh in September;
•	attacks on homes in Mogadishu in the days following the July riots; and
the detentions of defense lawyer Dr. Ismail Jumaale Ossobleh and several other prominent citizens in July (some of whom, including Dr. Jumaale Ossobleh, were released as part of the amnesty announced on October 21, the 20th anniversary of President Siad Barre's assumption of power).
The report also describes the broad use of "national security" powers, particularly by the National Security Services (NSS), to detain critics of the government and justify sweeping interferences with the homes and privacy of civilians, and notes that trials before the National Security Court do not meet international standards.
The report includes a useful summary of the "severe abridge[ment]" of freedom of speech, press and association, including the use of informants to monitor private conversations. In this regard, it improves upon previous reports, which tended to qualify the extent to which these fundamental rights had been circumscribed.
In several other respects, however, the report is unsatisfactory. The major shortcomings relate to its understated characterization of the attacks on villages and summary executions of large numbers of civilian non-combatants as "means of combating" the SNM and other dissident groups, as well as rioters. While it is true that many gross violations of human rights occurred in areas where SNM opposition activity was concentrated, there is ample evidence to demonstrate that attacks on civilians were unprovoked, not undertaken in circumstances in which the armed forces were in danger, and bore no relation to the military strategy against the SNM itself. The attacks on civilians were designed to frighten persons likely to be sympathetic to the SNM.
194
Somalia
In reporting the widespread civilian casualties, the authors of the report downplay the Somali government's role in the many killings of civilian non-combatants. In the section on extrajudicial killings, the report concludes only that the widespread killings "suggested" official government sanction. Available evidence confirms that this was in fact government policy.
Indeed, the report becomes internally inconsistent in this regard. On the one hand, the State Department acknowledges Gersony's finding that at least 5,000 unarmed civilians were deliberately killed by the Somali armed forces in a 10-month period ending in March 1989, even though civilians "no longer represented a threat" to the army. Yet, on the other hand, the report also explains the killings as being "a means of combatting" the SNM and other dissident groups, suggesting that the armed forces were under imminent danger at the time the killings took place.
In addition, while the report notes the spreading of fighting to the southern and central regions of the country, and that "[t]roops mutinied in the southern, central, and northern regions," it does so without providing sufficient detail. It does not give an adequate sense of the extent and increase in anti-government sentiments in these regions, as well as in the north. Most notably, the report makes no mention of the formation in 1989 of the United Somali Congress in the south-central region, and the Somali Patriotic Movement in the south, and does not make clear the degree of armed forces activities against civilian populations in both central and southern Somalia.
Of particular concern is the report's willingness to accept at face value claims of various reform measures in the military and political systems. For example, the report notes briefly that "[rjeformist groups" made efforts to reduce the arbitrary powers of detention practiced by the security services, "but were only partially successful." It does not, however, provide any evidence to corroborate this assertion. There were in fact no changes in the government's power to detain individuals.
The report's discussion of the October 21 amnesty of more than 1,000 prisoners leaves a mistaken impression that only a few persons remained in detention at the end of the year. As of the end of the year, a significant number of persons still were being confined awaiting trial for alleged political offenses. Some of these detainees were being held incommunicado at the "Godka" National Security
195
Somalia
Service prison in Mogadishu — a notorious government facility for interrogation and detention, often for extended periods, that inexplicably is not mentioned in the report. This facility is described as a torture center by several sources, including Amnesty International.
Similarly, the report appears to give President Siad Barre credit for "offer[ing] to negotiate with dissident organizations" as part of a plan to hold multi-party elections, perhaps as early as 1990. The report states that Siad Barre's "initial attempts" near the end of the year to negotiate with these opposition groups "had been rebuffed . . . ." This gives the misleading impression that the president had launched a good-faith effort to dramatically alter the political system in Somalia, only to be met with resistance by opposition movements.
In fact, as the report itself notes, by the end of 1989 "no practical steps" had yet been taken to implement the proposals for fundamental constitutional changes. Moreover, there is evidence that given the significant restrictions the government would place on opposition parties, the reform plan would be of at best marginal importance. It has been reported that President Siad Barre has informed the constitutional review committee established to prepare for multi-party elections that three parties -- labelled socialist, nationalist, and democratic -- will be sufficient. Furthermore, the government has stated that those who have taken part in or supported armed conflict against the state may not participate in the elections, and that no party based on either tribalism or regionalism will be permitted. The latter limitation is especially significant, because any meaningful opposition to the governing party almost certainly would be Organized on a regional and/or clan basis.
There have not been any meaningful changes made to date to the legal system, particularly as would affect the powers of the various national security agencies. Instead, the reforms appear to be at best piecemeal maneuvering undertaken by a government seeking to preserve itself in the face of increasing domestic and international opposition, and to win back much-needed foreign economic and military assistance.
It will be critical for the State Department to monitor throughout 1990 whether President Siad Barre's professed commitment to a multi-party system of civilian government -- a commitment given some credence in the 1989 report — proves to be at all genuine.
196
