 SOMALIA
 Somalia has been without a central government since its last president, dictator
 Mohamed Siad Barre, fled the country in 1991. Subsequent fighting among rival fac-
 tion leaders resulted in the killing, dislocation, and starvation of thousands of Soma-
 lis and led the United Nations to intervene militarily in 1992.
 Serious fighting among rival clans continued in Mogadishu, in the region outside
 of Baidoa, and in the area around Kismayo. The violence had a minimal effect on
 the balance of power between the various factions. Mogadishu faction leaders Ali
 Mahei, Hussein Aideed, and Osman Atto signed peace accords to prevent combat be-
 tween the rival factions, but disagreements remained about how to govern the-cap-
 ital area. Leading Somalis launched several serious efforts to advance the reconcili-
 ation process. The leaders of over two dozen groups formed the National Salvation
 Council (NSC) in January in an attempt to establish a national government. This
 group did not include Hussein Aideed. Until December, the group had failed to
 agree on the future governance of the country. In a conference in Cairo, Egypt in
 December, all parties except two signed the so-called "Cairo Declaration." The Dec-
 laration provides for a 13-person Council of Presidents, a prime minister, and a na-
 tional assembly. A National Reconciliation Conference in early 1998 in Baidoa is
 scheduled to negotiate further details, including appointments.
 
 
 312
 The NSC's executive committee, a five-member body that included the major fac-
 tion leaders, organized a national reconciliation conference in Bosasso in November,
 however, it did not lead to concrete results. Various intermediaries, including the
 Arab League, the Organization of the Islamic conference, the United Nations, the
 Organization of African Unity, and the Intergovernmental Authority on Develop-
 ment (IGAD) sought to promote reconciliation, with little success.
 In the northwest, the separatist "Republic of Somaliland" (Somaliland) established
 a Constitution and- a Parliament and conducted democratic elections. The
 Somaliland authorities refused to participate in the national reconciliation con-
 ference; It continued to proclaim its independence but did not receive international
 recognition. The absence of a central government prompted the continued establish-
 ment of rudimentary local administrations, most of which--are based on the author-
 ity of the predominant clan and faction in the area. Local authority remained con-
 tested, however, in the Kismayo area, parts of the northwest, and in Mogadishu. Ju-
 dicial structures are dependent on the predominant local clans and factions for their
 -authority.
 Clan and factional militias, in some cases supplemented by local police forces es-
 tablished with U.N. help in the early 1990's, continued to function with varying de-
 grees of effectiveness. Police and militias committed numerous human rights abuses.
 While the country is desperately poor, the economy continued to improve in 1997.
 - Relative peace in much of the country,,leading to the rising level of commercial ac-
 tivity, contributed to this recovery. Livestock and fruit exports continued to revive,
 although exports remained disrupted by the closure of Mogadishu seaport through-
 out the year. Somalia remains a chronic food deficit country, however, and some of
 "the most fertile agricultural regions suffered from drought, serious flooding, or both.
 In November floods caused by torrential rains left as many as 250,000 homeless in
 the south. Weather-related problems and the lack of employment opportunities led
 to some malnutrition in Mogadishu and other communities. International relief ef-
 forts were hampered by political insecurity.
 Human rights abuses continued. Many civilian citizens were killed in factional
 fighting, especially among the Hussein Aideed, Osman Atto, Ali Madhi, and Musa
 Sude factions in the Mogadishu, Baidoa, and Kismayo areas. Numerous persons
 were killed in interclan fighting in the Baidoa and Kismayo areas. Key human
 rights problems remained the lack of political rights in the absence of a central au-
 thority, the reliance of some communities on harsh Shari'a punishments, including
 amputations and stoning, harsh prison conditions, societal discrimination against
 women, and the mistreatment of women and children, including the nearly univer-
 sal practice of female genital mutilation (FGM). There is no effective system for the
 protection of worker rights.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Political violence and banditry have
 been endemic since the 1991 revolt against Siad Barre, who fled the country. Since
 the revolt, tens of thousands of citizens, mostly noncombatants, have been killed in
 interfactional and interclan fighting (see Section 1.g.).
 Politically motivated extrajudicial killings continued, although there were fewer
 killings than in 1996. For example, in March the Aideed faction abducted and killed
 a prisoner held for a criminal offense in a South Mogadishu prison under the fac-
 tion's control; the killing was reportedly in revenge. On June 20 of a Portuguese doc-
 tor working in Baidoa with a French nongovernmental organization (NGO) was
 killed. The chief suspect reportedly was seeking revenge for the death of his brother,
 who had been in the doctor's care. The lack of an effective response to this killing
 by local officials prompted relief organizations to leave Baidoa.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no known reports of unresolved politically moti-
 vated disappearances, although cases might easily have been concealed among the
 thousands of returning refugees, displaced persons, and war dead. Kidnaping re-
 mained a problem in many areas, particularly for relief workers and critics of fac-
 tion leaders (see Section 1.d.).
 Fighters of the Wasangeli subclan kidnaped five U.N. and European Union aid
 workers in the northwest in November, apparently in retaliation for the seizure of
 a Palestinian businessman by a rival subclan, the Marjeteen. They later released
 the Palestinian citizen and the aid workers unharmed.
 No politically related kidnapings have taken place in the northwest since the
 spring of 1996.
 
 
 313
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 There were no reports of the use of torture by warring militiamen against each
 other or against civilians. Many incidents involving torture are probably unreported.
 In North Mogadishu, parts of South Mogadishu, the Middle Shabelle, and parts
 of the Gedo and Hiran regions, Shari'a courts regularly sentenced convicted thieves
 to public lashings and, far less frequently, to the amputation of their hands (see Sec-
 tion i.e.). The North Mogadishu Shari'a (Islamic) court was effectively inoperative
 by year's end.
 rison conditions varied by region but were life threatening in some facilities.
 Conditions at the North Mogadishu prison of the Shari'a court system grew so harsh
 that prison officials released all but a handful of the inmates. In Bosasso, 10 pris-
 oners died after spending a night in an overcrowded, overheated cell; 20 others were
 hospitalized. In many areas, prisoners are able to receive food from family members
 or from relief agencies.
 The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) delegates were permitted
 to visitprisoners in some parts of the country, as were Western diplomats.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-In the absence of constitutional or other
 legal p rtections, Somali factions and armed bandits continued to engage in arbi-
 trary detention. Most incidents were the result of disputes among and within clans,
 political disagreements, and the requirements of military security. Among the most
 serious incidents were the February 16-19 occupation of an NGO's hospital in
 Bosass and the brief detention in early July of World Food Program staff in
 Mogadshu. In August the AI'Ittihad faction arrested several U.N. officials in Gedo.
 Each incident was resolved peacefully, generally after the intervention of local clan
 elders.
 None of the factions used forced exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-There is no national judicial system.
 Some regions have established local courts that depend on the predominant local
 clan and associated faction for their authority.
 The judiciary in most regions relies on some combination of traditional and cus-
 tomary justice, Shari'a law, and the pre-1991 penal code. Shari'a courts continued
 to operate in several regions, partially filling the vacuum created by the absence of
 normal government authority. Shari'a courts traditionally ruled in cases of civil and
 family law, but their jurisdiction was extended to criminal proceedings in some re-
 gions beginning in 1994. In Bosasso and Afmedow, for example, authorities surren-
 der criminals to the families of their victims, who exact blood compensation in keep-
 ing with Somali tradition. In November the U.N. in Kismayo reportedly turned over
 to victims' clans a group of guards accused of indiscriminate firing into a crowd. The
 guards were given a choice of execution or paying compensation to the families. The
 case was unresolved at year's end.
 In the northwest, the Republic of Somaliland adopted a new constitution based
 on democratic principles. Some district and regional courts, as well as a "supreme
 court" in Hargeisa, are functioning. In Bardera, courts apply a combination of Is-
 lamic Shari'a law and the pre-1991 penal code.
 In North Mogadishu, a segment of South Mogadishu, the Middle Shabelle, and
 parts of the Gedo and Hiran regions, court decisions are based solely on Shari'a law.
 In those areas and parts of Gedo and Hiran regions, where Shari'a culture is par-
 ticularly entrenched, harsh punishments-including amputations and stoning-are
 meted out for certain offenses. With the decline in Shari'a court influence, these
 practices diminished during the year. Armed conflicts between Islamic radicals and
 other citizens also caused many deaths in Gedo region. This conflict largely ended
 after the rebel troops were forced out of Gedo.
 The right to representation by an attorney and the right of appeal do not exist
 in those areas applying traditional and customary judicial practices or Shari'a law.
 These rights are more often respected in regions that continue to apply the pre-
 1991 penal code and in Somaliland. However, Somali human rights organizations
 note that proceedings in the North Mogadishu Shari'a court often contravene the
 norms of Shari'a law. In one serious incident at the end of spring, the court denied
 basic rights, including the right to counsel and to face witnesses, to a group sus-
 pected of plundering a local marketplace. Public protest led to the postponement of
 the planned mass trial, but the suspects remain in custody.
 There were no reports that the various factions held identifiable political pris-
 oners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Looting
 and forced entry into private property continued but at levels again reduced from
 previous years, when large numbers of marauding militiamen first occupied many
 urban properties. The marauders continued to control most such properties at year's
 end. Control of properties that were forcibly occupied during militia campaigns in
 
 
 314
 1992-1993, notably in Mogadishu and the Lower Shabelle, remains a problem in na-
 tional reconciliation efforts.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-Warring factions continued to commit violations of humanitarian law, in-
 cluding the killing of civilian noncombatants. Sporadic fighting in the Mogadishu
 area between pro- and anti-Aideed militia led to numerous of civilian deaths and
 hundreds of wounded. Numerous combatants also lost their lives. Both sides shelled
 targets located in densely populated neighborhoods or areas controlled by civilians.
 In March interclan fighting in Galgudud region, resulted in the deaths of 10 per-
 sons; an additional 18 were wounded. In Mogadishu in April, 17 persons were killed.
 From August through December, at least 2 dozen persons died as a result of fighting
 within, the Abgal clan, the dominant group in North Mogadishu and Lower Shabelle.
 Intermittent combat in North Mogadishu between militia loyal to faction leader
 All Madhi and militia of his rival Sheikh Ali Dherre, leader of the Shari'a court,
 was responsible for at-least one dozen deaths during the year.
 Fighting in the south between Islamic radicals and- their clan and factional oppo-
 nents led to many additional deaths. Repeated incursions into Somalia by forces in
 pursuit of the radicals and bandit gangs contributed to the high toll of lives. In
 Kismayo clashes between the Majerteen and Marehan clans also caused numerous
 deaths. Between March and year's end, more than-150. people, including noncombat-
 ants were killed as a result of these incidents. Interclan fighting in Burao and
 Erigavo, two towns in the northwest, claimed at least six lives during the summer.
 These areas became calm after the intervention and mediation of clan elders from
 both sides of the conflict.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Most citizens obtain news from foreign news
 broadcasts, chiefly the British Broadcasting 'Corporation (BBC), which transmits a
 daily Somali language program. The major faction leaders in Mogadishu, as well as
 the authorities of the Government of Somaliland operate small radio stations. The
 print media consist largely of short, photocopied, dailies, published in the larger
 cities and often linked to one of the factions. Several of these newspapers are nomi-
 nally independent and are critical of the faction leaders. Somaliland has two inde-
 pendent daily newspapers, one government daily, and an English language news-
 paper.
 In late March; gunmen forcibly entered the home of the BBC correspondent in
 Mogadishu, stole his camera and computer equipment, and beat him senseless. Al-
 though robbery was a possible motive, the journalist had published reports critical
 of militant Islamic cleric Sheikh Ali Dherre. In April another BBC journalist in the
 capital received threats after disseminating a report critical of a former Somali dip-
 lomat and a Malaysian businessman.
 Also in April, courts in Somaliland ordered the arrest of a newspaper publisher
 who had launched an investigative series on official corruption. Although the pub-
 "lisher was tried for slander, no judgment was announced. The trial was marred by
 a violent attack against a news photographer by a senior "minister" in the local gov-
 ernment; he was later dismissed from his job. Authorities again detained the pub-
 lisher and several of his coworkers in September and accusedthem of printing false
 customs receipts. Public criticism and findings by a regional court and the par-
 -liament that the arrests were carried out without due process and were unconstitu-
 tional led to the release of the journalists after 1 week. Some of them were re-
 arrested shortly thereafter on the same charges and faced trial at year's end.
 There is no organized higher educational system in the country.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Many clans and factions held
 meetings during the year without incident, albeit usually under tight security. Al-
 -though citizens are free to -assemble in public, the lack of security effectively limits
 this right in many .parts of the country. Few public rallies took place during the
 year without the sponsorship of an armed group.
 Some professional groups and local NGO's operate as security conditions permit.
 The new Constitution of Somaliland established the right of freedom of associa-
 tion.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Somalis are overwhelmingly Sunni Muslim. Local tradi-
 tion and past law make -proselytization a crime for any religion except Islam. Some
 local administrations have made Islam the official religion in their regions, in addi-
 tion to establishing a judicial system based on Shari'a law (see Section i.e.). Non-
 Sunni Muslims are often viewed with suspicion by members of the Sunni majority.
 'There is strong social pressure to respect Islamic traditions, especially in fundamen-
 talist enclaves such as Luuq, in the Gedo region. There is a small, low-profile Chris-
 
 
 tian community. Christian-based international relief organizations generally operate
 without interference so long as they refrain from proselytizing.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Freedom of movement continued to be restricted in many parts of the
 country. Checkpoints manned by militiamen loyal to one clan or faction inhibited
 passage by other groups. In the absence of a recognized national government, most
 citizens do not have documents needed for international travel. As security condi-
 tions improved in many parts of the country, refugees and internally displaced per-
 sons continued to return to their homes, particularly in the northwest.
 Ethiopia still holds at least 250,000 Somali refugees, mostly from the northwest.
 The UN-CR carried out a pilot repatriation of 1,000 persons in May, and was in
 the process of cariying out a repatriation of 20,000 at year's end.
 Djibouti hosted approximately 20,000 Somali refugees in camps at year's end, and
 about 2,000 in its capital city.siKey
 The number of Somali refugees         dropped to approximately 125,000 as of
 year's end, down from more than 400,000 at the height of the humanitarian crisis
 in 1992. The serious floods late in the year halted repatriation.
 As Somalia has no functioning government, there is no policy of first asylum, al-
 though a small number of Ethiopian refugees remained in Somalia, mostly in the
 northeast near Bosasso. The authorities in northwest Somalia have cooperated with
 the U. N. High Commissioner for Refugees and other humanitarian assistance orga-
 nizations in assisting refugees. There were no reports of forced expulsion of those
 having a valid claim to refugee status.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 In the absence of a widely supported, effective national government, recognized
 domestically or internationally, citizens could not exercise this right. In most, re-
 gions, local councils of clan leaders function as rulers. Although many such groups
 derive their authority from the traditional deference given clan elders, most face op-
 position of varying strength from political factions and radical Islamic groups.
 Although several women are important behind-the-scenes figures in the various
 factions, women as a group remain outside the political process. No women hold
 prominent public positions.
 In the "Republic of Somaliland," the existence of which was endorsed by clan el-
 ders in 1991 and 1993, a 315-person conference of clans that had begun in Novem-
 ber 1996 led to a peace accord early in the year. It demobilized militia groups, estab-
 lished a Constitution and a Parliament with- proportional clan representation, and
 held an election of a president and vice president from a slate of candidates. The
 Hargeisa authorities have established functioning administrative-, institutions in
 about half of the territory that they claim.       . I  I
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Several local human rights organizations were active during the year. ICRC dele-
 gates were permitted to visit prisons in some parts of the country, a' were Western
 diplomats. The United Nations Special Rapporteur on Human Rights in Somalia vis-
 ited the country during the spring and prepared a report for the Secretary General.
 International humanitarian N GOs and U.N. agencies continued to operate, but the
 poor security situation limited their activities in some areas. In July an Italian dele-
 gation investigating abuses committed by Italian soldiers in 1993 interviewed So-
 mali witnesses in Addis Ababa.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Discrimination against women and widespread abuse of children continued to be
 serious problems.
 Women.-Women suffered heavily disproportionate levels of violence in the civil
 war and in the, strife that followed. During the year, however, there were again no
 reports of systematic attacks on women in connection with the continuing civil
 strife.
 Women are systematically subordinated in the country's overwhelmingly patriar-
 chal culture. Polygyny is lawful; polyandry is not. Under laws issued by the former
 government, female children could inherit property, but only half the amount to
 which their brothers were entitled. Similarly, according to the tradition of blood
 compensation, those found guilty in the death of a woman must pay only half as
 much to the agieved family as they would if the victim were a man.
 Children.-Children remain among the chief victims of the continuing violence.
 Boys as young as 14 or 15 years of age have participated in militia attacks, and
 
 
 many youths are members of the marauding gangs known as "Mooryann (parasites
 of maggots)." Even in areas with relative security, lack of resources has limited the
 opportunity for children to attend school.
 Female genital mutilation (FGM), which is widely condemned by international
 health experts as damaging to both physical and psychological health, is a nearly
 universal practice. An independent expert in the field estimates that 98 percent of
 females have been subjected to FGM. The practice was illegal in 1991, when the
 Siad Barre government collapsed; it remains technically illegal, but the law is not
 enforced. Whzile U.N. agencies and NGO's have made intensive efforts to educate
 people about the danger of FGM, no reliable statistics are available on their success.
 People With Disabiities.-Before the colapse of the state in 1991, there were no
 laws mandating accessibility to public buildings, transportation, or government
 services for the disabled. In the absence of a functioning government, there are no
 authorities to address these problems or assist the disabled. Several local NGO's are
 attempting to provide limitdscial and medical services to the disabled.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-More than 80 percent of the people share a
 common ethnic heritage, religion, and nomadic culture. The largest minority group,
 Bantu Somalis are descended from slaves brought to the country about 300 years
 ago. In virtually all areas, members of groups other than the predominant clan in
 that area are excluded from effective participation in governing institutions and are
 subject to discrimination in employment, judicial proceedings, and access to public
 services.
 Members of minority groups are subjected to harassment, intimidation, and abuse
 by armed gunmen of all affiliations.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The 1990 Constitution provided workers with the
 right to form unions, but the civil war and factional fighting negatedthis provision
 and shattered the single labor confederation, the then government-controlled Gen-
 eral Federation of Somali Trade Unions. Given the extent of the political and eco-
 nomic breakdown and the lack of legal enforcement mechanisms, trade unions can
 not function freely.
 The new constitution of Somaliland established the- right of freedom of associa-
 tion, but no unions or employer associations have yet come into existence.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Wages and work require-
 ments in traditional Somali culture are largely established by barter based on sup-
 ply, demand, and the influence of the clan from which the worker originates. As
 during past years, labor disputes sometimes led to the use of force or kidnaping.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Local partners of multinational
 fruit export firms reportedly used forced labor, including forced labor by children in
 some areas of the Lower Shabelle.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-Formal
 employment of children was rare, but youths commonly participate in herding, agri-
 culture, and household labor from an early age. The lack of educational opportuni-
 ties are severely depressed economic conditions make such employment a necessity.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There was no organized effort by any of the
 factions or de facto regional administrations to monitor acceptable -conditions of
 work during the year.
