 SOMALIA
 Somalia, a nominally constitutional democracy in which civil
 and political rights are very limited, has been ruled for the
 past 15 years by President Mohamed Siad Barre, as head of the
 armed forces and Secretary General of the Somalia Revolutionary
 Socialist Party, the country's single political party. The
 formal government structure includes a Supreme Revolutionary
 Council formed in 1969 (now moribund), the Somali Revolutionary
 Socialist Party formed in 1976, a People's Assembly established
 in 1980, and a 45-member Council of Ministers. The President
 also regularly convenes the party politburo, a closer circle of
 advisors composed of the most powerful four or five ministers
 of government. However, the ultimate source of the President's
 political authority is the military, which brought him to power
 in 1969. The importance of the military in Somali society is
 reinforced by the continuing conflict between Somalia and
 Ethiopia over the area of Ethiopia populated by ethnic Somalis,
 as well as by the military's occasional role, along with the
 police, as keeper of civil order.
 Ethiopia and Somalia support armed dissident activity against
 the other. Dissident activity increased in 1984 beginning with
 the bombing of the Addis to Djibouti railway in January, to
 which Ethiopia reacted with the bombing of the town of Borama
 in the same month. Somali incursions into Ethiopia are more
 difficult to track than Ethiopian activities. Recent Ethiopian
 overflights have extended as far east of disputed areas as
 Baidoa--only 150 kilometers from Mogadishu.
 Significant numbers of ethnic Somalis live in the neighboring
 states of Kenya and Djibouti, as well as Ethiopia. There are
 no active territorial disputes between Somalia and either Kenya
 or Djibouti.
 The 1979 Constitution provides limited guarantees of political
 and civil rights. However, it also contains provisions
 allowing for its selective suspension, and these were invoked
 by President Siad during a state of emergency between October
 1980 and February 1982. While the Constitution has been
 reinstated, civil and political rights are tightly
 circumscribed and organized criticism of the Government is not
 permitted.
 Somalia has only one ethnic group, the Somali, which is
 subdivided into clans and clan groups. Although the country is
 ethnically and linguistically homogeneous, the clan divisions
 have a major impact on internal politics. Women have a
 prominent voice in many aspects of social and cultural life and
 have made inroads in government and business with the strong
 support of President Siad. In general, religious practices are
 not restricted, although proselytizing is not allowed, and
 religious leaders are not permitted to discuss political themes
 in their sermons.
 Somalia is a poor country with few natural resources. Most
 Somalis earn their living as herdsmen or farmers. The
 country's economic development suffers from frequent drought
 and recurrent conflict with Ethiopia, which has resulted in
 heavy defense expenditures and a massive refugee problem.
 Somalia receives substantial international refugee assistance,
 and large amounts of development assistance, commodity aid, and
 budget support. Most of the modern sector of the economy is
 
 
 288
 SOMALIA
 government controlled and plagued by bureaucratic
 inefficiencies and a lack of adequately trained personnel. In
 recent years the Government has encouraged development of the
 private sector and foreign investment. Change has been slow,
 but Somalia has made some economic and financial progress
 through joint efforts with the International Monetary Fund and
 the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
 The Government commitment to develop the private sector has
 involved divestiture of some state-owned organizations. In
 addition, organizations such as the General Federation of
 Somali Trade Unions and the Union of Somali Cooperatives
 Movement, which previously were tightly controlled by the
 central government and the party, appear to have been allowed
 more independence.
 The principal arm of the internal security apparatus is the
 National Security Service, which can arrest and detain people
 indefinitely. The Government shows little hesitation in
 imprisoning those whom it sees as a threat to its security.
 Political prisoners have occasionally been held for years, then
 released and rehabilitated, with some of them assuming
 responsible positions in the Government. The exact number of
 political detainees is unknown, but estimated to be 350 to 500,
 with new prisoners being incarcerated as others are released.
 Many have not yet been charged.
 The 1983 Agreement with the International Committee of the Red
 Cross on Welfare of Prisoners of War has met with limited
 success, and discussions are continuing on ICRC concern for the
 welfare and repatriation of Ethiopian POW's (as well as contact
 with Somali relatives of POW's held by Ethiopia).
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no reported instances of political killings by the
 Government in 1984. The Ethiopian-based Somali National
 Movement has issued radio statements that it is targeting
 prominent Issak clan supporters of the Siad Barre Government
 and has waged a bombing campaign in the northwest city of
 Hargeisa.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reported cases of disappearance in 1984.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 There continue to be allegations of systematic torture, but
 they have not been substantiated. There is evidence of rough
 treatment of criminal suspects by Somali police authorities in
 order to obtain confessions. Living conditions in prisons can
 be harsh.
 
 
 289
 SOMALIA
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Despite a constitutional provision guaranteeing formal charges
 and a speedy trial, arrests without warrants and indefinite
 detention without charges do occur in cases involving
 dissenters and others viewed by the Government as a threat to
 national security. At least 200 of the 350-500 political
 prisoners are being detained without charge, including six high
 government officials arrested in June 1982. A seventh died in
 prison. Others deemed to be no longer a threat to the
 Government have been released in the past year. These include
 a former Chief of Police and the wife of a defector who had
 been listed by Amnesty International as a prisoner of
 conscience. Habeas corpus does not exist in cases having to do
 with national security. In at least some cases, political
 prisoners are denied visitors and access to lawyers prior to
 being formally charged. Delays in bringing charges can be
 lengthy in criminal cases as well.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Somali court system, in both criminal and political cases,
 is subject to review and control by the Executive. Since 1970,
 judges have been nominated by the Supreme Revolutionary Council
 and all positions of the Higher Judicial Council, the highest
 judicial review body, have been taken over by Supreme
 Revolutionary Council members. The 1979 Constitution made the
 President Chairman of the Higher Judicial Council and added
 amnesty matters to its jurisdiction, thereby compromising the
 independence of the judiciary. In regular courts, judges refer
 to the Koran in rendering legal decisions pertaining to family
 matters such as marriage and inheritance. Prisoners can be
 held indefinitely without charge, and in some cases they can be
 tried without a lawyer in a closed session. The National
 Security Court, established in 1969, has authority with no
 right of appeal in cases of crimes against the State, the
 Government, or public order. Its deliberations are secret, and
 it is directly subordinate to the Government.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 'Mobilization campaigns' are organized by the Somali
 Revolutionary Socialist Party to promote public participation
 in, and enthusiasm for, various civic and national programs as
 well as general support for government policies. Participation
 in these campaigns is urged but not strictly enforced.
 The National Security Service has the authority to search homes
 without warrants and detain anyone suspected of being a
 political dissenter. This authority extends to wiretapping and
 opening of mail although there is no evidence that such
 practices are broadly used. Through a comprehensive network of
 informants the National Security Service is capable of
 effectively tracking the movements of individuals. This gives
 it the potential, if not the actual, ability to collect a great
 deal of information on private citizens. As a result, it is
 feared by most citizens.
 Throughout 1984 there has been sporadic forced conscription
 into the military.
 
 
 290
 SOMALIA
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The media are owned and operated by the Government, and they
 are devoted to disseminating information and opinion acceptable
 to the Government. Dissenting views are not allowed public
 expression. Members of opposition groups are not permitted
 public expression of their views and are subject to indefinite
 imprisonment for publicly criticizing the Government. However,
 anti-Government pamphlets and tracts do occasionally surface in
 urban centers. Foreign publications are subject to sporadic
 censorship.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 All non-religious organizations and public gatherings in the
 country are subject to government control or supervision.
 Rallies or meetings of a direct political nature are organized
 only by the Government to promote its own programs. The
 country's single labor confederation is government controlled
 and has no right to strike. The main role of the unions is to
 organize government oversight of the work force by monitoring
 its mood and providing a conduit for worker grievances.
 Government regulation of the General Federation of Somali Trade
 Unions and the Union of Somali Cooperatives Movement has eased
 considerably during 1984, with the result that these formerly
 rigid Soviet-style organizations are making tentative contact
 with their autonomous Western counterparts. The GFSTU labor
 confederation is a member at the Ghana-based, continent wide,
 Organization of African Trade Union Unity (OATUU), as well as
 of the International Confederation of Arab Trade Unions (ICATU).
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Islam is the state religion and is adhered to by over 95
 percent of the population. There is little Government
 interference in religious matters. However, some tensions are
 created by government appeals for national consolidation which
 cut across the clan and religious groupings of the traditional
 political system. Religious groups such as the Sufi orders
 enjoy religious freedom, but they have learned from past
 experience not to try to influence the political process.
 Members of religions other than Islam may freely practice their
 faith but may not proselytize.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Internal travel is not formally restricted but is controlled
 through numerous police and military checkpoints in the towns,
 border areas, and places where inter-clan violence occurs.
 Although passports can be obtained by any Somali citizen, the
 Government prevents the departure of people it does not wish to
 leave the country, especially young men of military age, by
 denying exit visas. Emigration is permitted but not for
 government employees. The Somali Government does not exile its
 opponents. Somalis who have left the country to reside abroad
 have done so voluntarily, either because of economic
 opportunities or because they oppose the President. The
 Government allows repatriation, and in some cases provides
 former dissident exiles with official government or military
 positions. In other cases, returnees have been interrogated
 
 
 291
 SOMALIA
 and detained indefinitely without trial for anti-Government
 activities.
 There are 350-400,000 ethnic Somali refugees from Ethiopia in
 Somalia. For political and kinship reasons, refugees are not
 forced to return to Ethiopia. In fact, the Somali Government
 prefers that they not return. While it is not possible for
 authorities to police the movement of individuals in the more
 remote refugee camp sites, there have been reports of the
 military periodically preventing the departure of large groups
 of refugees. In addition, cases of government conscription of
 refugees from camps into the armed forces have continued in
 1984. In mid to late 1984 there was a new influx of displaced
 persons from Ethiopia arriving mainly in northwest Somalia
 coincident with severe drought conditions in Ethiopia and
 institutionalization of political changes there along Soviet
 lines.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 President Siad Barre rules Somalia and controls political
 participation through the single legal party. The Somali
 Revolutionary Socialist Party directs participation in Somali
 political affairs for individuals and organizations, such as
 the General Federation of Somali Trade Unions, the Somali
 Women's Democratic Organization, and the Somali Revolutionary
 Youth Union. Elections were last held for the People's
 Assembly in December 1979, consisting of a vote for or against
 the party's national slate of candidates running uncontested.
 The Constitution stipulates that elections be held every five
 years, but the President has the power to delay elections.
 There is no legal opposition and criticism of government
 policies is forbidden. Recognizing the continuing strength of
 the traditonal, clan-based political system, President Siad and
 members of his Government frequently hold formal and informal
 consultations with various clan leaders. President Siad has
 used clan politics to consolidate and maintain his rule by
 placing members of his own clan, the Marehan, in key
 positions. However, members of other clans are also allocated
 responsible positions in government. Clan identification is
 very strong and, for many Somalis, the traditional system is
 the accepted method of political expression. Clan politics and
 clan rivalries occasionally erupt into violence.
 Women and minorities participate in politics and government.
 The Somali Women's Democratic Organization, though subordinate
 to the party, has advocated greater political participation and
 mobilization for women. President Siad has long been an
 advocate of greater rights for women, despite Islamic
 opposition to this policy. A number of women are in Parliament
 and in important positions in various ministries and within the
 party, and Somalia has recently appointed its first woman
 Ambassador.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Somali Government has refused permission for foreign
 officials or human rights organizations to visit political
 prisoners, although in 1983 Somalia allowed an International
 
 
 292
 SOMALIA
 Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) team to inspect facilities
 for prisoners of war from the conflict with Ethiopia. An ICRC
 representative is now accredited to Somalia. There are no
 Somali organizations which are actively concerned with human
 rights issues. In addressing itself to human rights issues at
 international forums, Somalia usually limits itself to general
 statements and to criticism of human rights practices in
 Ethiopia. The International Parliamentary Union has approved
 resolutions calling on the Somali Government to release the six
 parliamentarians held under arrest since 1982. Amnesty
 International in its 1984 Report also expressed its concern
 over the continued detention of these (and other) persons
 without trial, and stated that it had requested details on the
 death of a seventh, who had reportedly been refused hospital
 admission and denied access to family. The Attorney General
 later sent Amnesty International a copy of the post mortem
 report, which indicated kidney failure, but provided no further
 information or guarantees on treatment of prisoners. Freedom
 House terms Somalia 'not free.'
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Sixty percent of Somalia's 6.4 million people are nomads, 20
 percent are settled rural dwellers, and 20 percent are urban.
 Statistics on Somali economic and social conditions are limited
 and often inaccurate. Per capita gross national product in
 1982 was about $295, making Somalia one of the poorest
 countries in the world. Life expectancy at birth is 39.6 years
 and the infant mortality rate is 171.8 per one thousand
 births. The adult literacy rate in Somali is estimated at 6
 percent (male 11 percent, female 3 percent) and about 5.2
 percent in other languages such as Arabic, Italian, English,
 and Russian. The primary school enrollment ratio in 1980 was
 38 percent, (male 47 percent, female 29 percent). The ratio of
 calorie supply available for consumption relative to
 nutritional requirements was 96 percent in 1977. The
 percentage of population with access to safe drinking water was
 33 percent in 1976.
 The health of the Somali people is poor, with the principal
 causes of morbidity and mortality being malnutrition and
 infectious disease including diarrhea, malaria, measles,
 whooping cough, and respiratory infections. Health service
 facilities are generally poor, although urban inhabitants
 benefit from a wider range of government health and social
 services. Somali nomads are poorer than the urban population,
 with limited access to health and social services. The
 livelihood of this group is also subject to the greatest degree
 of risk because of recurrent droughts. The unavailablity of
 health care and other social services is due to the country's
 poverty and primary attention to security issues, rather than
 any deliberate government policy of neglect.
 Somali culture remains overwhelmingly traditional. This allows
 a degree of social support for individuals, but also permits
 the continuation of practices such as female circumcision. The
 Somali Government has improved the legal and political status
 of women in recent years to allow participation in the work
 place and in government. In 1975 women were given equal rights
 in several respects, including equal inheritance rights. The
 Government also promotes universal and coeducational schooling
 to the extent that resources allow. However, the dominance of
 traditional cultures is giving way slowly.
 
 
 293
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: SOMALIA
 1982     1983     1984
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...       55.8     69.7     81.7
 LOANS ..............       14.5     15.0     16.0
 GRANTS .............       41.3     54.7    65.7
 A.AID  ..................      34.4     47.9    50.6
 LOANS ..............      0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............       34.4     47.9    50.6
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.) ..        20.0    21.0     35.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE ......        21.4     21.8     31.1
 LOANS ..............       14.5     15.0     16.0
 GRANTS .............        6.9     6.8      15.1
 TITLE I-TOTAL .........        14.5     15.0     16.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS ....        14.5     15.0     16.0
 -PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0     0.0      0.0
 TITLE II-TOTAL .........        6.9      6.8     15.1
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & VFP.         6.9     6.8      15.1
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        0.0      0.0     0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...         0.0     0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ............. .0.0           0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS ......        0.0     0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0     0.0      0.0
 OTHER ............      0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        25.4    30.6     33.0
 LOANS ..............       10.0     10.0     0.0
 GRANTS ..............      15.4     20.6    33.0
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........       15.0     20.0    32.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....       10.0     10.0     0.0
 C.INTL MIL.EO.TRNG ....        0.4     0.6       1.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0      0.0     0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........        0.0     0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & NIL...       81.2     100.A   114.7
 LOANS ..............       24.5     25.0     16.0
 GRANTS .............       56.7     75.3    98.7
 OTHER US LOANS ..........        0.0      0.0     0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......        0.0     0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER ..............        0.0      0.0     0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1982     1983     1984     1946-84
 TOTAL ........    16.5     33.0     36.5    444.4
 IBRO               0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 IFC                0.0     0.0      0.0      0.4
 IDA               15.0     23.0     31.5   234.4
 1DB                0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 ADS                0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0
 AFDB               0.0      3.2      0.0     56.0
 UNOP               1.5      6.8      0.0     56.3
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0      5.0     19.8
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0    78.5
 
 
 294
