 SOMALIA
 Engaged in an undeclared war with Ethiopia and faced
 with the proclaimed task of bringing about a socialist
 transformation in Somalia's society, the Somali
 Government has tended to subordinate individual
 liberties to its political and economic goals, particu-
 larly that of bringing about a more equitable distribu-
 tion of Somalia's limited material resources. The
 government prides itself on the relative lack of
 coercion which has been required. With the departure
 of large numbers of Soviet civilian and military
 advisors, it is likely that there will be some liberal-
 ization, over time, in the Somali Government's atti-
 tude toward individual freedoms.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 We have no indication that torture is practiced in
 the Somali Democratic Republic.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Nor do we have any indications of cruel, inhuman or
 degrading treatment or punishment except for the
 execution of religious leaders noted in l.d. below.
 From our very limited knowledge of prison conditions
 and on the basis of what we know from released politi-
 cal prisoners, we have no reason to believe the prison
 conditions are not relatively humane.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 Arbitrary arrests, detention, and imprisonment have
 been used against suspected political dissidents in
 Somalia. Except in unusual cases, prison sentences
 are short. Many of the officials who held office
 under the previous regime and who were detained
 following President Siad's succession to power have
 since been appointed to positions of trust and
 responsibility in the government. There are no
 authoritative figures on the number of political
 
 (lo6)
 
 
 107
 prisoners, but the figure is probably less than
 thirty.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Political dissidents are not always accorded a public
 trial. We do not know whether private trials are held
 in cases where public trials 'are not. Trials in
 ordinary civil and criminal cases are public and
 appear to be fair. In January 1975, and as an excep-
 tion to the government's clear preference for social
 and political rehabilitation rather than excessive
 punishment, ten Somali religious leaders were executed
 for their public opposition to the government's
 decision to accord equal rights to Somali women. The
 religious leaders did not receive a public trial.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 Political dissidents probably are not free from
 arbitrary searches of their homes.
 2. Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education:
 Within its ability to do so, thq government is making
 a serious effort to fulfill the vital needs of the
 populace through economic development (current per
 capita income is $100). While the effectiveness of
 its approach is constrained by socialism which discour-
 ages much foreign investment, it has established
 programs of direct benefit to the Somali people. A
 major effort-has been made, for example, to resettle
 nomadic tribesmen whose herds were killed off by
 the recent drought. The effort to turn many of these
 people into farmers and fishermen may not succeed, but
 it represents a clear commitment in talent and re-
 sources on the part of the Somali Government to
 ameliorate the condition of the poor.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 
 
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion,
 and Assembly
 In the pursuit of its objectives the Somali Government
 has shown little tolerance for freedom of speech or
 assembly. Freedom of the press is impaired by govern-
 ment control and censorship. There does not appear,
 however, to be significant impact on freedom of
 thought and intellectual inquiry, except where these
 activities are deemed to be political in nature.
 The Somalis are a Muslim people and are allowed to
 practice their faith freely so long as their religious
 leaders do not challenge the political orientation or
 legitimacy of the government. The public opposition
 of the ten executed religious leaders in 1975 was
 based on theological as well as on political grounds
 since they believed that the government, in revising
 the inheritance laws, had attacked the Koran, the
 basis for Islamic divorce and inheritance rights.
 The government, however, viewed the protest in politi-
 cal terms and charged the leaders with opposing its
 decision on women's rights and preaching the Islamic
 faith falsely. The government also charged that the
 leaders were in the pay of a foreign power. Chris-
 tians and others are allowed to worship freely.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country,
 Foreign Travel and Emigration
 The Somalis, being a nomadic people, generally have
 freedom of movement within the country. Such freedom
 is sometimes curtailed, however, in the case of
 suspected or known dissidents, and where the Government
 believes that such movement is not in the national
 interest. Freedom to leave the country for travel or
 emigration purposes, or to change places of employment
 is sometimes denied for the same reasons.
 c. Freedom to Participate. in the Political
 Process
 Somalia is a one-party state which is ruled primarily
 by military officers who seized power in October 1969.
 In pursuit of the government's social and economic
 
 
 109
 goals, the leadership has imposed a high degree of
 political regimentation. No opposition parties are
 permitted to exist. There are no elections in Somalia.
 4.   Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-Governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Somali Government has received foreign reporters
 from time to time, but has not so far been disposed to
 permit outside investigation of its human rights
 record. In 1975, Amnesty International (AI) wished to
 send a mission to discuss the human .rights situation
 with the government, but AI's request was rejected on
 the grounds that the Somali authorities were preoccupi-
 ed with the resettlement of persons afflicted by the
 drought.
 
 
