 SOMALIA
 Somalia has been without a recognized central government since its last presi-
 dent, dictator Mohamed Siad Barre, fled the country in 1991. Subsequent fighting
 among rival faction leaders resulted in the killing, dislocation, and starvation of
 thousands of Somalis and led the United Nations to intervene militarily in 1992.
 With the exception of the capital city of Mogadishu and the region outside the pro-
 vincial city of Baida little serious interlan fighting occurred in 1996. Sporadic
 fighting continued in parts of the northwest. Although the death of self-proclaimed
 President Mohammed Farah Aideed in late July prompted his successor and the
 leaders of rival factions to declare a cease-fire in Mogadishu, this encouraging devel-
 opment was not implemented and failed to speed progress toward national reconcili-
 ation. Nonetheless, various intermediaries acting on behalf of the Organization for
 African Unity and the Arab League persevered in efforts to reconcile the competing
 factions.
 Following "President! Aideed's death, members of his faction selected his son Hus-
 sein Farah Aideed as president of the putative national government formed by
 Aideed in 1995. In the northwest, the breakaway "Republic of Somaliland" contin-
 ued to proclaim its independence. Neither "government," however, received inter-
 national recognition. After the withdrawal of the last U.N. Nations peacekeepers in
 
 
 250
 1995, the persistent absence of a central government prompted citizens in most re-
 gions to continue the process of establishing rudimentary local administrations.
 Most are based on the authority of the predominant clan and faction in the area.
 These continued to function with varying degrees of effectiveness. Local authority
 remained contested, however, in the Kismayo area, parts of the northwest, in Gedo
 and in Mogadishu. In most regions, the judicial system relies on some combination
 of traditional and customary justice, Islamic (Shari'a) law, and the pre-1991 penal
 code.
 While Somalia remains desperately poor, the economy continued to improve, espe-
 cially in comparison with its state during the mass starvation in 1992. However,
 limited rainfall and continued closure of seaports hindered progress. Relative peace
 in much of the country, coupled with an increasing level of commercial activity, con-
 tributed to this recovery. Annual gross domestic product per capita is estimated at
 $600. Livestock and fruit exports continued to expand, although the latter were dis-
 rupted by the closure of Mogadishu seaport throughout the year. Factional dif-
 ferences also impeded banana exports through the port of Merca. The country re-
 mains chronically deficit in food, however, and some of the most fertile agricultural
 regions suffered from drought or serious flooding. Lack of employment opportunities
 caused pockets of mainutrition in Mogadishu and some other communities.
 Human rights abuses ontinued, Many civian citizens were killed in factional
 fighting, especially in Mogadishu among the Hussein Aideed, Osman Atto, Ali
 ahi, and Musa Sude factions. However, due to the derease in interclan fighting,
 there were fewer reported abuses than in previous years. Other key problems re-
 mained the lack of political rights in the absence of a central authority, the reliance
 of some communities on harsh Shari'a punishments, including amputations and
 stoning, societal discrimination against women, and the mistreatment of women and
 children, including the nearly universal practice of female genital mutilation (FGM).
 There is no effective system for the protection of worker rights.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political or Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Political violence and banditry have
 been endemic since the 1991 revolt against Siad Barre. Tens of thousands of citi-
 zens, mostly noncombatants, have since died in interfactional and interclan fighting
 (see Section l.g.).
 Although many civilians died as a result of interfactional and interclan fighting
 during the year, politically motivated extrajudicial murder was less common. Early
 in January, an anti-Aideed group claimed that pro-Aideed fighters had massacred
 .8 people in Baidoa. There was no independent confirmation of the report. On
 March 9, unknown gunmen killed South Mogadishu peace activist Alman All
 Ahmed, apparently for political reasons. In August two Ethiopian businessmen were
 killed in Galcayo, reportedly in retaliation for the Ethiopian military incursion that
 took place on August 9-11. In September a businessman allied with opponents of
 the Aideed Government was shot and killed by pro-Aideed militia.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no known reports of unresolved politically moti-
 vated disappearances, although cases might easily have been concealed among the
 thousands of returnees, displaced, and war dead. Kidnaping remained a problem,
 particularly for relief workers and critics of the faction leaders (see Section 1.d.).
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 There were no reports of the use of torture by warring militiamen against each
 other or against civilians.
 In Sorth Mogadishu, parts of South Mogadishu, the middle Shabelle, and parts
 of the Gedo and Hiran regions, Shari'a courts regularly sentence convicted thieves
 to public lashings, stonings, and less frequently, to the amputation of their hands
 (see Section i.e.).
 Prison conditions varied by region. Conditions at the South Mogadishu Prison,
 controlled by the Aideed forces, improved markedly after the start in 1995 of visits
 by international organizations, while conditions at the North Mogadishu Prison con-
 trolled by the Shari'a court system deteriorated to the point that prisoners staged
 a hunger strike starting in early September. The head of the court system promised
 improvements, but this announcement did not satisfy the prisoners, who continued
 fasting for several weeks. Conditions elsewhere reportedly were less severe, accord-
 ing to international relief agencies. In many areas, prisoners receive food from fam-
 ily members or relief agencies. The International Committee of the Red Cross
 (ICRC) delegates were permitted to visit prisons in some parts of the country, as
 were Western diplomats.
 
 
 251
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-In the absence of constitutional or other
 legal protections, Somali factions and armed bandits continued to engage in arbi-
 trary detention, including the kidnaping of international relief workers. In January
 the Shari'a court arrested 18 s3pporters of General Aideed in north Mogadishu after
 they announced the formation of apolitical organization in support of his claimed
 government. Some of those arrestecl also had accepted positions in the Aideed re-
 gime. The courts later released the group. On May 3, General Aideed's forces ar-
 rested an Islamic court judge as a result of a political dispute.
 As in past years, kidnapers continued to target foreigners. Among the most nota-
 ble incidents were: the March 21 abduction of five U.N. staff members from Bale
 Dogle airfield; the kidnaping 2 days later in Bosasso of an American relief agency
 employee; and the seizure of three aid workers in the northwest in mid-May. U.
 citizen Daniel Suther was kidnaped at gunpoint in north Mogadishu on September
 17. With assistance from a U.. security officer and local elders, Suther was re-
 leased on September 18. In each instance, the victims managed to gain their re-
 lease, generally within days. One incident took far longer to resolve, the May 25 "ar-
 rest" o an Australian pilot by forces loyal to General Aideed. Accused of illegally
 entering Somali air space, the pilot remained in custody until October. Four Russian
 pilots detained in the northwest in mid-July regained their freedom after payment
 of a $45,000 'Tine."
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial-There is no national judicial system. The judiciary
 in most regions relies on some combination of traditional and customary justice, Is-
 lamic (Shari'a) law, and the pre-1991 penal cde. Islamic (Shari'a) courts continued
 to operate in several regions of the ountry, partially filing the vacuum created by
 the absence of normal government authority. Shari'a courts traditionally ruled in
 cases of civil and family law, but their jurisdiction was extended to criminal pro-
 ceedings in some regions beginning in 1994. In Bosasso and Afmedow, for example,
 authorities turn criminals over to the families of their victims, who exact blood com-
 pensation in keeping with Somali tradition. In the northwest, the so-called Republic
 of Somaliland continues to use the pre-1991 Somali penal code, pending adoption
 of a new constitution and related laws. In Bardera courts apply a combination of
 Islamic Shari'a law and the pre-1991 penal code. In North Mogadishu, a segment
 of South Mogadishu, the Middle Shabelle, and parts of the Gedo and Hiran regions,
 court decisions are based solely on Shari'a law.
 The right to representation by an attorney and the right to appeal do not exist
 in those areas applying traditional and customary judicial practices or Shari'a law.
 These rights are more often respected in regions that continue to apply the pre-1991
 penal code.
 There were no reports that political prisoners were being held by the various fac-
 tions.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Looting
 and forced entry into private property continued but at levels reduced from previous
 years, when large numbers of invading militiamen occupied many urban properties.
 In January rival factions set fire to the homes of Aideed supporters in central Soma-
 lia. In Gedo region, representatives of the local administration seized 163 metric
 tons of food, office equipment, and other supplies after relief agencies refused to
 comply with payment demands. In April General Aideed's militia forcibly removed
 220 patients, then seized control of Martini Hospital in Mogadishu. The facility sub-
 sequently became a military encampment. Also in April, local militia looted a relief
 agency's offices in Jowhar, prompting the agency to suspend operations.
 Most properties that were forcibly occupied during militia campaigns in 1992-93,
 notably in Mogadishu and the lower Shabelle, remained in the control of persons
 other than their owners.
 g. Use of Exessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-Warring factions continued to commit violations of humanitarian law, in-
 eluding the killing of civilian noncombatants. Beginning in early January, sporadic
 fighting in the Mogadishu area between pro- and anti-Aideed militia led to scores
 of civilian dead and hundreds wounded. Numerous combatants also lost their lives.
 Both sides shelled targets located in densely populated neighborhoods and, on sev-
 eral occasions, combatants used hospitals for military positions. Among the most
 egregious incidents were the shelling in early April of a Mogadishu internally dis-
 placed persons' camp, which resulted in at least 16 deaths, and a July incident in
 which warring factions shelled a soccer stadium. At least three noncom atants were
 killed. Fourteen civilians were killed when a mortar shell landed on a private house
 in Mogadishu, also in July. In April Aideed militiamen killed a number of worship-
 ers at a mosque in Mogadishu. Occasional fighting in and around Baidoa in Bay re-
 gion also claimed a number of noncombatant lives as local militia battled General
 Aideed's fighters for control of the area. The year ended with the most fierce fight-
 
 
 252
 ig in Mogadishu since the death of General Aideed. Factional fighting in
 Mogadishu from December 15 to 19 resulted in 132 known deaths. Another 1,500
 persons, according to the ICRC, were hospitalized.
 Ethiopian troops entered the Gedo region on August 8 and 9, displacing several
 hundred thousand civilian citizens, most of whom returned by mid-September. An
 estimated 300 persons, including combatants, died as a result of the fighting be-
 tween Ethiopian troops and members of the Islamic fundamentalist group A-Ittihad
 A'Islami. Ethiopian officials believed that members of Al-Ittihad ArIslami were re-
 sponsible for a number of terrorist acts inside Ethiopia, including the bombing of
 several hotels. On December 21, Ethiopian forces reportedly repulsed an attack by
 Somali-based AI-Ittihad extremists in the Somali border town of Dolo. The Ethio-
 pian government believes that Al-Ittihad Al'Islami forces were assisted by forces
 loyal to Hussein Aideed's Somali National Alliance. Ethiopian officials claim that
 100 attackers were killed with 12 Ethiopian casualties, but these figures could not
 be confirmed.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Most citizens obtain news from foreign news
 broadcasts, notably the British Broadcasting Corporation, which transmits a daily
 Somali language program. The major faction leaders in Mogadishu, as well as the
 authorities of the Republic of Somaliland, operate small radio stations. The print
 media consist largely of short, photocopied dailies, published in the larger cities and
 often linked to one of the factions. Several of these newspapers are nominally inde-
 pendent and are critical of the faction leaders.
 In January the head of the North Mogadishu Shari'a courts ordered the arrest
 of comedians and other actors at public entertainment sanctioned by the area's dom-
 inant political leader. Journalists came under threat as well, including an incident
 in early September when pro-Aideed gunmen briefly besieged several foreign cor-
 respondents who were in the city to interview political leaders.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Many clans and factions held
 meetings during the year without incident, albeit usually under tight security. Al-
 though citizens are free to assemble in public, the lack of security effectively limits
 this right in many parts of the country. Few public rallies took place during the
 year without the sponsorship one of the armed groups.
 Some professional groups and local nongovernmental organizations (NGO's) ope-
 ate as security conditions permit.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Somalis are overwhelmingly Sunni Muslim. Local tradi-
 tion and past law make it a crime to proselytize aderents for any religion except
 Islam. Some local administrations have made Islam the official religion in their re-
 gions,in addition to establishing a judicial system based on Shari'a law (see Section
 i.e.). Non-Sunni Muslims are often viewed with suspicion by the Sunni majority.
 There is strong social pressure to respect Islamic traditions, especially in fundamen-
 talist enclaves such as Luuq, in the  do region. There is a small, low-profile, Cs-
 tian community. So long as they refrain from proselytizing, Christian-based inter-
 national relief organizations generally operate without interference.
 In late April, militia loyal to General Aideed attacked worshipers at the Jumma
 Mosque in Mogadishu, killing a number of persons and robbing others; their motive
 remains unclear.
 ia Freedom of Movement Within the Countr  Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Freedom of movement continued to be restricted in most parts of the
 country. Checkpoints manned by militiamen loyal to one clan or faction inhibited
 passage by members of other groups. In the absence of a recognized national govern-
 ment, most citizens lack documents needed for international travel. As security con-
 ditions improved in many parts of the country, refugees and internally displaced
 persons continued to return to their homes. Despite sporadic harassment, including
 the theft of U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UJNHCR) food assistance pack-
 ages by militiamen, repatriation generally took place without incident.
 The number of Somali refugees in Kenya dropped to approximately 125,000 by
 year's end, down from more than 400,000 at the height of the humanitarian crisis
 in 1992. In Ethiopia, however, the number of Somali refugees remained steady at
 approximately 275,000. There are 21,000 Somali refugees in Djibouti. As Somalia
 has no functioning government, there is no policy of first asylum, although in 1996
 a proximately 560 Ethiopian refugees remained in northwestern Somalia near
 a     isa.The central authorities in northwest Somalia have cooperated with the
 U   CR   and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees, although
 agreement on the return of refugees to the coastal areas of the Awdal region has
 still not been reached. There were no reports of forced expulsion of those having a
 valid claim to refugee status.
 
 
 253
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens did not have this right as there is no government. There was no widely
 supported, effective national government recognized domestically or internationally.
 In most regions, however, local clan leaders in fact function as rulers. Although
 many such groups derive their authority from the traditional deference given clan
 elders, most face opposition of varying strength from political factions and radical
 Islamic groups. In the northwest, the so-called Republic of Somaliland was endorsed
 by clan elders in 1991 and 1993 and has since created functional administrative in-
 stitutions, albeit in only a small portion of the territory it claims to rule. In Kismayo
 the dominant faction leader seized the town in 1993, but is dependent on elders
 from several subclans in order to govern the community. Following the death of
 General Aideed, his supporters selected his son Hussein to succeed him as president
 of his claimed central government, which effectively exercises its authority in parts
 of South Mogadishu, Bay Region, and the lower Shabelle. Ali Mahdi and his Abgal
 subclan supporters, in cooperation with leaders of the Islamic Shari'a courts, func-
 tion as the governing authorities in North Mogadishu and the middle Shabelle.
 Although several women are important beind-the-scenes figures in the various
 factions, women as a group remain outside the political process. No women hold
 prominent public positions and few participated in regional reconciliation efforts.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There were no local human rights organizations active during the year. The ICRC
 visited prisons in some parts of the country. The U.N. Nations Special Rapporteur
 on Human Rights visited the country from February 25 to March 10, and prepared
 a report for the Secretary General; it is to be released in 1997. International human-
 itarian NGO's and U.N. agencies continued to operate, but the poor security situa-
 tion limited their activities in some areas.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Societal discrimination against women and widespread abuse of children contin-
 ued to be serious problems.
 Women.-Women suffered disproportionately heavily in the civil war and strife
 that has followed. During the past year, however, there were no reports of system-
 atic attacks on women in connection with the continuing civil strife.
 Women are systematically subordinated in the overwhelmingly patriarchal cul-
 ture. Polygyny is lawful; polyandry is not. Under laws issued by the former govern-
 ment, female children can inherit property, but only half the amount to which their
 brothers are entitled. Similarly, according to the tradition of blood compensation,
 those found guilty of the death of a woman must pay only half as much (50 camels)
 to the aggrieved family as they would if the victim were a man (100 camels).
 Children.-Children remain among the chief victims of the continuing violence.
 Boys as young as 14 or 15 years of age have participated in militia attacks, and
 many are members of the marauding gangs known as "Morian."
 Female genital mutilation, which is widely condemned by international experts as
 damaging to physical and mental health, is widely practiced. An independent expert
 in the field estimates that 98 percent of females have been subjected to it.
 People With Disabilities.-There were no laws mandating accessibility to public
 buildings, transportation, or government services for the disabled before the collapse
 of the state. No functioning government is yet in place that could address these is-
 sues.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-More than 80 percent of the people share a
 common ethnic heritage, religion, and nomadic culture. The largest minority group
 consists of "Bantu" Somalis, who are descended from slaves brought to the country
 about 300 years ago. In virtualy all areas, the dominant clan excludes members of
 groups other than itself from effective participation in governing institutions and
 subjects them to discrimination in employment, judicial proceedings, and access to
 public services. Members of minority groups are subjected to harassment, intimida-
 tion, and abuse by armed gunmen of all iliations.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The 1990 constitution provided workers with the
 right to form unions, but the civil war and factional fighting negated this provision
 and shattered the single labor confederation, the then governrment-controlled Gen-
 eral Federation of Somali Trade Unions. Given the extent of Somalia's political and
 
 
 economic breakdown and the lack of legal enforcement mechanisms, trade unions
 could not function freely in the country.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Wages and work require-
 ments in traditional Somali culture are largely established by bartering, based on
 supply, demand, and the influence of the clan from which the worker originates. As
 during past years, labor disputes sometimes led to the use of force or kidnaping (see
 also Section 1.d.).
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Local partners of multinational
 fruit export firms reportedly used forced labor in some areas of the lower Shabelle.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Formal employment of children
 was rare, but youths are commonly employed in herding, agriculture, and household
 labor from an early age.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There was no organized effort by any of the
 factions or putative regional administrations to monitor acceptable conditions of
 work.
