Somalia
For the Somali people, 1992 marked the second year of total anarchy and a continuation of the orgy of senseless bloodshed, slaughter and pillage along clan lines following the overthrow of Siad Barre in January 1991. An estimated 350,000 Somalis died as a result of starvation, brought on by widespread destruction, violence and the collapse of basic institutions. These conditions not only destroyed the sources of livelihood of the victims but also delayed and impeded the delivery of humanitarian assistance. A survey by U.S. epidemiologists in the fall of 1992 in one area in the south, found that only nine percent of the population was under five years of age. A rule of thumb for the developing world is generally that 25% of the population surveyed should be under five. As one commentator recently observed, while food was finally getting through, Somalia "was also simply running out of bodies." The report refers to the disproportionate effect of the famine on children, noting that according to a French non-governmental organization, approximately 70% of the children under five years of age in camps in Baidoa died between May and December.
The State Department's standard approach to reporting is largely irrelevant in a country without any form of government, either nationally or regionally, racked by continued violence and plagued by heavily armed bands preying on essentially a helpless and destitute civilian population. The report acknowledges the inapplicability of the standard approach and notes that the absence of U.S. embassy staff in Somalia for most of 1992
made accurate reporting difficult. It correctly notes that, in many areas of the country (particularly in the south), there were summary executions of many captured combatants and civilians who belonged to rival clans or sub-clans. Humanitarian supplies and relief workers were targets for the many armed bandits and militias of the political factions. International and non-governmental organizations resorted to hiring of private security guards from local militias affiliated with the factions, often the same as the local sub-clans. This practice contributed to the establishment of sub-clan turfs and extortions by others wanting to provide "security services."
The report correctly highlights the two worst incidents of human rights abuses in the country and their immediate causes. In Mogadishu, an estimated 30,000 people were killed or wounded and untold thousands fled to the countryside, where their fate is unknown. The fighting in Mogadishu was indiscriminate shelling by the Mahdi and Aideed wings of the United Somali Congress (USC) and involved their respective sub-clans and other Hawiye sub-clans allied with the two leaders. The other incident of systematic abuse occurred in the southwest when loyalists of Siad Barre's forces attacked communities around Afgoi and Baidoa in which they reportedly committed acts of torture and engaged in other cruel and inhuman treatment and in Baidoa destroyed the livelihood of farmers and systematically executed civilians.
The report repeatedly refers to the violence as clan or sub-clan based, mean-
342
Somalia
ing that innocent civilians, whether in Mogadishu or elsewhere, were slaughtered solely because of their clan affiliation. Special mention is made of the execution of the leaders and intellectuals of the Harti in Chismayo by Omar Jess, leader of the Somali Patriotic Movement. In the north, there were serious incidents of civilian slaughter in Burao during January and around Berbera during most of 1992. Both represented degenerations of the feuds among the leadership of the self-proclaimed Republic of Somaliland. The report acknowledges the progress in the restoration of traditional clan authority and the utilization of that authority in successfully mediating the conflict between the two sub-clans of Isaaq. The participation of other Isaaq sub-clans and non-lsaaq clans is generally recognized to have not only reversed the conflict but also created a means for resolution of the underlying leadership feuds. The relative stability of the northeast referred to in the report is indicative of similar assertion of authority by traditional sub-clan elders. Even in Mogadishu, the ceasefire that held during most of 1992 was in large part the result of the determined effort of the Hawiye traditional leaders rather than a reconciliation between the leaders of the rival wings of the USC.
The report in general is accurate as to the Somali clan and sub-clan systems. It also acknowledges the legacy of Siad-Barre in contributing to the civil conflict, but it relies excessively on clan conflict as an explanation of all violations of human rights. Greater emphasis should have been put on the fundamental disintegration of the Somali political consensus and the role of inter-clan conflict as a surrogate for leadership feuds. Greater stabili-
ty in the north and northeast regions in part illustrates the greater political consensus on fundamental objectives in these two areas. The fighting between the Somali Salvation Democratic Front and an Islamic fundamentalist group is partially a manifestation of the political rivalry between clan-based leadership and a multi-clan Islamic group over control of relief supplies and the management of the Bossasso port.
While there was no official interference with the freedom of religion, the report accurately notes that the practice of religion was rendered more difficult due to the violence and chaos in many parts of the country. The brutal and indiscriminate violence in Mogadishu resulted in the destruction of houses of worship, including the oldest mosque in the city. Moreover, the abject poverty and the large numbers of deaths made it impossible in many areas to bury the victims of violence and starvation according to Islamic precepts.
The report properly states that much of the killing was directed against members of other clans or sub-clans and that all factions summarily executed prisoners and civilians or permitted their armed militias to commit such crimes. The report also refers to General Mohamed Siad Hersi Morgan, leader of the Somali National Front, receiving support from Kenya, despite the UN Security Council's declaration of an arms embargo. The U.S. government should verify the accuracy of such reports, and if true, submit its findings to the UN Security Council.
Finally, the end of 1992 saw the beginning of "Operation Restore Hope"
343
Somalia
which sought to create a secure environment for the delivery of food and medicine in south and central Somalia. The operation resulted in the restoration of some degree of civil order. Even in the absence of a national government, the presence of the UN peacekeeping force should make it possible to establish minimal conditions for preventing serious and systematic human rights abuses. Human rights monitors should also be included in the UN operations. Greater emphasis should also be put on establishing human rights guidelines for the UN peacekeeping force and for all local police forces with which they work.
344
