 SOMALIA
 Determined to bring about a socialist transforma-
 tion in Somalia's society, the Government of the
 Somali Democratic Republic has subordinated individual
 liberties to its political and economic goals, particu-
 larly maintaining national unity and bringing about a
 more equitable distribution of Somalia's limited
 material resources. The Government has also made
 strenuous efforts to eliminate discriminatory tribal
 and clan distinctions and has greatly improved the
 status of women, despite opposition from tradi-
 tional sectors of Somali society. Women now enjoy
 full political and economic rights, and hold several
 prominent government positions. A trend towards
 liberalization of the Somali Government's attitude
 towards individual freedoms suffered a setback after
 an abortive coup attempt in April 1978.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom From:
 a. Torture
 The Department of State has no verification that
 torture is practiced in the Somali Democratic Repub-
 lic, although exiled dissidents claim that on occa-
 sion torture is used to obtain confessions in secur-
 ity cases. The penal code defines as a crime the
 causing of physical or mental hurt to an individual.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 We have no indications of cruel, inhuman or degrad-
 ing treatment or punishment recently. However, there
 were executions of ten Muslim leaders in 1975, several
 political figures during the 1969-1978 period, and
 seventeen army officers who led a coup attempt against
 the Government in April 1978.
 The Prisons Law of 1971 provides for regulated forced
 (163)
 
 
 164
 labor; prisoners are entitled to remuneration. The
 Law mandates adequate food for prisoners. Solitary
 confinement is legal and practiced.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 Arbitrary arrests, detention and imprisonment have
 been used against suspected political dissidents in
 Somalia. Prison sentences are generally short except
 when an individual is perceived by the Government as
 a threat to its continued existence. Many of the
 officials who held office under the previous regime and
 who were detained following President Siad's succession
 to power in 1969 have since been appointed to positions
 of trust and responsibility in the Government. However,
 it is possible that some of those arrested in the 1969
 coup are serving life sentences. We lack authoritative
 figures on the number of political prisoners. Amnesty
 International has designated twelve of those now in
 prison as "prisoners of conscience." Official indica-
 tions have been that the total number of these prisoners
 has averaged less than thirty, while Somali exiles have
 alleged that there are many more. There have been
 increased reports of political detentions since the
 April 1978 coup attempt. Some political prisoners
 were among the 2,831 prisoners amnestied on October 21.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Political dissidents are not always accorded a public
 trial. The Department of State does not know whether
 private trials complete with sentences are held
 in cases where public trials are not. At least one
 political prisoner, a former Prime Minister, is appar-
 ently being held without trial. Detention without
 trial is legal. Trials in ordinary civil and criminal
 -cases are public and appear to be fair. In the summer
 of 1978, 74 people were tried publicly for their
 involvement in the April 9, 1978 coup attempt.
 Seventeen were executed, 34 sentenced to prison
 terms varying from three to thirty years; 21 acquitted
 and two were reported to have died before trial. A
 National Security Court was established at Mogadiscio
 by edict and was given jurisdiction over a broad range
 of crimes, including attacks against the state, the
 
 
 165
 public administration, members of the government or
 military forces, or public order. The Court appears to
 be a political instrument of the Government, executing
 political decisions. However, the Department of State
 understands that usual juridical forms are followed
 forms are followed and defendents are given the right
 of legal counsel.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 Immediately following the April 1978 coup attempt,
 the army and police conducted systematic searches of
 homes in some districts. Political dissidents and
 those suspected of political dissent are subject to
 frequent arbitrary searches of their homes. In these
 cases, Somali law protecting sanctity of the home is
 superseded by search and seizure authority of the
 National Security Service.
 2. Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 Within its ability to do so, the Somali Government
 is making serious efforts to fulfill the vital needs of
 the majority of the population through economic develop-
 ment. The Government allocated 25.42 percent of its
 1977 budget to social services. The tax system is
 equitable, although this has little impact in a society
 where income differences are slight. There is some
 corruption in Somalia, but government officials includ-
 ing the President show considerable austerity in their
 personal lives. There is relatively little difference
 between the life-styles of ordinary civil servants and
 ranking government officials. The Somali Government
 has implemented legislation to protect workers and
 assure fair compensation for work. In 1972 it made
 Somali a written language and began a nationwide
 literacy campaign which has achieved impressive results.
 The Government now estimates sixty percent of the
 population is able to read Somali. Major efforts have been
 made to improve health care, diet, housing, education
 and job training, although bureaucratic inefficiency
 and a doctrinaire approach have weakened the impact of
 
 
 166
 these efforts. Nonetheless, in education, the number
 of students has gone from 56,979 to 242,656 in seven
 years.
 The effectiveness of the Somali Government's endeavors
 to improve the condition of the Somali people is
 limited by the nomadic nature of much of the population.
 Also, the Government has assumed some responsibility
 for ethnic Somalis living outside the borders of the
 Somali Democratic Republic. A recent influx of war
 refugees from the disputed Ogaden region of Ethiopia
 has been an added burden. Moreover, a large portion of
 Somalia's budget is devoted to defense purposes due to
 its dispute with neighboring Ethiopia.   Athough faced
 with considerable obstacles, the program of resettling
 nomads has been modestly successful. It has now been
 enlarged to include war victims.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion,
 and Assembly
 The Somali Government has shown little tolerance
 for freedom of speech or assembly. There is no freedom
 of the press, which is entirely controlled by the
 Government and the Somali Revolutionary Socialist
 Party.
 The Somalis, a Muslim people, are allowed to practice
 their faith freely so long as their religious leaders
 do not challenge the political orientation or legiti-
 macy of the Government. Public opposition by ten
 Muslim religious leaders, who were executed within
 twelve days following their arrest in 1975, was based
 on theological as well as on political grounds. They
 believed that the Government, in revising the inheri-
 tance laws, had attacked the Koran and sacred Islamic
 divorce and inheritance rights. The Government,
 however, viewed the protest in political terms. It
 charged the leaders with opposing its decision on
 women's rights, preaching the Islamic faith falsely and
 being in the pay of a foreign power. Christians and
 others are allowed to worship freely but not to prose-
 lytize.
 
 
 167
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 Although there are no legal restrictions for Somali
 citizens on movement within the country, the military
 and police monitor movement along main roads, particu-
 larly near larger urban areas and military emplacements.
 Complete Government control or monitoring is impossible
 in a country where an estimated seventy percent of the
 population lead nomadic or semi-nomadic lives. Travel
 on domestic flights, however, is monitored and control-
 led for Somali citizens, as it is for foreigners.
 Travel outside the country is restricted; passports are
 not issued freely. A relatively large number of
 Somalis, however, do travel abroad, primarily to Saudi
 Arabia and other mid-Eastern countries. An estimated
 10,000 make the Haj pilgrimage annually. Movement
 across the Kenyan, Ethiopian and Djiboutian frontiers
 cannot be effectively controlled.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Somali leaders including Government Ministers have
 on several occasions told United States Embassy officers
 that the Central Committee of the SRSP debates issues
 seriously and regularly. President Siad has frequently
 asserted he requires a party consensus to act. Citizens
 are consulted either by the Party or the Government
 only indirectly, although the Party professes to be
 responsive to the wishes of the people. The leaders
 apparently do take into account prevailing public
 opinion. There are no elections of local or national
 government officials. Party officials down to the
 district level are n6rmally appointed. The right of
 petition does not exist. Although "tribalism" is
 illegal, and traditional tribal or clan leadership,
 responsibilities, and title (e.g. Sultan, Boqor,
 Sheikh) have been abolished, tribal elders still
 maintain an important role. Unofficially and sub rosa
 they are consulted by government leaders, incliu-6ng
 Siad.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged
 Violations of Human Rights
 
 
 168
 Many foreign correspondents visited Somalia in 1977-78,
 particularly during the war with Ethiopia. The Depart-
 ment of State knows of no requests to investigate
 Somalia's human rights situation since an Amnesty
 International telegraphic inquiry in 1977 concerning
 the continued imprisonment without trial of one of the
 persons involved in the 1969 coup. The Department of
 State has no information on what, if any, reply was
 made by the Somali Government to the Amnesty Inter-
 national query.
 
 
