SOMALU
The report on Somalia is not a serious attempt to review human rights in that countiy. In substance and in tone it is a major step backwards from last year's report. Although the 1986 report omitted important abuses and understated others, it provided a more comprehensive analysis and a more objective assessment than the 1987 report. A pro-government bias leads the State Department this year to distort facts, to omit discussion of vital issues, and to minimize the scope of human rights problems and the institutionalized nature of the repression. The report also seeks to justify abuses by exaggerating seciu^ity threats to the government. The piecemeal treatment of the situation fails to convey the seriousness of human rights abuses in Somalia. The report is particularly weak when it discusses individual cases.
We do not accept the statement that "[t]here was no significant change in Somalia's human rights situation in 1987." Throughout the year, political violence and unrest intensified as a reaction to a well-publicized government policy to root out dissent and opposition. Conditions grew notably worse: the army and security forces committed abuses in the North; a crackdown took place on religious freedom; and various abuses were committed against refugees.
One would never suspect from reading the report that President Mohamed Siad Barre rules by force and for eighteen years has relied on a policy of calculated brutality, pragmatic ruthlessness, killing, and detaining or buying out potential rivals. Key military and security posts and strategic economic and administrative appointments are held by very close relatives. A recent example is the appointment of Barre's son, Maslah Mohamed Siad Barre, as the supreme military commander of the newly created Sector 77. Covering the country's capital, it is the most important and politically sensitive military sector. The son, a civil engineer, has no previous command experience. During the years of Barre's rule, his minority clan, the Marehan, have come to dominate Somalia's political
133
Critique
and economic system. The report paints a rosy picture of a benign elder statesman who is engaged in the difficult task of maintaining clan balance, when in truth Barre is a shrewd and corrupt dictator whose divisive tactics have exacerbated clan differences and regional rivalry.
The section on political killings is particularly weak. It begins by citing killings and attacks on civilians by opposition forces in an attempt to suggest that government reprisals are, if not justified, at least understandable as a response to a guerrilla threat. The report cites the difficulty in obtaining information on political killings, thereby evading any effort to assess the scale of such abuses. Yet at the same time that it relies on this difficulty in commenting on government abuses, the State Department nevertheless makes a broad range of assertions about killings and other abuses by the opposition forces, many of which it fails to substantiate with relevant facts or examples. The assassination of the former head of the National Security Service in Hargeisa in December 1986 features quite prominently in the report. The report, however, fails to mention the government's actions in the aftermath: after the escape from prison of those arrested on suspicion of having assisted the assassins, the government summarily executed four prison officers in August 1987, on the grounds that they had facilitated the escape.
Moreover, while the State Department may rightly point to the difficulty in obtaining information, it should also have pointed out that the responsibility for this lies with the government, which has severely limited access to the North, It has also made it politically dangerous for Somalis to mingle freely with foreigners living in the country, thus inhibiting information from reaching the outside world.
The report misrepresents the government's attitude towards human rights organizations. According to the report, th^ government "responded to an inquiry on prisoners from the [U.S.] National Academy of Sciences (NAS) Committee on Human Rights. It also permitted a visit of inquiry (first requested in 1985) by the NAS Human Rights Committee in October 1987." The NAS has been following closely the cases of 13 scientists imprisoned in Somalia on political grounds, many of them for several years. The statement that the Government "responded" to such an inquiry is misleading. The report neglects to
134
Somalia
mention that e^t of the nine meetings requested by the NAS delegation with senior government officials were not granted, including a meeting with the President. The only Minister with whom the delegation met, the Minister of Justice and Reli^ous Affairs, did not know who the prisoners were and said he had not been able to find out where the prisoners were being held, although most of them have been in prison for more than five years. The report also fails to mention that the delegation was not permitted to visit the prisoners. Promises by the MirJ«ter of Justice and Religious Affairs and other government officials to send follow-up information to the Academy were not fulfilled. Nonetheless, the Committee published a report in January 1988, a devastating indictment of the torture and mistreatment of hundreds of political prisoners in Somalia. The Academy's conclusions make the State Department's failure seriously to address human rights abuses in Somalia all the more astonishing.
The State Department seeks to downplay mounting evidence about torture in Somalia, gathered by neutral sources, including Amnesty International, the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights, the U.S. National Academy of Sciences, the U.S. Institute of Medicine, and the Canadian Center for Torture Victims. The section on torture, which is perfunctory, refers to "recxuring reports" rather than stating the views of the State Department. It does not attempt to assess the credibility of these "reports," and cites the government's denial of torture without any critical commentary.
We believe that there is enough information to justify the finding that torture is a serious issue in Somalia. In the towns of the North, there are frequent reports of rape, both of young and old women, who are taken to National Security Service detention centers and released only upon the payment of a bribe by the family. Considerable material has been published by the Canadian Center for Torture Victims, which has conducted extensive physical and psychological examinations of Somali refugees, including young people. In 1987 it received 36 new Somali patients, and documented cases involving torture by cigarette burns, bayonet-wounds, immersion in water, beatings with whips, and gang rapes.
The report gives little sense of the serious abuses and imrest in the North as a result of the government's determination to eliminate opposition.
135
Critique
The North has been the scene of increased fighting between government forces and the opposition guerrilla movement, the Somali National Movement (SNM), which has conducted its most successful military operations in the North. In a concerted effort to turn SNM areas of operation into uninhabitable territory, the government embarked, in 1987, on a scorched-earth policy, previously implemented in central Somalia between 1978-82 against the Majeerten clan. Many of the wells, water-storage tanks, homes and livestock of the largely nomadic population of the region have been completely destroyed. As a result, thousands of northern Somali nomads have fied their homes and are now living in refugee camps in Ethiopia, run by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
The report does not mention the atrocities associated with the presence of the military and security services in the North, including the extrajudicial e^^cutions and torture of civilians suspected of supporting or sympathizing with the SNM, and the illegal arrest and detention of civilians, particularly for purposes of extortion. Such extortion is practiced especially against members of the large Somali community living in the Arabian gulf when they return on visits; they are released only upon the payment of a substantial ransom by members of their clan. A dusk-to-dawn curfew in all the principal towns of the North throughout 1987 facilitated arbitrary restrictions on freedom of movement. This also provided opportunities for extortion. Curfew patrols have also been accused of unlawful killings. Despite widespread reports of extortion and looting of homes and shops, no soldier has ever been disciplined or prosecuted. It would seem appropriate that future reports should focus on the serious abuses that have become pervasive in the North.
The report argues that "while there is no overt discrimination in the distribution of economic benefits among the various clans and clan-groups in Somalia, members of certain clans and some individuals capitalize on their political connection in the government." We take a radically different view. The government has piu-sued, since at least 1986, a deliberate policy of economic sanctions gainst businessmen and traders from the North, especially the Isaaq clan, which is numerically and geographically the largest clan in the North. Many of them have had their bank accounts frozen; they find it difficult to obtain loans
136
Somalia
and credit at banks, all of which are state-owned in Somalia; and their vehicles have been seized. Special financial incentives have been offered to non-northern businessmen. The government's aim is to destroy the economic power of the Isaaq, which it perceives as the financial and political base of the SNM.
The report does not acknowledge the massive, institutionalized corruption and diversion of resources, including food aid, for the benefit of President Barre's cronies and military officers. The report's constant references to the country's poverty and economic problems implicitly seem to offer a context for human rights violations. What is not mentioned, however, is that to a substantial degree, Somalia's poor economic performance is due to profound mismanagement by the government for almost two decades.
The discussion of Somalia's serious refugee problem is superficial and cursory to the point of seriously misrepresenting some of the most important human rights issues in Somalia. Despite the official policy of maintaining a welcoming profile, there have been serious violations of the rights of refugees. According to the report, "Somalia provides a home to a much disputed number of refugees from Ethiopia." But it fails to mention the primary reason for this "dispute," namely, the Somali government's exaggeration of refugee numbers to obtain more relief aid, much of which is then used to feed the army or to enrich top government officials.
The report completely fails to mention the forced conscription of refugees into the Somali army, as reported by journalists and many international organizations working directly with refiigees. In 1987, when these practices were intensified, it came to light that the Somali army has carried out forced conscription campaigns against refugees since 1980. In May 1987, for example, over 200 refugees were reportedly seized at the Bihin camp near the Red Sea Port of Berbera. Auxiliary health workers and patients suffering from tuberculosis were indiscriminately seized as well.
During the months of September and October 1987, as many as 7000 refugees were rounded up from Bihin, Biyalley, Drawali, Sabad, Dak and Darbi Hore, and taken to a military camp in Sheikh for training. According to a report in the Economist ("Profit in Poverty," Jan. 9,1988):
137
Critique
The UNHCR has officially protested, without response, about the recent press-ganging of up to 7,000 Ethiopian refugees into the Somali army, many of them taken by force inside refugee camps in direct defiance of international law.... If the Somali authorities bother to explain, they say the conscripts are ethnic Somalis, liable to military service and "morally obliged" to fight against Ethiopia.
The principal motive behind the forced conscription of refugees is not to fight Ethiopia, but to use refugees to reinforce the government's military capacity, in light of significant defections from the army. The ultimate aim is to fight the SNM, which has its military bases in Ethiopia, and to contain the civilian unrest in the North. Many of these refugees are not ethnic Somalis. Numerous sources have told us of Oromo refugees turned "soldiers" who have raided and looted their homes in Buroa and Hargeisa. The report is silent on these crucial matters.
While the report is correct in saying that the refugees "are not allowed to assimilate into the Somali population," it fails to mention that the government has recently abandoned this longstanding policy for short-term political gains.
In an effort to dilute the numerical su|>eriority of the Isaaq clan, and consequently the political balance in the North, the government has "settled" huge numbers of refugees in the main towns in the North, especially in Hargeisa, the capital of the northern provinces. Many of these refugees have recently been given Somali passports.
The country report states, in passing, that "[Amnesty International's] report, as well as other sources, claim that Somalia is holding without trial at Hawai prison several hundred Ethiopian civilians reportedly captured by Somali forces in the 1977-78 Ogaden War." The report cites the charges by Amnesty International but refuses to endorse them. According to a report issued by the United States Committee for Refugees in October 1987, there are at least 2,000 civilians detained in Hawai prison, and maybe as many as 2,800, including many women and children. The country report adds that "the Government provides no information about the number of detainees." The State Department should be more direct and state in its own voice categorically that the Government denies the enstence of this prison camp and that it has consistently denied
138
Somalia
access to it by the UNHCR and the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).
The discussion of religious freedom severely imderstates the gravity of current problems. On coming to power in 1969, the declared ideology of the Barre government was "scientific socialism," an alien philosophy in a profoundly Islamic coxmtry. From the outset, there was animosity and suspicion between the government and religious leaders, which has continued despite the government's abandonment of its Marxist rhetoric since 1978. In fact, hostility towards religious leaders has intensified in recent years, as mosques have become increasingly important as a public forum to voice national grievances and as the most powerful symbol of political defiance. The report downplays the extent to which the government monitors mosque sermons. It should have mentioned that, in an effort to check the rise of religious observance and to undermine religious freedom, the Ministry of Justice and Religious Affairs relies on a decree, issued on August 1,1985, that forbids the teaching of the Holy Koran or preaching in mosques or houses without a permit issued by the Ministry. The same decree regulates the importing of religious books. The establishment of mosques or schools for the teaching or recital of the Koran is subject to the grant of a permit issued by the Ministry. Permits may be withdrawn from persons deemed to be "troublemakers." The decree established committees for all mosques to monitor the implementation of the Ministry's orders. Responsibility for enforcing the decree is vested wth the police, the National Security Service, preachers, the Central Inspection Bureau of the Party, and the People's Militia and Mosque Committee. The report's discussion of freedom of peaceful assembly and association states that "all non-religious organizations and public gatherings are subject to government control or supervision." This implies that religious organizations and gatherings are free from such restrictions, which is contradicted by the evidence.
The report notes that nine reli^ous leaders were sentenced to death in April 1987by the National Security Court but neglects to add that many others were sentenced to long prison terms. The report should mention that their "crime" was to criticize the government's failure to respect freedom of worship. According to Law No. 54 of 1970, "any person who uses re%ion to create
139
Critique
division or to cripple or weaken the authority of the leaders will be punished with death."
We take serious exception to several statements that relate to religious issues. The report states that "in 1986 there were some arrests of Islamic religious figures, made on the basis of the Government's suspicions that they were dissidents, not because of their reli^ous activities.'' (Emphasis added.) Later, in reference to the nine religious leaders sentenced to death in April 1987, the report states that, "while these clerics were reported to be radical Shia, they were more likely Sunni fundamentalists." The report cites these assertions by the Government without critical analysis. Nor has the State Department provided any evidence to substantiate these charges. The references to dissidents and radical Shia/Sunni fundamentalism appear as if they are intended to suggest a justification for the measures taken by the government against these religious leaders. These references exploit the common association of "fundamentalist" beliefs with political violence and threats to the established order, tending to absolve the government of culpability for abuses.
In the section on freedom of speech and press, the report does not mention that there are/io newspapers or magazines that are completely independent of government control and influence. Consequently, it is misleading to say that "there have been no reports of detention of journalists" because there are no independent journalists to challenge the government.
Similarly, the discussion of trade unions is misleading. It states that "no trade union official has been punished by fine, imprisonment or death for violating the anti-strike law." The reason for this seemingly virtuous behavior by the government is that there has never been an attempt to organize a strike, as the report itself points out.
Contrary to the impressions provided by the report, the police force is largely inconsequential, especially in the North. The National Security Service (NSS) does not "augment" police work, as the report claims; rather, it supersedes it, with imlimited powers of arrest, detention and confiscation of property in matters considered relevant to security, which is defined broadly and vaguely. The NSS has its own detention centers and prisons, separate and independent of those of the police forces. It also has its own courts. The report
140
Somalia
should also have noted the existence of the powerful military police, the "Dabar-jabinta" (the "Backbreakers"), who execute sensitive political decisions, such as the arrest of clan elders.
In the section on arbitrary arrest and detention, the report casually states that "Amnesty International's latest report recalls that among those held without charge are politicians and lawyers detained without trial since 1975." Amnesty International has done more than "recall" the case of Yusuf Osman Samatar. It has repeatedly drawn special attention to his case as a long-term detainee. He has spent over 12 years in prison since the Barre government came to power. After being arrested and released on several previous occasions, he was detained again, without explanation, following a coup attempt in 1978. He has not been charged with any offense, and is held in Labatan Jirow maximum security prison, where he is denied access to his family, legal counsel and doctors.
In the discussion of freedom of movement, the report states that "any Somali citizen can obtain a passport." It neglects, however, to mention several important factors: in practice, the power to grant a passport is exercised in an arbitrary fashion and depends on the discretion of the immigration officer; the required dociunents include a letter from the Criminal Police Department to certify a clear political and criminal record; and the Immigration Department forms an integral part of the National Security Service.
The statement that "internal travel is not formally restricted" is incorrect. Throughout 1987, formal restrictions were imposed when travelling from any of the principal towns in the North, where political unrest was pervasive. To obtain the required exit visa, the following documents had to be obtained: 1) a note from the NSS to prove that the person in question is not wanted in connection with any crimes; 2) a letter from the police; and 3) a letter from the bank to certify that the person concerned is not wanted in connection with outstanding loans. In addition, other "documents" may be required, arbitrarily. Finally, the visa will be given only if someone from the town, preferably with business connections, will stand as a "guarantor." The guarantor will later be held accountable for the traveler's political actions.
141
Critique
