Somalia
2007 was a bleak and turbulent year for Somali civilians, particularly in the
volatile south-central region of the country, following the December 2006 invasion
by Ethiopian forces in support of the Transitional Federal Government (TFG),
which ousted the Islamic Courts Union (ICU) from Mogadishu. The TFG was
formed in 2004 following extensive negotiations between Somali factions and
clans mediated by the Inter-Governmental Authority on Development (IGAD) in
Kenya. Before the government was able to impose its authority in Somalia, in
2006 the Islamic Courts emerged as a powerful political force in Mogadishu and
surrounding areas, disarming warlords and bringing about unprecedented local
stability. Their emergence threatened the existence of the TFG, and their links
with Eritrea and Ethiopian opposition groups triggered Ethiopian military intervention.
Since January 2007, Ethiopian forces deployed in Mogadishu have become
increasingly embroiled in a violent counter-insurgency campaign. In one of the
world’s most ignored human rights and humanitarian crises, residents of
Mogadishu have been indiscriminately attacked by all of the warring parties, leaving
hundreds dead and more than 500,000 displaced according to UN estimates.
Escalating attacks on Ethiopian and TFG forces precipitated a massive Ethiopian
bombardment of residential neighborhoods in the capital in March and April
2007 that failed to quell the insurgency, but took a heavy toll on civilians. As part
of the crackdown, Ethiopian and TFG forces also harassed and arbitrarily detained
civilians. Tens of thousands of people suffered widespread looting, sexual violence,
and lack of access to humanitarian relief while fleeing the clashes in
Mogadishu, which escalated again in November and show no sign of abating.
The violence and lawlessness of Mogadishu is extending to other regions. The
southern port town of Kismayo remains in the hands of clan militias opposed to
the TFG. Another port town, Merka, located 100 kilometers south of Mogadishu,
witnessed growing fighting in October between two rival groups affiliated to the
TFG. Two formerly peaceful regions, Somaliland and Puntland, clashed over Las
Anod, a town on the border which is claimed by both regions. Puntland is reportedly
regrouping after Somaliland forces took the town on October 15.
But Mogadishu remains the focal point for the country’s seemingly endless cycle
of violence. There, representatives of the media and civil society are increasingly
under threat from all the warring parties, particularly the TFG, which has repeatedly
tried to suppress independent reporting of events in Mogadishu.
Violations of International Humanitarian Law in Mogadishu
Since January 2007, a coalition of insurgent groups including the extremist Al-
Shabaab militia has waged almost daily attacks on Ethiopian and TFG forces,
including several suicide bombings, and killed TFG civilian officials. In March,
members of the insurgency summarily executed and mutilated the bodies of several
captured TFG soldiers. Hit and run attacks by insurgency forces using remotely
detonated roadside devices, small arms, and heavy weaponry have also killed
and injured many civilians. The insurgency has repeatedly launched mortar
attacks from urban neighborhoods, further jeopardizing civilian security.
The Ethiopian and Somali government have responded to the insurgency by
besieging entire neighborhoods with heavy weaponry and conducting mass
arrests and detentions. Ethiopian forces launched two major offensives on large
areas of Mogadishu in March and April 2007. Densely populated neighborhoods
perceived to be insurgent strongholds were indiscriminately bombarded with
“Katyusha” rockets, artillery, and mortar fire, with no apparent effort to distinguish
between insurgents and civilians. On several occasions Ethiopian troops
have occupied hospitals, looting them of desperately needed medical equipment.
The Ethiopian military was mainly responsible for the bombardment and civilian
casualties in March and April, but TFG officials failed to provide effective warnings
to civilians in combat zones and also looted property, impeded relief efforts for
displaced people, and mistreated dozens of people detained in mass arrests.
Many of those arrested have been transferred to known and secret detention centers
where they are held without charge for long periods. The Ethiopian and TFG
forces have not disclosed the number of people detained—believed to be in the
hundreds—or their whereabouts. Although dozens of people were released in late
June 2007 after the TFG offered an amnesty, hundreds more have been detained
since then and many people have disappeared.
The ongoing mayhem has crippled the economy. Tens of thousands of displaced
people remain in desperate circumstances without sufficient food, water, or medical
supplies, and have become easy prey to extortion and abuse by the warring
parties and by other armed groups outside the capital.
Threats to Freedom of Expression
The environment for journalists and independent media outlets in Mogadishu,
already difficult under the Islamic Courts Union, worsened dramatically with the
intensifying conflict. The TFG repeatedly closed major independent media outlets
such as Shabelle Media Network, HornAfrik, and other smaller radio stations
serving Mogadishu, claiming the broadcasts incited violence. Several journalists
were detained for long periods without charge, apparently in an effort to suppress
independent reporting.
At least eight journalists were killed in the course of the year, making it the most
dangerous year for Somali journalism since 1991. On the morning of August 11,
Mahad Ahmed Elmi, a talk show host with HornAfrik radio, was shot in the head
by two men armed with pistols. Just a few hours later, Ali Iman Sharmake, one of
the owners of HornAfrik, was killed in a roadside explosion as he returned from
his colleague’s funeral. On October 19, the acting manager of Shabelle Media
Network, Bashir Nur Gedi, was shot dead at close range outside a cafe in
Mogadishu. Several high profile journalists from Shabelle Media Network and
HornAfrik fled the country after the killings.
Threats to the media continued with a series of brief detentions of journalists and
raids on local radio stations. On September 16, Somali government troops fired
on the Shabelle Media compound and briefly detained 16 staff members, alleging
that a grenade was thrown from the building, which Shabelle vehemently denied.
The following day, government troops besieged the station with gunfire, allegedly
injuring one staff member slightly and damaging equipment. Shabelle radio was
closed for two weeks and returned to the air on October 2, after government
troops withdrew from the area. On November 12, TFG forces again closed Shabelle
radio without any explanation.
Attacks on Human Rights Defenders and Civil Society
Human rights defenders and members of civil society organizations also came
under increasing attack in 2007. On March 14, Isse Abdi Isse, a founder of KISIMA,
a non-governmental organization based in Kismayo, was shot dead at close range
in Mogadishu by unknown assailants.
In September, a well-known lecturer at the Somali Institute of Management and
Administration Development, Professor Mohammed Ahmed Hussein, was gunned
down as he walked through Mogadishu’s central Bakara market. Professor
Hussein had played a significant role in reviving higher education in the city following
the collapse of public services in the early 1990s.
On June 18, TFG and Ethiopian troops raided the offices of SAACID-Somalia, one
of the largest nongovernmental organizations in the south-central region. Several
SAACID staff members, including the director, were arrested and briefly detained.
The soldiers smashed doors and windows, destroyed office equipment, and confiscated
property.
On August 18, TFG officials raided the office of the Somali Red Crescent in Bal’ad
town, 30 kilometers north of Mogadishu, temporarily closing the office and
detaining a staff member. The staff member was released and the office reopened
two days later.
In October the TFG ordered the closing of one of Somalia’s oldest human rights
organizations, Elman Human Rights, citing “security reasons.”
Key International Actors
Somalia’s internal crisis is exacerbated both by the ongoing tension between
Eritrea and Ethiopia, and by US counterterrorism initiatives in the region. The failure
to resolve Ethiopian-Eritrean tension has led to each country supporting
opposing sides in Somalia: Ethiopia, backed by the US, supports the weak, but
internationally-recognized TFG, while supporters of the ICU reportedly rely on substantial
military and financial support from Eritrea.
US policy on Somalia is dominated by counterterrorism concerns, including the
presence in Mogadishu of several allegedly high-level suspects wanted for
involvement in the 1998 US embassy bombings in Kenya and Tanzania. US backing
for Ethiopia’s December 2006 offensive became obvious when US aircraft
launched several airstrikes in southeastern Somalia in January 2007 and again in
Puntland in June 2007. US intelligence agents also participated in interrogations
of some of the dozens of people rendered from Kenya and Somalia to Ethiopia in
early 2007 (see Ethiopia chapter).
While most key government and international institutions ignored or downplayed
the serious crimes committed in Mogadishu in 2007, some policymakers have
recognized the urgent need to replace the Ethiopian forces with a neutral force.
The African Union sent 1,500 Ugandan troops to Somalia in March as part of a
proposed 8,000-member African Union mission known as AMISOM. However, by
year’s end the force remained at only 1,700 members, with most African states
reluctant to provide further forces in the volatile context.
On August 20, the United Nations Security Council voted to extend the AMISOM
Mission in Somalia by six months and approved contingency planning for a possible
UN takeover of the mission. However, few observers anticipate that a UN mission
will materialize in the short term.