SFD8C@8
The year was marked by ongoing fighting in Somalia and abuses by the warring
parties, including indiscriminate attacks harming civilians. While the armed
Islamist al-Shabaab group continued to control more territory than any other
group in South and Central Somalia, the Transitional Federal Government of
Somalia (TFG)—with the support of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
and militias aligned to the TFG, notably Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama’a (ASWJ)
and Raskamboni—gained control over new areas in Mogadishu, the capital, and
small areas along the border with Kenya and Ethiopia. On August 6 al-Shabaab
withdrew from Mogadishu, citing tactical reasons, but has continued to attack
the capital, including with suicide bombings.
Al-Shabaab continued to administer arbitrary justice in the areas it controls,
including beheadings, beatings, and torture. TFG forces and TFG-aligned militias
also committed serious abuses against civilians, and the TFG has largely
failed to protect the basic human rights of the population in areas under its
control. The war contributed directly to the worsening humanitarian emergency
and famine that struck Somalia in mid-2011. Abuses by al-Shabaab and to a
lesser extent the TFG restricted humanitarian aid from reaching intended beneficiaries
in the country.
Violations of the Laws of War
Indiscriminate attacks were committed by all parties to the conflict during a
series of military offensives led by the TFG, with the support of AMISOM and
ASWJ, in late 2010 and between February and May 2011. Al-Shabaab regularly
fired mortars indiscriminately from densely populated areas towards TFG/AMISOM
positions, often unlawfully placing civilians at risk. TFG and AMISOM
forces frequently responded with indiscriminate counter-attacks, notably in and
around Bakara market. According to the World Health Organisation (WHO),
between January and late September three hospitals in Mogadishu treated
8,430 casualties for weapon-related injuries. Hospital records show that a significant
proportion of civilian casualties were women and children.
Indiscriminate fire on civilian areas has also occurred during offensives by TFGaffiliated
militias in the border areas of Dhobley and Baardhere during clashes
with al-Shabaab. An outburst of renewed fighting between Raskamboni and
other TFG-affiliated militias against al-Shabaab in Dhobley in early October
resulted in at least 11 civilian deaths, reportedly due to crossfire.
There have been no attempts to hold to account those responsible for indiscriminate
attacks.
On October 4 a suicide bombing in Mogadishu, claimed by al-Shabaab,
occurred outside a compound housing several government ministries, including
the Ministry of Education. At least 100 civilians were killed, including students
and parents awaiting exam results at the ministry.
Abuses in TFG-Controlled Areas
Many civilians were killed and wounded during fighting between TFG forces and
insurgents and during TFG “law enforcement” operations. In an incident in late
January TFG forces reportedly fired on civilians in Mogadishu, killing between 12
and 20 people and wounding at least 30.
TFG forces and aligned militias have committed a range of abuses against internally
displaced persons (IDPs) in Mogadishu, including looting food aid in IDP
camps, carrying out arbitrary arrests and detentions, and raping. Despite the
TFG’s public claims that it would consider a moratorium on the death penalty,
the military court has tried and sentenced at least 17 TFG soldiers and one civilian
to death since August, when TFG President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed
declared a state of emergency in areas of Mogadishu. On August 22 two TFG
soldiers were executed.
In areas under the control of TFG-affiliated militias, civilians have been arbitrarily
arrested and detained. In March in Bula Hawo ASWJ arbitrarily arrested hundreds
of civilians, including women and children, after a bomb attack. Those
fleeing to Kenya via Dhobley reported being arrested and accused of being al-
Shabaab sympathizers by men in uniform they believed to be associated with
the TFG. Individuals alleged or perceived to support al-Shabaab were also
unlawfully killed. At least three civilians were summarily executed by ASWJ following their takeover of Bula Hawo in March; one was reportedly a 17-year-old
boy. In May media quoted an ASWJ spokesperson as saying the group would
execute those found spying for al-Shabaab.
Indiscriminate shooting by AMISOM has also resulted in civilian deaths; some
incidents have led to internal investigations. On September 2, AMISOM forces
in Mogadishu shot dead a Malaysian journalist and injured his colleague. An
internal investigation found three Burundian soldiers responsible for the killing.
The three have been returned to Burundi, reportedly to face trial.
Abuses in Opposition Controlled Areas
Al-Shabaab remained in control of most of southern Somalia where every area
of people’s lives is regulated by an extreme form of Islamic law. Women and
girls in particular have suffered from these harsh laws. Freedoms previously
enjoyed by women in Somali culture have been severely curtailed to prevent
them from mixing with men. This has also limited women’s ability to engage in
small-scale commercial enterprises. Harsh punishments—notably floggings,
summary executions, and public beheadings—are common. Such punishments
generally take place after summary proceedings without due process. On
August 23 al-Shabaab publicly executed three men accused of spying for the
TFG in the Daynile district of Mogadishu.
Children Associated with Armed Forces and Groups
Schools have featured heavily in al-Shabaab’s combat operations. The group
has fired on AMISOM and TFG forces from schools, deliberately exposing students
and teachers to retaliatory fire and, in some cases, directly attacking students
and school buildings and interfering with teaching. As a result of ongoing
attacks, teachers have fled and—where schools have not shut down entirely—
children, deprived of any meaningful education and afraid for their safety, have
dropped out in large numbers. Forced recruitment of adults and children by al-
Shabaab is widespread and ongoing. Al-Shabaab routinely uses children in its
ranks. Children continue to also be found within the TFG armed forces and TFGaffiliated
militias; the TFG has at this writing failed to ensure that all its recruits, including those formerly associated with aligned militias, undergo effective age
vetting to prevent the recruitment of children.
Restrictions on Humanitarian Assistance
On July 20 the regions of South Bakool and Lower Shabelle were declared to be
in a state of famine and by August the United Nations had declared six areas,
primarily in southern Somalia, to be in a state of famine. As of August 2011
more than half of the Somali population—an estimated 4 million people—was
in need of food aid.
Al-Shabaab restrictions on humanitarian assistance persisted despite the
unfolding humanitarian disaster. It continued to prohibit over a dozen humanitarian
organizations from working in areas under its control, with continued
attacks on humanitarian workers.
Al-Shabaab has also imposed taxation, both monetary and on livestock, on the
population under its control, causing significant hardship. It also severely
restricted the movement of those in need of assistance, preventing people, particularly
boys and young men, from fleeing to Kenya for assistance. In late
September al-Shabaab prevented IDPs from reaching Mogadishu, stopping
them in the Afgooye corridor on the outskirts of the city and transporting them
back to their places of origin. It also returned IDPs from Baidoa to rural areas.
The diversion of humanitarian aid within Mogadishu and the perpetration of
violence during food distribution by TFG forces and allied militias have further
limited IDPs’ access to greatly needed assistance. On August 5 at least three
civilians were killed in a Badbado camp after militias reportedly allied to the
TFG opened fire on a food distribution site. Newly appointed Prime Minister
Abdiweli Mohamed Ali created a committee to investigate the incident. In addition,
United States sanctions on terrorist groups have restricted US aid going
into southern and central Somalia and support for certain humanitarian organizations.
Key International Actors
Western governments, the UN, the AU, and neighboring countries, with the
exception of Eritrea, are united in supporting the TFG as the legitimate government
of Somalia. Support for the TFG was forthcoming despite concerns about
political infighting and lack of progress on the basic priorities of the Djibouti
agreement, such as the drafting of the constitution, the reformation of the parliament
and addressing issues of corruption.
Eritrea uses Somalia as a convenient theater in its proxy war against Ethiopia.
In July the UN Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea reported Eritrea’s continued
support for al-Shabaab.
Kenya closed its border with Somalia in January 2007; it has forcibly returned
Somalis, including asylum seekers, to their country and has repeatedly called
for Somalis to receive assistance only within Somalia, and yet at this writing
Kenya continues to accommodate the arrival of around 1,000 new Somali
refugees daily in the sprawling refugee camps around the northern town of
Dadaab.
Kenya and Ethiopia have trained and offered military support to TFG-affiliated
militia groups, notably Raskamboni and ASWJ. Reports suggest that both
Ethiopian and Kenyan forces have also entered Somalia for security operations
near the border. On October 16, Kenyan military forces entered Somalia and
declared war on al-Shabaab, following a series of kidnappings of foreigners in
Kenya.
The US military has carried out targeted strikes using aerial drones on alleged
al-Shabaab targets.
The UN Security Council has authorized an AU force of 12,000 peacekeepers for
Somalia, but thus far only 9,000 Ugandan and Burundian troops have been
deployed, despite calls by the AU for an increase in the number of troops.
The UN independent expert on Somalia and some other key international actors
have recognized that accountability for past abuses in Somalia is crucial to
establishing a meaningful and inclusive peace process, but they have not prioritized this issue. Such accountability efforts should include documenting abuses
since the end of the Siad Barre regime in 1988 and, ultimately, a UN commission
of inquiry into war crimes committed since then.