SOMALIA
The 1994 State Department report on human rights in Somalia is generally accurate. On the whole, however, the report is less detailed and specific than it has been in the past. A number of factors may explain why it has become more onerous than before to conduct a thorough and detailed account of the human rights situation in Somalia: the civil war has now continued unabated for more than five years; the US Liaison Office in Somalia has moved to Nairobi, making on-site monitoring more difficult; and the fighting has deterred major news organizations from sending journalists to Somalia. Nonetheless, the report does not acknowledge these obstacles other than by way of a passing comment, buried in the middle of the seventh paragraph of a discussion of inter-clan fighting, that it is "impossible to report charges of human rights violations due to the severity of the situation." Such a statement would have been more appropriately placed in the first or second paragraph of the introduction so that it would have set the tone for the entire report and not simply have applied to the statement about efforts by clan militias to gain and maintain power in areas under their control.
Overall, the human rights situation did not improve in Somalia in 1994. Since the civil war began, there has been a violent struggle between the larger Somali clans for control of the country. As the report accurately describes in its introduction, the major clans have each gained control of a region of the country and continue to fight each other for control of additional territory. As the State Department explains in its publication Somalia: Country Conditions & Comments on Asylum Claims, "Virtually all of the leaders of the warring clans have violated the most basic tenets of humanitarian law, and there have been unprecedented suffering and wanton violations of human rights — including summary executions of many combatants and even civilians who happened to be from rival clans."
In addition to these inter-clan rivalries, there are many internal stuggles and conflicts within the major Somali clans. However, the report's account of these is vague and incomplete. Many of the tribal militia are further divided into sub-clans and sub-sub-clans, which often support
223
CRITIQUE 1994
different leaders and feud and form alliances in a constantly changing manner. Accordingly, Somalis are not necessarily safe within the areas controlled by their clan. Moreover, a member of one clan could find him-or herself in serious danger if found in territory controlled by another clan.
Since 1991, most Somalis have been living in fear for their lives. Many have been displaced from their homes and have lost their personal property to looters. Many have seen their family members killed in inter-clan and intra-clan battles. While the report accurately states that the Somali economy has improved since 1992, with farmers beginning to replant their fields and export livestock, the country is still heavily dependent on foreign support for essentials such as food. The threat of starvation has waned from its height a few years ago. Nevertheless, most Somalis live day to day, with no ability to plan for their future.
One underlying weakness of the report is that it tends to emphasize human rights abuses directed at foreigners in Somalia and, in comparison, to minimize the abuses suffered by Somali nationals. While the report generally does not misstate facts, its organization, emphasis and level of detail are such as to mislead the reader about the overall human rights situation in Somalia. On the whole, the report is more detailed and explicit about the abuses of foreigners stationed in Somalia, such as members of the UN peacekeeping forces (UN Operations in Somalia: UNOSOM) and representatives of non-governmental humanitarian organizations, than it is about cases in which Somali nationals were the victims.
This is particularly true in the section of the report dealing with the integrity of the person. The passage describing political and extrajudicial killing is practically devoted to a detailed discussion of attacks on non-Somalis: Somali factions killed 37 UNOSOM soldiers; Somali National Alliance (SNA) militia murdered five Nepalese soldiers in May; three Indian medical officers were killed in Baidoa; and interfactional crossfire killed a Swiss reporter in the south. In contrast, the report's statements about Somali casualties is generic and lacking in detail: "Violence and banditry is endemic ... civilians were routinely killed during the fighting." A similar bias is again evident in the section on "disappearances," which
224
SOMALIA
highlights the kidnapping of foreign relief workers.
Moreover, throughout the report the State Department subtly portrays UNOSOM in a positive light. In the introduction, the report notes that "there were few reports of abuses by UNOSOM troops" and later adds that "UNOSOM held no prisoners at year's end." In addition, when describing the Islamic court system, the report comments that "UNOSOM took no action to interfere with their operations." Moreover, the report's equivocal statement that "there were no credible allegations of abuse of Somali civilians by foreign peacekeeping forces" leaves the reader to wonder whether peacekeeping forces abused noncivilians and what factors were considered in the determination that the allegations were not credible.
The tendency to depict UNOSOM favorably is further evinced in the discussion of human rights abuses of Somalis by UNOSOM troops. In particular, the discussion of the August murder of several Somalis by Indian troops is circuitous and guarded. Rather than affirming categorically in the State Department's own voice that Somalis were killed by Indian troops, the sole reference to the murder of Somalis by UNOSOM troops is as a motive for the subsequent murder of three Indian officers: "The attack may have been in retaliation for the deaths of several armed Somalis killed by Indian troops a few days earlier...." The tone of this reference is detached and noncommittal. Notably, the report fails to include such details as the number of Somalis that were killed by Indian troops.
In sharp contrast to the previous year, however, the 1994 report is more forthright in its discussion of the human rights violations committed by UNOSOM troops in Somalia during 1993. While these attacks themselves did not occur during the reporting period for the 1994 Country Reports, and therefore do not have to be reexamined here, the report deserves praise for its accurate discussion of the findings of the Special Investigatory Commission established by the UN Security Council, and for properly noting that the commission was critical of the actions of UNOSOM forces. In further contrast to the 1993 report, the discussion of
225
CRITIQUE 1994
these abuses is included in the proper section of the report — that referring to political and extrajudicial killing — and not in the section dealing with the use of excessive force and violations of humanitarian law in internal conflicts.
The report's examination of the conduct of UNOSOM is further marred by some notable omissions in the discussion of the role of US forces within the overall peacekeeping operation. US forces played an important role in coordinating, communicating among and organizing the UNOSOM troops. The last of the US forces participating in UNOSOM departed from Somalia at the end of March 1994, leaving an obvious void at the helm of the remaining UN peacekeeping force. However, the report is silent about these concerns.
Also notably absent from the report is any reference to the controversial donation by the US Army to the Somali police force of 5,000 M-16 rifles, 5,000 handguns and millions of rounds of ammunition. Some of this matériel was seen in the hands of the factional militias within a matter of months. A further controversial aspect of the UNOSOM deployment, which is not mentioned in the report, is the allocation of resources. The Economist reported that at least 90% of the $1.6 billion allocated to UNOSOM II went to support its military operations. A mere 4.5 percent of the total has gone directly to the Somali economy through the employment of Somali nationals, and the lease of real estate and equipment, and none has been used to create economic opportunities for Somalis, particularly the young men who have been drafted into the clan militias.
Despite the overall lack of detail, the report's discussion of the plight of the Bantu minority clan is commendable, and the level of detail employed here is welcome. However, the report fails to explain that there are numerous other minority clans in Somalia, many of which are smaller in size than the Bantu and therefore more vulnerable to abuse, and that these clans have become even more vulnerable to attack since the overthrow of the Siad Barre goverment. Like the Bantu, these clans suffer discrimination because their ethnic heritage differs from that of most
226
SOMALIA
Somalis, and therefore they are unable to live safely in Somalia.
The report accurately notes that Somali women have suffered disproportionately since the overthrow of the Siad Barre government. In addition to being forced to participate in clan-based battles, Somali women have been the victims of severe sexual abuse. The State Department makes reference to "a sharp decline in the instances of rape" in Kenyan refugee camps but never assertively states that there was a problem in the first place. The report's implicit acknowledgment of the high incidence of rape in the Kenyan camps, even if guarded and indirect, is overdue — since the 1993 report was silent on this issue. In fact, sexual abuse of Somali refugee women in Kenyan camps in 1993 took place on an unprecedented scale. As a result, UNHCR commissioned an assessment of the problem, which was published in 1994. The UNHCR assessment concluded that the majority of the sexual assaults of Somali women "appear to be clan-related. Many victims have stated that during attacks men would ask their clan affiliation or demand to know the locations of the dwellings of a particular clan." The UNHCR assessment also states that several women in a neighborhood were often attacked by a group of men. Rape is particularly damaging to Somali women, most of whom have previously undergone female genital mutilation. Somali women are also often ostracized as a result of bearing children from rape incidents. The report is notably silent on these concerns.
Another troubling omission from the report is any reference to the fact that many of the victims of the battles between the clans are women and children. While the report notes that civilians have been victims of the clan-based fighting, it makes no specific mention of women or children casualties. Nor does the report recognize that many children have been orphaned since the civil war began in 1991 and that the protracted fighting has essentially deprived an entire generation of Somali children of an education.
In addition, the report's characterization of the relationship between the militias and the clans in Somalia is internally inconsistent. In Somalia,
227
CRITIQUE 1994
for the most part, each militia is composed of members of a particular clan or sub-clan. Yet the second paragraph of the report's introduction explains that the clans and sub-clans have "lost influence to a variety of political factions and armed militias," implying that these factions and militias do not derive from clan affiliations. Only later does the report correctly characterize the militias as having a "factional" and "clan" identity.
In sum, the 1994 report tends to emphasize abuses of UNOSOM and humanitarian non-governmental personnel who are working in Somalia, and to understate human rights abuses committed against Somali nationals. While the current situation in Somalia may go some way toward justifying the overall absence of detail in this year's report, the absence of any explanation of these shortcomings leaves the reader to wonder whether the drafters of the report were aware of them.
228
