 SOMALIA
 The 21-year rule of Mohamed Siad Barre ended in January 1991,
 when Siad fled an uprising in the capital, Mogadishu. Efforts
 to establish a new government have stalled repeatedly, with
 central and southern clan factions involved in repeated bitter
 fighting. Foreign embassies were evacuated in January and
 most, including that of the United States, remain vacant. The
 successors to Siad, 10 or more clan-based factions, exercise
 varying degrees of control in their home regions. The two most
 powerful groups are the United Somali Congress (USC),
 predominantly of the Hawiye clan, located in central Somalia,
 including in Mogadishu, and the Somali National Movement (SNM),
 predominantly of the Isaak clan, located in northwestern
 Somalia. Siad Barre and his supporters regrouped to form yet
 another faction in southwestern Somalia, home of Siad's Marehan
 clan. Elements of the large Darod clan family, of which the
 Marehan are a small segment, fought the USC while trying to
 distance themselves from Siad.
 In January the USC proclaimed a provisional government which
 none of the other factions recognized. In May the SNM declared
 an independent "Somaliland Republic" which neither the other
 factions nor any foreign countries recognized. In July, at a
 meeting in Djibouti, six factions--including the USC and two
 Darod movements but not the SNM--agreed to form an interim
 government, under the old 1961 constitution, with a 2-year term
 of office until elections could be held. The six factions
 announced a 72-member cabinet, headed by Ali Mahdi Mohamed as
 President. However, their efforts to establish a government
 were aborted by fighting between factions of the USC, i.e. Ali
 Mahdi's Abgal subclan and General Mohamed Farah Aideed's Habr
 Gedr subclan. In November and December, thousands of people
 were killed in Mogadishu, and at year's end Somalia had almost
 ceased to exist as a state, and Somali society had increasingly
 diintegrated into chaos and general disregard for human rights.
 Somalia's security forces consist of clan militias and the
 uniformed police. Remnants of the former Somali National Army
 (SNA), which disintegrated when Siad fell, are scattered among
 the militias according to clan loyalties. Armed bands
 associated with the USC engaged in indiscriminate killing of
 members of other clans in Galkayo and Brava, as well as in
 extensive pillage and rape. Uniformed police units,
 reconstituted in Mogadishu and in the SNM-controlled north,
 continued a tradition of professionalism, despite a lack of
 resources. In Mogadishu the police struggled unsuccessfully to
 confiscate weapons and suppress criminal gangs. Secret police
 organizations probably existed but were minuscule compared to
 Siad Barre's former extensive internal security apparatus.
 Continued internal warfare in 1991 drastically slowed the
 rudimentary pastoral and agricultural economy; disrupted
 infrastructure, including water supplies; and international
 telecommunications links. Malnutrition and disease were
 widespread, especially in the southern and central regions,
 particularly among vulnerable groups such as mothers and small
 children. At year's end, the fighting in Mogadishu disrupted
 international food relief efforts.
 Serious human rights abuses occurred often in a country racked
 by war, anarchy, and poverty. Neither President Ali nor
 General Aideed, the most prominent clan leaders, showed any
 determination to require respect for human rights by their
 various armed forces. Undisciplined militias killed, looted,
 and raped. Several prominent political figures were killed
 
 
 345
 SOMALIA
 either for revengelor simply because of their clan
 affiliation. Combat often produced disproportionate numbers of
 women and children killed or wounded, suggesting a pattern of
 clan-motivated revenge. Security'forces sometimes 'summarily
 executed'persons suspected of banditry.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN-RIGHTS
 Section I' Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 Among the .approximately 20,000 people killed in the chaos of
 early 1991-were several well-known political figures. Hashi
 Weheliye-Malin '(Abgal Hawiye clan) and Haji Musse Bokor
 (Majertain clan), two senior opposition leaders attempting to
 arrange a cease-fire during the January fighting, were killed,
 apparently on orders from Siad Barre. During the same period
 Hawiye gangs killed Abdalla Mohamed Fadil, a Somali of Yemeni
 ancestry who-had served as assistant prime minister:and
 commissioner for northern reconstruction in the Si~d
 government, and Professor Ibrahim Mohamoud Abyan, a .Dolbahante,
 former president of the'Somali National University, who led a
 coalition of veteran politicians known as the Manifesto Group.
 In September tw6 adult s6ns of the elderly chairman of the "
 chamber of-commerce,' Haji Osman Ahmed.Robleh (Abgal Hawiye)q,
 were killed along with their wives and children.- It is unclear
 whether they were delibdritely targeted or were random victims
 of fighting -in Mogadishu that took several hundred'lives.
 Somali activists in the United States and*Canada published
 lists of-dozens of "elders" in various regions who were
 allegedly victims of political killings.
 According to credible reports, the USC chairman, Generai
 Aideed, ordered his militia to execute summarily suspected
 robbers and lootersi sometimes within minutes of capture. A
 militia commander in the northern city of largeisa is -reported
 to have carried out similar executions; and authorities in
 other areas pfoably conducted much the saine kind of campaign
 against crime. Dozens, probably hundreds, of suspected bandits
 suffered summary execution.
 b. Disappearance
 Some disappearances occurred when groups resembling death
 squads attacked people because of their clan background and for
 the oppoituniity-to loot their property. Some of the
 perpetrators were undoubtedly members of clan-militias. Local
 authorities did not condone thesd killings, but were unable to'
 prevent them. Such disappearances would have been hard to
 distinguish from the thousands of people who disappeared as the
 result-of mass migrations to avoid conflict, deaths from
 disease among refugee and displaced populations, and killings
 in battle.' The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
 has established a tracing network, covering a large part 'of the
 country, which handles thousands of messages per month as
 family members try to relocate one another. There is no known
 compilation of disappearances. Most will likely remain
 unsolved.
 
 
 346
 SOMALIA
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 In the uprising against Siad Barre, Somalia's internal security
 apparatus was shattered and the doors of the country's prisons
 were opened, allowing some 20,000 prisoners, including violent
 criminals, to go free. Because of these events, there were
 probably far fewer instances of torture by secret police than
 in previous years. Temporarily at least, harsh treatment of
 prisoners and deplorable prison conditions also ceased to be
 relevant problems. Mogadishu Central Prison, a medieval castle
 with seriously inadequate sanitation, resumed operations June
 30. Its fate in the subsequent fighting is not known.
 With increasing disorder, other forms of degrading treatment
 increased; militia forces and bandits allegedly committed rape
 on a massive scale (see Section l.g.).
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Information on these subjects is lacking, although at the
 Djibouti conference the factions reportedly agreed to use the
 1960 penal code based on the Napoleonic Code. It appears that
 arbitrary arrests and detentions decreased substantially, in
 part because local security forces were weak and disorganized,
 in part because the new authorities were less zealous than
 their predecessors in detaining suspected opponents. At year's
 end, the SNM and possibly other factions held an unknown number
 of former members of Siad's army as prisoners of war. The
 feuding factions in Mogadishu held an unknown number of persons
 in detention. Some local authorities as well as the interim
 Government granted the ICRC access to detainees, but chaotic
 conditions throughout Somalia made it difficult for the ICRC to
 maintain access and systematically pursue detainee visitations.
 There were credible reports of clan factions abducting members
 of unfriendly clans and holding them hostage as insurance
 against attacks on their own people. The USC militia, for
 example, allegedly abducted 200 Majertain from the town of
 Galkayo; SNM militia allegedly abducted 116 Warsangeli from
 Erigavo and kept them in an open-air holding pen. There were
 no known instances of exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The regular judicial system collapsed with the end of the Siad
 government. There is little available information about the
 successor authorities' efforts to revive and operate court
 systems. In April, Radio Mogadishu announced the establishment
 of an Islamic court. No details were given. Later, Radio
 Mogadishu announced that regular courts and prisons hoped to
 resume their functions by June 15. In the north, the SNM
 announced that it was adopting Shari'a law, but how this worked
 in practice is not known. It appears that none of the factions
 created a version of the Siad government's National Security
 Court, which tried political cases in secret with no regular
 rules of procedure.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Because all telephones were out of service, and the post office
 stopped functioning for more than 6 months, phone tapping and
 interception of mail ceased, for the time being, to be
 significant problems.
 
 
 347
 SOMALIA
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian
 Law in Internal Conflicts
 The January uprising produced thousands of casualties and
 violations of human rights. Siad Barre shelled Mogadishu with
 field artillery, inflicting heavy casualties on clans he
 considered enemies. One Siad loyalist distributed flyers
 urging a war .of extermination against non-Darod clans. The
 insurrectionists in Mogadishu gave no quarter to Siad's forces;
 members of the hated "Red Hat" presidential guard were left
 unburied where they died.
 At about the same time, armed Hawiye gangs began attacking
 Darod ieighborhoods in Mogadishu. There are credible reports
 that hundreds of unresisting people--mostly Darod but Hawiye as
 well--were killed in ethnically motivated violence: Other
 reports, which cannot be confirmed, indicated people were
 hacked to death with axes or killed by other brutal methods.
 Mogadishu's population dropped .by half or more as hundreds of
 thousands of Darod residents and between 7,090 and 15,000
 Isaaks fled the killing.
 Atrocities were not limited to Mogadishu. On February 10, USC
 militias entered the ancient coastal town of Brava in pursuit
 of Darod forces.,- Although welcomed by the Bravanese (a people
 of mixed'Persian, Portuguese, Arab,. and African ancestry) the
 USC thoroughly looted the. town.' During-their 36-day
 occupation, repeated waves of USC combatants, many 14 to 16
 years old, came through town looting, killing, and raping. USC
 forces reportedly shot dead about 120 Bravanese, raped young
 girls in front of their parents, and repeatedly robbed houses
 and businesses. Girls carried away when the USC left Brava are
 still missing.
 Darod organizations in the UnitedStates estimate that 500
 civilians were killed, 1,000 wounded, and 200 taken hostage in
 the February attack by USC forces on Galkayo in north-central
 Somalia. Although the numbers may be.inflated, the allegation
 appears to.be based on fact.
 In the northwest, the SNM forces.attacked and looted Borama;
 about 80,000 people fled into Ethiopia. -SNM.units also raided
 villages in Sanaag Region;..Darod organizations in the-United
 States claim that civilian casualties in these raids ranged
 into the hundreds, including children and some politically
 active elders. Corroboration.of numbers is lacking, but it
 appears that the incidents did happen.
 In addition to the SNM offensive, the USC attacked refugee
 camps at Jalal~qsi and other locations.in south central,
 Somalia: Oppqnents of the USC claim that thousands of refugees
 were killed in these raids.
 In December a Belgian ICRC worker died after being shot in
 downtown*Mogadishu, as well. as a. Somali Red Crescent worker who
 tried to protect him* In early January 1992, a Bulgarian'
 UNICEF d6ctbr was niachine-gunned.by.assassins in the
 northeastdrntown of Bosiso. By year's .end, the resumption of
 fighting in Mogadishu had almost brought international
 humanitarian relief efforts to a halt. An ICRC official
 reported, according to the international press, that 60 percent
 of the children in some areas suffered from severe malnutrition.
 Although some commanders controlled their troops better than
 others, there are no reports of members of clan militias or
 
 
 848
 SOMALIA
 other security personnel being disciplined or otherwise called
 to account for human rights abuses.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 When Siad Barre fell, restraints on speech disappeared.
 Prominent politicians expressed controversial views; in March,
 Mohamed Omar Jama, a member of the 1990 Manifesto Group,
 accused the USC of persecuting Darods. Members of the
 Mogadishu Government denounced Jama, accusing him of being in
 league with Siad Barre, but took no action against him. In the
 north, the SNM's political control may have discouraged
 expression of unsanctioned views.
 Radio Mogadishu continued to broadcast as the voice of the
 USC. A rehabilitated Radio Hargeisa was similarly controlled
 by the SNM. The Mogadishu television stat'ion was destroyed
 during the January fighting and had not been rebuilt by year's
 end. There was no private broadcasting in Somalia.
 By March there were at least six newspapers publishing in
 Mogadishu. Largely independent of factional control, these
 papers carried on a lively commentary as the clan struggles
 unfolded. By October over 22 "newspapers" operated in
 Mogadishu, mainly printed on photocopy machines. It is not
 known how many survived the fighting of November and December.
 Academic freedom was a moot question, as the Somali National
 University remained closed after Italian professors fled.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The demise of Siad's security apparatus opened new possibil-
 ities for peaceful assembly and association. People began to
 demonstrate, seemingly undeterred by the climate of violence
 and insecurity. By June peaceful demonstrations in favor of
 peace, demanding more food, or calling for an end to crime were
 occurring almost daily in Mogadishu. People in Mogadishu not
 only supported General Aideed's campaigns for the USC
 chairmanship and against the Darod, they also demonstrated
 against Aideed and in favor of USC participation in the
 conference held in Djibouti with other clans. Demonstrations
 also occurred in the SNM's capital, Hargeisa. Information is
 lacking on freedom of assembly in other parts of the country.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Nearly 100 percent of the population is Muslim, predominantly
 of the Sunni sect. The fall of Siad Barre's regime, which was
 both secular and fearful of religious opposition, eliminated
 constraints on the practice of Islam. Political figures
 declared their solidarity with Islam, and the SNM's Somaliland
 Republic adopted Shari'a law and described itself as an Isldmic
 state, though what that meant was unclear. The practice of
 religions other than Islam ceased in 1991 because practically
 all non-Muslims were evacuated from Somalia. In Mogadishu
 vandals looted, defaced, and burned the Catholic cathedral.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 With the breakdown of government, movement within Somalia was
 unconstrained except by the risks of encountering bandits or
 
 
 349
 SOMALIA
 the. militias of hostile clans. Hundreds of thousands of people
 moved into the countryside or.traveled-great distances to their
 home regions to avoid the-fighting and clan-motivated killings
 in Mogadishu and other cities.
 Government contros -on-foreign travel also ceased, but for most
 Somalis'ti'practical difficulties of international travel'
 becamie-acute.. Air transport services .were suspended; and
 foreign embassies and -their visa sections-closed. Somalis
 living overseas were free to retuin home if they were not-
 deterred by the dangers and'the difficulty of travel.
 Practically all 350,000 refugees believed tb be in the country
 fled back into Ethiopia. 'These included-,ethnic Somali
 (Ogadeni) .refugees from Ethiopia and Ethiopian Oromos, camped
 in Somalia'since the 1977-78 Ogaden War. As a result of the
 SNM campaigns early in the year'and 'the dontinuing-reluctance
 of most Isaaks to return to their'homes despite the SNM
 victory, the number of Somali refugees in.Ethiopla ieached
 500,000, up from 370,000 at the end of 1990. About 100,000
 Isaak refugees ii eastern Ethiopia did return to northwestern
 Somalia by the end of.1991:       -
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Thir Government
 Despite~the end of the--Barre regime, people still did not have
 the right tf'o"hange their government thrdugh democratic means.
 However, aithidyear unfdlded the p6ople-exerted considerable
 influeni6, mainly through large dem6nstiations, on polifical
 developments: -General Aideed won an indirect election as
 chairman,of the USC with genuine p6pular support, yet when he
 vetoed USC participation in'the Djibouti Conference he.was
 overruled by publid'opinion favoring national reconciliation.
 When politicians in northern Somalia tried to stopshort of
 declaring independence, they were.overruled by grass roots
 demands fo' secession.
 At the end of 1991, for all practical purposes-Somalii did not
 exist as a unified state; No general elections could be held,'
 and the clan based movements functioned much like local
 one-party states; there was debate within the '-
 organizations--sometimes erupting into battles in which
 hundreds were killed-but no competing political parties. The
 role of women in the political events of 1991 was minimal,
 except as victims'.
 Section 4 Govdrnibent Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Right
 Although the Association of Somali Lawyers formerly was
 involved with human rights issues,.their activities in 1991
 were unknown. The varibus'authorities' attitudes toward human
 rights organizations vere unclear. No international human
 rights groups attempted to send delegations to Somalia for
 investigative purposes.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 -Language; or Social Status
 Eighty percent or more of the populdtion are ethnic Somalis.
 The Somali majority looks down upon the minorities of Bantu and
 Asian extiaction. Somalis also view as inferior members of
 several small client or "outcast" clans, who are relegated to
 
 
 350
 SOMALIA
 certain low-prestige occupations and who rarely intermarry with
 members of majority Somali clans.
 Racial tensions are a minor problem, however, compared to
 animosities and rivalries between ethnic Somalis based on clan
 affiliation. These are the fundamental cause of the country's
 continuing civil conflict. Siad Barre's favoritism towards his
 family and members of the Marehan clan, and corrupt
 accumulation of wealth by Siad's cronies, were common
 grievances among the clans which rebelled against Siad's rule.
 Somali women suffer discrimination in education, work, and
 family matters. About 96 percent of female Somalis cannot
 read, and females receive about one-third the schooling of
 males. A year of turmoil in Somalia seriously weakened women's
 rights as recognized in the 1990 Constitution. The intentions
 announced by some officials to promote greater adherence to
 Islam and the adoption of Shari'a law in northern Somalia
 indicated that religious practices will probably become more
 conservative. Nevertheless, at least one women's group
 (associated with the USC) continued in existence, working to
 counter fundamentalist pressures to reduce women's rights.
 Female circumcision remained a common practice, including
 Pharaonic circumcision, the most extreme and dangerous form.
 However, the risks of undergoing circumcision in the midst of
 war and famine may have led some families to delay subjecting
 their daughters to the procedure. The chances of getting
 medical attention in case of infection or other complications
 of circumcision were even less in 1991 than in past years. The
 Siad Barre government opposed female circumcision and organized
 campaigns against it; attitudes of Somalia's new governing
 authorities toward female circumcision are unknown.
 The absence of alcohol in Somali culture and the tradition that
 the family protects a daughter after her marriage help shield
 women against domestic violence, such as wife beating. There
 are suggestions, however, of these constraints breaking down
 under the strains of civil war, anarchy, and urban life.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The Constitution adopted in October 1990 granted workers the
 right to form independent unions and to strike, but this reform
 was not implemented in practice before Somalia descended into
 anarchy. It is unknown if any unions are functioning in the
 current situation or if there were any strikes during 1991.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 No instances in 1991 of collective bargaining are known, nor
 were there any known cases of antiunion discrimination. There
 are no export processing zones in Somalia.
 c. Forced or Compulsory Labor
 There were no known instances of forced or compulsory labor.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 During the Siad years the minimum age for employment was 15,
 but the law was widely ignored, with considerable child labor
 on the margins of the wage economy. Civil war and anarchy have
 
 
 351
 SOMALIA
 probably made these conditions worse, with street children
 * engaged in begging and thievery more often than work or
 education, which are increasingly unavailable.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 During the Siadyears there was no legal minimum wage.
 Inflation reduced salaries in the public sector to the
 equivalent of a few dollars a month. To survive, government
 workers resorted to corruption and outside business activities.
 In theory the small modern sector of Somalia's economy had an
 8-hour workday, 6 days per week, with limits on overtime.
 Workers were entitled.to paid holidays, annual leave, and other
 benefits. Laws set minimum safety and health standards in the
 workplace, and in theory inspectors from the Ministry of Labor
 enforced these standards. Because of inflation and low
 productivity, these benefits were mostly fictional. In 1991
 political instability and economic contraction further
 undermined working codditions for those persons lucky enough to
 be employed.
 
 
 352
