 SOMALIA
 Somalia is a one-party state ruled since 1969 by President
 Mohamed Siad Barre. He presides over the Somali Revolutionary
 Socialist Party (SRSP), the sole legal political party, and
 the Government through the presidentially appointed Council of
 Ministers. The President's clan, the Marehan, holds key
 positions, e.g., the President's eldest son, Abdurahman
 Mohamed Si.ad "Maslah", is Commander of the Armed Forces. A
 National People's Assembly, last elected on a single slate in
 1984, is subordinate to the executive. Civil conflict
 contined during 1989,-with an outbreak of rioting in the
 capital, Mogadishu, followed by official reprisals. Troops
 mutinied in the southern, central, and northern regions, and
 political ferment intensified.,
 The Somali Armed Forces (SAF) number over 35,000 troops.
 Internal security responsibilities, including for coping with
 the civil conflict, are shared by the National Army, the
 military police,(MP), the Defense Intelligence Security Agency
 ("Hangaash"), the National Police, and the National Security
 Service (NSS). During 1989 army combat-units and military
 police resorted to attacks on civilian villages, roundups, and
 summary executions as means of combatirfg the antiregime Somali
 National Movement (SNM), other dissident groups, and rioters.
 Reformist groups made efforts during 1989 to curb the security
 services' arbitrary powers of detention, but were only
 partially successful.
 Clans continued their age-old competition for waterholes and
 grazing lands, and at the national level the governing elite,
 based on the Marehan subclan, struggled with other clans for
 control of the country's few resources. Most of Somalia's
 estimated 8 million people manage a bare subsistence as
 herdsmen or farmers. The modern sector of'the agricultural
 economy consists mainly of banana plantations located in the
 south. The chief exports are livestock and bananas.
 Mogadishu now has a population exceeding 1.5 million, many of
 whom are unemployed-migrants from the countryside.
 Increasingly straitened conditions in the capital contributed
 to an increase in crime and to the potential for civil
 disorder, while life in the north has been severely disrupted
 by the civil conflict.
 Despite some limited progress in the first half of the year,
 human rights in Somalia suffered sharp setbacks during 1989.
 A State Department-sponsored study (the Gersony report)
 documented massive human rights violations, committed by both
 government and, to a lesser extent, SNM forces in the 1988-89
 fighting; the SAF murdered at-least 5,000 unarmed civilians
 between May 1988 and March 1989. In the first half of 1989,
 the Government did-release most political prisoners, including
 those whose cases had been publicized in the West" and
 strengthened the constitutional prohibition against arbitrary
 detention. However, on July 9, ,an unknown gunman shot and
 killed the Roman Catholic Bishop ot Mogadishu. The Government
 detained fdr investigation several prominent Islamic leaders
 and other critics. On July 14, rioting broke out in Mogadishu
 as a result of the detentions, and several police officers
 were killed. The police and IP's responded to the killings by
 firing on the crowds. At least 100 people were killed and
 hundreds more injured in fighting throughout the city. (One
 human rights group claims 450 were killed.) On subsequent
 days and nights military units detained about 2,000 people,
 searched and looted houses, assaulted and sometimes shot
 
 
 322
 people in their homes, and summarily executed at least 46
 young men, mainly Isaaks, at a nearby beach. In response to
 the growing political discontent, the President announced that
 multiple political parties would be allowed to organize and to
 contest elections to a new People's Assembly within 16
 months. He offered to negotiate with dissident organizations,
 but his initial attempts had been rebuffed at year's end.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 During 1989 extrajudicial killing was employed as a method of
 warfare in Somalia's civil conflict. Government forces were
 the worst though not the only offenders. While some incidents
 could be attributed to poor leadership and training, the
 pattern of raids on civilian villages, reprisal killings, and
 summary executions suggested that extrajudicial killing had
 official sanction (see Section l.g., for details). Following
 the extensive July disorders' and killings, the President
 formed an investigating committee, but at the end of 1989 the
 committee had not released its findings, and the Government
 had not brought those responsible to justice. There have been
 persistent reports that the perpetrators were members of the
 Marehan subclan (Rer Koshin) to which the President and his
 family belong.
 b. Disappearance
 Disappearances continued to occur in Somalia during 1989.
 They were hard to distinguish from arbitrary arrests and
 detentions (see Section l.d.) and extrajudicial killings,
 because these are not acknowledged by the authorities. For
 example, an interpreter employed by the U.S. Office of
 Military Cooperation has been missing since July 17 and is
 presumed to have been among the victims of the shootings at
 the beach.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Torture is forbidden by Article 27 of the Constitution.
 Senior government officials repeatedly deny that it is
 practiced as a government policy and, in fact, instances of
 torture appeared to decrease in response to a governmental
 reform effort and international pressure, Some recently
 released short-term detainees complained, however, that they
 were subjected to forms of torture such as the "Mig," in which
 their hands and feet were tied together behind their backs
 with a rope, which was pulled tight so that the body was
 arched backwards, to resemble the swept-back wings of a Mig
 aircraft. The Canadian Centre for Victims of Torture
 continued to report seeing torture victims from Somalia.
 Harsh prison conditions do not provide sanitation, adequate
 water, or medical care. Prisoners receive the absolute
 minimum of food necessary for survival because it is customary
 for food to be supplied from outside by their families.
 Amnesty International (AI) stated that the conditions at the
 maximum security prisons of Lanta Bur and Labatan Jirow, where
 political prisoners are often held incommunicado, were
 particularly life-threatening.
 
 
 323
 Mistreatment of detainees sometimes results from negligence.
 In October, for example, at least 11 youths died of
 suffocation and dozens of others were hospitalized after
 police locked them in a steel shipping container. The
 authorities arrested the police official allegedly responsible
 for this incident.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Although Article 26 of the Constitution accords citizens the
 right to be formally charged and to receive a speedy trial,
 the Criminal Code was modified in 1970 to exempt crimes
 involving national security from time limits and rules of
 procedure. The Government has repeatedly shown an
 exceptionally'broad interpretation of what constitutes
 national security and has used it's powers in an arbitrary
 manner to-detain, often incommunicado, suspected political
 opponents orfcritics. In the first half of 1989, in response
 to growing criticism of such abuses, the Government revised
 Article 26 of the Constitution to limit arbitrary detention.
 As.a result, the security services in the early months of 1989
 thtained fewer-persons and usually released them if evidence
 agaist'them was lacking. (Normally, the National Security
 Court--see Section l.e.--gives investigators a fixed time
 limit, with necessary extensions, to complete an
 investigation.)
 Following the disturbances in July", however, mass detentions
 were resumed under a presidential decree (as provided for in
 Articles 82 and-83 of the Constitution) imposing emergency
 rule throughout the country. Many detentions seemed to have
 only an inoidental investigative purpose, the main aim being
 to frighten possible opponents of the regime and silence
 criticism. Most of the detainees were released after a few
 weeks in military camps.
 Prominent Somalis drrested in the investigation of the
 Bishop's assassination in July' included the-lawyer Dr. Ismail
 Jimale Ossoble, chief counsel for the defense in the February
 1988 national security trial; Abdulkadir Aden Abdulle Osman,
 son of Somalia's first president; Sheikh Abdirahman Sheikh Ali
 Sufi, a senior religious leader; and three other imams. Dr.
 Jimale Ossoble and Mr. Osman were released in October 1989.
 The sheiks remained in detention at the end of the year.
 Also under detention were former cabinet ministers Aden Nur
 and Ba'adleh, who were arrested in July.
 The number of detainees is difficult to estimate because the
 Government does not disclose such information, detainees are
 often-held incommunicado, and at least 9 entities (National
 Police, NSS, Hangaash, military police, SRSP, the militia, the
 Custodial Corps, regional governors, and district
 commissioners) have the power to detain. The number probably
 fluctuated considerably during 1989, as the Government first
 released most detainees, then arrested about 2,000 people in
 July, and then released most of them after a few weeks. In
 conjunction with the October 21 national day celebrations, the
 President amnestied over 1,160 detainees and prisoners. Most
 of these detainees had been held on criminal charges, but some
 may have been detained for minor political offenses such as
 making "tribalistic" remarks.
 The Somali security forces also practice the taking of
 hostages in interclan conflicts. In disputes between rival
 clans, the Government may order the arrest of senior members
 
 
 324
 of both clans in order to compel an end to the violence. The
 most recent example of this practice occurred in June when a
 minority Darod clan began attacking members of the Hawiya clan
 in and around Mogadishu. The Government arrested members of
 both clans and dictated peace terms between the parties; when
 peace was assured the hostages were released.
 The Government does not practice exile as a means of political
 control. With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see
 Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Somali judicial system includes civil and criminal courts,
 and a separate National Security Court. Lawyers are permitted
 to represent suspects before the National Security Court, but
 proceedings are usually held in camera. Although nominally
 independent, the judiciary is in fact not distinguishable from
 the executive, which reviews and controls judicial decisions.
 All judges in the Supreme Court and lower courts are appointed
 by the President with the advice of the higher judicial
 council, of which the President is chairman. Judges of the
 National Security Court generally are military officers posted
 to the Court.
 Law No. 54 of 1970 provides the death penalty for political
 offenses "against national security," defined as behavior
 "which may be considered prejudicial to the maintenance of
 peace, order and good government." Among the 20 offenses
 punishable by death are "organizing a subversive association"
 (Article 3), "exploiting religion for creating national
 disunity" (Article 12), and "publishing antistate propaganda"
 (Article 18).
 In the civil and criminal courts, legal assistance is
 provided, and there are established rules of evidence. There
 are no religious courts in Somalia. In civil proceedings
 relating to family matters, such as marriage and inheritance,
 the judge may cite prevailing Islamic Sharila law in rendering
 decisions. The right to appeal exists in criminal and civil
 cases but not in cases heard by the National Security Court.
 For persons convicted by the National Security Court, the only
 avenue for clemency is through the Politburo of the SRSP.
 Only one trial before the National Security Court received
 publicity in 1989. This was the November conviction and
 sentencing to death of five persons accused of embezzling
 funds from the Commercial and Savings Bank. These were the
 first death sentences announced in Somalia in over a year. It
 appeared that some of those convicted were still at large. At
 year's end none of the death sentences had been carried out.
 By midyear most political prisoners had been released. Most
 of the thousands of persons detained in July were also
 released. Few if any detainees were tried and convicted of
 political offenses.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Under the umbrella of the National Security Act, the security
 forces routinely search the homes of citizens for weapons and
 printed material critical of the Government. These searches
 are carried out without a warrant or the consent of the
 searched. No probable cause is required (see Section l.g.).
 The telephone conversations and mail of suspected persons are
 
 
 325
 SOMA&LIA
 monitored, and anyone in-the country suspected of political
 activity is subject to surveillance.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian
 Law in Internal Conflicts
 About 500,000 people fled the outbreak of fighting in northern
 Somalia in 1988. A U.S. Government-sponsored 1989 study (the
 Gersony Report), based on 300 interviews with displaced
 persons and refugees (many of them eyewitnesses to killings),
 "conservatively estimated that at least 5,000 unarmed
 civilians'were purposefully murdered by the SAF between May
 1988 and'14rch 1989," when the civilians no longer represented
 a threat to the Somali Armed Forces (SAF) forces. The study
 also fvund that the S51 combatants killed hundreds of unarmed
 civilians in similar indiscriminate fashion. Further, the
 study found that both sides systematically engaged in grave
 violatiohs of the internationally protected status of
 Ethiopian refugees in the refugee camps administered by the
 United Nations in the area. The Government forcibly
 conscripted Ethiopian refugees from the camps into the SAF
 after May 1988. The SNM4 conducted systematic violent attacks
 against these camps, killing 400 or more refugees in the
 process (see also Section 2.d.).
 Some of these abuses, apparently sanctioned by the opposing
 leaderships, were consistent with traditional patterns of clan
 warfare in an arid land. One of the basic tactics of Scmali
 army forces, for example, was to control the waterholes and
 deny their use to the SNM. The SNM similarly prevented the
 Government from repairing the pumping station which once
 supplied water to Hargeisa. When-combating rebels, mutineers,
 and bandits in the central regions of the country, Somali
 troops took reprisals against certain villages by driving off
 livestock and burning houses.
 Documented incidents included:
 SN14 members of the Isaak clan, in fighting around the
 northern town of Erigavo in March, killed a number of
 unresisting civilians. Progovernment militias then drove the
 SNM out of Erigavo and killed about 200 Isaak civilian
 inhabitants of the town.
 Marehan soldiers carried out reprisal killings of about
 30 Isaak civilians after a landmine explosion on the
 Burao-Berbera road in May.
 Reacting to rioting in Mogadishu on July 14, military
 police fired into crowds, killing bystanders as well as
 rioters. Some innocent persons were killed in their homes by
 stray rounds. During searches of Mogadishu neighborhoods on
 subsequent nights, security forces looted houses and
 assaulted--and occasionally shot--their inhabitants.
 In retaliation for the killing of some of their comrades
 in the July 14 riots, members of the Armed Forces abducted 47
 Somali men, took them to an isolated section of beach, and
 shot them. Reports from witnesses and one survivor indicate
 that the targets of this execution were members of the Isaak
 clan, randomly selected and identified by their accents.
 In late September, when government forces attacked rebels
 of the Ogadeni clan near the Kenyarx border, troops overran the
 village of Dobli and killed many of the inhabitants.
 
 
 326
 SOMALIA
 In November, when government forces attacked several
 villages near Galkayo in central Somalia in reprisal for a
 mutiny there, troops reportedly killed a number of civilians
 outside of immediate combat zones.
 There have been other unverified reports of summary executions
 of rebels in the northern and southwestern regions of the
 country and of massacres committed by SNM fighters against
 non-Isaak villages in the north.
 The situation remained volatile at the end of 1989. According
 to the Gersony report, the Government has armed clan-based
 civilian militias which are not under the effective command of
 either the SAF or clan elders. These militias were an
 additional element of continuing instability and lawlessness.
 Information is lacking on the fate of prisoners taken in
 Somalia's civil conflict. In general, it seemed that few
 prisoners were taken. Rebel forces welcomed deserters from
 government ranks.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Although freedom of speech is guaranteed by the Constitution,
 that right continued to be severely abridged in practice. NSS
 informants frequented public places listening for expressions
 of antigovernment sentiment; persons were sometimes held
 responsible for opinions expressed in personal conversations
 as well as in public forums.
 The Government continued to own and operate the radio and
 television as well as the country's six newspapers. No
 publications other than those authorized by the Government
 were legally distributed, and possession of unauthorized
 newspapers and journals has brought prison sentences of from 5
 to 15 years. All printed, taped, and filmed material entering
 Somalia must be approved by the National Censorship Board.
 The material is checked for "obscene" as well as politically
 objectionable content. Academic freedom was not permitted; a
 Somali law professor with an evident interest in the local
 human rights situation was detained for several months in 1988
 and 1989.
 Information on the situation in Somalia was difficult to
 obtain because throughout the first half of 1989 the
 Government refused to issue visas to foreign journalists.
 Several European journalists were permitted to enter the
 country in the latter part of 1989. An American journalist
 arrived in Mogadishu in December for a 1-week visit.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Although politics is a common topic at informal gatherings of
 Somalis, and although Article 24 of the Constitution
 guarantees the right to participate in or organize an assembly
 or demonstration, in practice the Government only permitted
 meetings which it sponsored to advance government purposes.
 Political protest meetings were not permitted.
 Freedom of association, though not specifically mentioned, is
 implicitly provided for in the Constitution, which entitles
 every citizen to participate fully in political, economic,
 social, and cultural activities. In practice, however, there
 was no freedom of association in Somalia in 1989. Having a
 
 
 327
 SOMALIA
 business relationship with a person under suspicion was enough
 to attract the attention of the security services. In March a
 restaurant owner was detained by the NSS when his restaurant
 was host to a party for former political prisoners. The only
 organizations allowed to exist are those approved by the
 Government and the SRSP.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unionS, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Islam is the state religion and nearly 100 percent of the
 population is-?Muslim, predominantly of the Sunni sect. The
 Constitution states, however, that every person shall be
 entitled to profess any religion or creed. In practice this
 means that members of religions other than Islam may practice
 their faiths but may not proselytize. Mogadishu has a Roman
 Catholic community numbering about 2,000, which was
 established during the-period of Italian colonial rule. Both
 Protestant and. Catholic houses of worship operate openly. No
 other religious group has significant representation in
 Somalia. Christian charitable organizations operate in
 Somalia but- confine their activities to technical assistance.
 There is no evidence that the July 9 killing of the Catholic
 Bishop of Mogadishu was religiously motivated. Nevertheless,
 the assassination inflamed Muslim-Christian relations.
 Tension between the communities increased in the first half of
 1989, as a revivalist spirit spread within the Muslim
 community, and some imams accused Christians of
 proselytizing. During the July disturbances in Mogadishu,
 there was some violence against Protestant medical
 missionaries and other persons perceived to be Christians.
 Many in the Muslim community attribute Somalia's difficulties
 to lax observance of Islam. Such views, in addition to
 raising popular anxiety over Christian proselytizing, also
 tend to set the Islamic community in opposition to the
 Government, which has secular roots and a long history of
 antagonism toward religious leaders. The Government is
 sensitive to this trend, because it threatens to unite
 disparate opposition groups under the banner of Islam.
 Therefore, since 1985 the Government has licensed all mosques
 and Koranic schools, and since 1986 it has approved all imams
 and paid them a salary. Tensions between the Government and
 the Islamic community came to the fore in July, following the
 Catholic Bishop's assassination. In the investigation of that
 crime, security forces detained several outspoken imams.
 These acts provoked more antigovernment criticism within the
 mosques. The police, alerted to expect trouble on Friday,
 July 14, ringed the mosques, entered some, attempted to
 prevent antigovernment sermons, and tried to arrest additional
 imams. Widespread rioting and many deaths ensued.
 Ethiopian Christian refugees sometimes claim that they face
 persecution in Somalia, but apparently that persecution is
 based more on nationality than religion.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Police and military checkpoints control travel between towns,
 in border areas, and in areas of interclan violence. There
 is, however, no requirement to report residence to the police
 
 
 328
 SOMALIA
 or other government authority. Many Somalis'are nomads, and
 the nomadic tradition remains strong. Travel within Somalia
 is a freely practiced right. In general, there are no
 restrictions on international travel for those who can afford
 it. Passports are available to all citizens and to ethnic
 Somalis who reside abroad; they generally are not denied on
 political grounds.
 However; the Government restricted the travel of some former
 detainees and political prisoners by denying them passports or
 stopping them at the airport. Former political prisoners
 Suleiman Nuh Ali and Abdi Ismail Yunis were prevented from
 attending the Muslim pilgrimage. Their passports were
 confiscated when they tried to depart Somalia at Mogadishu
 airport. At the end of 1989 their passports had not been
 returned.
 Somalis who have emigrated are generally permitted to return;
 in 1989 President Siad repeatedly promised amnesty to
 antigoveinment Somalis returning from foreign countries.
 Nevertheless, based on the experience of previous years, some
 Somalis remained abroad because they feared possible
 imprisonment for opposition activity if they returned.
 There have been massive displacements of persons as a result
 of the civil conflict. Many persons have fled to Mogadishu
 where the population has swollen to over 1.5 million. The
 Isaak population of northern Somalia has been driven into
 remote rural areas, and many hundreds of thousands are living
 in exile in Ethiopia and Djibouti, and fewer in Kenya. Within
 Hargeisa, about 90 percent of the Isaak homes, businesses, and
 property have been destroyed or severely damaged. The
 economic life of northern Somalia has been profoundly
 disrupted. At the end of 1989, the best estimates indicated
 that there were 324,000 displaced persons and refugees from
 Somalia (mainly Isaaks) in Ethiopia and 30,000 in Djibouti.
 The Government reports that there are 837,000 Ethiopian
 refugees in Somalia, but outside observers, including from the
 United Nations, indicated that about half that number remained
 in refugee camps at the end of 1989. Conscription of refugees
 into the Somali army continued in 1989, in violation of
 international covenants. Spontaneous repatriation of refugees
 to Ethiopia continued throughout the year, and tripartite
 negotiations involving Somalia, Ethiopia, and the United
 Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) made progress
 on arrangements for officially sponsored voluntary
 repatriation. In addition to the UNHCR, the International
 Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) agreed to participate.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Citizens have neither the legal right nor the ability
 peacefully to change their government or the form of their
 government. The SRSP is the only legal party; opposition
 groups and criticism of the Government are illegal. However,
 in August President Siad Barre announced that multiple
 political parties would be allowed to contest elections to a
 new People's Assembly by the end of 1990. In November a
 committee of lawyers began drafting proposed changes in the
 Constitution that would remove the SRSP from its leading role
 in state and society, permit the operation of multiple
 parties, and allow operation of a free press and other
 institutions of an open society. At the end of 1989 no
 
 
 329
 SOMALIA
 practical steps had been taken to implement these proposals.
 In the present governmental structure, the National People's
 Assembly has Very limited powers.
 For many-Somalis the traditional clan system is the accepted
 vehicle of political expression. President Siad Barre and
 other-officials consult f-requ6htly with clan elders. Since
 1982, however, President Siad has been widely perceived as
 relying on- and furthering, the interests of his family and his
 Marehan subclan by playing off other clans aginst one
 another. This reliance on the Marehan accelerated in 1989, as
 the President appointed his son as head of the Armed Forces,
 another family member as Chief of Police, and Marehan officers
 as commanders of most military units.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 "Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 ..of Human Rights
 During the first half of 1989, the Government showed a
 willingness to cooperate with international and other human
 rights organizations. A visit by Amnesty International,
 proposed by President Siad in 1988, took place from June 24 to
 July 2. Officials arranged the meetings requested by the
 two-man delegation, including with former political prisoners,
 Prime Minister Samantlar, and President Siad. However, a week
 after the Al delegation's departure, the Bishop of Mogadishu
 was killed and civil unrest and summary executions followed;
 and AI has rot been invited to return.
 The Government has continued cooperation with the ICRC, which
 is now operating an emergency hospital in Berbera and making
 preparations to aid in refugee repatriation.
 Although there are no human rights organizations as such in
 Somalia, the Association of Somali Lawyers concerns itself
 with human rights issues.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or-Social Status
 Because Somalia is racially homogeneous, there is little
 racial discrimination as such. Animosities and rivalries
 based on bloodline and clan affiliation, however, are a
 fundamental problem at the root of the country's continuing
 civil conflict. Many persons have capitalized on their clan
 and family affiliations to gain economic advantage or
 privilege.. The clan differences also have a north versus
 south aspect. Members of the Isaak clan, who form the bulk of
 SNM supporters, are increasingly discriminated against because
 most of them are perceived as opponents of the Government.
 Although not all Isaaks are persecuted, a disproportionate
 number of political detainees and victims of extrajudicial
 executions (e.g., almost all of the 46 in Mogadishu in July)
 were of that clan.
 By tradition Somali women suffer discrimination in education,
 work, and family matters. Female enrollments in school remain
 far below those for males at all levels of education for
 traditional and cultural reasons. The payment of dowry and
 bride wealth are common marriage customs. Divorce laws and
 practices strongly favor the male partner.
 
 
 330
 The Siad Barre Government has historically supported women's
 rights. In the face of conservative opposition, it rewrote
 laws to increase women's rights to inherit and own property,
 made women the legal equals of men, and perhaps most
 importantly it outlawed female circumcision. The Government's
 campaign against female circumcision, led by the Somali
 Women's Democratic Organization of the SRSP, continued to make
 progress in 1989. Although the practice remained common,
 especially in rural areas, pharaonic circumcisions (the most
 extreme and dangerous form of female genital mutilation)
 became less common.
 Domestic violence against women is not a significant social
 problem in Somalia. There are several interlocking cultural
 and economic reasons why such practices as wife beating are
 relatively uncommon. One is that Somalis, being Muslims, do
 not generally drink alcohol. A second reason is that Somali
 marriages are contractual, with the wife's relatives prepared
 to enforce the agreement that she will be treated with
 dignity. Wife beating carries a stigma which makes it
 difficult for divorced wife beating males to remarry. Finally
 economic conditions, which have made it increasingly difficult
 for men to have more than one or at most two wives, also tend
 to curtail violence against women. (A veteran police officer,
 asked whether wife beating was a problem, said that in the
 days before independence it was common for men to have three
 or four wives and to treat the less favored of them as beasts
 of burden, beating the ones who faltered or were lazy. He
 said that young men of the present generation cannot afford
 more thad one wife, and therefore they are constrained to
 treat her with respect.)
 The civil conflict has, however, had a profoundly negative
 impact, and it appears that rape by government forces and
 others has occurred fairly often.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Workers are not free to form independent unions. There is a
 single labor confederation, the-government-controlled General
 Federation of Somali Trade Unions (GFSTU), is run by
 government-appointed officials. The GFSTU's main function is
 to monitor the work force and provide a conduit for worker
 grievances. The GFSTU is a member of the Organization of
 African Trade Union Unity and the International Confederation
 of Arab Trade Unions. Somalia has been a member of the
 International Labor Organization (ILO) since 1960, but has
 ratified neither ILO Convention 87 regarding freedom of
 association nor Convention 98 on collective bargaining.
 Strikes are outlawed, and organizing a strike is legally
 punishable by death. Nevertheless, there was a short
 transportation strike in 1987, and strikes by quarry workers
 in 1989. The Government took no action against the striking
 workers.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The right to organize does not appear to be infringed by
 employers. Because the GFSTU speaks for the Government, its
 dealings with employers on wages, hours, and working
 
 
 331
 SOALIA
 conditions tend to resemble binding arbitration rather than
 collective bargaining; Some-negotiation between employers and
 employees goes on outside the union framework. Given the
 official status of the GFSTU, antiunion discrimination appears
 to be a moot question. Labor courts adjudicate
 employer-employee disputes with relative impartiality. There
 are no export processing zones in Somalia.
 c. Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced or compulsory labor is prohibited by law, but the
 Government and party occasionally organize campaigns of
 "voluntary labor" to clean streets or boost production of
 state-owned factories.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The minimum age for the employment of children is 15, and
 persons under 18 are not permittedto work at night or in
 certain hazardous occupations. The law imposing the
 requirements, however, is not effectively implemented, and
 there is considerable child labor on the-margins of the wage
 economy. Children sell cigarettes on the street, carry bags
 in the market, and watch and clean cars to support themselves
 and to supplement family incomes.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Somalia has comprehensive labor legislation setting minimum
 safety and health standards for the workplace. These are
 applicable to the small, modern wage sector of an economy that
 is predominantly pastoral and agricultural and are not
 normally enforced. Xn theory the workday is 8 hours per day,
 6 days per week, with limits on overtime hours. There is no
 legal minimum wage. Workers are entitled to paid holidays,
 annual leave, holiday bonuses, and a variety of fringe
 benefits. In reality, however, the salary scale is extremely
 low, especially in the public sector. The average salary of a
 civil servant is equivalent to about $10 per month and is not
 adequate to maintain a decent standard of living.
 Productivity in the public sector is correspondingly low, and
 many civil servants make only minimal appearances in their
 offices. Workers resort to second jobs, corruption,
 assistance from other family members, and remittances from
 abroad to support themselves and their families.
 
 
 332
