 SOMALIA
 Somalia has been ruled for the past 17 years by President
 Mohamed Siad Barre, head of the armed forces and Secretary
 General of the Somali Revolutionary Socialist Party, the
 country's sole legal political party. The formal government
 structure includes a National People's Assembly, created in
 1980, and a Council of Ministers. The members of the Peoples
 Assembly were last elected on a single slate in December 1984
 with no provision for alternative or dissenting votes. The
 Council of Ministers is appointed by President Siad. The
 President also regularly convenes the party politburo, a close
 circle of advisers composed of the four or five most powerful
 ministers, who also represent the major clans and clan groups
 in Somalia. Informal and formal consultations between the
 leadership and clans and clan groups also have a major impact
 on internal politics.
 The ultimate source of the President's political authority is
 the military, which brought him to power in 1969. The police
 force performs day-to-day operations in maintaining civil
 order. These two uniformed services are augmented by the
 National Security Service (NSS), created in 1970, which has
 essentially unlimited powers of arrest, detention, and
 confiscation in matters deemed to involve national security.
 Somalia is a poor country with few natural resources. Most of
 its estimated population of 7.6 million earn a bare
 subsistence as herdsmen or farmers. The country's economy
 suffers from periodic drought and overcentralization.
 Recurrent conflict with Ethiopia has entailed heavy defense
 expenditures and a massive refugee problem. However, since
 1983 the Government has been introducing new policies to
 encourage development of the small private sector and to
 initiate financial reforms with the assistance of the
 International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, and the Agency
 for International Development. These reforms have had
 salutary effects on production and exports and have also
 lowered the inflation rate.
 There was no significant change in Somalia's human rights
 situation in 1986. Civil and political rights remain tightly
 circumscribed, and public criticism of the Government is not
 allowed. The Government shows little hesitation to imprison
 those it sees as a threat to security. Two antiregime
 organizations, operating out of Ethiopia, conducted infrequent
 military attacks against Somali Government and army
 establishments, primarily in northern Somalia.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were credible reports that an Isaak tribesman, a member
 of the antigovernment Somali National Movement, whom the
 Somalis concluded was working for Ethiopia, was executed
 without trial in March. Opposition groups were responsible
 for a few deaths or woundings of civilians in the course of
 their attacks on government establishments. While the
 opposition's avowed targets are the military, a recent change
 in tactics involves use of land mines, which have injured some
 civilians. Amnesty International's 1986 Report noted
 
 
 268
 SOMALIA
 unconfirmed reports of extrajudicial executions of unarmed
 civilians in 1985 by the security forces in areas of armed
 conflict.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reported cases of disappearance.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 There are periodic but unsubstantiated allegations of the use
 of torture by police and security officials. For example,
 letters sent to President Siad Barre, Ambassador Haji Nur, and
 State Department officials allege that four detained Somali
 high school students were tortured before being sentenced to
 death in Hargeisa for unspecified charges in August 1986.
 There is evidence that authorities routinely apply rough
 treatment in order to obtain confessions from criminal
 suspects. Somali prisons are frequently unsanitary, and
 living conditions are harsh. According to Amnesty
 International's 1986 Report, political prisoners are
 reportedly held in harsh conditions in maximum security
 prisons, are denied contact with their families and, in some
 cases, are held in solitary confinement. Upon release from
 prison, some political prisoners have been restored to their
 old government jobs or have had new jobs created for them.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Despite constitutional provisions that accord Somali citizens
 the right to formal charges and a speedy trial, the criminal
 procedure code was modified in 1970 to exempt crimes involving
 national security from specific time limits and rules of
 procedure. Those arrested for expression of critical views of
 the Government may be charged with crimes against the State,
 such as sedition and conspiracy against the State, and held
 indefinitely without ever being brought to trial. The
 National Security Service is empowered to arrest without a
 warrant anyone suspected of a crime involving national
 security. There is no provision for bail in any but minor
 cases before the National Security Court.
 There are an estimated 300 to 500 political detainees, of whom
 at least 200 are being held without charge, including 6 former
 members of Parliament arrested in 1982, presumably for alleged
 coup plotting. There is no known movement toward trial in any
 of these cases. Some detainees are also held incommunicado
 for various lengths of time. The Government provides no
 information about the number of detainees. The Government
 does not practice exile. In January, President Siad Barre
 publicly offered amnesty to dissidents abroad who wished to
 return to Somalia.
 Compulsory labor is not permitted under the Somali labor
 code. However, occasional campaigns are organized by the
 Government or the party in which "voluntary" labor is used in
 cleaning up streets and is sporadically enforced by
 paramilitary youth units. Prisoners occasionally perform
 labor as part of their penal servitude.
 
 
 269
 SOMALIA
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Somali judicial system includes civil/criminal courts,
 headed by a Supreme Court, and a separate National Security
 Court. Lawyers are permitted to represent suspects before the
 National Security Court, but proceedings are not always open
 to the public. In contrast, the civil and criminal courts are
 conducted openly. Although nominally independent, the
 judiciary is in fact not distinguishable as an institution
 from the executive. The results are subject to review and
 control by the executive. All judges in the Supreme Court and
 lower courts are appointed by the President with the advice of
 the Higher Judicial Council, of which the President is the
 chairman. The right to appeal exists in criminal and civil
 cases but not in cases heard by the National Security Court.
 In the civil and criminal courts, legal assistance is
 provided, and there are established rules of evidence. There
 are no religious courts in Somalia. In certain civil
 proceedings relating to family matters, such as marriage and
 inheritance, the judge may cite the Koran in rendering
 decisions.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 "Mobilization Campaigns" are organized by the Somali
 Revolutionary Socialist Party to promote public participation
 in, and enthusiasm for, various civic and national programs,
 as well as general support for government policies.
 Participation in these campaigns is urged but not strictly
 enforced. Military press gangs are often used to provide
 "recruits" for the army. The National Security Service has
 the authority to search homes without warrants. This
 authority extends to monitoring communications and opening
 mail, although there is no evidence that such practices are
 broadly used. The NSS can effectively track the movements of
 persons through its comprehensive network of informants. Some
 more traditional families arrange marriages for their
 children, but the Government does not interfere with this
 facet of family life.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Government forbids public expression of dissenting views.
 The media are owned and operated by the Government. There is
 one weekly newspaper, published in Arabic and Italian, which
 is privately owned but government controlled. The press
 disseminates only information and opinion acceptable to the
 Government. The Central Censorship Board retains control over
 all media including publications (foreign and local)
 circulated within the country, films, plays, concerts, and
 other means of communication, such as videotapes whether
 imported or produced in Somalia. In 1986 the only publication
 subject to frequent censorship was the magazine Africa Report
 published in New York. In the past, some Italian publications
 have been banned, as well as the quarterly journal Horn of
 Africa published in New Jersey by Somali and Ethiopian
 intellectuals who reside in the United States. One incident
 of censorship of the weekly magazine Newsweek occurred in
 1986, when a letter concerning Ethiopian refugees was blacked
 out of all issues distributed in the country.
 
 
 270
 SOMALIA
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 All nonreligious organizations and public gatherings are
 subject to government control or supervision. Protests
 against government policies are not permitted. In April a
 short-lived rally in favor of imposition of the Islamic
 Shari'a Law resulted in the arrest of nearly 100 participants.
 The country's single labor confederation, the General
 Federation of Somali Trade Unions (GFSTU) is government
 controlled and its members do not have the right to strike.
 Organizing a strike is punishable by the death penalty. The
 GFSTU's main function is to monitor the work force and provide
 a conduit for worker grievances. The GFSTU is a member of the
 Organization of African Trade Union Unity and the
 International Confederation of Arab Trade Unions and
 participates in the International Labor Organization.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Islam is the state religion of Somalia, and nearly 100 percent
 of the population is Muslim. The Government monitors the
 topics of sermons preached in the mosques and occasionally
 will arrest a religious leader whose text strays too far into
 political areas. The Government arrested Somalis and deported
 expatriates for Muslim Brotherhood activities, but contends
 that the Brotherhood which seeks to apply Islamic tenets to
 politics, is a secular, not a religious, organization.
 Somalis are free to participate in the Hajj, and many do so
 annually. Members of other religions may freely practice
 their faiths, but proselytizing is not permitted.
 In June there were credible but unconfirmed reports that the
 Government arbitrarily arrested some Islamic "extremists" and
 accused them, among other things, of using religion to incite
 people against the security of the State. These "extremists"
 were reported to be radical Shia. (Somalis are predominantly
 of the Sunni sect of Islam.)
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Internal travel is not formally restricted but is controlled
 through police and military checkpoints in towns, border
 areas, and regions noted for interclan violence. Although any
 Somali citizen can obtain a passport, the Government denies
 exit visas to categories of people it prefers to keep in
 country, such as young men of military age and to those under
 police surveillance. Emigration is permitted for all but
 government employees. Somalis who have gone abroad are not
 restricted from repatriation. Those who have been involved in
 dissident activities against the regime may face questioning
 or imprisonment upon their return, although some returning
 dissidents who have renounced their opposition to the regime
 have been welcomed back and provided with government jobs.
 Somalia provides a home to a much disputed number of refugees
 from Ethiopia. Estimates range from the Government's figure
 of 800,000 down to 350,000. Most are ethnic Somalis. In 1986
 there was an increase in the number of non-Somalis seeking
 refuge in Somalia. The Oromos who fled to Somalia state that
 they were fleeing from the Ethiopian Government's
 villagization and collectivization policies. The Somali
 Government officially welcomes refugees to stay or to return
 
 
 SOMALIA
 to Ethiopia as they wish. Real obstacles to voluntary
 repatriation, beyond the lack of agreement with Ethiopia, do
 exist, but some observers believe the Somali Government may be
 using the issue of repatriation as a tool in its long-running
 conflict with Ethiopia. Limited repatriation, assisted by the
 United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, has begun; and
 about 1,000 refugees have returned to Ethiopia. The increase
 in the number of non-Somalis has created some ethnic tension
 in the northern region. These recent arrivals for the most
 part, like other non-Somalis displaced into Somalia, are not
 allowed to assimilate into the Somali population.
 The Somali Government recently issued approximately 60 travel
 documents to refugees in Somalia who qualified for
 resettlement in the United States. These persons had been
 waiting for at least 2 years for this documentation.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 President Siad Barre rules Somalia and controls political
 participation through a single legal political party, the
 Somali Revolutionary Socialist Party. The party directs
 participation in Somali political affairs by individuals and
 organizations, such as the General Federation of Somali Trade
 Unions, the Somali Women's Democratic Organization, and the
 Somali Revolutionary Youth Organization. Voting for the
 People's Assembly entails only a vote for or against the
 party's national slate, although one need not necessarily be a
 member of the party to be included as a candidate on the
 slate. President Siad Barre, the sole candidate for
 president, was reelected to another 7 year term on December
 23. There is no legal opposition to the Government, and
 public criticism of its policies is forbidden. Somalia has
 only one indigenous ethnic group, the Somali, which is
 subdivided into clans and clan groups. Although the country
 is ethnically and linguistically homogeneous, clan divisions
 have a great impact on domestic politics. President Siad
 recognizes the continuing strength of the traditional,
 clan-based political coalitions, and government officials
 frequently hold formal and informal consultations with various
 clan leaders. President Siad has used clan politics to
 maintain his rule by placing members of his own clan, the
 Marehan, in key positions. He is conscious of clan
 constituencies, and members of other clans also occupy
 important positions. Clan identification is very strong, and
 for many Somalis, the traditional clan system is the accepted
 vehicle of political expression. Clan politics and clan
 rivalries occasionally erupt into violence.
 Women and minorities participate in politics and government.
 The Somali Women's Democratic Organization, though subordinate
 to the party, has advocated greater political participation
 and mobilization for women. A number of women are members of
 the People's Assembly. Other women occupy relatively
 important positions in various ministries. Several vice
 ministers and one ambassador are women.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Somali Government has refused requests by foreign
 officials and human rights organizations to visit political
 prisoners, and it has not responded to requests from various
 
 
 272
 SOMALIA
 governments and organizations, such as the International
 Parliamentary Union, to release the six parliamentarians who
 have been detained without charge since 1982. In November
 1985 Amnesty International proposed a visit of inquiry to
 Somalia. At the end of 1986, the Government had not yet
 responded to that request. The International Committee of the
 Red Cross (ICRC) has a representative in Somalia and is
 allowed visits to prisoners of war from the 1977-78 Ogaden
 Conflict. The Somali Government requires that witnesses be
 present at ICRC interviews. There has been no repatriation or
 exchange of these prisoners of war, although the Governments
 of Ethiopia and Somalia discussed the issue during 1986.
 There are no Somali organizations which actively address human
 rights issues. In international forums, official Somali
 remarks on human rights are usually restricted to general
 statements and criticism of human rights practices in
 Ethiopia.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 While there is no overt discrimination of economic benefits
 among the various clans and clan groups in Somalia, members
 of certain clans with good political connections in the
 Government have been able to capitalize on the current
 economic liberalization. There is no discrimination regarding
 access to education and health services on clan or ethnic
 basis, although these social services are generally available,
 if at all, only in larger urban areas of the country.
 While they have considerable inheritance and ownership rights,
 Somali women suffer from traditional discrimination in work
 and family matters. Long-established practices, such as
 female circumcision, remain prevalent despite Government
 opposition. Dowries and "wife buying" are also prevalent in
 the more traditional rural areas.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 Somalia has comprehensive labor legislation which establishes
 minimum safety and health conditions for the workplace. These
 are applicable to the modern, or cash, sector of an economy
 which is predominantly pastoral and agricultural. The minimum
 age for employment of children is 15, and persons under 18
 years of age are not permitted to work at night or in certain
 hazardous occupations. However, there is considerable child
 labor on the margins of the economy. Children sell cigarettes
 on the street, carry bags in the market, and watch and clean
 cars to support themselves and supplement family incomes. The
 established workday is 8 hours a day, with a total of 48 hours
 per week, and overtime hours can be limited. Workers are
 entitled to paid holidays, annual leave, and holiday bonuses.
 However, the salary scale is extremely low, especially in the
 public sector. The average salary of a civil servant is
 roughly $15 per month.  Workers resort to second jobs,
 bribes, misuse of public funds, assistance from other family
 members, and remittances from abroad to support themselves and
 their families. Productivity in the public sector is
 extremely low, and many civil servants make minimal
 appearances in their offices. A civil service reform is
 beginning, through which it is projected public sector jobs
 will be cut by attrition and salaries increased.
 
 
 273
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.PISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: SOMALIA
 1984     1985     1986
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL,..         81.7     82.7     44.5
 LOANS ..............    ... 16.0     20.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............   ... 65.7      62.7     44.5
 A.AID ...... ..............   50.6      51.0     44.5
 LOANS .................    0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................   50.6      51.0     44.5
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.) ...       35.0     30.0      22.0
 B.FOOD  FOR  PEACE .......     31.1      31.7      0.0
 LOANS ..............    ... 16.0     20.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................   15.1      11.7      0.0
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ...........    16.0      20.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....       16.0      20.0      0.0
 PAY.  IN  FOR.  CURR .....      0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  II-TOTAL .........      15.1      11.7      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.OEV  &  WFP.      15.1      11.7      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY.....         0.0       0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST.            0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .................    0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............     0.0       0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS ......        0.0       0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0       0.0      0.0
 OTHER ..............     0.0       0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        33.0      34.1     20.2
 LOANS .................     0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................   33.0      34.1     20.2
 A.MAP  GRANTS ...........    32.0      33.0     19.1
 3.CREDIT FINANCING ....        0.0       0.0      0.0
 :.INTL  MIL.EO.TRN$ ,..        1.0       1.1      1.1
 O.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...,         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER  GRANTS ........       0.0       0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL  ECON.  &  MIL...    114.7     116.8     64.7
 LOANS ..............    ... 16.0     20.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    98.7     96.8     64.7
 OTIER US LOANS                    0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS.......          0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER ..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FRO4 INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1984     1985     1986     1946-86
 TOTAL ........    35.3     51.8      34.3    532.2
 IBRO               3.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 IFC                0.0      0.6       0.0      1.0
 IDA               31.5      20.6     34.3    287.3
 IOB                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 A03                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 AFOB               0.0     27.9       0.0     83.9
 UNDP               1.8       2.7      0.0     60.7
 OTIER-UN            5.0      0.0      0.0     18.8
 EE:                0.0      0.0       0.0     78.5
 
 
 274
