SOMALIA
The 1993 report on human rights in Somalia accurately documents for the most part the denial of many fundamental human rights to Somalis of every clan and faction. Under the rule of President Siad Barre, and since his overthrow, many Somalis have seen family members killed in clan-based battles, have been uprooted from their homes and separated from their families by rival clan militia and have lived in fear for their lives. The infrastructure in Somalia has been destroyed and all semblance of civil order has vanished. Furthermore, the United Nations Task Force (UNITAF) and its successor, the United Nations Operations in Somalia (UNOSOM) have claimed that their mission of creating a secure society and a framework for the observance of human rights was disrupted when its troops were allegedly attacked by militia of the Somali National Alliance (SNA), led by Mohamed Farah Aideed. For several months thereafter, UNOSOM's goal changed sharply. Rather than facilitate the establishment of civil order, UNOSOM became an active participant in the internal conflict. Consequently, UNOSOM troops violated the human rights of some Somalis.
On the whole, the report minimizes the validity of claims of human rights violations committed by UNOSOM froops in Somalia and downplays their importance. For the most part, accounts of such violations are either included in unlikely sections of the report or are buried in discussions of unrelated events. When discussed, the account is abbreviated. This is particularly true of accounts of abuses committed by US troops. The most striking examples of the report's summary freatment of such incidents are the accounts of the July 12 attack on a house near Digfer where a political meeting involving Aideed was taking place (the Abdi House) and the firefight at Digfer Hospital.
The report's reticence in discussing the assault on the Abdi House is evinced both by the location of the reference to the attack and the cursory manner in which the event is summarized. The report devotes only one sentence to the attack, and that is buried in the section on the use of excessive force and violations of humanitarian law in internal conflicts. The report relies on an "alleged" charge by human rights organizations that the attack makes UNOSOM a "party in an internal conflict" as the basis for this solitary reference. The placement of the discussion in this section is all the more surprising given that the earlier and more logical section for its inclusion — that referring to political and other extrajudicial killing — makes reference to the March incidents of abuse by Canadian troops against Somalis; the April conviction of a US marine for using excessive force in an incident in which one Somali was killed; the alleged June 5 attack by Aideed on UNOSOM Pakistani troops; the assassination of six Somali distributors of the
326
SOMALIA
UNOSOM paper; the June 15 fight between UNOSOM and the SNA; and the September 5 attack on UNOSOM Nigerian troops.
The equivocation in discussing the July 12 attack is further evinced by the report's reluctance to discuss the incident in its own voice. The tone of the reference to the attack is somewhat detached. Given that it was conducted by US missile-firing helicopters, the State Department has first-hand knowledge of the incident. However, rather than discuss the incident in its own voice, the report refers to it only in terms of charges brou^t by UNOSOM critics. Notably absent from the account is the number and identities of the victims of the attack. The ICRC verified that at least 54 people were killed, among them women and children.
The July 12 political meeting was attended by representatives from a number of clans including Habr Gidir, Majerteen, Ogaden, Hawadle and Galjel and included clan elders, doctors, engineers, military officers and other intellectuals and religious leaders. The human rights organization African Rigjits has reported that those believed to have been killed included: Sheikh Mohamed Iman Elmi Gelle, a religious leader of the Saad subclan of the Habr Gidir; Sheik Hassan Abdi Naleye, a religious leader of the Habr Gidir; Abshir Qahir Farah, a Habr Gidir elder; Dr. Khalife Adawe Ali, an intellectual from the Hawadle clan; and Osman Hassan Kulmiye, an elder from the Hawadle clan.
While the report accurately distinguishes the Abdi House attack from other UNOSOM incidents, in that no advance warning was given, it fails to note that the attack took place in a relatively busy part of town in the late morning when the sfreets are generally bustling with civilian activity, African Rights has claimed that the number of casualties could have been sharply reduced if advance warning had been given to the civilians or if the attack had taken place at night. An internal report by the justice division of UNOSOM concluded that:
UNOSOM should anticipate that some organizations and member states will characterize a deliberate attack meant to kill the occupants without giving all the building occupants a chance to surrender as nothing less than murder committed in the name of the United Nations.
Like the account of the attack on the Abdi House, the report's sole reference to the firefight between UNOSOM and SNA forces at the Digfer Hospital also appears in the section on violations of humanitarian law. Again, this would have been better placed in the earlier section on extrajudicial killings. The report also should have noted that Aideed violated the laws of war by headquartering troops in the hospital.
Human Rights Watch has commended the State Department's recording in the report of the instances of violations of the laws of war by UNOSOM
327
CRITIQUE 1993
personnel, noting that the report exceeds all prior statements by the US government. While this praise is merited, the report is far from perfect. Its discussion of the conviction of a US marine, for example, is equivocal. Rather than directly attribute blame to the soldier for the killing, the report backtracks by noting that the marine was convicted of "using excessive force in an incident in which one Somali was killed." Human Rights Watch reports that the marine was in fact convicted of killing two civilians. Furthermore, in a rather serious omission, the report fails to mention that six Canadian soldiers were charged with murder and torture of a Somali held in their custody. A court martial proceeding was undertaken in Canada.
Furtherrnore, the report's account of the mistreatment of Somali detainees at the hands of Belgian troops is misleading and incomplete. In a single paragraph the report speaks of merely an "alleged" abuse, while noting that "military authorities had taken appropriate action in cases of apparent misconduct." The reader is left to wonder whether more than one incident is contemplated. If so, the report is equivocal at best. Furthermore, although the report notes that bum marks were found on the bodies of Somalis held by the Belgians, it surprisingly fails to document other reports of abuse. Rather, it says, in a detached manner, that, "...thirteen other cases were still under investigation at year's end." The report fails to say whether these are 13 cases of burning of detainees or whether they involve other kinds of abuses. African Rights was told of several cases of unwarranted killing and harassment of unarmed Somalis by Belgian troops, but the report makes no reference to any of these allegations. The allegations reported by African Rights include the case of Ibrahim Sabriye Khayre, a carpenter who made crutches for the ICRC, who was shot as he entered a mosque to pray. Belgian forces are also accused of throwing seven children into the Juba River between June 9 and 30.
Twice in a two-paragraph discussion describing the fighting between the SNA and UNOSOM, the report draws attention to the fact that women were among the SNA combatants. Only later, in its discussion of intemal conflicts and discrimination against children, however, does the report acknowledge that women were forcibly coerced into such battles for propaganda purposes. • The use of women as human shields is pervasive throughout Somalia, but particularly among the SNA. Other than this distortion of the facts, however, the report is accurate in its discussion of abuses against women and children. Its acknowledgement of the widespread incidence of female genital mutilation (FGM) is appropriate and overdue. Despite the well-documented damage to both physical and mental health caused by FGM, the report does not adequately address the fact that the practice stems from the traditional social imbalance between the sexes. Until traditional attitudes are altered, uncircumcised women and girls will continue to be treated as social outcasts in Somalia.
328
SOMALIA
The State Department's account of the freedom of peaceful assembly and association is internally inconsistent. For example, the discussion of the attack on the Abdi House recognizes that the object of the attack was a political meeting. Therefore the UNOSOM attack interfered with the freedom of peacefril assembly. However, no reference is made to the incident in that section of the report.
The report makes a passing reference to accusations that UNOSOM troops fired on protesters in June, but gives no details. Surprisingly, for instance, the exact date and place of the incident are not stated; nor is any reference made to the casualties, if any. While the absence of details makes it difficult to know exactly which incident is being referred to, attacks on peaceful demonstrators by UNOSOM on June 12 and 13 were reported by both Human Rights Watch and African Rights. If the reference is to these incidents, the report should have mentioned that at the June 12 demonstration at least two civilians were killed by Pakistani UN troops. Also notably absent is the fact that at least 10 civilians died in the June 13 demonstration.
Despite the report's tendency to understate alleged abuses by foreign troops, the account of National Police Commander Mousa's deposition, in which he described alleged abuse by US forces against him and his family, is commendable. The level of detail employed here is especially welcome.
Since the overthrow of the Barre dictatorship, Somalia has experienced a violent internal struggle for control of the country. This struggle is fought by warlords who have manipulated their access to arms by leading bands of mihtia in attacks against their political rivals. Civilians uninvolved in the battles are targeted simply on account of their membership in a particular clan. Unarmed civilians and children are often deliberately killed because they belong to a particular clan or sub-clan and are therefore associated with its goals. The gravity of the internal conflict is accurately documented in the report, although little reference is made to specific human rights atrocities committed by the warring factions.
One surprising omission from the section on violations of humanitarian law is any reference to one of the worst outbreaks of interclan fighting in Somalia in 1993 — the February-March battle for control of Kismayo between forces of General Mohamed Said Hersi Morgan, leader of the Somali National Front and son-in-law of former President Siad Barre, and forces of Colonel Ahmen Omar Jess, leader of a section of the Somali Patriotic Front, which is part of Aideed's alliance. Kismayo changed hands several times during this period of fighting.
Foreign journalists have also been victims of violence by Somalis, usually in retaliation for actions by UNOSOM. The report ignores such incidents. For instance, it fails to mention that four foreign journalists reporting on the Abdi House attack were summarily killed. The Committee to Protect Journalists reported that the journalists had been invited by an Aideed spokesman to view the remains of the house. Upon arrival the journalists were set upon by a group of Somalis
329
CRITIQUE 1993
wielding rocks, guns and clubs. Intemational PEN reported an attack on a fifth joumalist, who received head wounds from a machete while examining the remains of the Abdi House.
The State Department frankly and commendably reports on the public stoning to death in Hargeisa of five women suspected of prostitution. Having been tried and convicted in an informal Islamic tribunal, the women were condemned to death without appeal under Islamic law (Shari'd).
The report's account of the release of 348 detainees negotiated by the ICRC inaccurately states that the majority of the prisoners were held by the United Somali Faction. In fact, these people were mostly detained by Aideed's SNA militia. Also, the report correctly notes that Aideed and foreign news agencies control the broadcast and print media sources available to Somalis. In other words, warlords and clans other than Aideed's SNA do not have access to the media. Also correctly reported is the recent increase in the number of joumals distributed. The report's statement that six Somali distributors of the UNISOM newspaper, Maanta, were killed by Aideed loyalists is also accurate.
It is difficult to record or discuss the denial of the right to be free from arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home and correspondence in Somalia. Since the overthrow of President Barre, all common notions of privacy, family and home have disappeared, and the report correctly notes that in 1993 there was no right to privacy in Somalia. The SNA is the biggest perpefrator of violations in this area, entering the homes of rival clan members, killing all inhabitants and looting contents. While the brief summary of the denial of these fundamental rights is accurate, the report's uncommitting and sweeping statements are a marked contrast to the detail found in other parts of the report. Indeed, the report appears almost callous in its bland statement that militia "occupy private homes and buildings without the permission of the owners."
In sum, the 1993 report is frank and accurate on several issues. Especially in view of the current situation in Somalia, the report covers a number of points comprehensively and thoroughly. Nonetheless, one is left with the impression that the report almost consistently understates and minimizes human rights violations by UNOSOM troops.
330
