Serbia
Despite being granted status as a candidate for European Union membership in
March, Serbia did little to improve its human rights record in 2012. The situation
of ethnic minorities remains precarious, especially for Roma. Journalists still
face a hostile environment, despite some progress in bringing perpetrators of
attacks to justice. The asylum system remains weak and overburdened.
Relations with Kosovo remain tense, exemplified by Kosovo and Serbian police
carrying out tit for tat arrests of Serbian election officials and Kosovo Albanian
activists in the run-up to the May 6 Serbian elections.
Accountability for War Crimes
There was ongoing progress in domestic war crimes prosecutions. In
September, the Belgrade War Crimes Chamber convicted 11 members of the
Kosovo Liberation Army’s (KLA) “Gnjilane group” to a combined total of 116
years in prison for crimes against civilians, mainly Roma and Ashkali, during the
1999 Kosovo war. In June, the chamber sentenced 14 former members of the
Yugoslav People’s Army (JNA) to a combined total of 126 years in prison for war
crimes against Croat civilians in the Croatian village of Lovas in 1991. The
Serbian war crimes prosecutor indicted three people for crimes against civilians
during 2012. Sixteen cases were pending at this writing.
However, Chief Prosecutor Serge Brammertz at the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) in a June report criticized Serbia’s lack
of efforts to uncover the networks that helped war crimes fugitives wanted by
the ICTY to evade justice. The Serbian war crimes prosecutor’s office subsequently
began investigating 13 suspects, including a former high-ranking security
official. In his report Brammertz also criticized Serbia’s failure to sign a proposed
protocol on war crimes cooperation between the Serbian prosecutor and
his Bosnian counterpart.
Freedom of Media
Journalists continue to face a hostile environment, although the authorities
brought some perpetrators of attacks on journalists to justice.
In February, a cameraman from Studio B television was punched and kicked in
the capital Belgrade. The sole assailant was arrested by police and charged in
June for the assault. In February, a Belgrade appeals court increased the prison
sentences of two men for the 2008 attack on journalist Bosko Brankovic while
he reported on a demonstration in support of Radovan Karadizic, the Bosnian
Serb wartime president, on trial at the ICTY for genocide and crimes against
humanity. The court upheld sentences for two others.
Despite having 24-hour police protection since October 2005, threats continued
against Vladimir Mitric, a journalist specializing in uncovering corruption. In
September, Mitric was threatened twice by the same person and told not to
report on particular individuals. On the second occasion the person making the
threats was accompanied by a police officer who had been responsible for
Mitric’s protection. The person making the threats was charged with minor
offences in September, but at this writing the police officer had not been disciplined.
In October, the homes of three journalists were attacked, although it is unclear
whether the attacks were linked to their reporting. Unknown assailants lobbed
Molotov cocktails at the Belgrade homes of Biljana Vujovic, a presenter at TV
Kopernikus, and Damir Dragic, director of Belgrade-based tabloid Informer. No
one was injured but Dragic’s car was destroyed by the fire. It is unclear whether
the incidents were connected to their reporting. An explosive device, which did
not detonate, was placed near the home of Tanja Jankovic, an investigative journalist
at TV B92 in Vranje, southern Serbia. At this writing, all three incidents
were under police investigation.
In July, a Belgrade appeals court sentenced freelance journalist Laszlo Szasz to
120 days in prison for a 2007 commentary criticizing the leader of the Hungarian
nationalist 64 Counties Youth Movement. Szasz was released after receiving a
presidential pardon on August 3.
In September, Information Minister Bratislav Petkovic announced that the government
was preparing legislation guaranteeing freedom and independence of
the media. The same month, the government announced it would establish an
international commission to investigate unsolved murders of three prominent
journalists more than a decade ago.
Treatment of Minorities
Roma continued to experience harassment, threats, discrimination when
accessing education, and problematic forced evictions.
In April, around 1,000 Roma were forcibly evicted from the Belvil informal settlement
in Belgrade. Those internally displaced Romani families from Kosovo and
those with permanent residency in Belgrade were rehoused in metal containers
on the outskirts of Belgrade. Families with residency registered in other parts of
Serbia were returned there, including four families returned to Nis, southern
Serbia, where they were housed in an abandoned warehouse without access to
water or electricity.
On May 1, 15 to 20 masked persons armed with baseball bats approached the
Jabucki Rit container settlement occupied by Roma. They shouted racist slogans
and drew a swastika on one metal container. At this writing, police had made
only one arrest and the case remained under investigation.
There was progress in addressing problems of undocumented persons, many of
whom are Roma. A new law adopted in September removes administrative barriers
and simplifies registration procedures for birth certificates.
Tension rose in the Vojvodina region, northeast Serbia, between members of the
Serb majority and Hungarian minority. In September, approximately 20 Serbs
armed with iron rods attacked eight Hungarian children and young adults in the
town of Subotica, allegedly because the victims spoke Hungarian. Police were
investigating at this writing.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
Serbia made some progress in protecting the rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual,
and transgender (LGBT) people. In February, Simo Vladicic was sentenced to a
three-month jail term for making threats against LGBT people via a Facebook
group called “500,000 Serbs against Gay Pride.” In March, a Belgrade court sentenced
Mladen Obradovic, leader of the right-wing extremist movement Obraz,
to 10 months in prison for threatening gays and inciting hatred in the run-up to
the 2009 Gay Pride Parade, which was then cancelled on security grounds. In a
separate case, Obradovic was sentenced to two years in prison in April 2011 for
inciting violence during the 2010 Gay Pride Parade, a sentence that was under
appeal at this writing. The Serbian Ministry of Interior banned the October 6
parade and other public gatherings citing security reasons, but took no measures
to try to facilitate the parade in face of the threats of violence. Serbian
authorities also banned the Belgrade Pride Parade in 2011 due to violent incidents
during and after the 2010 event that injured policemen and participants.
Asylum Seekers and Displaced Persons
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) said
in September that the defects in Serbia’s asylum system mean that it cannot be
considered a safe country of asylum or safe third country and that countries
should refrain from sending asylum seekers from other countries back to Serbia.
Hungary, Greece, and Turkey are among the countries sending asylum seekers
back to Serbia. In the first eight months of 2012, 1,454 asylum seekers were registered
in Serbia, down from 2,134 during the same period in 2011.
There were concerns about inadequate capacity in Serbia’s two asylum centers,
which can only accommodate a total of 280 people. The Asylum Office, which
makes initial decisions on asylum claims, has not granted refugee status or
temporary protection to any applicant since it assumed responsibility for the
asylum procedure in 2008.
There was little progress towards finding a lasting solution for refugees and
internally displaced persons (IDPs) from the Balkan wars. According to the
UNHCR, in July there were 66,563 refugees in Serbia, most from Croatia, and 228,215 IDPs of whom 210,146 hail from Kosovo. A successful international
donors conference in Sarajevo in April raised financial support for the housing
needs of 74,000 of the most vulnerable IDPs in Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Croatia, and Montenegro.
In October, the EU renewed calls on Serbian authorities to stop the influx of asylum
seekers, mainly Roma, to EU countries, adding that failure to do so risked
losing the right for Serbian citizens to travel to the EU without visas. There were
credible reports by international human rights NGOs throughout 2012 that
Serbian border guards prevent persons of perceived Romani origin from crossing
the border from Serbia into Hungary.
Key International Actors
On March 1, EU heads of state granted candidate status to Serbia following a
February 28 recommendation by the General Affairs Council, which made clear
the decision was linked to Serbia’s progress on cooperation with Kosovo,
including on management of their border, and made no reference to human
rights. The European Commission’s annual progress report on Serbia stressed
the need to strengthen the rule of law, ensure judicial reforms and protect vulnerable
groups, particularly Roma. The commission said that Serbia needed to
increase efforts to fight corruption and protect freedom of expression in the
media.
A joint US and EU Balkans tour led by US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and
EU High Representative Catherine Ashton in late October and early November
failed to emphasize the importance of improving human rights protection in
Serbia and instead focused on political dialogue between authorities in
Belgrade and Pristina.
In June, the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT) published a
report on its 2011 visit to Serbia expressing concerns about allegations of illtreatment
of detainees by law enforcement officials and overcrowding in all prisons
it visited.
The UN special rapporteur on human rights defenders expressed concern about
allegations of harassment of LGBT human rights defenders in Serbia in her
February global report.
In April 2012, Serbia signed the Council of Europe (CoE) Convention on preventing
and combating violence against women and domestic violence.