 SERBIA/MONTENEGRO*
 The dissolution of the S'ialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, which began in
 1991, was completed in 1992 with international recognition of the independence of
 three of the former Yugoslav republics (Slovenia, Croatia, and Bosnia and
 Herzegovina). On April 27, Serbia and Montener, two of the remaining constituent
 republics of the former Yugoslavia, proclaimed te establishment of the "Federal Re-
 pubic of Yugoslavia" (FRY  and promulgated a new constitution. The international
 community rejected the FRY's claim to be the sole successor of the former Yugo-
 slavia, and Yugoslav participation was suspended in the United Nations General
 *The United States does not recognize the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
 
 
 898
 Assembly and the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE). This
 section of the Country Reports addresses human rights within the territory of Ser-
 bia/Montenegro. Serbian responsibility for human rights abuses on the territory of
 Bosnia and Herzegovina -abuses characterized by a scale and level of sheer cru-
 elty, brutality, and killing rarely equalled in this century--are addressed in the
 Country Report on Bosnia and Herzegovina.
 Elections were held in May for delegates to the bicameral Federal Assembly. The
 democratic opposition in Serbia and Montenegro boycotted the elections, which the
 CSCE denounced as unfair and illegitimate. In June the Assembly, controlled by the
 Socialist Party of Serbia (SPS), selected as Federal President Dobrica Cosic, a
 prominent Serbian writer known for his nationalist views. In July a Serbian-Amer-
 ican businessman, Milan Panic, was named Federal Prime Minister and formed a
 Government that included some respected opposition figures. Real power remained
 in the hands of the President of the Republic of Serbia and SPS leader Slobodan
 Milosevic, who led the Serbian bloc in usurping the authority of the Federal Presi-
 dency in October 1991. Accusing Federal President Cosic and Prime Minister Panic
 of betraying Serbian interests, President Milosevic used his party's dominance over
 the FRY Assembly to water down democratic reforms, delay new federal and repub-
 lic elections, and ensure continued support for military aggression in Bosnia and
 Herzegovina.
 Federal, republic, and local elections which were held on December 20, 1992,
 failed to meet international standards for a free and fair democratic process. In the
 preelection period in Serbia, the ruling Socialist Party of Slobodan Milosevic used
 state-run television and radio for its own advantage and to the disadvantage of the
 opposition. On election day, voter lists were found to have been manipulated so that
 many eligible voters were excluded; procedures for ballot secrecy an ballot security
 were inadequate, and other irregularities occurred. Milosevic retained complete con-
 trol over Serbian republic police, who in October seized federal police headquarters
 and did not relinquish it despite a court order to do so. Although the Army of Yugo-
 slavia (VJ), successor to the old Yugoslav National Army, (JNA), under the joint
 command of the Federal, Serbian, and Montenegrin presidents, ostensibly remained
 outside politics, its position was made clear in an interview just before the Decem-
 ber election, when a senior Yugoslav Army general said that no Serbian general
 would serve as Minister of Defense in a government led by opposition candidate
 Milan Panic.
 On January 2, 1992, Federal/Serbian and Croatian authorities signed a United
 Nations-brokered cease-fire the Vance Plan, which provided for the introduction of
 U.N. peacekeeping forces (UNPROFOR) in Serb-controlled areas of Croatia (approxi-
 mately one-third of Croatia's territory) and withdrawal of JNA forces. This resolved
 the fighting, during the last 6 months of 1991, between Croatian forces and the
 JNA, which had intervened on the side of militant Serbs opposed to Croatian inde-
 pendence.
 During the war in Croatia, JNA soldiers and Serbian paramilitary forces were
 stationed throughout neighboring Bosnia and Herzegovina. When sporadic outbursts
 of violence there escalated into full-scale war in April 1992 as Serbian nationalists
 attempted to establish an independent state within Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
 JNA armed Bosnian Serb irregulars and fought on behalf of Serbian forces until its
 nominal withdrawal in mid-May. At that time, federal and republic authorities
 claimed that the 80 percent o the crsonnel of the JNA in Bosnia who were
 Bosnian Serbs were free to remain in Bsnia and Herzegovina to fight. The a pproxi-
 mately 80,000 "volunteers" who "left" the JNA formed the core of the newly formed
 Serbian Army of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The federal and Serbian authorities con-
 tinued to provide fuel and other forms of support.
 Because of the role of Serbia/Montenegro in the Bosnian war, the U.N. Security
 Council imposed broad military and economic sanctions on Serbia/Montenegro on
 May 30, aimed at forcing compliance with U.N. Resolution 752, which called for an
 immediate cease-fire and an end to ethnic oppression in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
 After the London International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia in August,
 Federal President Cosic and Prime Minister Panic for the first time condemned the
 practice of "ethnic cleansing," the brutal and systematic practice of forcing members
 of one ethnic group to leave their homes by any means necessary, including murder
 and the razing o villages. They also fulfldledthe federal commitment under the
 Vance Plan for the  NA's withdawal from Croatia and began a dialog with Cro-
 atian and Bosnian leaders on mutual recognition. Although federal officials prom-
 ised a crack-down on Serbian nationalist paramilitary groups that were intimidating
 minorities in                              i   Bononegr  and fghi i Bo   and Herzegovina, federal
 authorities arrested only a handful of paramilitary figures and did not confront the
 
 
 899
 most notorious ones who were thought to have special links to Serbian President
 Milosevic.
 The disastrous economic policies of the Serbian Government, the cost of the wars
 in Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the effects of international sanctions
 produced a massive economic crisis in Serbia/Montenegro. Many essential commod-
 ities were in short supply, and foreign trade was at a standstill. An estimated 60
 to 80 percent of the work force was either unemployed or on mandatory leave, and
 hyperinflation amounting to 20,000 percent in 1992 destroyed the value of the cur.
 rency.
 Serbian police under President Milosevic's control extensively, brutally, and sys-
 tematically violated human rights in the Serbian province of Kosovo, continuing the
 pattern of gross human rights violations and systematic repression of Kosovo's ma-
 jority Albanian population. Serbian authorities maintained complete control over all
 aspects of political, economic, social, and cultural life. The police routinely and sys.
 tematically carried out arbitrary arrests of Albanians, and police torture and brutal
 beatings during interrogations resulted in a number of deaths; those responsible
 were not prosecuted. Serbian nationalists and paramilitary groups, encouraged by
 the Milosevic regime, used threats and violence to intimidate minorities-Muslims
 in the Sandzak area, Croats and Hungarians living in Vojvodina, and ethnic Alba-
 nians in Kosovo-resulting in disappearances and deaths. Ethnic Serbian and Mon-
 tenegrin democratic opposition leaders were routinely denied fair access to gover-
 ment-controlled mass media and subjected to acts of intimidation. The Milosevic-
 dominated Serbian Assembly adopted laws restricting freedom of assembly and uni-
 versity autonomy. Freedom of press and speech are guaranteed by law but in prac-
 tice not respected.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Political violence in Serbia/
 Montenegro resulted primarily from efforts by Serbian authorities to suppress other
 ethnic groups. Leaders of minority communities centered in Voivodina, Sandzak,
 and Kosovo reported that violence by the authorities or by Serian paramilitary
 groups was intended to intimidate non-Serbs into leaving Serbia and Montenegro
 and ultimately to achieve the "ethnic cleansing" of these republics.
 One of a number of extrajudicial killings took place in the village of Hrtkovci, in
 Vojvodina, where one ethnic Croat was killed, apparently by Serbian nationalists
 carrying out "ethnic cleansing" in the village, andan ethnic erb accused of aiding
 his non-Serbian neighbors was also attacked. In August, at the insistence of federal
 authorities, the Hrtkovci mayor and a local Serbian paramilitary leader, together
 with three other men, were charged in connection with violence in the village.
 In the Sandzak, Muslim leaders alleged that several unsolved murders of ethnic
 Muslims were politically motivated, including those of Selim Sejfic near Novi Pazar
 on October 15 and of Berbo Ramo near Pnboj on August 26, the latter allegedly
 killed by members of the Serbian 'White Eagles" paramilitary group. In October two
 Muslim men were killed in Belgrade (Ismet Bektasevic on October 14 and Ibro
 Hajrovic on October 17), and Muslim leaders claimed their deaths also were con-
 nected to a campaign to intimidate Muslims into leav*   Serbia. On December 8
 a hand grenade exploded at a mosque in Belgrade. Two Muslim patients abducted
 from the Priboj hospital in July were later found murdered across the border in
 Bosnia, in an area controlled by Serbian paramilitary forces.
 In Kosovo at least 15 ethnic Albanians died at the hands of police during 1992.
 None of the incidents were investigated by the authorities, nor were the policemen
 involved in the killings indicted. In a well-documented case in mid-December 1992,
 Adem Zeqiaj was severely beaten by policemen in the police station of Ponosnec.
 When taken to a hospital, he was reported to have been in a state of shock, his kid-
 neys had almost stopped functioning, and he suffered from internal bleeding. He
 died the following day, repoikedly from kidney insufficiency. However, the Director
 of the Institute of Forensics, who was unwilling to give international observers de-
 tails of the cause of death, denied that the victim's kidneys had been damaged. An
 international human rights organization reported two deaths as the result of inju-
 ries sustained during interrogations. Although the families of both victims requested
 investigations of these killings, the Government did not respond. Kosovo Albanian
 sources reported at least two other deaths as the result of police raids on the vil-
 lages of Lesan and Ladrovic. In the latter case, police claimed one of the dead had
 committed a crime. A number of Albanian citizens were killed by Serbian/Montene-
 grin border guards in the vicinity of the border with Albania under circumstances
 suggesting excessive use of force.
 
 
 900
 b. Disappearance.-Serbian paramilitary forces and nationalist groups are largely
 responsible for numerous disappearances of Muslims. In October Serbian para-
 military forces kidnaped 17 Muslims who were traveling between the village of
 Sjeverin and the town of Priboj in Serbia's Sandzak region on a section of road that
 passes through Bosnian territory. Although Serbian republic police and federal army
 units were subsequently dispatched to the area and two persons were arrested, the
 fate of the abducted Musims remained unknown. Two men disappeared from the
 predominantly Muslim district of Rozaje, Montenegro, after   orcibly mobilized
 into the VJ in August, according to their parents, who were refused information on
 their sons' whereabouts by military offiials. On May 20, Setko Kubat, a refugee
 from Bosnia, was arrested in Sutomore, Montenegro. After 4 days in detention,he
 was moved to an unknown location, according to his wife, who believes he may have
 been turned over to the Serbian Democratic Party (SDS) in Bosnia, to be offered
 in a prisoner exchange there.
 c. Torture, and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Federal law prohibits torture, but there were numerous reports of severe beatings
 of persons in detention, most frequently involving ethnic Albanians in Kosovo.
 Among the hundreds of victims of such abuse were the Secretary of the Council for
 the Defense of Human Rights and Freedoms and a member of the Executive Board
 of the Kosvo Helsinki Committee. In many cases, police inflicted beatings on citi-
 zens in the street, in full public view. Although defense lawyers demonstrated that
 19 Albanian youths were beatn while being held in pretrial detention, no police or
 prison officials were prosecuted for the beatings. During demonstrations in Pristina
 and other Kosvo towns in October, police used tear gas and truncheons against
 peaceful ethnic Albanian demonstrators, and a number of people were injured (see
 Section 2.b.). Police also beat ethnic Turks in Priaren for participating in a peaceful
 demonstration and arrested and beat a German citizen observing the demonstra-
 tion.
 In Sandak, several cases were reported in which army reservists and Serbian
 paramilitary members bat ethnic Muslims, including one incident near Tutin in
 a    in wich an 85-year-ld man was beaten.
 C  son conditions are harsh. A citizen of Albania,  rrested on suspicion that he
 was traveling to Croatia to join the military forces there, was badly beaten while
 incarcerated at the prison in Sremska Mitrovica. In womens prisons, inmates were
 reported to be forrdeto stand or sit on the concrete floor from 5:30 n.m. to 9:00 p.m.;
 they were fed twice daily, allowed two 10-minute exercise periods (with handcuffs),
 and permitted two bathroom breaks daily. Men's prisons are reported to be crowded
 with meagre rations.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exie.-Federal law permits detainees to be ar-
 rested without a warrant and held incommunicado up to 3 days without charge or
 access to a defense attorney. After this period, a suspect must be turned over to an
 investigating judge, who may order a 30-day extension of investigative detention.
 The courts may extend this period an additional 5 months before charges must be
 brought. During investigative detention, detainees have theoretical access to a law-
 yer, although in practice they often do not.
 Arbitrary arrest continued to occur frequently in Kosovo in 1992. Ethnic Alba-
 nians were freqiuently detained for as long as 2 months for pe acefully exercising
 their rights to freedom of expression, association, and assembly. Among those ar-
 rested were the Chairman of he Alba   ni Teachers' Association, who was detained
 in August and held for over 2 months, and the Vice President of the Democrtic
 Alliance of Kosovo (LDK), who was detained in June. No charges were filed in either
 case. Mass arrests occurred in June when the Albanians attempted to convene the
 assembly of the self-preclaimed "Kosovo Republic," in September when they at-
 tempted to enter public schools without accepting de education program mandated
 by the Serbian Government, and in October when they organized a mas education
 protest.
 For harassment with the intention of provoking departure and exile, see Section
 1.g.
 e. Denial of Fair Public TriaL-The court system comprises local, district, and su-
 preme courts at the republic level, and a Federal Supreme Court to which republic
 Supreme Court decisions may be appealed. There is also a military court system.
 Accordin to the federal Constitution, the Federal Constitutional Court rules on the
 constitutionaity of laws and regulations relying on the republic authorities to en-
 force its rulings. The Federal Criminal Code of the former Yugoslavia still applies,
 but until the new Federal Constitutional Court is established, republic constitu-
 tional courts in effect have the final say on federal law. The Federal Assembly
 blocked efforts by the Federal President and his Government to establish a new con-
 
 
</pre>
<pre>
 stitutional court under the new FRY Constitution. The result is that the constitu-
 tionality of federal laws cannot be contested effectively.
 Under federal law, defendants have the right to be present at their trials and to
 have an attorney, at public expense if needed. The defense, however, is sometimes
 restricted in the time allowed to prepare its case. Both the defendant and the pros-
 ecutor may appeal the verdict. The judiciary is not free of political influence or of
 ethnic bias.
 As the army became embroiled on the side of Serbian forces in ethnic violence in
 Croatia and Bosnia, thousands of Serbian and Montenegrin citizens refused military
 service. In addition to direct legal sanctions, those who resisted conscription or mo-
 bilization were sometimes fired- from their jobs. According to Muslim leaders in the
 Sandzak, criminal proceedings were being conducted against 2,000 ethnic Muslims
 who refused military service.
 Between March and July, many Croatian prisoners of war (POW's) were charged
 with war crimes in milit  courts. Some of these were tried and found guilty. Many
 had confessed to crimes alter being beaten, and some defendants were not provided
 with competent defense counsel. A military court in Belgrade sentenced four Croats
 to death and seven others to long prison terms for crimes allegedly committed dur-
 ing the 3-month siege of Vukovar. The FRY Constitution does not allow for the
 death pehalty, but the Croats were tried under a law of the former Yugoslavia,
 which does. Most Croatian POW's, including those sentenced for war crimes, were
 released in a prisoner exchange negotiated by Prime Minister Panic under Inter-
 national Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) auspices. At year's end, talks on ex-
 changing the remaining POW's between Croatia and Serbia/Montenegro were
 stalled by the fact that some Croatian POW's had been convicted by a civil court
 on charges of terrorism.
 When Kosovo's status as a separate federal unit was annulled in 1989, provincial
 courts in Kosovo were abolished. Only a handful of ethnic Albanian judges remain
 at the district or appellate level in Kosovo. In the case of 19 Albanians sentenced
 in Pec from 1 to 7 years under Federal Criminal Code Articles 136 (association for
 hostile activities) and 135 (endangering the territorial integrity of Yugoslavia), the
 judge, contrary to the Penal Code, did not carry out the investigation of the alleged
 crimes but turned it over to state prosecutors and defense attorneys were not al-
 lowed to be present during the interrogation of their clients or to examine evidence
 before the indictment was handed down. Albanian human rights groups report there
 are at least 17 Albanian political prisoners in Kosovo sentenced to terms ranging
 from 5 to 20 years.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Federal
 law gives republic Ministries of Interior sole control over the decision to monitorpo-
 tential criminal activities, a power they routinely abused. Authorities continued-to
 monitor opposition and dissident activity, eavesdropped on conversations, read mail,
 and tapped telephones. Although the law includes restrictions on searches, these
 safeguards were ofen ignored, particularly in Kosovo.
 In Kosovo, police searches were accompanied by indiscriminat  se of force. Fol-
 lowing an incident in Glogovac in which a Serbian policeman was killed, the police
 conducted house-to-house searches and entered and vandalized a number of Alba-
 nian shops, allegedly in order to collect evidence related to this murder.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-While the Governments of Serbia and Montenegro insisted they were not in-
 volved in the war in Croatia in 1991 or the subsequent war in Bosnia and
 Herzegovina, they were, in fact, deeply involved in the extensive and egregious vio-
 lations of humanitarian law and human decency in the Bosian war committed by
 JNA and Serbian paramilitary forces there. They armed the Serbian forces in bth
 Republics through the JNA, their citizens participated in the wars as members of
 paramilitary formations with government sanction, and they permitted JNA regular
 troops to remain in Bosnia after May in the renamed "erbian Army" there. In addi-
 tion, they continued to supp ly the Bosnian Serb forces with fuel, food, and other
 supplies, even while     items were in critically short supply in their own repub-
 lics. They have not prosecuted personnel who appear to have been involved in war
 crimes. The unspeakable human rights violations in Bosnia and Herzegovina are de-
 scribed more fully in the report on that country.
 Members of ethnic minorities in Serbia were frequently subject to intimidation,
 with the goal of provoking the emigration of non-Serbs. The military and the police
 did not interfere with or try to prevent paramilitary forces and other extreme na-
 tionalists from carrying out numerous attacks and harassment against minorities
 designed to drive them from their homes. In Vojvdina, paramilitary groups associ-
 ated with such extremist groups as the Serbian Radical Party (SRS), led by Vojislav
 Sese, openly threatened Crats, Ruthenians, Hungarians, and others and  ageda
 
 
 902
 campaign to replace the non-Serbian population with Serbian refugees from Croatia
 and Bosnia.
 In Sandzak, ethnic Muslims were harassed by paramilitary forces and by army
 reservists. In the districts of Priboj (Serbia) and Pljevba (Montenegro), in particular,
 Muslims were pressured to emigrate. Beginning in May, numerous bombings of
 businesses and homes owned by Muslims were reported in P]jevlja; Muslim leaders
 claimed there were 32 such incidents by September. In August Montenegrin au-
 thorities arrested the local SRS leader and some of his followers in PUevbja because
 of their paramilitary activities. Serbian paramilitary members who were arrested in
 the Serbian town of Pribo* by Serbian police in connection with the October kidnap-
 ing and disappearance oi 17 Muslims from a bus near Priboj were released from
 custody. Although the VJ has now agreed to provide villagers from the area with
 protection when they travel to and from Priboj, it has not moved against the
 paramilitaries.
 . In Kosovo, a village near Pristina that recently had an estimated 700 Croatian
 families now has 100. In 1991 young men fled because of possible mobilization into
 the JNA, then at war in Croatia. In response to searches by Serbian authorities
 looking for draft resisters and intimidation by paramilitary groups, villagers began
 emigrating.
 The Serbian Government's actions in summarily firing local law enforcement and
 judicial personnel and replacing them with ethnic Serbian officials, often from out-
 side the area, had the effect of withdrawing the protection of the law from targeted
 ethnic communities. Members of the ethnic Hungarian community in Vojvodina, for
 example, have no confidence that threats against their lives and property will be
 investigated because the new police officials normally fail to take any action when
 called in. Members of an ethnic Hungarian family received murder threats from an
 ethnic Serb wishing to buy their new home. Based on the experience of friends and
 neighbors, they believed that the authorities would make no effort to protect them
 and therefore succumbed to this intimidation.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Press and Speech.-Although existing laws in Serbia and
 Montenegro provide for freedom of speech and press, it is not respected in practice.
 Media institutions are organized and run under laws and guidelines established by
 the two republic Governments. The print media are subject to varying degrees of
 government influence, although a few publications (particularly low-circulation
 weeklies such as Vreme and Monitor) are highly critical of the Governments of Ser-
 bia and Montenegro. Both Governments kept a firm gripon radio and television and
 used them for propaganda purposes. Republic authorities use provisions of the Fed-
 eral Criminal Code to restrict freedom of speech.
 The laws under which Kosovo Albanians were charged because of political activi-
 ties were most frequently Serbian Criminal Code Article 216 "Inciting to Resist-
 ance" (punishable by imprisonment of 1 to 5 years), and Federa Criminal Code Arti-
 cles 134, "Spreading of Ethnic Hatred" (6 months to 5 years), and 136, "Association
 for Illegal Activity" (up to 3 years). In addition, the leader of the Muslim Party of
 Democratic Action (SDA) in April was sentenced to 6 months' imprisonment on
 charges of spreading disinformation, inciting ethnic intolerance, and disturbing the
 peace.
 Montenegrin radio and television (RTV Montenegro) is controlled by the Govern-
 ment and serves as its mouthpiece. In January 1992, Serbia implemented a new law
 on radio and television, which consolidated control over government-run radio and
 television (RTV) organizations in Belgrade, Pristina, and Novi Sad under the frame-
 work of a new entity, Serbian Radio-Television (RTV Serbia). This consolidation in-,
 stituted government editorial control over all news programming. The most popular
 evening news broadcast, produced by TV Belgrade, was used to present the Serbian
 Government's point of view on all issues. For example, broadcasts often featured
 lengthy scenes of mutilated corpses presented as alleged Serbian victims of
 "Ustasha" (a reference to World War II Croatian Fascists) or "Muslim fundamental-
 ists."
 Coverage of the Bosnian conflict was so one-sided that the independent daily,
 Borba, accused TV Belgrade journalists of encouraging revenge and "ethnic cleans-
 ing." As the December election campaign heated up, the attacks by TV Belgrade and
 TV Novi Sad against independent journalists, opposition parties, and ethnic minori-
 ties became ever more scurrilous. For example, Borba and Vreme were accused of
 enabling "slaughters in which tens of thousands of people died." The TV's nightly
 commentaries ranged from accusing unnamed, but still readily identifiable, local
 iournalists as traitors in service to Bonn and Washington to charging that the Hun-
 
 
 903
 arians in Vojvodina wished the return of fascism and planned to rename a square
 in the town of Subotica for Hitler.
 Serbian authorities tightened control over Radio Belgrade, purging respected jour-
 nalists from senior editorial positions. The ruling party also applied pressure
 through the local government to replace key personne in order to rein in the pub-
 licly owned but independent-mindeN Radio Pancevo, located in a suburb of Belgrade.
 Other independent electronic media, including Studio B Radio and Television, B-
 92 Radio, and TV Politika, continued to broadcast but do not reach beyond the sub-
 urbs of Belgrade. The Serbian Government used its control over frequencies to re-
 strict licenses to new, independent broadcasters and to threaten existing stations
 (B-92, for example, has yet to receive a license for its frequency). The Serbian Gov-
 ernment also set a frequency fee schedule that, if put into effect, would force most
 private broadcasters into bankruptcy.
 When regional electronic media showed independence the Serbian Government
 took steps to bring them under control. In Vojvodina, TV Novi Sad imposed tighter
 editorial restrictions on its Hungarian-language service. At least 10 employees re-
 signed during Augst and September because of pressure and interference from gov-
 ernment-appointe-d managers. In Subotica an ethnically mixd city, the Govern-
 ment refused to renew the "experimental" broadcast license of a loca radio station.
 Government pressure on the independent Pan Radio in Novi Sad, resulted in key
 personnel changes that curbed its independent editorial line.
 The Serbian Government exerted strong but less direct influence over the print
 media, although emboldened by the accession of Federal President Cosic and Fed.
 eral Prime Minister Panic, newspapers thereafter took a more critical stance toward
 the Milosevic regime. Unhappy with changes in key editorial positions, the Serbian
 Government moved in July to convert the Politika publishing house, the most influ-
 ential in Serbia, into a public enterprise but backed down in the face of strong nega-
 tive public reaction. The independent daily, Borba  was hampered by high costs, a
 weak economy, and a sanctions-related shortage o? spare parts and newsprint. The
 Serbian Government ontrolled the sole local producer of newsprint. The same was
 true of the independent weekly, Vreme, the NJovi Sad Hungarian-language daily,
 Magyar Szo, andthe recently founded Novi Sad weekly, Novosadski Indeks. In fact,
 the high cost of newspapers and the weakness of the Serbian economy greatly re-
 duced circulation-and      ore the influence-of all newspapers and magazines, to
 the benefit of television and radio. Pressures by the Serbian Government discour-
 aged businesses from placing advertisements with private publications and private
 radio and television stations.
 In Montenegro, the major daily, Pobjeda, remained firmly in progovernment
 hands. The only independent news publication, The Weekly Monitor, continued to
 reach a significant but small audience. In May a Monitor journalist was given a sus-
 pended sentence of 8 months for making the President and Prime Minister of
 Montenegro "objects of public ridicule" by alleging that they had abused their offices
 for personal financial gain. He was charged under the Communist-era statute pro-
 hibiting criticism of government leaders. Other part-time Monitor journalists were
 fired from their jobs at Montenegrin Radio and Television.
 In the Kosovo region, the only local television service was TV Pristina, an affiliate
 of the government-controlled TV Serbia. Although the primary Albanian-language
 daily, Rilindja, was closed in 1990, other publications of the Rilindja publishing
 house, such as the newspaper Bujku, provided an alternative source of information
 in Albanian to the progovernment, Serbian-language daily, Jedinstvo. On several oc-
 casions, however, Bujku was unable to publish because of difficulty in obtaining
 newsprint. In order to control Rilindja publications, the Serbian Government de-
 clared both Jedinstvo and Rilindja operations bankrupt, shut down their operations
 for 10 days, and moved to establish a public corporation to manage the operations
 of both, including the Jedinstvo printing press.
 Both local and international journalists were harassed and intimidated. Right-
 wing politicians publicly referred to independent journalists as "traitors." One West-
 ern reporter, singled out for criticism by TV Belgrade, subsequently received a num-
 ber of threatening telephone calls. Another journalist representing a foreign publica-
 tion was shot and slightly wounded, while other foreign journalists were harassed.
 While the Serbian Government denied any involvement in these activities, it cam-
 paigned actively to convince its citizens that foreign journalists formed part of an
 international conspiracy against Serbia. At year's end, local journalists working for
 foreign media received calls from the Serbian Ministry of the Interior asking why
 they worked for foreigners and suggesting that they might like to come in for an
 interview.
 Representatives of news media from other former Yugoslav republics were also
 harassed. In May armed men from the Serbian News Agency (SRNA) operated by
 
 
 904
 
 Bosnian Serb insurgents seized the Belgrade offices of the Sarajevo daily news-
 paper, Oslobodjenje. Despite a court decision finding the seizure illegal, Serbian po-
 lice did nothing to overturn the illegal occupation of these offices.
 Activists in political groups opposed to war or to nationalist extremism in Serbia
 and Montenegro received death threats and were subjected to other harassment.
 In Montenegro a warrant remains in effect for the arrest of the Vice President
 of the PEN Club there, Jevrem Brkovic. He is charged with "inciting ethnic and reli-
 gous hatred," because of an open letter he wrote in 1991, aplogizing to Bosnians
 for the behavior of Montenegrin reservists in Herzegovina. The authorities ordered
 the immediate arrest and pretrial detention of Brkovic, who sought refuge in Cro-
 atia and remained there through 1992.
 Serbia's government-controlled media were highly critical of Belgrade University
 at the time of antigovernment demonstrations in June and July, in which professors
 and students played a prominent role. The Serbian Assembly (legislature) subse-
 quently passed a new universities law, significantly curtailing the independence of
 universities and increasing political control over management and personnel policies
 through the republic Education Ministry. In Kosvo, Serbia's sweeping purge of Al-
 banian faculty and administrators and associated measures have effectively denied
 university education to most ethnic Albanians. The Albanian community chose to
 educate many elementary and all secondary school students privately rather than
 accept the curriculum imposed by Belgrade. Ethnic Albanianteachers and students
 attempted to conduct Albanian-curriculum classes in public school buildings at the
 begnning of the 1992/93 school year but were barred by polie.
 b.Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Assin.-Although Serbian authorities
 permitted opposition parties in most of Serbia to organize demonstrations with ad-
 vance authorization, in Kosovo they sharply restricted freedom of assembly. Anti-
 Milosevic oppsition parties held a series of demonstrations in Belgrade and other
 cities, beginning on June 28, with which the authorities generally did not interfere.
 Following the demonstrations, however, the Serbian Assembly passed legislation
 banning political demonstrations in front of public buildings, where peaceful pro-
 tests had previously been held. The legislation also discouraged the organization of
 demonstrations by requiring an (unspecified) cash deposit in advance to cover the
 costs to municipal authorities for sanitation and possibe damses.
 In Kosovo, virtually any gathering of ethnic Albanians was likely to be broken up
 on the pretext that the gathering had separatist aims or did not receive prior plice
 permission. In June Serbian polie surrounded a building in Pristina where Koovo
 Albanian leaders were planning to convene the "Kosva Rpublic Assembly" in defi-
 ance of a Serbian government ban, and some leaders were detained. In October Al-
 banians held 2 days of protests over the closing of schools. On the first day, Serbian
 police arrested and beat demonstrators in Pec, Prizren, and Klina, while on the sec-
 ond day, police used tear gas and trncheons to disperse protestors in Pristina.
 The federal law against association for hostile activities was used to prosecute
 ethnni Alaians who advocated independence for Kosovo. The Serbian election law
 denies registration to any party that does not accept the territorial integrity of Ser-
 bia, a provision aimed at Albanian political parties, almost all of which  ave sought
 separate status for Kosovo. The Serbian Government lodged a motion to ban the
 Muslim Party of Democratic Action (SDA) in December 1991. Although the Party
 continued to function in 1992, the motion to ban it remained as a form of intimida-
 tion.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-There are no legal restrictions on the practice of religion;
 however, the rise of nationalism in Serbia and Montenegro was reflected in increas-
 ingly intolerant attitudes in religious matters. In Serbia, a single school program
 imposed throughout the Republic focused on the history of the Serbian people and
 the development of Orthodox Christianity, a provocative development to ethnic mi-
 norities practicing Islam, Roman Catholicism, and other faiths.
 The authorities continued to block the Muslim community in Belgrade from build-
 ing a mosque, since requests to build places of worship required changes in the
 city's prescriptive "urban plan." In Sandzak, the Serbian Government refused to reg-
 ister the Muslim charitable organization Merhamet, although it was allowed to
 function unofficially.
 On at least two occasions, Serbian police in Kosovo harassed Roman Catholic Al-
 banians who were attending religious services.
 d. Freedom of Movement W�ithin the Country, Foreign Travel, Emenration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for freedom of movement. Exit visas are gen-
 erally not required, except for travel to Albania, and passports are available to most
 citizens of Serbia and Montenegro. Until May, citizens subject to mobilization had
 to obtain permission from military authorities before a passport could be issued.
 
 
 905
 Early in the Bosnian war the Serbian authorities facilitated the work of Serbian
 nationalists driving non-Serbs out of Bosnia. Transit camps were set up for Bosnian
 Muslims in Vo   na, and travel documents were rapidly issued allowing them to
 proceed to other European countries. Some Muslim refugees said they were told by
 authorities never to return to "Yugoslavia." This practice changed after the coun-
 tries brdring Serbia refused to accept additional refugees. The UN. High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees reports a total of 433,000 refugees in Serbia who have come
 from Croatia (162,000) and Bosnia (271,000). The majority are believed to be ethnic
 Serbs displaced from their homes.
 Ethnic Albanians in Kosovo and Montenegro were routinely harassed by police
 and subjected to interrogation and searches when attempting to cross the border
 with Albania. Border guards, in a number of cases, shot and killed Albanian citizens
 in the vicinity of the border. Security officials claimed these individuals, in some
 cases, were armed, which the Albanians denied.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Elections to the Federal Assembly and local government bodies were held on May
 31. Most democratic opposition parties boycotted them, and international bodies re-
 jected them as illegitimate. The 30-day period between the announcement of elec-
 tions and election day was judged insufficient to allow political parties to organize
 their campaigns and communicate their positions to the voters. In addition, govern-
 ment control and manipulation of the principal news media, particularly state tele-
 vision, made it impossible to hold a fair election.
 Efforts by FRY President Cosic and Prime Minister Panic to hold new electioni
 at the federal and republic level were hindered by Milosevic's Socialist Party of Ser-
 bia (SPS), which insisted on holding a referendum on whether Serbia should hold
 elections (the referendum failed to draw the required majority of eligible voters), re-
 fused to give up its control of RTV Serbia, and blocked opposition demands for a
 straightforward system of proportional representation. Serbia eventually moved to
 schedule elections for December 20 aRer decisions were taken to hold elections at
 the federal level and in Montenegro. Anticipating the candidacy of Milan Panic, the
 Serbian Assembly in November passed a law requiring candidates to have 1 years
 residence in Serbia. The Federal Election Commssion twice tried to exclude Panic
 from the ballot on that basis, although it was overruled by the courts. Officials re-
 moved many names from electoral judged , including many who had not voted in the
 May 1992 elections, which the opposition boycotted. Procedures for reregistration
 were cumbersome. In another example of misuse of the democratic process, Zelko
 Raznatovic, a Serb paramilitsry leader and notorious criminal, better known as
 "Arkan," was permitted to run for the Serbian Assembly from Kosovo. He was elect-
 ed and will therefore enjoy immunity from prosecution.
 Montenegro's Assembly adopted a new Constitution in October which contained
 provisions to ensure representation for Muslim and ethnic Albanian minorities in
 f overnment institutions, but Muslim and Alban  political parties objeted to the
 onstitution as providing insufficient guarantees of minority rights. Other demo-
 cratic opposition parties refused to participate in drafting the Constitution, given
 the government partys dominance in the republic Assembly and its ability to over-
 ride alternative views. On November 14, a Montenegrin opposition party convoy was
 blocked by an armed paramilitary unit wearing Serbian insignia from reaching a
 party ray a   m in Bijelo Pole in the Montenegrin portion of the Sandzak. Again N
 vember 18, leaders of an opposition party attempted the same trip with the same
 result.
 In Kosovo, ethnic Albanians boycotted elections, leaving the Serbian minority in
 control of local government and the Albanians without representation in the Federal
 and Republic Assemblies. Albanians instead held their own elections, which were
 not recognized by the international community or the Serbian Republic, for the pres-
 idency and parliament of a self-prclaimed "Kosova Republic" in May. While Serbian
 police set up checkpoints and the balloting had to be conducted in secret, the au-
 thorities didnot attempt to prevent the vote entirely. Police did prevent the assem-
 bly that was elected from meeting in June and arrested several deputies, o ovf
 whom received a 60-day sentence.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Serbian Government frequently prohibited investigation of alleged human
 rights violations by domestic organizations. For example, Kosvo Albanian human
 rights monitors were stopped a a roadblock in Pec in June, were taken to a police
 station, and beaten after human rights material was found in their ar.
 
 
 The Governments of Serbia and Montenegro formally maintained they had no ob-
 jection to international bodies conducting human rights investigations on their terri-
 tories. The Federal Government was more forthcoming in its dealings with inter-
 national bodies, and a Federal Ministry of Minority and Human Rights Affairs was
 created, headed by a widely respected human rights advocate. The new Ministry
 lacked the authority to investigate and correct human rights abuses, as real power
 (and, in some cases, formal authority) rested with the Serbian Government. Many
 international groups sent missions to the two republics, and in September, the
 CSCE, with the Federal Government's cooperation, established a long-duration mis-
 sion to Kosovo, Sandzak, and Vojvodina to monitor and investigate minority and
 human rights issues. After an earlier visit to Belgrade, U.N. Special Human Rights
 Rapporteur Tadeusz Mazowiecki visited Kosovo in October and reported on the
 gross violations of the human rights of the Albanian population there. In a 1992 re-
 port, an international human rights group described the human rights situation in
 Kosovo as deteriorating to the extent that civil war was considered a real possibility.
 In practice, obstacles were placed in the way of human rights investigations in
 Serbia by republic authorities. A staff member of an international human rights or-
 ganization was robbed in Belgrade of documents, including the testimon and
 names and addresses of contacts. Two U.S. election observers visiting Kosovo for the
 May assembly elections were detained at gunpoint and held for 90 minutes.
 The findings and recommendations of human rights groups invariably elicited a
 defensive response from the Serbian Government, which, instead of taking measures
 to stop abuses on its own territory, referred to abuses it claimed were suffered by
 ethnic Serbs elsewhere.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Language, or Social Status
 Federal and republic laws guarantee equal rights to all citizens, regardless of eth-
 nic group, religion, language, or social status. However, the ethnic minorities of the
 FRY (that is, those who are neither Serb nor Montenegrin) suffered discrimination
 in employment, education, housing, and other respects, in addition to the egregious
 abuses described in previous sections of this report. For example, in the Subotica
 district, Vojvodina, where ethnic Serbs make up about 15 percent of the population,
 the directors of the vast majority of state enterprises are Serbs, appointed to their
 positions by the Socialist Party of Serbia. In Sandzak, in the district of Tutin, whose
 population is almost entirely ethnic Muslim, three of four school directors are Serbs.
 In Kosovo, where Serbs constitute less than 10 percent of the population, virtually
 all key positions in administration and the state sector of the economy are held by
 Serbs.
 Since 1989, tens of thousands of ethnic Albanians have been summarily dismissed
 from their jobs. Among those dismissed were many physicians, teachers, and other
 professionals in what amounted to an attempt to deprive the Kosovo Albanian com-
 munity of its educated elite.
 Federal and republic law prohibits discrimination against women; however, be-
 cause of traditional attitudes, women have relatively limited access to senior posi-
 tions in political or economic life. Women are entitled to equal pay for equal work;
 maternity leave for employed women is granted, usually for 1 year and in some
 cases for a longer period. Legal penalties for spouse abuse are the same as those
 for assault on other persons, but the abused spouse must file a complaint, and this
 is seldom done.
 Gypsies have complained that they suffer discrimination in employment, social
 services, and education.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Legally, all workers (except military personnel) are
 entitled to form or join unions of their own choosing without prior authorization,
 and this right is formally respected. Workers are no longer formally obligated to join
 and pay dues to the official unions. However, the older progovernment union um-
 brella organizations (the Council of Independent Trade Unions of Serbia-CITUS
 theCouncil of Independent Trade Unions of Montenegro-CITUM, and their federal
 counterpart, the Council of Independent Trade Unions of Yugoslavia-CITUY) can
 offer material benefits to members, such as preferential access to lower cost com-
 modities from government reserves, that the fledgling independent unions are un-
 able to match. Although statistics on the size of the organized work force are unreli-
 able, the large bulk of Serbian and Montenegrin workers are probably members of
 the semiofficial CITUS and CITUM. CITUS claims current membership of 1.8 mil-
 lion workers, while the more loosely affiliated Serbian independent trade union or-
 ganization (Nezavisnost) has between 80,000 and 200,000 members. There are re-
 portedly no unions independent of CITUM in Montenegro.
 
 
 Since mid-1991, union activity has generally been at a reduced level, either out
 of support for the Belgrade Government or due to fears of being perceived as dis-
 loyal. As the economy also has continued to decline throughout 1992, independent
 trade union leaders in particular have claimed workers are avoiding activism out
 of fears for job security in extremely tough economic times.
 The right to strike is recognized and was exercised by both the independent and
 progovernment trade union organizations throughout 1992. Serbian law requires a
 30-day notification before striking, although there are no reports of unions being
 sanctioned for violating this provision in 1992. Strikes in the latter half of 1992 fo-
 cused on demands for job security for the duration of U.N. economic sanctions
 against Serbia and Montenegro, and for government-controlled wages to keep pace
 with hyperinflation. Some unions also called for the resignation of the current Ser-
 bian Government for failing to fulfill wage promises.
 In Kosovo, the Independent Trade Unions of Kosovo (ITUK), formally recognized
 by the Federal Government, continued to face huge obstacles at the local level in
 representing a work force that suffered from official repression, repeated mass dis-
 missals on ethnic grounds, and consequent massive unemployment. The ITUK re-
 ceived significant support in October when the International Labor Organization
 (ILO) condemned the labor situation in Kosovo as "ethnic cleansing of the work
 place" and demanded that all workers fired illegally from their jobs be reinstated
 and compensated for lost wages.
 Federal Prime Minister Panic requested the formation of a joint Albaniarn/Scrbian
 government working group to discuss this issue, but the Federal Government has
 no authority to override Serbian government decisions. CITUS is well represented
 in Kosovo and has taken over the offices occupied by the Communist-era trade
 union. According to ITUK, worker union fees deducted from paychecks are deposited
 with CITUS, and benefits are only distributed to Serbian workers. Union fees from
 ethnic Albanian workers are all paid voluntarily by the workers. On the eve of the
 attempted convening of the Albanian Kosovo Assembly in June, police raided the
 ITUK offices and reportedly broke office equipment and confiscated printed mate-
 rial.
 b. The Right To Organize and Bargain Collectively.-This right is guaranteed by
 law, but Western-style collective bargaining has yet to take hold. Pending develop-
 ment of economic reforms, plant management is not independent of the Government
 nor an effective bargaining partner for the unions. Republic wage controls effectively
 usurped the role of enterprises and the semiofficial Chambers of Economy. The re-
 public Governments promised that no workers would be discharged as a result of
 U.N. economic sanctions and guaranteed that idled workers would receive an in-
 come equal to 65 percent of their former wages. Some collective agreements were
 negotiated with the Chambers of Economy but proved unsatisfactory for lack of the
 Chambers' clear authority and management responsibility. Privatization of "social
 property" is another problem in which the rights and interests of workers are not
 well defined or understood.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced labor is prohibited by law
 and is not known to occur.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum age for employment
 is 16, although in villages and farm communities younger children often assist with
 family agricultural obligations.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Minimum wages are guaranteed by the repub-
 lic Governments, but delays and partial payments were pandemic throughout 1992.
 In June the Governments of Serbia and Montenegro instituted strict wage controls,
 with delayed monthly adjustments for rapidly increasing inflation. Massive unem-
 ployment or underemployment due to both U.N.-mandated sanctions and internal
 economic structural problems also reduced the number of families with two wage
 earners. The minimum wage is insufficient to provide a worker and family a decent
 living standard. The official workweek was listed as 42 hours, but many enterprises
 and workers worked fewer hours for lack of raw materials. Formally, sick leave and
 other benefits were generous. Federal and republic laws and regulations on occupa-
 tional health and safety were adequate, although enforcement was reportedly lax.
