 SERBIA-MONTENEGRO
 The United States and the international community do not recognize Serbia-
 Montenegro as the successor state to the former Yugoslavia. Serbia-Montenegro, a
 constitutional republic, is dominated byr Slobodan Milosevic, who is serving his sec-
 ond term as President of Serbia. President Milosevic controls the country through
 the Socialist Party of Serbia (SFS) which, although it lacks majorities in both the
 federal and Serbian parliaments, controls governing coalitions and holds the key ad-
 ministrative positions. Serbia abolished the political autonomy of Kosovo and
 Vojvodina in 1990, and all significant decisionmaking since that time has been cen-
 tralized under Milosevic in Belgrade. The Government's control of the judiciary was
 illustrated by its manipulation of the courts to annul opposition victories in the No-
 vember local elections.
 The Government precipitated a political crisis in November by orchestrating the
 annulment of election victories by the opposition coalition Zajedno in Belgrade and
 other major cities. The Government failed to act on the recommendations of former
 Spanish prime minister Felipe Gonzalez, who led a delegation from the Organiza-
 tion for Cooperation and Security in Europe (OSCE) to Belgrade in December, which
 confirmed the opposition victories and called for their recognition. Large demonstra-
 tions in Belgrade and other cities continued into January to protest the stolen elec-
 tions and demand democratic reforms.
 During 1996 the international community worked intensively with the Govern-
 ment of Serbia-Montenegro to secure implementation of the terms of the Dayton
 Peace Accord, a step-by-step process designed to end the war in Bosnia and secure
 the peace. While U.N. sanctions against the "Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" (FRY)
 were lifted in October, the FRY is still not permitted to participate in the United
 Nations (U.N.), the OSCE, or other international organizations.
 As a key element of his hold on power, President Milosevic controls the police,
 a heavily armed force of over 100,000 that is responsible for internal security. The
 police committed extensive and systematic human rights abuses.
 Despite suspension of U.N. sanctions against Serbia-Montenegro in December
 1995, economic performance was anemic in 1996. Unemployment and underemploy-
 ment remained high as the Government was unable and unwilling to introduce nec-
 essary restructuring measures. Industrial production, hampered by a lack of invest-
 ment capital, averaged only 30 percent of capacity. By year's en, a typical family
 of four required 2.2 times the average wage to obtain sufficient food. Largely as a
 result of the central bank's tight monetary policy, hyperinflation was avoided.
 The Government's human rights record continued to be poor. The police commit-
 ted numerous, serious abuses including extrajudicial killings, torture, brutal beat-
 ins, and arbitrary arrests. Police repression continued to be directed against ethnic
 minorities, particularly the Albanians of Kosovo and the Muslims of Sandzak, and
 was also increasingly directed against any citizens who protested against the Gov-
 
 
 1106
 
 ernment. The Government used its continued domination of the media and election
 law amendments to manipulate the electoral process, and in practice citizens cannot
 exercise their right to change their government. The Government used police and
 economic pressure against independent press and media. The Judicial system is not
 independent of the Government and does not ensure fair trials. The authorities in-
 fringe on citizens' right to privacy and movement. Discrimination and violence
 against women remained serious problems, as did discrimination against Albanian.
 Muslim, and Romani minorities. The Government continues to harass international
 and local human rights groups, though to a lesser extent than in 1995. The Govern-
 ment limits unions not affiliated with the Government in their attempts to advance
 worker rights.
 As a signatory of the Dayton Accords, Serbia-Montenegro is obliged to cooperate
 fully with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia by turning
 over to the Tribunal persons on its territory who were indicted for war crimes. The
 Government has so far been uncooperative. There are credible reports that some
 indictees live in Serbia and that others freely travel in and out of Serbia.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial KuWn .-Political violence, including killings
 by police, resulted mostly from efforts by Serbian authorities to suppress and intimi-
 date ethnic minority groups. According to the Council for the Defense of Human
 Rights and Freedoms (CDHRF), a monitoring organization based in Pristina,
 Kosovo, the authorities killed 14 ethnic Albanians during the year. One was shot
 by soldiers and the others died as a result of mistreatment or beatings while in po-
 lice custody. In Belgrade a prodemocracy demonstrator was killed on December 24
 after an altercation with government supporters.
 According to a CDHRF report, in June Serbian police took Isuf Muse from his
 home in Gjurakoc, Kosovo, and tortured him. He was allowed to return home where
 he died of his injuries shortly afterward. The CDHRF photographed the remains in
 order to provide a record of the extent of the injuries.
 In a particularly egregious incident, on December 9 police raided the home of
 Feriz Blakcori, a schoolteacher in Pristina, and demanded that he turn over a hand-
 gun, which police alleged that he owned. When he denied possessing a gun, police
 took him into custody and beat him. He subsequently died of his wounds. According
 to Blakcori's family members, who were contacted by police to pick up his remains
 from a local morgue, the police told his wife that if they provided approxmately
 $21,000 (DM 35,000), they would spare her husband. She told the police that she
 did not have the means to pay.
 Crimes against citizens of minority groups appear to have rarely been inves-
 tigated, nor were police generally held accountable for their excesses. However, a
 court convicted and sentenced a Serbian policeman to 412 years' imprisonment in
 April for the 1994 killing of a 6-year-old ethnic Albanian bey. However, there was
 no confirmation that the subject has actually served any prison time.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 There were no developments in the 1993 Strpci incident, in which 20 Muslim men
 disappeared (see Section 4).
 c. Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Torture and other cruel forms of punishment-prohibited by law-continue to be a
 problem in the FRY, particularly in Kosovo directed against ethnic Albanians.
 Police routinely beat people severely when holding them in detention. On Decem-
 ber 7, a prodemocracy demonstrator in Belgrade was arrested and brutally beaten
 by police. Earlier in the day he had appeared at an opposition demonstration with
 a lfe-sized puppet of President Milosevic dressed in prison garb. The law permits
 the police to hold suspects for up to 72 hours before charging them. This period can
 be extended an additional 24 hours to establish a suspect'saidentity. The police have
 abused this p rvision by holding persons whose identity was not in question for 96
 hours. It is during this period of "informative talks" that the worst police brutality
 takes place. These excesses are now primarily concentrated in Kosovo, and to a less-
 er extent in Sandzak, although prodemocracy demonstrators also face selective de-
 tention and abuse while in poice custody.
 Ethnic Albanians continue to suffer at the hands of security forces conducting
 searches for arms. Human rights observers report that the police, without following
 proper legal procedures, frequently extract 'confessions" during interrogations that
 routine include the beating of susects' feet, hands, genital areas, and sometimes
 heads. The police use theit ists, n tsticks, and occasionally electric shocks. Appar-
 ently confident that there would be no reprisals and, in an attempt to intimidate
 
 
 1107
 the wider community, police often beat persons in front of their families. According
 to various sources, etn  Albanians are frequently too terrified to ask police to fo-
 low proper legal procedures--such as having the police provide written notification
 of 9informative taks.
 Police also used threats and violence against family members and have held them
 as hostages. According to Albanian and foreign observers, the worst abuses against
 ethnic Albanians took  lace outside urban centers in rural enclaves. In one Jul i
 cident, several ethnic lbanian vendors in an open market near Pristina were eat-
 en by Serbian financial police who accused them of not having their vendor's li-
 censes in order. According to the victims, the police stole all the merchandise from
 the vendors without evenlooking at their papers, and then left the scene.
 Ethnic Albanian children also were not spared abuse. According to the CDHRF
 in Pristina, over 200 children faced mistreatment at the hands of the authorities
 between January and June alone. The Council reported an incident in Mitrovica on
 July 3 in which police broke into the home of Zymer Ahmeti to search for guns.
 When they could not find him they took his 16-year-old daughter into custody, re-
 leasing her only when they were assured that her father would appear the next day.
 According to the CDHRF, some 3,657 ethnic Albanians were mistreated, many se-
 verely beaten, in the first 6 months of 1996. The Council suggests that the number
 may be higher owing to the threat of retaliation by police authorities. Other observ-
 ers say that the situation improved in 1996.
 Prison conditions meet minimum international standards. There were no reports
 of abuse of prisoners, once sentenced and serving time.
 The Government permits prison visits by human rights monitors.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Police use of arbitrary arrest and deten-
 tion was concentrated primarily in Kosovo and Sandzak. Police often apply certain
 laws only against ethnic minorities, using force with relative impunity. Laws re-
 garding conspiracy, threats to the integrity of the Government, and state secrets are
 so vague as to allow easy abuse by the State.
 Federal and republic-level statutes permit police to detain suspects without a war-
 rant and hold them incommunicado Ir up to 3 days-4 if required to establish a
 suspect's identity-without charging them or granting them access to an attorney.
 After this period, police must turn a suspect over to an investigative judge, who may
 order a 30:day extension and, under certain legal procedures subsequent extensions
 of investigative detention up to 6 months. In Kosvo police otien beat people without
 ever officially charging them and routinely hold suspects well beyond the 3-day stat-
 utory perio& However, observers report the problem is not as pronounced in the rest
 of Serbia-Montenegro as in the past.
 Defense lawyers and human iights workers complained of excessive delays in fil-
 ing formal charges and openig investigations. The ability of the defense to chal-
 lenge the legal basis of theirlnts' detention often was further hampered by dif-
 ficultie in gaining access to detainees or acquiring copies of official indictments and
 decisions to remand defendants into custdy. In some cases, judges prevented de-
 fense attorneys from reading the court file. The investigative judges often delegated
 responsibility to the police or state security service and rarely questioned their ac-
 counts of the investigation even when it was obvious that confessions were coerced.
 The police carried out arrests and detentions for alleged crimes in an arbitrary
 fashion against members of ethnic minorities. In a country where the majority of
 ethnic Serbs are armed, police, according to some members of minorities, selectively
 enforced the laws regulating the possession and registration of firearms so as to
 harass and intimidate ethnic minorities, particularly Albanian Kosovars and
 Bosniak Muslims. The most frequent justification given for searches of homes and
 arrests was illegal possession of weapons. Observers allege that in Kosovo the police
 are known to use the pretext of searching for weapons when in fact they are also
 searching for hard currency. Local police authorities more easily ap prove registra-
 tion of legal weapons for Kosovo Serbs and, according to observers, they frequently
 turn a blind eye to Serbs" possession of illegal weapons.
 Exile is neither legally permitted nor routinely practiced. No specific instances of
 the imposition of exile as a form of judicial punisbment are known to have occurred,
 although the practical effect of poice repression in Kosvo and Sandzak is to cause
 many ethnic Albanians and Bosniak Muslims to go abroad to escape persecution.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, but in practice the courts are largely controlled by the Government and rarely
 challenge the will of the state security apparatus. The authorities frequently deny
 fair pubic trial to non-Serbs and to persons they beieve oppose the regime.
 While judges are elected for life terms, they may be subjected to governmental
 pressure. For example, the opposition coalition Zajedno charged that the municipal
 court judge whose ruling overturned the opposition's majority in the Belgrade city
 
 
 1108
 assembly was convicted of a criminal offense that should result in his removal from
 the bench. Zsjedno contends that the regime abused the situation to influence the
 ruling. The court system comprises local, district, and supreme courts at the repub-
 lic level, as well as a federal Supreme Court to which republic supreme court eci-
 sions may be appealed. There is also a military court system. According to the Fed-
 eral Constitution, the Federal Constitutional Court rules on the constitutionality of
 laws and regulations, relying on republic authorities to enforce its rulings. The Fed-
 eral Criminal Code of the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia still re-
 mains in force. Some confusion and room for abuse remain in the legal system be-
 cause the 1990 Constitution of Serbia has not yet been brought into conformity with
 the 1992 Constitution of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
 Under federal law, defendants have the right to be present at their trial and to
 have an attorney, at public expense if needed. The courts must also provide inter-
 preters. The presiding judge decides what will be read into the record of the pro-
 ceedings. Both the defendant and the prosecutor may appeal the verdict. Although
 generally respected in form, defense lawyers in Kosovo and Sandzak have filed nu-
 merous complaints about flagrant breaches of standard procedure that they believed
 undermined their clients' rights. Even when individual judges have admitted that
 the lawyers are correct, courts have ignored or dismissed the complaints.
 The Government continues to pursue cases brought previously against targeted
 minority groups, under article 116 of the Yugoslav Criminal Code, of jeopardizing
 the territorial integrity .of the country and, under article 136, of onspiring or form-
 ing a group with intent to ommit subversive activities--that is, undermining the
 "constitutional order." However, apparently no new cases were brought against eth-
 nic Albanians in Kosovo in 1996. As a result, the estimated number of _political
 prisoners" in Kosovo declined from more than 250 to 200 overall The Fund for Hu-
 manitarian Law found that proceedings on charges of subversion, all brought before
 1996, have been initiated exclusively against Kosovar Albanians and Sandzak Mus-
 lims.
 A high-profile case during the past year involved the leader of the Democratic
 Party, Zoran Djindjic. In September Djindjic lost a court case 6 weeks prior to the
 federal elections.
 Djindjic was accused of "slandering Serbian Prime Minister Marjanovic for
 Maijanovic's alleged role in a scam to line the pockets of political cronies from the
 profits on sales of wheat during sanctions. Djindjic was given a 4-month suspended
 sentence and told to refrain from criticizing government officials or face time in pris-
 on. In the course of the proceedings, the court rejected one defense motion to call
 the Prime Minister as a witness and another to appoint a court auditor to review
 the vommodity reserve's book of accounts.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Federal
 law gives republic Ministries of the Interior sole control over the decision to monitor
 potential criminal activities, a power routinely abused. Authorities monitor opposi-
 tion and dissident activity, eavesdrop on conversations, read mail, and wiretap tele-
 phones. The federal post office registers all mail from abroad, ostensibly to protect
 mail carriers from chares of theft, even though this is illegal under provisions of
 all three constitutions: Federal, Serbian, and Montenegrin.
 Although the law includes restrictions on searches, officials often ignored them.
 In Kosovo and Sandzak, police have systematically subjected ethnic Albanans and
 Bosniak Moslems to random searches of their homes, vehicles, shops, and offices,
 asserting they were searching for weapons. CDHRF records showed that the police
 carried out scores of home raids. For example, in November police entered the home
 of Samir and Sahit Seferi, neither of whom were home, threatened a family mem-
 ber, and took another brother to the police station where he was subjected to phys-
 ical abuse, according to the CDHRF. In a similar incident, on November 14 police
 raided the home of Isuf Surkishi in Podujevo and demanded that he report to the
 police station for "informative talks." When he did not attend, police returned to his
 home, according to the CDHRF, physically "ill-treated" him in front of his family.
 In December police raided a home, took a schoolteacher into custody, and beat him
 so badly that he subsequently died of his wounds (see Section l.a.).
 The police also seize family members as hostages to compel the appearance of per-
 sons they wish to take into custody (see Section 1.c.).
 The Government's law requiring universal military service is enforced only spo-
 radically. It was not vigorously enforced in 1996, although during one campaign
 there were some 100 call-ups. Of approximately 100,000 draft evaders living a road
 to avoid punishment, 40 percent were estimated to be ethnic Albanian. This number
 in part reflects the large number of conscription-age men in the FRY's Albanian
 community.
 
 
 1109
 The climate appears to be moderating, no doubt as a result of the cessation of
 hostilities in Bosma. Nevertheless, leaders of the Kosovar Albanian community have
 maintained that forced compliance of ethnic Albanians with universal military serv-
 ice was an attempt to induce young men to flee the country. According to an arn-
 nesty bill assed in June, young men for whom criminal prosecution for draft eva-
 sion had already started were granted amnesty. In a related development, under a
 1996 agreement with Germany, ethnic Albanian refugees repatriated to the FRY
 will not be prosecuted for fleeing the draft.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Federal law provides for freedom speech and
 the press, but in practice the Government strongly influences most of the media.
 Prior to FRY federal elections in November, numerous complaints from democratic
 opposition leaders suggested that media manipulation by the Government was even
 worse than during previous elections. Serbian state-ran radio and television (RTS),
 the prime source o news for the populace (especially outside Belgrade) has long
 been under the direct control of the regime and serves as its most poweriul tool for
 manipulating public opinion.
 The main empa" of prime-time news programs in the pasty ear was on the ac-
 tivities of the Presidnt, the ruling Socialist Party of Serbia (SPS), and JUL (United
 Yugoslav Left), whose leader, Mirjana Markovic, is President Milosevic's wife. The
 most striking example of media bias came in reaction to mass demonstrations that
 followed widespread government theft of elections won in November 17 voting by
 the opition in several key municipalities, including Belgrade. The government-
 controlled media downplayed the size of crowds, sometimes ignoring demonstrations
 altogether-despite numbers of demonstrators in the tns of thousands. When state-
 run television did cover the demonstrations, it was in an effort to label protestors
 as "hnooigans" and "traitrs" determined to destroy Serbia. Meanwhile, the print
 media responded to prodemocracy demonstrations by stepping up a smear campaign
 against opposition leaders, frequently with personal, unsubstantiated stories of in-
 trigue. One such story, for example, suggested that an opposition leader's political
 e o   rwe    ing funded by Albanian drug money.
 The media's bias was also demonstrated in the coverage given a strike by workers
 at the Zastava munitions factory in Kragujevac in August and September. The cov-
 erage demonstrated the Government's use of progovernment media to obscure facts
 inimical to government objectives and to maip ate ublic opinion. Official media
 gave little or no coverage to the first weeks of thestrike, despite the fact that thou-
 sands of workers and supporters were demonstrating every day in front of
 Kragujevac's municipal building. What limited coverage there was focused on gov-
 ernment largesse in meeting some of the demands of the workers but avoided ref-
 erences to the size of the deonstrations. When the strike appeared to be waning,
 the prgovernment press emphasized its demise. Later, when the strike flared up
 and temporarily drew support from workers at other factories, thus becoming an
 antigovernment rallying point, the official press lashed out with front page at-
 tacks-labeling the workers self-indulgnt.
 Economic pressure was the usual weapon of the regime against the free press. For
 example, state-owned enterprises were dissuaded from advertising in independent
 media. Although not the problem it was during the period of sanctions, the avail-
 ability of newsprint continued to pose occasional problems, especially for the inde-
 pendent media. Also, while the state-controlled press got newsprint at subsidized
 prices, independent publications paid substantially higher market prices. According
 to a January announcement in the progovernment daily Politika, the cost of news-
 print--even with subsidies-accounts for 71 percent of the expense of producing a
 daily paper. Nasa Borba, the most respected independent paper, continues to be pre-
 vented from using the distribution networks available to the progovernment press.
 This tactic has had the effect of reducing readership and raising distribution costs.
 There were numerous cases of government harassment of the media. In April po-
 Ice temporarily prevented the publication of the Albanian-language Koha magazine.
 They interrogated the director of the printing company that publishes the magazine,
 informing the editor that Koha would not be allowed to resume publication unless
 future issues were screened by the authorities. After drawing public attention to the
 pressure, the company ignored the warning. No subsequent action has been taken
 by the Government. In May municipal auhrities in the eastern Serbian town of
 Smedrevo, following a similar tactic used previously elsewhere in Serbia, took con-
 trol of the local radio station. The progvernment city council used transformation
 of property laws to change management at what had been one of the last independ-
 ent stations in Serbia. Other stations faced similar pressures. In a related develop-
 ment, the Vranjske, an independent newspaper in southern Serbia faced financial
 
 
 1110
 ruin after pressure from the Government. Meanwhile, during key phases of the
 early stage of prodemoracy demonstrations, the Government blockedtransmission
 of the independent radio stations B-92, in Belgrade, and Boom 93, in Pozarevac.
 Boom 93 remained off the air at year's end.
 Academic freedom exists in a limited fashion. Many leading academicians are ac-
 tive members of the political opposition and human rights groups, and the adoption
 of antiregime positions would likely limit their advancement.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The federal and republic-level
 constitutions provide for freedom of peaceful assembly and association. Numerous
 instances occurred in 1996 in which citizens exercised this right, including political
 rallies by opposition parties prior to the November elections. After the November
 elections, the opposition continued to organize political rallies; the Government,
 however, blocked marches after December 25.
 The Government continued to treat political association by members of ethnic mi-
 norities as a threat. For example, in October the court in Kamenici sentenced Sevdi
 Tacija, the President of the local chapter of the Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK)
 and chairman of the local athletic society to 6 months' imprisonment for having in
 his possession 12 membership cards for the football club "Hogost" The court ruled
 that Tacija had committed a criminal offense because the organization he heads is
 not officially registered.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-There is no state religion, but the Government gives pref-
 erential treatment, including access to state-run television for major religious
 events, to the Serbian Orthodox Church to which the majority of Serbs belong. On
 several occasions Muslims have been ordered to remove loudspeakers from some
 mosques in Kosovo and the Sandzak.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for freedom of movement, and the Govern-
 ment makes passports available to most citizens. However, many inhabitants of Ser-
 bia-Montenegro who were born in other parts of the former Yugoslavia, as well as
 large numbers of refugees, have not been able to establish their citizenship in the
 FRY, leaving them in a stateless limbo.
 According to a report by the Humanitarian Law Center, authorities on several dif-
 ferent occasions barred FRY citizens from reentering the country. On March 2, six
 ethnic Albanians holding valid passports were refused entry at Pristina airport.
 They were held in detention overnight and then transferred to Belgrade for 6 days
 before being returned to Pristina and sent back to Germany. One LDK official was
 detained at the airport on entering the FRY for over 4 hours and subjected to inten-
 sive interrogation related to his political activities.
 In early 1996, the Government eliminated the need for an exit visa to visit Alba-
 nia, greatly facilitating travel between the two countries. Prior to this development
 ethnic Albanians had traveled to Albania by way of Macedonia because of the great
 difficulty in obtaining exit visas. The Government occasionally continues to restrict
 the right of Albanian Kosovars to travel by holding up issuance or renewal of pass-
 ports for an unusually long period of time and has reserved the option of prosecut-
 ing individuals charged previously with violating exit visa requirements.
 WY citizens reported difficulties at borders and occasional confiscation of their
 passports. Ethnic Albanians frequently complained of harassment at border cross-
 iIgs. There were numerous reports ofbrder guards confiscating foreign currency
 or passports from travelers as well as occasional complaints o physical ill-treat-
 ment. The authorities have generally allowed political leaders, including Zajedno
 leaders and LDK head Ibrahim Rugova, to leave the country and return.
 The Government has been very slow to issue passports to refugees. Albanian
 Kosovars also have problems with issuance and renewa of asports and are some-
 times called in for interrogation by stats security offiers bfore passports are is-
 sued. In 1995 the Governmnt passed a new citizenship law which, when it goes
 into effect in January 1997, is expected to affect adversely the rights of many inhab-
 itants, including those born in other parts of the former Yugoslavia, refugees, and
 citizens who had migrated to other countries to work or seek asylum. Prior to the
 law's adoption, the U.N. human rights rapporteur noted that the new law would
 give the Ministry of Interior almost complete control over the granting of citizen-
 ship. The Government has served notice that it plans to limit severely the granting
 of citizenship to refugees from the conflicts in Bosnia and Croatia. The Government
 also plans to revise the eligibility status of a large number of people, chiefly refu-
 gees, who have been granted citizenship since 1992.
 Observers in the Sandzak region also note that Muslim residents who were forced
 to flee to Bosnia from Sandzak in 1992 and 1993 may not be permitted to return
 to Serbia, particularly if they have obtained Bosnian passports in the interim.
 
 
 1111
 Government policy toward refugee and asylum seekers continued to be uneven.
 Refugees are often treated as citizens of Serbia-Montenegro for labor and military
 purposes but are denied other rights such as employment and travel (see Section
 IS.). The Government has cooperated with the U.N. High Commissioner for Refu-
 gees to provide help for the more than 600,000 refugees in Serbia-Montenegro.
 Section 3. Respect for Politica Rights. The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The three constitutions-Federa], Serbian, and Montenegrin Republic-provide for
 this right, but in practice citizens are prevented from exercising it by the Govern-
 ment's monopoly on the mass media and manipulation of the electoral process. Fed-
 eral and municipal elections were seriously flawed. At the federal level, in violation
 of constitutional statutes, the Government gerrymandered election districts to
 smooth the way for candidates in the ruling coalition. Media access was seriously
 restricted, to an extent worse than in 1992, according to opposition leaders.
 At the municipal level, the opposition fared much better, gaining strong victories
 in key urban centers, including Belgrade. However, opposition victories in the No-
 vember 17 voting were successively stolen by the government-controlled electoral
 commissions and courts-exposing vividly the Government's Potemkin village-style
 "democracy."
 Leaders of opposition political parties complain that media access during the 1996
 FRY elections was even more restricted than in 1992. Additionally, opposition politi-
 cians charge that changes in the election law, including redrawing of districts, im-
 plemented since the last election, were designed specifically to favor the ruling
 party.
 Slobodan Milosevic dominates the political system. Although formally President of
 Serbia, one of the two constituent republics in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
 Milosevic first consolidated his position by weakening the authority of the Federal
 Government through his control of the Serbian police, the army, and the state ad-
 ministration. He then placed his followers in key appointed positions, including the
 Federal Presidency and Federal Prime Ministership. Manipulating power within the
 federation based on the comparative size of the Serbian and Montenegrin popu-
 lations and economies, Milosevic greatly circumscribes the Montenegrin Govern-
 ment's sphere for independent action and does not tolerate significant divergence
 from the ruling Socialist Party line. Nevertheless, the political crisis after the No-
 vember elections did prompt a greater measure of Montenegrin criticism of the Ser-
 bian President's handling of events.
 Although the domestic political opposition faces many obstacles, it coalesced into
 a united front for November's elections. Nevertheless, the Government's control over
 the media was a determining factor. Also, many citizens hesitate to join oppositien
 parties unless they are economically self-sufficient because of SPS's and associated
 parties' control over many jobs. Although the SPS does not have an absolute major-
 ity in the Serbian Parliament, it coopted one of the smaller opposition parties and
 formed the previous government.
 In Montenegro the ruling Democratic Party of Socialists (DPS) enjoys an absolute
 majority. In both Serbia and Montenegro, the ruling parties have effectively blocked
 leaislation that would loosen their control over the state-run media.
 There are no legal restrictions on women's participation in government and poli-
 tics, and women are active in political organizations. However, women are greatly
 underrepresented in party and government positions, holding less than 10 percent
 of ministerial-level positions in the Serbian and federal governments. An exception
 is the controversial Mira Markovic, wife of Serbian President Milosevic. She is the
 leading force in the neo-Communist United Yugoslav Left Party, through which she
 exerts considerable influence on policymakers.
 There are no legal restrictions on the role of minorities in government and poli-
 tics, but ethnic Serbs and Montenegrins dominate the country's political leadership.
 Few members of other ethnic groups play any role at the top levels of government
 or the state-ran economy. The same is true of women, although in both instances
 there are no legal restrictions preventing advancement. Ethnic Albanians have re-
 fused to take part in the electoral process, including federal and local elections in
 November and therefore have virtually no representation. Their refusal to partici-
 pate in FRY federal elections has had the practical effect of increasing President
 Milosevic's and his supporters' political influence. Ultranationalist parties, which in
 the past were occasional Milosevic allies, have also taken advantage of the ethnic
 Albanian boycott to garner representation beyond their numbers.
 
 
 1112
 
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Governments of Serbia and Montenegro formally maintain that they have no
 objection to international ornations conducting human rights investigations on
 their territories. However, they sporadically hindered such activities and regularly
 rejected the findings of human rights groups. In the most glang example of the
 regime's uneven approach, Milosevic invited the OSCE to send a delegation to inves-
 tigate the charges of election irregularities. However, rior to the arrival of the
 team, led by former Spanish Prime Minister Gonzalez, the President staged a mass
 demonstration of supporters in Belgrade condemning international interference in
 domestic affairs. As of year's end, he had refused to accept the OSCE team's find-
 'knumber of independent human rights organizations exist in Serbia-Montenegro,
 researching and gathering information on abuses, and publicizing such cases. The
 Belgrade-based Humanitarian Law Fund and Center for Antiwar Action researches
 human rights abuses throughout Serbia-Montenegro and, on occasion elsewhere in
 the former Yugoslavia. The Belgrade-based Helsinki Committee ublishes studies on
 human rights issues and cooperates with the Pristina-based Helsin Committee in
 monitoring human rights abuses in Kosovo. In Kosovo the Council for the Defense
 of Human Rights and Freedoms collects and collates data on human rights abuses
 and publishes newsletters. In the Sandzak region, two similar committees monitor
 abuses against the local Muslim population and produce comprehensive reports. All
 of these organizations offer advice and help to victims of abuse.
 Local human rights monitors (Serbs as well as members of ethnic minorities) and
 nongovernmental organizations (NGO's) worked under difficult circumstances. Sefko
 Alonerovic, chairman of the Helsinki Committee for Human Rights in Sandzak, was
 formally charged with libel by former FRY President Dobrica Cosic and his advisor
 Vladimir Matovic. His trial opened in October. Alomerovic had publicly accused
 Cosic and Matovic of direct complicity in the February 1993 Strpci incident, in
 which some 20 Muslim men were taken off the Belorade-Bar train as it passed
 through Bosnian territory. The fate of these men remains a mystery, but Alomerovic
 believes that the Government, and Cosic specifically, were responsible for the
 kidnapings. While evidence directly linking Cosic to the kidnapings remains in
 doubt, the Government's reluctance to fully investigate the Strpci incident, as well
 as other disappearances, is clear.
 Overall, however, most observers say the situation improved in 1996, with much
 less overt obstruction by the Government of human rights NGO's. For example,
 after revoking the license of the Sors Foundation in 1995, the Government later
 reversed its decision. It has also improved its record regarding issuing visas to visi-
 tors it believed would visit the ethnic minority areas ofSerbia. After past problems
 obtaining a visa, the rapporteur for the U.N. Committee on Human Rights visited
 Serbia-Montenegro, including Pristina, on a regular basis. During 1996 the Inter-
 national Committee of the Red Cross was allowed to conduct ongoing prison visits
 in Kosovo. An NGO was also allowed to visit the mines at Trepca in Kosovo in order
 to investigate reports that forced labor from Bosnia was being used at the site. The
 Government also allowed the U.N. Committee on Human Rights and the Inter-
 national Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia to open offices in Belgrade.
 However, the authorities also refused numerous approaches by OSCE representa-
 tives to allow the reintroduction of the OSCE long-duration missions into Kosovo,
 Vojvodina, and Sandzak, maintaining that the FRY must first be "reinstated" in the
 OSCE. President Milosevic also refused to meet with the U.N. Special Rapporteur
 for Human Rights during her October visit, for as yet unspecified reasons.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 While federal and republic laws provide for equal rights for all citizens, regardless
 of ethnic group, religion, language, or social status and prohibit discrimination
 against women, in reality the eg  system provides little protection to such groups.
 Women.-The traditionally high level of domestic violence persisted. The few offi-
 cial agencies dedicated to coping with family violence have inadequate resources and
 are limited in their options by socialpressure to keep families together at all costs.
 Few victims of spousal abuse ever ifie complaints with authorities. The Center for
 Autonomous Women's Rights offers a rape crisis and spousal abuse hot line, as well
 as sponsoring a number of self-help groups. The Center also offered help to refugee
 women, many of whom experienced extreme abuse or rape during the conflict in the
 former Yugoslavia.
 Women do not enjoy status equal to men in the FRY and relatively few women
 obtain upper level management positions in commerce. Traditional patriarchal ideas
 
 
 1113
 of gender roles, which hold that women should be subservient to the male members
 of their family, have long subjected women to discrimination. In some rural areas,
 particularly among minority communities, women are little more than serfs without
 the right to control property and children; in a few villages, brides are still bought
 and sold. Although underrepresented in party and government positions, women are
 active in political and human rights organizations. Women are entitled to equal pay
 for equal work and are granted maternity leave for 1 year, with an additional 6
 months available. Womens rights groups continue to operate with little or no official
 acknowledgement.
 Children.-The state attempts to meet the health and educational needs of chil-
 dren. The educational system is adequate, with 8 years of mandatory schooling.
 The current division of Kosovo into parallel administrative systems has resulted
 in Serb and Albanian Kosovar elementary age children being taught in separate
 areas of divided schools, or attending classes in shifts. Older Albanian Kosovar chil-
 dren attend school in private homes. The quality of the education is thus uneven,
 and the tension and division of society in general has been replicated to the det-
 riment of the children.
 An agreement negotiated under the auspices of the Rome-based Sant-Egedio com-
 munity and signed on September I by President Milosevic and Dr. Ibrahim Rugova,
 the leader of the LDK, seeks to resolve the division of the educational system and
 lend impetus to efforts to normalize the situation within Kosovo. No progress on im-
 plementation of the accord had been discerned by year's end, owing to intransigence
 on both sides.
 Economic distress, owing primarily to the Government's abject mismanagement,
 has spilled over into the health care system, adversely affecting children. In Kosovo,
 the health situation for children remained particularly poor. Humanitarian aid offi-
 cials blamed the high rate of infant and childhood mortality, as well as increasing
 epidemics of preventable diseases, primarily on poverty that led to malnutrition and
 poor hygiene, and to the deterioration of public sanitation. Ethnic minorities in
 some cases fear Serb state-run medical facilities, which results in a low rate of im-
 munization and a reluctance to seek timely medical attention. Significant coopera-
 tion between Serbian medical authorities and ethnic Albanian-run clinics in Kosovo
 on a polio vaccination camag  represents a hopeful development. A similar drive
 took place in Sandzak for uslim children, although there too local suspicions
 caused difficulty in implementing the vaccination program.
 There is no governmental or societal pattern of abuse against children. Children
 are not conscripted into the army.
 People With Disabilities.-Facilities for disabled people are inadequate, but the
 Government has made some effort to address the problem. The law prohibits dis-
 crimination against disabled persons in employment, education, or in the provision
 of other state services The law mandates access to new official buildings for people
 with disabilities, and the Government enforces these provisions in practice.
 Religious Minorities.-Religion and ethnicity are so closely intertwined as to be
 inseparable. Serious discrimination and harassment of religious minorities contin-
 ued, especially in the Kosovo and Sandzak regions. Violence against the Catholic mi-
 nority in Vojvodina, largely made up of ethnic Hungarians and Croats, has also
 been reported.
 National/RaciallEthnic Minorities.-There were credible reports that Muslims
 and ethnic Albanians continued to be driven from their homes or fired from their
 jobs on the basis of religion or ethnicity. Other ethnic minorities, including ethnic
 Hungarians in Vojvodina, also allege discrimination.
 The Romani population is generally tolerated, and there is no official discrimina-
 tion. Roma have the right to vote, and there are two small Romani parties. How-
 ever, prejudice against Roma is widespread, and local authorities often ignore or
 condone societal intimidation of the Roma community.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-All workers (except military and police personnel)
 have the legal right to form or join unions. Unions are either official (government-
 affiliated) or independent organizations. There are 1.8 million members of the offi-
 cial unions and 85,000 members in the independent unions, but neither enjoys sig-
 nificant clout. Owing to the poor state of the economy, about 60 percent of union
 workers are on long-term mandatory leave from their firms pending increases in
 production.
 The independent unions, while active in recruiting new members, have not yet
 reached the size needed to enable countrywide strikes that would force employers
 to provide concessions on workers' rights. The independent unions also claim that
 the Government has managed to prevent effective recruiting through a number of
 
 
 1114
 tactics including preventing the busing of workers to strikes, threatening the job se-
 curity of members, and failing to grant visas to foreign visitors supporting independ-
 ent unions. The largely splintered approach of the independent unions has left them
 with little to show in terms of increased wages or improved working conditions.
 The ability of unions to affiliate internationally is not clear at present.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-While this right is provided
 by under law, collective bargaining remains at a rudimentary level of development.
 Individual unions tend to be very narrow and pragmatic in their aims, unable to
 join with unions in other sectors to bargain for common purposes. The history of
 trade unionism in the country has centered not on bargaining for the collective
 needs of all workers, but rather for the specific needs of a given group of workers.
 Thus, coal workers, teachers, health workers, and electric power industry employees
 have been ineffective in finding common denominators (e.g., job security guarantees,
 minimum safety standards, universal workers' benefits, etc.) on which to negotiate.
 The overall result is a highly fragmented labor structure composed of workers who
 relate to the needs of their individual union but rarely to those of other workers.
 Additionally, job security fears--given the high rate of unemployment-have limited
 workers' militancy.
 The Government is seeking to develop free trade zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced labor is prohibited by law
 and is not known to occur. Rumors surfaced that Bosnian Muslims were laboring
 in Kosovo's Trepea mines; an inspection of the mines and surrounding areas uncov-
 ered no evidence to substantiate the report.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.The minimum age for employment
 is 16 years, although in villages and farming communities it is not unusual to find
 younger children at work assisting their families. With an actual unemployment
 rate     stered unemployed plus redundant workers who show up at the workplace
 but perform only minimal work) in excess of 60 percent, real employment opportuni-
 ties for children are nonexistent. Children can, however, be found in a variety of
 unofficial "retail" jobs, typically washing car windows or selling small items on the
 streets such as cigarettes.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Large gvernment-owned enterprises, includ-
 ing all the major banks, industrial plants, and atrding companies generally observe
 minimum wage standards. The current minimum wage is approimtely $50 (240
 Din) a month. This figure, however, is comparable to unemployment benefits and
 is paid to workers who have been placed in a 'forced leavew status. The actual mini-
 mum wage would correspond to the lower level of the net average wage, approxi-
 mately $120 (600 Din). It is not sufficient to meet basic needs, as the cost of food
 and utilities alone for a family of four is estimated at nearly $430. Private enter-
 prises use the referenced wages as a general guide, but are often more fiexible
 paying higher wages. Reports of sweatshops operating in the country are rare. The
 official workweek, listed as 40 hours, had little meaning in an economy with mas-
 sive underemployment and unemployment. Neither employers nor employees tended
 to give high priority to enforcement of established occupational safety and health
 regulations, focusing their efforts instead on economic survival.
 In light of the competition for employment, and the fact that many industries are
 stte-operated, workers are not free to leave hazardous work situations without
 risking loss of their jobs.
