 SERBIA/MONTENEGRO*
 Serbia and Montenegro, two of the constituent republics of the former Yugoslavia,
 proclaimed the establishment of the "Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" in 1992. The
 United Nations and the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE),
 as well as the international community, rejected the "FRY's" claim to be the sole
 successor to the former Yugoslavia and suspended Yugoslav participation in their
 organizations.
 Serbia/Montenegro's formal federal governmental structure is subsumed under an
 authoritarian state apparatus controlled by Slobodan Milosevic, reelected for a sec-
 ond 5-year term as President of the Serbian Republic in a December 1992 election
 that was judged by CSCE observers to have been neither free nor fair. He dominates
 the political scene through his Socialist Party of Serbia (SPS), which holds the key
 administrative positions in both the Federal and Serbian Governments, and has
 generally succeeded in circumscribing Montenegrin autonomy. Serbia has two prov-
 inces--Kosovo and Vojvodina-but their political autonomy was abolished in 1990,
 and all significant decisionmaking authority is centralized in Belgrade.
 Because of Serbian responsibility in instigating and propagating violence on the
 territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina, including human rights abuses on a massive
 scale, the United Nations imposed sweeping economic and political sanctions in
 1992 and tightened them in 1993. Despite claims to the contrary, the Belgrade re-
 gime sustained military, economic, and political support for ethnic Serbs responsible
 or massive human rights abuses and acts of genocide in Bosnia-Herzegovina in
 1992-93 and similarly aided Croatian Serbs occupying nearly a third of Croatian
 territory.
 Milosevic also wields absolute control over the Serbian police, a heavily armed
 force of some 70,000-80,000 which is guilty of extensive, brutal, and systematic
 human rights abuses, including extrajudicial killing. It continued a pattern of gross
 human rights violations and systematic repression of ethnic Albanians in the
 Kosovo region.
 The economy, already under serious strain due to the cost of proxy wars in Cro-
 atia and Bosnia-Herzegovina and the breakup of Yugoslavia, deteriorated markedly
 in 1993 under the impact of U.N. sanctions. The massive printing of money to keep
 the economy afloat resulted in hyperinflation of historic proportions. By year's end,
 many goods, including food staples, had disappeared from stores and were available
 only on the black market for foreign currency.
 Human rights violations increased in Serbia during 1993, but Montenegro's
 human rights record was not as poor. Ethnic minorities continued to suffer most.
 Systematic police repression in Kosovo, where some 90 percent of the population are
 ethnic Albanians, included killing suspects allegedly while they were fleeing or re-
 sisting arrest, beating detainees and prisoners to death, arbitrary arrests, and wide-
 spread harassment. Paramilitary attacks and threats tolerated by the Belgrade re-
 gime resulted in the murder and dislocation of many Muslims in the Sandzak re-
 gion. Selective intimidation by police and others of members of the Croatian and
 Hungarian minorities in multiethnic Vojvodina spurred the emigration of non-Serbs.
 This situation worsened after Belgrade authorities, over Montenegrin objections, ex-
 pelled CSCE human rights monitoring missions at the end of July, despite a U.N.
 Security Council resolution calling for the missions' continuation.
 The police also used heavy-handed violence against Serbian opponents of the re-
 gime. During a spontaneous protest in Belgrade in June, police arrested and mal-
 treated several dozen people, including opposition leaders Vuk and Danica
 Draskovic who were both severely beaten while in police custody. More than a dozen
 Kosovar Albanians died at the hands of police, either while allegedly resisting arrest
 or in custody. Police responsible for abuses are rarely prosecuted. However, two Ser-
 bian police officers in Prizren were sentenced to short prison terms in December for
 the beating death of Aif Krasniqui, a Kosovar Albanian, while in police custody.
 Freedom of the press is greatly circumscribed. One Serbian journalist was briefly
 kidnaped by unknown individuals, thought to be agents of the Government. Bel-
 grade authorities refused to renew the accreditation of two long-time foreign jour-
 nalists, without official explanation. The police sometimes interfere with peaceful
 assembly and travel and regularly enter homes and offices without warrants. They
 monitor and harass opposition leaders and dissidents.
 
 *The United States does not recognize the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
 
 
 1039
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and  Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Political violence in Serbia/
 Montenegro, including killings, resulted mostly from direct and indirect efforts by
 Serbian authorities to suppress and intimidate ethnic minority groups. Leaders of
 minority communities in the Sandzak, Vojvodina, and Kosovo reported numerous
 acts of violence and intimidation, the express aim of which was to disrupt and ter-
 rorize non-Serbs and Muslims to the point that they would flee their homes and the
 ultimate objective of "ethnic cleansing" would be achieved.
 During the war in Croatia, Yugoslav army (JNA) soldiers and Serbian para-
 military forces were stationed throughout neighboring Bosnia and Herzegovina.
 When sporadic outbursts of violence there escalated into full-scale war in April
 1992, as Serbian nationalists attempted to establish an independent state within
 Bosnia and Herzegovina, the JNA armed Bosnian Serb irregulars and fought on be-
 half of Serbian forces until its nominal withdrawal in mid-May. At that time, federal
 and republic authorities claimed that the personnel of the JA in Bosnia, 80 per-
 cent of whom were Bosnian Serb, were free to remain in Bosnia and Herzegovina
 to fight. Approximately 80,000 "volunteers" who "left" the JNA formed the core of
 the newly formed Serbian aryr of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The federal and Serbian
 authorities continued to provide fuel and other materiel support to that army.
 Violence was most severe in the Muslim-populated region of Sandzak and the Al-
 banian-populated region of Kosvo. Paramilitary groups regularly crossed the border
 from Bosnia-Herzegovina into Serbia and Montenegro to attack local Muslims with-
 out opposition from units of "FRY" army reservists stationed in border villages. Dur-
 ing these raids, paramilitary forces beat to death at least five elderly Musins. The
 Humanitarian Law Fund, a Serbian human rights organization, charged in a Feb-
 ruary report that "FRY" reservists intentionally allowed groups of armed Bosnian
 Serbs onto the territory of the State of Serbia and did not prevent the mistreatment
 and abuse of its non-Serb residents.
 In Kosovo at least 15 ethnic Albanians died at the hands of police during 1993,
 of which 7 took place after the CSCE monitorihg missions left the area in late July.
 In most cases, the authorities claimed that those killed were shot while fleeing or
 resisting arrest. Police, however, appear to have resorted to deadly force with little
 or no attempt to apprehend the alleged suspects by other means. During a raid on
 the market in Pristina, police arrested two brothers, shooting both of them as they
 broke away, and one died instantly. In late August, during a raid on a house in the
 village of Cernille, also in Kosovo, police waiting to qestion twobrothers shot and
 killed their 16-year-old brother as h d  is two older brothers tried to run away.
 In other cases, persons died while in police custody as the result of torture and
 other mistreatment. In February police arrested, imprisoned, and subsequently beat
 to death Adem Sequiri, an ethnic Albanian from Djakovica, Kosovo. The official re-
 port of death cited blows all over his body as the cause of death. In August Arif
 Krasniqi, an ethnic Albanian, died at the police statio  n Prizren 24 hours after
 his arrest. His body showed clear signs of torture to his head, feet, and genitals.
 Two policemen were charged in Krasniqui's death and sentenced to 3-year prison
 terms. The convictions represented an exception to the general rule of official denial
 and failure to investigate police abuses.
 In a series of incidents along the Serbian-Albanian border, Serbian border guards
 were responsible for the death of 14 Albanian citizens in Albania. Serbian authori-
 ties defended their behavior, claiming that those killed were on the Serbian side of
 the border and had crossed it illegaly, possibly for acts of terrorism. Smuggling is
 rife in the area, but the authorities appear to hav e d deadly force with little ef-
 fort to apprehend the suspected border violators. In an effort to excuse the killings
 following one incident, a senior Serbian official said that the Serbian border guards
 invlved were inexperienced.
 The Yugoslav Democratic Party of Gypsies complained that police had harassed
 and beaten Gypsies in the village of Strazilo, resulting in one death.
 b. Disappearance.-Bosnian Serb paramilitary forces operating with impunity in
 erbia/Montenegro were responsible for disappearances in the Sandzak region. In
 one case, paramilitary forces abducted at least 19, and possibly 24, Muslims from
 a Serbian train when it was forced to step while in a Serb-controlled area of Bosnia-
 Herzegovina en route from Belgrade to Montenegro. Despite a meeting between
 Milosevic and families of the disappeared, no progress was made in finding the men.
 Police held Milan Lukic, a Serb paramilitary leader in Bosnia, for 2 days in Serbia
 in connection with the disappearances but released him after his troops threatened
 to blow up the Belgrade-to-Bar railway. The paramilitary forces are presumed to
 have murdered the Muslims, although their bodies have not been found.
 
 
 1040
 
 In February Bosnian Serb soldiers entered the predominantly Muslim village of
 Seliste (Montenegro) and took away two women, a 16-year-old youth, and two small
 children, returning the following night for more members of the same family. Six
 of those taken, all over 60, were released after 3 weeks. According to some reports,
 Bosnian Serbs continued to hold the others, including a mother and two children
 under 5 years of age, in Cajnice, Serb-held Bosnia. Those released described their
 treatment as brutal.
 In April two Muslims, Hasan Mujovic and Mustafa Pulinac, who had abandoned
 their homes in Sjeverin (Serbia) following the kidnaping of some of its residents
 from a bus passing through Bosnian Serb-controlled territory in 1992, returned to
 check on their property. Four masked men attacked Pulinac, but he escaped into
 the woods when Mujovic ran to his aid. Mujovic has not been seen since. Bosnian
 Serb officials in nearby Rudo reportedly had information as to his whereabouts but
 stated they were not responsible for the safety of citizens of another country.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Federal law prohibits torture, but reports that police in Serbia severely beat people,
 whether under detention or at police checkpoints, numbered in the thousands. Police
 routinely used violence indiscriminately aginst ethnic Albanians, justifying such re-
 pression as necessary to quell Kosovar Albanian demands for independence. While
 overt police violence against Serbian opponents of the regime was comparatively
 rare, some cases occurred.
 In a highly publicized instance, police violence was directed against Vuk
 Draskovic, leader of a major Serbian opposition party, and Danica Draskovic, a
 member of the party's executive committee. Police arrested them at their party
 headquarters following a demonstration during which violence broke out in front of
 the Federal Parliament building on June 1. Police severely beat them while drag-
 ging them from the party headquarters to police vans, where at least 10 policemen
 subjected them to further beatings. During the initial 20 days of their detention, the
 Serbian Ministry of Justice denied that the couple had any serious health problems.
 After a panel of medical exports examined them, however, Serbian authorities felt
 obliged to transfer them to a special clinic because of the severity of their injuries.
 Mounting international pressure and domestic support for a hunger strike by Vuk
 Draskovic led President Milosevic to pardon the couple on July 9.
 Police brutality contributed to and exacerbated the violence which erupted at the
 June 1 rally that provided the excuse for the Draskovics' arrest. Police conducted
 sweeps, detaining some 30 opposition party members and 5 journalists; eyewitness
 reports confirmed that police clubbed and detained innocent bystanders, including
 journalists who identified themselves to the police. One policeman died, and several
 others were injured as a result of the fracas.
 Police also badly beat a Serbian woman in Belgrade in October when she pro-
 tested economic conditions while waiting in a ration line for flour. The middle-aged
 woman was shown on television with severe bruises on her face. The Serbian Min-
 ister of the Interior later apologized to the Serbian parliament and said the police-
 men who had beaten the woman were suspended and under investigation. An oppo-
 sition party called for the Minister's resignation, citing a growing pattern of police
 brutality and disregard for the law.
 In Kosovo indiscriminate beatings of ethnic Albanians took place routinely, with
 a marked increase following the expulsion of the CSCE missions in July. One Alba-
 nian human rights group took statements from 804 people beaten by police during
 a 12-month period. many times that number were also reportedly beaten but did
 not register the assaults with human rights groups. Those victimized included pro-
 fessionals associated with Albanian demands for independence, human rights mon-
 itors, and people without any discernible political affiliation. In June the principal
 of a secondary school in Pristina, after being warned against continuing his work
 in the local Albanian private school system which Serbian authorities considered il-
 legal, was arrested and badly beaten, likely suffering permanent damage to his
 hearing.
 Confident of their impunity and with no fear of reprisal, police brazenly abused
 and beat their victims in public view. For instance, in late August, during a raid
 on an ethnic Albanian village near Kamenica Serbian police, conducting a fruitless
 search for weapons, allegedly badly beat two brothers in front of their family, caus-
 ing the pregnant wife of one of them to collapse and miscarry. A few days later,
 during a raid on the village of Cabra, Kosovo, an 80-year-old woman reportedly col-
 lapsed and died after witnessing the beating of her sons. Victims of the raid were
 interviewed 3 days later, and witnesses saw evidence of severe beatings of several
 villagers.
 Police were exceptionally brutal after several attacks against security forces by
 unknown assailants. An ethnic Albanian former policeman provided details of tor-
 
 
 1041
 
 ture during investigations into the ambush of Serbian police in Glogovac in May,
 during which two policemen died. One of several hundred Albanians rounded up
 after the ambush and taken in for questioning, he described how police beat and
 threatened some 150 men. A policeman hit a man next to him in the head with such
 force that it looked as if he would lose an eye. Similar instances of mass arrests
 and police beatings occurred after other attacks on police (several policemen were
 wounded but none killed) in Pee and Prizren. No one was charged with the attacks
 on the police.
 The victims themselves, usually through ethnic organizations, provided accounts
 of police brutality carried out against minority members. Human rights organiza-
 tions independently confirmed many of these reports. The sheer number of such re-
 ports, represented here by illustrative examples, is evidence of pervasive, systematic
 police brutality.
 Most allegations of harsh interrogations and police brutality stem from incidents
 in police stations rather than in prisons. However, abuses were also known to occur
 after sentencing. In July prison officials rejected the requests of ethnic Albanian
 prisoners serving sentences in Nis to be transferred to prisons in Kosovo, placed
 them in solitary confinement, beat them, and did not allow them parcels or family
 visits. With the exceptions noted below, conditions in prisons generally meet mini-
 mum standards. Prison facilities are for the most part built for that purpose and
 reasonably maintained.
 Prisons are divided into three categories: open, low, and high-risk. Due to the ex-
 tremely low number of female inmates, lower category facilities for women are not
 available, and instead all female prisoners are confined in high-risk facilities, with
 far greater restrictions. Female prisoners have reported that, although they are per-
 mitted writing materials, they are not allowed to keep what they write, whereas the
 men are. Female prisoners are not given any opportunity for further education,
 though mandated by law, nor are their recreational facilities as well supplied as
 those of the men. A new draft law to correct this situation was drawn up but not
 enacted by year's end.
 The number of political prisoners in Serbia/Montenegro is unknown. At the end
 of 1993, there were at least 60 prisoners who had been convicted of political crimes.
 The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) was able to visit political
 Srisoners after sentencing but not to gain access to those in pretrial confinement.
 Numerous Albanian political activists were arrested because of their political activi-
 ties in supnort of Kosovo independence and were detained briefly under mis-
 demeanor laws.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Federal law permits police to detain sus-
 pects without a warrant and hold them incommunicado for up to 3 days without
 charging them or granting them access to a defense attorney. After this period, po-
 lice must turn a suspect over to an investigating judge, who may order a 30-day
 extension and, under certain legal procedures, subsequent extensions of investiga-
 tive detention up to 6 months. Wuring investigative detention, detainees theoreti-
 cally have access to legal counsel, although in practice access is only occasionally
 granted.
 In May and June, there was a wave of arrests of Muslims in Novi Pazar
 (Sandzak) for illegal possession of weapons. Many of those arrested had close ties
 to the Muslim Party of Democratic Action (SDA), which publicly advocates auton-
 omy for Sandzak through peaceful means. In September, while he was out of the
 country, a warrant was issued for the arrest of the leader of the SDA, Dr. Ugljanin.
 The prosecutor later brought formal charges of fomenting rebellion against SDA
 members. SDA leaders admit that some of those charged may have possessed weap-
 ons but point out that Serbian police as a rule have not prosecuted ethnic Serbs
 for violations of weapons laws, despite the proliferation of arms within the general
 population and the threatening activities of organized Serbian paramilitary groups.
 Police arrested several dozen former political prisoners and activists of Albanian
 Folitical parties and associations in Kosovo in August and September. Some were
 later charged with threatening the territorial integrity of Serbia. According to their
 attorneys, police had severely beaten them all during detention. Police detained
 Salajdin Braha from Prizren, member of the ethnic Albanian Kosovo parliament for
 5 weeks, repeatedly beat him during this time, and then released him due to iack
 of evidence.
 Exile is neither legally permitted nor routinely practiced. No specific instances of
 the imposition of exile as a form of judicial punishment are known to have occurred.
 e. Denial of Fair Public TriaL-The court system comprises local, district, and su-
 preme courts at the republic level, and a Federal Supreme Court to which republic
 Supreme Court decisions may be appealed. There is also a military court system.
 
 
 1042
 According to the Federal Constitution, the Federal Constitutional Court rules on
 the constitutionality of laws and regulations, relying on the republic authorities to
 enforce its rulings. The Federal Criminal Code of the former Yugoslavia still applies.
 Under federaF law, defendants have the right to be present at their trials and to
 have an attorney, at public expense if needed. Both the defendant and the prosecu-
 tor may appeal the verdict. The judiciary is not free from political influence or eth-
 nic bias, as evidenced by the dismissal of ethnic Albanian judges in Kosovo following
 their refusal to take an oath of loyalty to Serbia, and judicial handling of charges
 against the Draskovics. Serbian courts continue to sentence ethnic Albanians, re-
 portedly including some minors, for political actions to terms of from 1 to 20 years.
 Sandzak Muslims and ethnic Albanians and Hungarians still avoid military serv-
 ice. Prosecution is rare, but force is sometimes used in mobilizing troops. The draft
 is sometimes used as a means of harassing opposition figures. In Vojvodina in late
 December, Sandar Balint, editor in chief of the Hungarian language publication
 Magyar Szo, was called up for military duty. Balint is in his mi -forties. However,
 ethnic Serbs in Vojvodina have repody een subjected to similar treatment by
 the military authorities.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Federal
 law gives republic ministries of interior sole control over the decision to monitor po-
 tential criminal activities, a power routinely abused. Authorities routinely monitor
 opposition and dissident activity, eavesdropped on conversations (see Section 2.a. re
 DusanRebic), read mall, and tapped telephones. A Serbian minister boasted in Par-
 liament about the wiretapping of the leader of the main ethnic Hungarian party.
 Although the law includes restrictions on searches, officials paid scant attention to
 such restrictions.
 In Kosovo, police routinely subjected ethnic Albanians to random searches of their
 homes, vehicles, and offices on the pretext of searching for weapons.
 Police at checkpoints throughout Kosovo, both between localities and within cities
 and towns, systematically stopped private vehicles and searched them and the pas-
 sengers with no probable cause. In a round-trip journey of 40 miles, independent
 observers noted four separate checks of a single vehicle. Police often confiscated for-
 eign currency from drivers and passengers, although it is not illegal to possess for-
 eign currency. Similar confiscations occurred in Sandzak.
 Police deliberately timed raids on Albanian private schools in Kosovo to disrupt
 entrance tests for children to secondary schools. Police subjected all those suspected
 of any form of involvement with private Albanian schools to searches of their homes
 and offices and often confiscated personal documents.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and -Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-Despite their denials, the Governments of Serbia/Montenegro and Croatia
 were deeply involved in the extensive and egregious violations of humanitarian law
 and abuses of basic human rights in Bosnia committed by Serbian and Croatian
 paramilitary forces there. The Government of Serbia/Montenegro armed the Serbian
 forces in both Bosnia and Croatia, its citizens participated in the wars as members
 of paramilitary formations with government sanction, and it permitted regular
 troops to remain in Bosnia after May 1992 in the renamed "Serbian army" there.
 In addition, it continued to supply the Bosnian Serb forces with fuel, food, and other
 supplies, even while these items were in critically short supply in its own territory.
 The authorities in Belgrade have not sought to prosecute former regular army per-
 sonnel for suspected war crime activities in either Croatia or Bosnia-Herzegovina.
 Members of ethnic minorities in Serbia were frequently subjected to intimidation,
 with the goal of provoking the emigration of non-Serbs. The army and the police
 did not interfere with or try to prevent paramilitary forces and other extreme na-
 tionalists from carrying out numerous attacks and harassment against minorities
 designed to drive them from their homes. In Voivodina, paramilitary forces associ-
 ated with such extremist groups as the Serbian Radical Party (SRS) led by Vojislav
 SeseU openly threatened Croats, Ruthenians, Hungarians, and others and waged a
 campaign to replace the non-Serbian population with Serbian refugees from Croatia
 and Bosnia.
 In the multiethnic Serbian province of Vojvodina, following the defeat of Prime
 Minister Panic in the December presidential elections, there was a resurgence of the
 campaign of harassment against non-Serbs. In Hrtkovci, Vojvodina, the local mayor
 and his deputy, who had ten imprisoned for incitement to violence against non-
 Serbs, were convicted on May 5 and given suspended prison sentences. Harassment
 began anew of non-Serbs and of Serbs who defended them, as well as of Serbian
 refugees from Croatia and Bosnia-Herzegovina who refused to return to fight along-
 side local Serb paramilitary forces.
 Many of these incidents were instigated by SRS chief and paramilitary leader
 Seselb and his followers. In October Milosevic's ruling party denounced Seseb as a
 
 
 1043
 
 Fascist and a war criminal, guilty of paramilitary attacks and war crimes in Croatia
 and Bosnia. Serbian authorities recently brought criminal charges against nearly 40
 members of Seselj's paramilitary organizations, including accusations of smuggling,
 racketeering and rape. Although the authorities described the charges as related to
 war crimes, p ress reprts indicated that only one case was specifically connected to
 activities in Bosnia. The timingof the charges had a highly political flavor, growing
 out of SeseU's conflict with Serbian President Milosevic, and do not appear to have
 been motivated by justice or the rule of law. As of year's end, no legal action had
 been brought directly against Seselj or his Serbian Radical Party. In December
 Seselj andZeljko "Ar an Raznatovic, a paramilitary leader and a candidate in the
 elections for the Serbian Parliament, traded accusations of criminal activity on
 state-run television. The charges included war profiteering and murder.
 Officially sanctioned violence and intimidations directed against the Croatian pop-
 ulation of Vojvodina, which peaked in the summer of 1992, continued in 1993. Con-
 ditions eased in the last months of the year following the arrest of some Seseli sup-
 porters directly implicated in these crimes. Early in 1993, Croatian families in the
 Vojvodina town of Srijemska Kamenica received threatening telephone calls to move
 out or be killed. These calls were usually followed by visits from men offering prop-
 erty exchanges in Croatia. Fearing for their lives, many families moved out. Local
 authorities did not intervene and in at least one case actively participated. In July
 in Kukujevci Vojvodina, one prominent Croat, his wife, and elderly aunt were found
 shot dead. fie had been warned many times that he should move. Several people,
 all of them members of the Serbian Radical Party, were arrested and charged with
 the crime.
 Significant numbers of ethnic Hungarians left the Vojvodina due to the prevailing
 atmosphere of fear, economic collapse, and insecurity. Estimates range as high as
 50 000, out of a total Hungarian population of 350,000.
 Local Serbian authorities reportedly threatened and intimidatdd Albanian inhab-
 itants in northern Kosovo into leaving their homes near the town of Leposavic,
 which is a mostly Serb-inhabited area, according to an international human rights
 organization.
 Ceko Dacevic, a local Radical (SRS) and paramilitary leader, was the main insti-
 gator of attacks on Muslims in Montenegro. He enjoyed immunity from prosecution
 for a time as a member of the Federal Assembly. In late March, members of his
 group burst into a local restaurant, forcing the owner at gunpoint to remove a pic-
 ture of former President Tito and ordering him to close down the restaurant, which
 they said would be converted into an Orthodox church. At the end of August, Serb
 extremists demolished a Muslim-owned cafe under the eyes of the police, who inter-
 vened only when a crowd of Muslims demanded they prevent the rape of the owner's
 daughter. A week later police arrested a Muslim bystander as well as three of
 Dacevie's men, who were only briefly detained. Harassment of Muslims in the Mon-
 tenegrin Sandzak district of Pljevlja lessened following the arrest and trial of
 Dacevic.
 In 1993 more than 800 Bukovica (Sandzak) Muslims were forced to leave their
 homes and villages following threats from "FRY" army members and the kidnaping
 of some villagers during a violent attack by the Bosnian Serb army during cross-
 border sorties. Many claimed they fled to escape "FRY" reservists, putatively sta-
 tioned in the area to protect them but in practice making no attempt to do so, who
 in some cases beat and accused them of working for the Bosnian Government of
 President Izetbegovic. The last three Muslim families in the village of Dekare moved
 to Pljevlja in April, following a late night incident at the home of one of them when
 "FRY" army members burst in and questioned them about weapons.
 A group of armed civilians opened fire on a Canadian company of the United Na-
 tions Protective Force (UNPROFOR) that was stopped at a police checkpoint in Ser-
 bia near the Bosnian border. A French soldier with the Canadian company was
 wounded in the leg. Serbian police were on the scene but did nothing to prevent
 the shooting or to pursue the attackers. It was noted that SRS leader Seselj was
 attending an SRS meeting nearby and drove past the UNPROFOR convoy shortly
 before the shooting, rolling down the window of his car to shout obscenities at the
 UNPROFOR troops.
 On at least one occasion, armored personnel carriers, trucks, and armed troops
 of the t-rbiait militia prevented a humanitarian aid convoy rom proceeding through
 Serbia to Sreb~cr ia, Bosnia, claiming that the United Nations did not have permis-
 sion to use that read.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Specch and Press--Although freedom of press and speech is pro-
 vided for under iow, this right is not respected in practice. The regime controls frc
 
 
 1044
 
 quency allocations for broadcasters and has enormous influence on supplies and rev-
 enues for the print media. Although the regime continued to tolerate the critical
 independent but low-circulation print media of Borba and Vreme in Belgrade, most
 of the population nationwide is dependent for their news on electronic media firmly
 under government control. The Government blocked the attempts of independent
 television station Studio B and independent radio station B-92 to expand trans-
 mission of their broadcasts. Republic authorities use provisions of the Federal
 Criminal Code to restrict freedom of speech.
 Shortages of newsprint and the deteriorating economy due to international sanc-
 tions enabled the Government selectively to direct supplies to favored publications
 and to reduce financial support to independent journals. In Vojvodina, the Hungar-
 ian independent Magyar Szo resisted an attempt to have it merge with a Serbian
 publishing house, fearing financial mismanagement would force it to close. The
 paper struggled on, overcoming a stoppage in March, but ceased publication tempo-
 rarily in October due to financial problems and a shortage of newsprint. At year's
 end, Magyar Szo was appearing twice weekly.
 Proposed press regulations to regulate foreign investment in domestic media
 would make illegal Serbian press connections with foreigners or foreign support of
 Serbian media under most circumstances.
 Despite a precarious existence, Bujku, the only Albanian-language newspaper,
 continued to be published. It was forced to miss two issues in October because of
 their Serbian-run publishing house's alleged inability to obtain newsprint. The pub-
 lishing house itself had previously been in Albanian hands but was transferred to
 Serbian control by various financial and legal measures over objections from the Al-
 banian management. A hunger strike by Aibanian writers in June failed to prevent
 control being tranferred into Serbian hands. The paper is pre ared independently
 and uncensored and clearly reflects the views of the ethnic Albanian democratic
 movement in Kosovo. As such, it is the main source of information for the Albanian
 community.
 Publication of material critical of the Government, however, was tolerated, with
 a few notable exceptions. A political cartoon deemed to incite ethnic, religious, and
 racial hatred resulted in the confiscation of all copies of an issue of Sandzak, a pub-
 lication of the Muslim cultural society in Novi Pazar; the prosecutor brought crimi-
 nal charges against its editor in chief. Serbian police seized Rexhep Ismaili's book
 "Kosovo and the Albanians in the Former Yugoslavia" from a private printing house
 and confiscated all copies of it. They also temporarily blocked distribution of
 "Thema, published by the Kosovo Association of Sociologists and Philosophers.
 On February 9, satirist Mihajlo Radojcic was sentenced to 5 months in prison,
 with 2 years suspended, for 'exposing the President of the Presidency of the Repub-
 lic of Montenegro, Momir Bulatovic, to ridicule." The President of the Association
 of Professional Journalists of Montenegro criticized the conviction and accused the
 Government of trying to eliminate free thought.
 Both local and international journalists were harassed and intimidated. Dusan
 Reljic, foreign editor of the independent Vreme, a publication consistently critical of
 Milosevic, was kidnaped and questioned while blindfolded for 2 days in late Septem-
 ber, shortly after the Serbian Minister of Information warned of "fifth column ele-
 ments among Serbian journalists. Reljic believed his interrogators were police or
 state intelligence agents.
 Progovernment media in January accused Roy Gutman, correspondent for
 Newsday, of being a spy involved in a Western media conspiracy against Serbia.
 They made these charges on the same day that the Government threatened restric-
 tions on certain foreign journalists. Dunng the June 1-2 demonstrations in Bel-
 grade, police confiscated or destroyed the equipment of many journalists whom they
 beat and threatened. The authorities expelled the Belgrade correspondent of the
 London-based, Saudi-owned Al Hayat from Serbia/Montenegro after 13 years in resi-
 dence, with 2 weeks' notice and no official explanation. In early December, the Gov-
 ernment refused, without explanation, to extend the accreditation of long-time Lon-
 don Times correspondent Desa Trevisan.
 Milosevic's control of the media and particularly state television is vital to the
 strength of his regime. Through Serbian Radio and Television (RTS), the Govern-
 ment exerts editorial control over all news programming, which is used to spread
 ethnic hatred. Blatant anti-Muslim or anti-Albanian propaganda, fanning the fires
 of religious and ethnic hatred, constituted a substantial portion of the regular news
 programs which RTS broadcast.
 In early 1993, RTS placed some 1,500 employees on involuntary leave. The major-
 ity had publicly condemned RTS's encouragement of nationalistic and religious intol-
 erance. They were also members of the independent RTS union. The director of Novi
 Sad Radio-Television ordered stricter application of the Serbian law on the official
 
 
 1045
 use of language and the alphabet, which resulted in the immediate deletion of all
 references in the Hungarian language from official programming.
 Independent television station Studio B continued to struggle for survival. It faced
 eviction from its premises in favor of a proregime firm. Despite its having received
 frequencies approved by the International Telecommunications Union for repeater
 stations, Serbian authorities refused to approve them on the grounds that only the
 Serbian government could allocate frequencies on Serbian territory. This attitude,
 combined with the hijacking in late 1992 of new equipment and its inability to buy
 suitable land from the government to house its transmitter, prevented Studio B
 from extending its range of reception beyond Belgrade. Police broke into Studio B
 studios and confiscated video footage of the June 1 protest (see Section I.e.).
 A new compulsory tax was levied on citizens of Serbia/Montenegro as part of their
 electric bills beginning on October 1. Revenue is to be used to subsidize RTS, thus
 further diminishing independent television's ability to compete.
 Reports continued of threats and, on rare occasions, instances of physical violence
 directed against individuals or organizations who expressed criticism of Serbia's ex-
 treme nationalist ideology or of the "Yugoslav" army and security services. For in-
 stance, a journalist who wrote for a Belgrade daily a piece critical of the army sub-
 sequently received death threats. Several Belgrade University professors who ex-
 pressed oppositionist views or simply failed to collaborate with the regime received
 death threat,.
 In January Miosevic's government fired the Rector of Belgrade University, as
 well as the directors of the Modern Art Museum and the National Theater. Some
 teachers were removed from their posts, and others reported receiving death
 threats. Legislation granted the State direct control of public enterprises. The Edu-
 cation Ministry used this power to fire school princi pals.
 The controversial university law was quietly motified by the Serbian assembly in
 May to give more control to the government regarding the founding of private and
 foreign universities and minority language instruction, requiring that an "opinion"
 (in other words, permission) be sought from the Ministry of Education. The Govern-
 ment controls 50 percent of the membership of the University Council, the supreme
 ruling body of the University as well as the chairman. On June 22, the University
 Council elected the dean of the Agricultural faculty and SPS representative in the
 Federal Assembly as Rector of the University of Belgrade.
 In June Rexhep Osmani, chairman of the Kosovo Association of Albanian Teach-
 ers, was sentenced to 60 days in prison for organizing peaceful protests on Albanian
 education in October 1992. Professor Ejup Statovci, rector of the underground Alba-
 nian university of Pristina, was returned to prison in February to complete serving
 a 60-day sentence growing out of the same 1992 incident.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Although freedom of peaceful
 assembly and association is legally provided for, these freedoms were severely re-
 stricted. Authorities arbitrarily enforced regulations, permitting some demonstra-
 tions and banning others. They permitted supporters of National Peasant Party
 leader Dragan Veselinov to demonstrate in Belgrade in July for the release of Vuk
 Draskovic, whereas in late August police broke up a gathering of milk producers in
 Belgrade organized by Veselinov's party to protest the Government's pricing of milk.
 When violence by protestors marred the spontaneous June 1 demonstrations at the
 Federal Assembly building, police riot teams broke up the gathering, indiscrimi-
 nately beating and arresting participants and bystanders alike (also see Section
 1.c.).
 Ethnic Albanians involved with political groups are subjected to arbitrary arrest
 and detention, disruption and destruction of their meetings and offices, and
 confiscation of documentation and property. During one such raid on the offices of
 the Democratic League of Kosovo, police arrested the local vice chairman and party
 members. During their detention at the police station, police beat them and in-
 structed them not to continue their political activities. In another incident, the
 chairman and secretary of the office of the Democratic Alliance of Kosovo (LDK) in
 Glogovac were beaten at a police checkpoint. The branch chairman was sent to
 Pristina where he was detained for 30 days for allegedly assaulting a police officer,
 during which time police beat and tortured him. He faces a possible 5- to 15-year
 sentence. During raids on schools, police arrested ethnic Albanian teachers and re-
 leased them the same day as a form of harassment to discourage employment in
 private Albanian schools. Police held many others for longer than 3 days but subse-
 quently released them without filing charges or providing an explanation for their
 detention.
 Disruptive and violent police raids frequently targeted meetings of ethnic Alba-
 nians. In Mitrovice, police raided a peaceful gathering to commemorate the 60th an-
 niversary of the murder of Hasan Prishtina, an ethnic Albanian hero. Police broke
 
 
 1046
 up the gathering and indiscriminately beat the participants, including the elderly,
 children, and women.
 Police detained and questioned a founding member of Arkadia, a gay rights group,
 about the group's activities.
 Police arrested committee members of the Belgrade Islamic community in April
 and accused them of collecting money for arms while compiling data on the Islamic
 community.
 c. Freem of Religion.--There is no state religion but the Government gives the
 Serbian Orthodox Church to which the majority of 4erbs belong, preferential treat-
 ment over other faiths ana access to state-run television for religious events.
 Although there are no legal restrictions on the practice of religion, the regime
 overtly and covertly promoted religious intolerance. Police condoned periodic harass-
 ment of religious facilities used by ethnic minorities. After the fire-bombing of Hun-
 garian and Croatian Catholic churches in the Vojvodina, police investigations were
 generally perfunctory and inconclusive.
 Following the mining of a mosque in the municipality of Bar in October, the
 fourth such act of vandalism against Muslim religious sites in Montenegro, there
 was widespread condemnation from local authorities.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for freedom of movement. Exit visas are gen-
 erally not required except for travel to Albania. Passports are available to most citi-
 zens of Serbia/Montenegro, but many Kosovar Albanians have had their right to
 travel restricted.
 Following Macedonia's imposition of a passport requirement for all citizens of the
 former Yugoslavia, there were increasing reports that Serbian border guards con-
 fiscated the passports of ethnic Albanians working abroad as they returned to
 Kosovo. Police also confiscated some passports during house searches. Serbian au-
 thorities on the Kosovo-Macedonia border delayed departure of a Kosovar Albanian
 delegation attending meetings on educational issues of the International Conference
 on the Former Yugoslavia.
 The authorities detained two members of the Kosovo Helsinki Committee as they
 crossed into Kosovo from Macedonia following their attendance at a meeting in
 Tirana. Serbian police seized the passport of a well-known ethnic Albanian journal-
 ist and political activist on the grounds that he had visited Albania without obtain-
 ing a Serbian exit visa. Despite such cases Serbian authorities have generally al-
 lowed ethnic Albanian leaders, including LDK leader Ibrahim Rugova, to leave the
 country and return, even though they consider his party and other ethnic Albanian
 parties illegal.
 On May 1, Serbia tightened its refugee requirements, drawing up a list of "safe
 municipalities" and contending that those arriving from nationalist Serb-controlled
 regions of Bosnia and Croatia were no longer eligible for refugee status. Only
 Montenegro continued to offer unconditional protection to refugees from Bosnia and
 Croatia. There are approximately 60,000 refugees in Montenegro, 10 percent of its
 population. As in Serbia, nearly 95 percent live with host families.
 Informed observers reported that Serbian police at times prevented Muslim refu-
 gees from entering Serbia by bus from Montenegro, while allowing Serb refugees on
 the same busses to enter.
 Numerous reliable reports indicate that local minorities, especially in Vojvodina,
 have been forcibly displaced and Serb refugees moved into their homes.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution allows cidizens to change their government, but their ability to
 do so is circumscribed by the Milosevic government's control of mass media and the
 electoral process. This is the case particularly in Serbia. In the December 1992 elec-
 tions, opposition parties were denied equal access to the state-run media, voter reg-
 istration lists omitted many eligible voters, international observers noted numerous
 voting irregularities and serious questions were raised as to the accuracy of the
 vote count. The CSCE report concluded that this election could not be deemed to
 be fair and democratic. The CSCE found conditions in Montenegro much better. In
 the December 1993 Serbian parliamentary elections, similar doubts were raised as
 to the fairness of voting procedures.
 Parliamentary elections are held every 4 years. In principle the ballot is secret,
 but in practice voting booths are often not available, and voters mark their ballots
 on open tables or behind small cardboard shields. Voters, nonetheless, can obtain
 a degree of privacy.
 Slobodan Milosevic dominates the political system in Serbia/Montenegro. Al-
 though formally President of Serbia, one of the two constituent republics in the so-
 
 
 1047
 
 called Yugoslav Federal Republic, Milosevic, through his control of the Serbian
 lice, the army, and the state administration, first weakened the authority of the
 Federal Government and then placed his followers in key positions, including Fed-
 eral President and Federal Prime Minister.
 In May the Serbian Socialist Party combined with the Serbian Radical Party to
 remove Federal President Dobrica Cosic, who had shown some degree of independ-
 ence from Milosevic. In a striking display of political ruthlessness, Cosic was sum-
 marily ousted following a single day's unscheduled debate in the Federal Parliament
 with no opportunity to defend himself. Democratic opposition deputies, who pro-
 tested the unprecedented haste with which the Head of State was dismissed, were
 jeered and threatened by SRS deputies, one of whom subsequently attacked an op-
 position delegate in the lobby of Parliament, knocking him unconscious. This
 sparked the June 1 demonstrations (see Section 1.c.).
 A new law on the declaration of a state of siege carries the threat that martial
 law could be imposed over the objections of the Montenegrin republic. Throughout
 1993, party and political institutions in Montenegro functioned in fits and starts
 with some degree of adherence to democratic principles and the rule of law, as well
 as tolerance for opposition and ethnic minority views, at least in comparison with
 the situation in Serbia. Nevertheless, the Montenegrin government's sphere for
 independent action is greatly circumscribed by Milosevic's refusal to tolerate signifi-
 cant divergence from the Serbian party line.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Local human rights monitors, Serbs as well as members of minorities, worked
 courageously under difficult circumstances and despite public insinuations by
 ultranationalist leaders and sometimes government officials that they were traitors.
 Police routinely searched human rights offices in Kosovo, confiscated documents,
 and harassed their employees.
 A number of independent human rights organizations exist in Serbia/Montenegro,
 researching and gathering information on abuses and publicizing such cases. Sev-
 eral operate out of Kosovo, including the Council for the Defense of Human Rights
 and Freedoms and the Kosovo Helsinki Committee. In the Sandzak region, a sepa-
 rate Council for the Defense of Human Rights and Freedoms monitors abuses
 against the local Muslim population. The Belgrade-based Humanitarian Law Fund
 and the Center for Antiwar Action (CAA) have a broader scope of activities re-
 searching human rights abuses throughout the "FRY" and on occasion, elsewiere
 in the former Yugoslavia. In addition to monitoring human rights abuses, the CAA
 sponsors symposiums and lectures and runs a small publishing house. The activities
 of independent human rights agencies are carefully monitored by Serbian authori-
 ties but they are not generally subject to overt harassment. Last July, however,
 local authorities seized files and computer disks belonging to the Council for the De-
 fense of Human Rights and Freedoms in Pristina. The materials have not been r-
 turned. In August the CAA and two opposition groups had their offices robbed and
 documents stolen, pointing to political rather than criminal motives for the break-
 ins.
 The governments of Serbia and Montenegro formally maintain that they have no
 objection to international organizations conducting human rights investigations on
 their territories. However, they regularly attacked the findings of human rights
 groups. The Federal Minister for Human Rights and National Minorities repeatedly
 charged the international community with selective application of international law,
 criticized the work of the CSCE monitors even as local Serbian officials praised that
 work, and denied human rights violations against minority groups.
 On June 29, the "FRY" mission to the United Nations in Geneva rejected a pro-
 posal to allow envoys of U.N. Human Rights Rapporteur Tadeusz Mazowiecki entry
 to Serbia/Montenegro. The refusal was based on the assertion that in previous vis-
 its, Mazowiecki had indulged in "malicious" misrepresentations and had applied
 double standards unfair to Serbia.
 The CSCE missions established in September 1992 and terminated by Milosevic
 in July 1993 experienced varying degrees of cooperation. During a planned visit to
 villages bordering Bosnia in the Montenegrin part of Sandzak, the mission was not
 able to reach the villages because local officials failed to provide security guaran-
 tees. However, relations with local officials were generally good. Belgrade refused
 to extend the mission's mandate in July after insisting on linking its presence to
 Serbia/Montenegro's suspended status in the CSCE, and several Serbian and federal
 officials publicly accused the CSCE mission of inciting local populations.
 Violent acts against ethnic minorities in the regions formerly monitored by the
 CSCE missions subsequently increased, particularly in Kosovo, including acts
 
 
 1048
 against former employees and associates of the missions. Prizren police detained
 and questioned a Helsinki Watch representative and a British journalist while they
 were covering the aftermath of a trial of five Albanians accused of "endangering the
 territorial inegrity of Yugoslavia." They were released after 4 hours of questioning.
 Many foreign delegations visited all parts of Serbia and Montenegro without dif-
 ficulty, but a Swedish delegation due to visit Kosovo on a refugee-related mission
 was denied visas.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Federal and republic laws guarantee equal rights to all citizens, regardless of eth-
 nic group, religon, language or social status.
 Women.- omen have suffered numerous human rights abuses in the hostile at-
 mosphere of oppressive nationalism fostered by the regime during the conflict and
 warfare over the breakup of Yugoslavia. Women's rights activists have little access
 to the mass media and are therefore virtually unknown outside of Belgrade and
 Novi Sad. Serbian women face rising levels of domestic violence and sexual harass-
 ment in the workplace. Few women are represented in high-level political positions.
 Federal and republic laws prohibit discrimination against women, but the laws
 are not enforced. in comparison to men, women have limited access to senior posi-
 tions in political and economic life but are well represented in the professions, par-
 ticularly as doctors and teachers. According to women's rights monitors, as a result
 of the deteriorating economic situation, women were often the first to be let go. The
 Police Academy no longer accepts female students. Those women who had attended
 the school were hired in purely administrative positions, and there are no female
 police officers in uniform on the street. Although women constitute 70 percent of the
 students enrolled at the Law Faculty of Belgrade University, in the workplace
 women comprise only 10 percent of public prosecutors and only 10 percent of judges
 at the Supreme Court level.
 Women are entitled to equal pay for equal work. Maternity leave for employed
 women usually is granted for 1 year, and even longer in some cases, although the
 collapse of the economy has restricted such benefits in practice. Legal penalties for
 spousal abuse are the same as those for abuse of other persons, but a complaint
 must be filed. This is seldom done, according to women's rights groups, due to tradi-
 tional attitudes.
 According to women's rights monitors in Belgrade, these same traditional atti-
 tudes cause women's rights gups to be largely ignored. One group reported a bur-
 glary at its offices, during which nothing was taken, and after which the group was
 evicted from those premises. The reasons for the eviction are not clear.
 Women's rights groups established an SOS hotline and opened a rape crisis center
 in Belgrade in September with the aim of assisting women raped in the war in
 Bosnia. Some 5,000 calls have been received since the hotline was established in
 1992. Most of the women who call are aged between 40 and 60, poorly educated
 and unemployed. Representatives claim that domestic violence against women and
 children has taken an upward turn as husbands, returning traumatized and armed
 from the war in Bosnia, are unable to find jobs and take their frustration out on
 their families. The hotline reports that sexual harassment of women has increased
 and is tolerated by women from all levels of society who are fearful of losing their
 jobs.
 The Serbian Orthodox Church accused Serbian women of failing to give birth to
 enough children and demanded a ban on abortions earlier in the year.-The Church
 had insufficient political support and failed to achieve the ban.
 Children.-The minimum age for employment is 16 years, although in villages
 and farm communities, younger children often assist with family agricultural obliga-
 tions.
 National IRacial IEthnic Minorities.-The ethnic minorities of Serbia/Montenegro
 continued to suffer discrimination in all respects, in addition to the abuses described
 elsewhere in this report. There were credible reports that qualified Muslims or eth-
 nic Albanians were fired from their jobs on the basis of religion or ethnicity.
 Members of ethnic minorities were badly treated in the armed forces where they
 were viewed with suspicion and often outright hostility. In early 1993, there ap-
 peared to be an increase in the number of Muslims being called to military service
 which may have reflected an effort to encourage Sandzak Muslims to leave the area.
 A recently enacted law for the army contains a provision whereby recruits may
 serve in a civilian capacity for religious or other reasons of conscience; it remains
 to be seen whether it will be applied to minorities.
 There is a traditional prejudice against the substantial Gypsy (Roma) population.
 The Yugoslav Democratic Party of Gypsies is not well organized and does not play
 
 
 1049
 
 a role in the political life of the country commensurate with its numbers. The Gypsy
 population has the right to vote, and there is no legal discrimination, although tra-
 ditional societal discrimination is widespread, and local authorities apparently con-
 done and even participate in harassment and intimidation of Gypsies.
 Religious Minorities.-After the December 1992 election victory of Milosevic's So-
 cialists and Seselb's Radicals, the regime moved to fire uncooperative employees and
 place its own handpicked candidates in senior positions at Serbian Radio and Tele-
 vision and other institutions. Seselj mounted a campaign of treason accusations
 against dissidents and non-Serbs. Increasing authoritarianism and intolerance cre-
 ated a fearful climate for members of all of Serbia's ethnic and religious minorities.
 The Humanitarian Law Fund stated that since August 1992 violent incidents
 against Muslims have been increasing. The Fund accused military and paramilitary
 Serbian groups from Bosnia, reservists of the "FRY" army, and local police. The gov-
 ernment has not taken any effective action to protect the Muslim population in
 Sandzak from continuing violence.
 Sandzak Muslim soccer fans and supporters of Zeljko "Arkan" Raznjatovic's All-
 Serbian Pristina Club clashed at Novi Pazar stadium during a soccer game. Police
 arrested 50 Muslim spectators on a variety of charges, but none of Arkan's support-
 ers were arrested.
 In Sandzrak there continued to be reports of destruction of mosques and Muslim-
 owned businesses. In Sjenica 17 Muslims in senior positions were fired and replaced
 by Serbs.
 People with Disabilities.-There is no formal legislation to uarantee equal rights
 for the disabled. Attempts to introduce legislation have failed. An opposition party
 is lobbying to broaden existing legislation to provide equal rights for the disabled.
 Public buldings are required to provide access for the disabled, but it is only rec-
 ommended that private buildings provide such access.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-All workers (except military personnel) are legally
 entitled to form or join unions of their own choosing. This right is formally re-
 spected. Workers are no longer obligated to join and pay dues to the official unions.
 The older semiofficial union umbrella organizations (the Council of Independent
 Trade Unions of Serbia-CITUS, the Council of Independent Trade Unions of
 Montenegro-CITUM, and their federal counterpart, the Council of Independent
 Trade Unions of Yugoslavia-CITUY) had offered material benefits to members,
 such as preferential access to lower cost commodities from government reserves,
 that the fledgling independent unions were unable to match. These commodity re-
 serves have dwindled, however, leaving union members facing much the same short-
 ages as nonunion members. Although statistics on the size of the organized work
 force are unreliable, the large bulk of Serbian and Montenegrin workers are prob-
 ably members of the semiofficial CITUS and CITUM. CITUS claims current mem-
 bership of 1.8 million workers, while the more loosely affiliated Serbian independent
 trade union organization (Nezavisnost) has between 80,000 and 200,000 members.
 There are reportedly no unions independent of CITUM in Montenegro. Since mid-
 1991 union activity has generally been at a reduced level, either out of support for
 the dovernment or due to fears of being perceived as disloyal.
 The right to strike is recognized and was exercised by both the independent and
 progovernment trade union organizations throughout 1993. A 30-day notification of
 the intent to strike is required. More than two dozen strikes were recorded, protest-
 ing lack of job security and the failure of wages to keep pace with hyperinflation.
 Some unions called for the resignation of the Federal Government. Additionally,
 there were two general strikes, one organized by the independent labor union on
 May 19 and the other organized by progovernment unions on August 5. Both were
 poorly organized and failed to achieve the widespread work stoppages initially
 planned. During the course of the year, the Government successfully defud worker
 discontent by either partially or fully meeting union demands for wage increases.
 Hyperinflation, however, eroded purchasing power so quickly that any wage in-
 creases rapidly disappeared in realeconomic terms.
 The Serbian Interior Ministry has instructed Belgrade's public prosecutor to in-
 vestigate leaders of a strike organized by the Kolubara Coal Miner's Union in De-
 cember. There have been reports of union activists being harassed and briefly de-
 tained by the police.
 In June 160 civil air controllers working for the Mi.nistr of Traffic and Commu-
 nications went on a hunger strike to protest low wages an hazardous working con-
 ditions. The strike, which was bitterly fought, proved to be a negative turning point
 in government-labor relations but, more significantly, provided the Government
 
 
 1050
 
 with the impetus to pass a major new law that bans all public service workers from
 participating in strikes.
 The Independent Trade Unions of Kosovo (ITUK), formally recognized by the Fed-
 eral Government, continued to face huge obstacles at the local level in representing
 a work force that suffered from official repression, repeated mass dismissals on eth-
 nic grounds, and consequent massive unemployment. CITUS is well represented in
 Kosovo and has taken over the offices occupied by the Communist-era trade union.
 According to ITUK, worker union fees deducted from paychecks are deposited with
 CITUS, and benefits are distributed only to Serbian workers. All ethnic Albanian
 workers pay union fees voluntarily.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-This right is guaranteed by
 law, but Western-style collective bargaining is unknown. Under U.N. sanctions,
 which have led the Government to freeze previously planned economic reforms, real
 collective bargaining is unlikely. Plant management is not independent of the Gov-
 ernment nor an effective bargaining partner for the unions. Republic wage controls
 effectively usurped the role of enterprises and the semiofficial chambers of economy.
 The republic governments have promised that no workers would be discharged as
 a result of the sanctions and guaranteed that idled workers would receive an income
 equal to 50 percent of their former wages.
 Privatization of social property (state enterprises) is another problem in which the
 rights and interests of workers are not well defined or understood.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced labor is prohibited by law
 and is not known to occur.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum age for employment
 is 16, although in villages and farm communities younger children often assist with
 family agricultural obligations.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The republic governments guaranteed mini-
 mum wages, but delays and partial payments were pandemic. The governments of
 Serbia and Montenegro continued strict wage controls in 1993. Unemployment and
 underemployment due to sanctions and other economic problems also reduced the
 number of families with two wage earners. The minimum wage is insufficient to
 provide a worker and family a decent living standard. By October the net. minimum
 monthly wage in Serbia was only sufficient to feed a family of four for 2 or 3 days.
 The official workweek was listed as 40 hours, but many enterprises and workers
 worked fewer hours for lack of raw materials. In general, sick leave and other bene-
 fits are generous. Federal and republic laws and regulations on occupational health
 and safety were adequate, although enforcement was lax.
