SERBIA AND MONTENEGRO
Ethnic relations in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY) remain on the verge of explosion. Although Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic entered the political scene presenting himself as the savior of the Serbian nation, inter-ethnic relations and the relative socioeconomic condition of all citizens of Serbia and Montenegro have now reached their lowest level in peacetime since the creation of the first South Slav state in 1918. Not only has the middle class diminished, but 90% of the FRY population has fallen below the poverty threshold. Approximately half a million citizens have emigrated, half of them college-educated youth. Economists predict a dreary future; according to some reliable estimates, it will take approximately 25 years to restore the FRY economy to its 1990 level — assuming an annual growth rate of five percent. The FRY has been suspended from almost all international organizations and placed under the firmest regime of international sanctions yet seen. Ethnic Albanians in the province of Kosovo have created a functioning parallel state system, while they continue to be the most oppressed segment of FRY society, together with the Muslim and other ethnic minorities. Dissenters among ethnic Serbs and Montenegrins continue to share the fate of other "enemies of the state," confirming again How state-sponsored ethnonationalism turns into oppressive authoritarianism.
It would appear that documenting the human rights situation of a country with such a poor record would not be a difficult task. However, perhaps because of its rigid format, the 1994 State Department report has fallen short of pulling an abundance of fragmented data into an analytical document that would elucidate the context in which human rights violations occur. For instance, the report would have benefited analytically if it had begun with the discussion of worker rights and fi-eedom of speech and the press, since these two subsections enable one to discern the basis on which other individual or collective abuses can better be comprehended. Curtailing these already weak rights has allowed Milosevic a greater degree of political control in his efforts to rally the Serbian nation behind his nationalist policies.
213
CRITIQUE 1994
Unfortunately, the report is lax in its treatment of worker rights. The subsection on the right of association merely specifies that workers have the legal right to form and join unions and that "independent unions ... are so weak that they have been largely ineffective." To question this insinuation that unions are somehow to blame for their ineffectiveness, one need only recall, for example, that most of the 1,000 or so employees of Radio TV Serbia who were demoted to stand-by positions in 1994 belonged to an independent union. The UN Special Rapporteur, Tadeusz Mazowiecki, has offered a more balanced view, stating that repeated threats and reprisals are "frequently carried out against members of the political opposition and especially against trade union activists."
In striving for value-free language, the authors of the report are wary of setting forth causal arguments (such as "unions are weak and ineffective because. . ."). This makes the document as a whole seem disorganized, lacking in analysis and excessively preoccupied with description. More importantly, considering that the FRY is in transition to becoming a free-market economy, the reports for both 1993 and 1994 are more than a little vague in recognizing the political and business interests that are being promoted through the economic process. Privatization has largely benefited a narrow social stratum — the political and managerial elites — revealing the impotence of independent labor unions, the low political and socio-economic status of labor and the means by which workers are controlled and instrumentalized. Dragan Veselinov, professor of political economy at Belgrade University, has succinctly remarked:
Two thirds of Serbian enterprises were privatized without any financial transactions. Workers became proprietors of enterprises by buying 'internal' shares. However, by creating stock companies with mixed ownership (social and private), socially owned capital poured into private enterprises owned by managers of the socially-owned enterprises. . . . Hence, workers became proprietors of companies which have no capital and no work, while
214
SERBIA AND MONTENEGRO
[former] communists acquired dollars by stealing from the
people.
In its evaluation of the state of worker rights in the FRY, the report should at the very least have noted that the social and economic policies of the Milosevic government have created fertile soil for a range of human rights abuses by reducing workers to insecure bystanders.
The report deserves praise for its accurate and extensive discussion of freedom of speech and the press. It acknowledges the existence of independent media and discusses the government's methods for curtailing their expansion by controlling frequency allocations for broadcasters and the flow of supplies for the print media. However, as in other commendable sections of the report, the description of the media would have benefited from being grounded in a more coherent sociopolitical context.
The right of citizens of the FRY to change their government should have been examined in conjunction with the issues of press freedom and eroding living standards — a linkage that the report makes only halfheartedly. The formal right to change a government is of little consequence if the citizens are not provided with information and/or are impoverished to the point where newspapers become a luxury. Milosevic and the Socialist Party of Serbia (SPS), along with their ideological partners in Montenegro, have succeeded in repeatedly winning post-1990 multiparty elections largely by depriving citizens of their right to information. The report should have cited some readily available data on the systematic extent of this manipulation. For example, during the December 1993 election campaign, RTV, Serbia's evening news — the only countrywide information broadcast — dedicated 34 minutes to the United Left Coalition, 12 minutes to the Democratic Opposition, five minutes to the Democratic Party, four to the Democratic Party of Serbia and three to the Serbian Radical Party. No less than 227 minutes — or 80% of the total coverage — was devoted to the SPS.
215
CRITIQUE 1994
The report has overlooked, moreover, the abundance of statements by government officials that could, ironically, be used to support accusations of abuse. One illustrative example is a report by the TANJUG news agency, quoting an official statement with which the FRY government hoped to refute assertions that RTV Serbia was unfair toward opposition parties during the elections:
Mazowiecki's assertion that Radio TV Serbia was a propaganda tool of the ruling party during the 1993 elections is rejected. Compared to the number of seats the Socialist Party of Serbia had [in the Assembly], it was allotted modest time on RTV Serbia. The allotted time was disproportionate to the publicity given to relatively small parties.
Statements such as this make it apparent that the Serbian government believes in a direct proportional relationship between the number of parliamentary seats held by each party and the time it should be allotted in the media during subsequent elections. In the same report, the government laments that a number of opposition print and electronic media have editorial boards that are under the influence of opposition parties.
Also in connection with the right of citizens to change their government, the report should have included some comment on the extensive misuse of federal funds by the Milosevic government to secure its reelection, including vote-buying among crucial sectors of the SPS's constituency, such as pensioners and workers in state-owned enterprises.
In places, the report is in need of more plainspoken language. For instance, it states that "Ethnic Albanians, as a matter of principle, refuse to take part in the electoral process, and therefore have little representation." It is important to elucidate the principle that is at stake here. It is not that the electoral principle is undemocratic — an assertion made by the majority of opposition parties, which have, nevertheless, participated in elections. It is rather that ethnic Albanian political elites do not recognize the legitimacy of the State. As Human Rights Watch puts it concisely:
216
SERBIA AND MONTENEGRO
Contesting the legitimacy of the 1990 constitutional amendments that revoked Kosovo's autonomy, the Kosovo Albanians have refused to sign oaths of loyalty to Serbia and Yugoslavia, and instead have organized defiantly for an independent Republic of Kosovo.
The State Department should have clarified its own view of this principle, which has also been invoked by Serb political elites in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia. Extrajudicial killings, torture and other forms of inhumane treatment of ethnic Albanians and other politically active minorities can never be excused on the pretext that members of these communities are allegedly involved in illegal activities. Respect for the collective and individual rights of minorities and the principle of the inviolability of state borders are not incompatible principles, as the State Department report should have made clear.
This is not an academic matter. Given that the State Department's Country Reports are carefully analyzed by both the FRY government and the opposition parties, a clear statement on this matter might well have had an impact on their respective political strategies. Since 30% of FRY citizens are of non-Serb ethnic origin, the participation of ethnic Albanians — by far the largest minority group at 16.6% — in the electoral process could be detrimental to Milosevic's authoritarian rule.
Although the body of the report contains an abundance of well-documented cases of human rights abuses, it is sometimes unclear whether the State Department regards particular charges as having any foundation. For instance, the report states without comment that:
On December 28,21 defendants were sentenced to prison terms ranging from 2 to 7 years for "attempting to undermine the territorial integrity of the State." The head of the Party of Democratic Action (SDA) in Montenegro, Hajrun Hadzic, received the stiffest sentence of 7 years, to begin immediately rather than after the appeals process.
217
CRITIQUE 1994
It is clear that Hadzic's rights were violated, since he was ordered to serve his sentence before the appeals process began. But despite this grave violation of legal procedure, the report does not explicitly state whether the indictment was substantiated in the opinion of independent domestic or international observers. In the section on the denial of a fair public trial, the report repeats the same error. The simple enumeration of alleged abuses, in which the opinion of "defense lawyers" is invoked, with no suggestion of the State Department's own position or that of other independent observers, is seriously questionable.
The instructions issued by the State Department to US embassies preparing the Countjy Reports specify that they should ascertain the average period of time for which pre-trial detainees have been held. Unfortunately no data of this sort appear in the report on Serbia and Montenegro. This is problematic, since the longer pre-trial detainees are held, the more profound the flaws in the judicial system are likely to be. Some quantitative assessment from year to year would therefore allow the State Department to judge whether the situation is improving or deteriorating. Furthermore, in countries such as the FRY, where most human rights abuses are perpetrated against non-dominant ethnic groups, it would be useful to determine the ethnic composition of pre-trial detainees. Such statistical information would give unambiguous findings on the existence and extent of discrimination. (The fact that the FRY authorities have not secured the information for themselves tends to suggest that it would be detrimental to their claim that there is no ethnically based discrimination.)
Pursuing this line of reasoning, an assessment of the arbitrary arrest and detention of members of ethnic minorities would further benefit from a comparison of the ethnic composition of pre-trial detainees with that of convicted prisoners. (Such an assessment could be further refined by distinguishing between those accused or convicted of ordinary crimes and of political offenses.) If the percentage of ethnic minorities were shown to be higher among pre-trial detainees than among those convicted, this would be a persuasive indication that arbitrary arrest and detention is more frequently employed in cases involving ethnic minorities than in those
218
SERBIA AND MONTENEGRO
involving the ethnically dominant Serbs and Montenegrins. This reasoning would hold under the presumption that trials were fair and public, thus excluding the possibility that a convicted person might be innocent. Of course, assessing the fairness of trials would remain problematic, although this is an easier matter to assess on an empirical basis than arbitrary arrest and prolonged detentions — for instance through the presence of independent trial observers.
To judge by its response to the UN Special Rapporteur's Sixth Periodic Report on the Situation of Human Rights in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia, the government of the FRY appears sensitive to its credibility on this point. The government claims that "the judicial authorities do not possess the information on political leanings of the accused and charged persons" (emphasis added) since the law does not require them to be declared. However, the Special Rapporteur's report does not contend that opposition party members and/or supporters are being abused, but that "Muslims and other minority party members" (emphasis added) are the primary targets of prosecution. In order to gather (counter)data to Mazowiecki's accusation, one does not need "information on political leanings" of the accused, but on their ethnicity — data which can easily be collected — by examining the accused person's first and/or last name.
The drafters of the report on Serbia and Montenegro appear to have disregarded the explicit demand in the State Department's instructions to embassies to present official estimates of the numbers of political prisoners, as well as the estimates of opposition, international and other non-governmental sources. The report gives none of these. Again, precise figures would allow for a comparative assessment of the state of human rights in the FRY from year to year.
The report also says nothing about the issue of the presumption of innocence in the FRY judicial system. If one recalls that most of the cases of torture and inhumane treatment cited to such good effect in the report involved pre-trial detainees, it is readily apparent that these persons
219
CRITIQUE 1994
enjoyed no presumption of innocence. Although this is clear enough by inference, it would nevertheless have been helpful to state the fact explicitly. In one of his periodic report's, the UN Special Rapporteur cites a remark by the president of the Pristina Regional Court to a credible NGO to the effect that he supported the "ill-treatment" of detainees by the police when "crimes against the State" were involved, "irrespective of whether there was a conviction or not." Little more needs to be said about the presumption of innocence in the judicial system of the FRY.
The report might usefully have said more about the limited influence of the judiciary on the law enforcement agencies. The point is nicely illustrated, for example, in a report by Amnesty International, citing a letter from the deputy president of the District Court of Pristina to a defense lawyer who had complained about the ill-treatment of his client. The official wrote: "As regards the conduct of police officers, this court is not able to influence their work." This acquiescent attitude on the part of the judiciary is not limited to Kosovo but is a state-wide phenomenon. Judges generally fail to act as a check on abusive law-enforcement agencies, despite having a more than sufficient basis in law to challenge such abuses. For instance. Article 191 of the Yugoslav Criminal Code punishes with up to three years' imprisonment officials who in the performance of their duties physically ill-treat, intimidate or insult another person, while Article 65 of the Serbian Criminal Code provides for a sentence of up to five years' imprisonment if the ill-treatment is intended to extract a confession, with a one-year minimum if the ill-treatment is very serious.
The report should be applauded for pointing out that Serbian paramilitary groups have ceased their illegal activities and that no new cases of disappearances have occurred. This demonstrates the readiness of the report to acknowledge improvements when they occur. Although one may debate the reasons for these isolated improvements (for example, the growing cleavage between President Milosevic and Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic, the impact of sanctions on the stability of the government, etc.) it was right for the report to recognize them.
220
SERBIA AND MONTENEGRO
Unfortunately, the incidence of extrajudicial killings — the most serious of human rights violations — increased in 1994. In the province of Kosovo, for example, extrajudicial killings increased by two compared with 1993, from 15 to 17. Despite this escalation, not a single member of the continuously expanding security apparatus was charged in 1994 in connection with any of these killings. The government also failed to make any breakthrough in the 1992 kidnappings in Strpci of 19 ethnic Muslim and Croat citizens of the FRY, suggesting either that the government is protecting the perpetrators or that it is incapable of extending its protection to all of its citizens. The report unfortunately downplays the importance of this case.
The report deserves praise, however, for pointing out candidly that the police "appear to have resorted to deadly force with little or no attempt to apprehend the alleged suspects by other means." It should also, however, have noted that the police force now numbers anywhere from 70,000 to 100,000, with a projected budget for 1995 of only about 30% smaller than that of the military — a level of resources that makes particularly inexcusable its failure to apprehend by non-lethal means those suspected of threatening the security of the state.
The FRY authorities have done nothing to enact an amnesty law for those who boycotted the war by leaving the country. This category of people, constituting a considerable proportion of the roughly half-million post-1990 emigrants, remains in legal limbo. Most are young, educated and, of course, dissatisfied with the policies of the Milosevic-controlled government. The report recognizes neither this issue nor the problem which the so-called "false asylum seekers," most of whom are reportedly of Albanian ethnicity, face if Western European states proceed with their deportation. The FRY authorities hold that they will not issue new passports to "false asylum seekers," thus hindering their entry into the FRY. This is not only contrary to international norms but also to the FRY Constitution, which guarantees entry to the country for all of its citizens.
221
CRITIQUE 1994
In conclusion, tlie 1994 State Department report is generally well prepared, although the rigid format that it is obliged to follow inevitably prevents it from treating the issues at hand in a comprehensive and analytical fashion. The report's fragmented format leaves it ill-equipped to deal with the complex phenomenon of state-sponsored ethno-nationalism, which lies at the heart of most of the human rights violations committed in the FRY. This ethnonationalism is disseminated in a variety of ways and takes root in ideological and sociopolitical soil that the Milosevic government has prepared with care. It has produced extrajudicial killings, political inertia, tolerance of criminal behavior toward ethnic and political opponents, and the repeated election of a "savior" in multiparty elections. These changing conditions, and the introduction of new and subtler forms of human rights abuse, will oblige future Country Reports on Serbia to adapt accordingly
222
