 SERBIA-MONTENEGRO
 Serbia-Montenegro, a constitutional republic, is dominated by Slobodan Milosevic
 who, after two terms as President of Serbia, became Federal President in July.
 President Milosevic continues to control the country through his role as President
 of the Socialist Party of Serbia (SPS)-a dual role arrangement proscribed by the
 federal Constitution-and his domination of other formal and informal institutions.
 Although the SPS lacks majorities in both the Federal and Serbian Parliaments it
 controls governing coalitions and holds the key administrative positions. Serbia
 abolished the political autonomy of Kosovo and Vojvodina in 1990, and all signifi-
 cant decisionmaking since that time has been centralized under Milosevic in Bel-
 grade. The Milosevic regime effectively controls the judiciary and has used this
 power to manipulate the election process, most notably to reverse opposition vic-
 tories in Serbian municipal elections over the winter of 1996-97-an effort that the
 regime abandoned in February after sustained domestic and international pressure.
 During 1997 the international community continued to work intensively with the
 Miosevic regime to implement the Dayton Accords, a step-by-step process designed
 to end the war in Bosnia and secure the peace. United Nations (U.N.) sanctions
 agalnst the "Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY) were formally lifted in 1996. The
 FRY is still not permitted to participate in the United Nations (U.N.), the Organiza-
 tion for Security and Cooperation in Europe, or other international organizations
 and financial organizations. The United States and the international community do
 not recognize Serbia-Montenegro as the successor state to the former Yugoslavia.
 As a key element of his hold on power, President Milosevic effectively controls the
 Serbian police, a heavily armed force of over 100,000 that is responsible for internal
 security. After his move to the Federal presidency, Milosevic precipitated a crisis
 when he tried to wrest control of the Montenegrin police from Montenegrin Prime
 Minister Milo Djukanovic. Serbian police committed extensive and systematic
 human rights abuses.
 Despite the suspension of U.N. sanctions, economic performance has been anemic.
 Unemployment and underemployment remained high as the Government was un-
 able or unwilling to introduce necessary restructuring measures. The Government
 has not implemented sweeping economic reforms, including privatization, which
 could undermine the regime s crony system. Largely as a result of the central bank's
 tight monetary policy and the partial selloff of the state telecommunications entity,
 inflationary pressures were kept relatively in check.
 The Government's human rights record continued to be poor. The police commit-
 ted numerous, serious abuses including extrajudicial killings, torture, brutal beat-
 ings, and arbitrary arrests. Police repression continued to be directed against ethnic
 minorities, and police committed the most widespread and worst abuses against
 Kosovo's 90- rcent ethnic Albanian population. Police repression was also directed
 against the Muslims of Sandzak and detainees and citizens who protested against
 the Government. While under the Constitution citizens have a right to stage peace-
 ful demonstrations, the police seriously beat scores of protesters throughout the
 country, sending many to hospitals. The Government used its continued domination
 of Parliament and the media to enact legislation to manipulate the electoral process.
 In practice citizens cannot exercise the right to change their government. The judi-
 cial system is not independent of the Government and does not ensure fair trials.
 The authorities infringe on citizens' right to privacy. The Government used police
 and economic pressure against the independent press and media and restricted free-
 dom of assembly and association. The Government infringed on freedom to worship
 by minority religions and on freedom of movement. The Government continues to
 hinder international and local human rights groups and reject their findings. Dis-
 crimination and violence against women remained serious problems. Discrimination
 against ethnic Albanian, Muslim, and Romani minorities continues. The regime lim-
 its unions not affiliated with the Government in their attempts to advance worker
 rights.
 Montenegro was the only relatively bright spot, although Milosevic's influence
 threatens to complicate the republic's as yet unproven efforts at democratization. In
 July Montenegro s increasingly reformist Prime Minister, Milo Diukanovic, success-
 fully fought off an attempt by Milosevic to change the Federal Constitution and
 boost the powers of the Federal presidency. Djukanovic appears to be resisting at-
 
 
 1272
 tempts by Milosevic to consolidate Montenegro's security apparatus-with its rel-
 atively clean human rights record since 1995-under the Belgrade regime. The re-
 sults of the October presidential election, in which Mlo D'ukanovic defeated the in-
 cumbent, Momir Bulatovic, were questioned by the central authorities despite being
 endorsed as free and fair by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Eu-
 rope OSCE).
 Auls a signatory of the Dayton Accords, Serbia-Montenegro is-obliged to cooperate
 fully with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia by turning
 over to the Tribunal the five persons on its territory who were indicted for war
 crimes. The Government has so far been uncooperative. According to credible -re-
 ports, some of those indicted live in Serbia, and others freely travel in and out of
 Serbia. Over the summer, suspected war criminal Ratko Mladic vacationed in
 Montenegro and earlier, according to press reports, attended his son's well-pub-
 licized wedding ceremony in Belgrade.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Political violence, including killings
 by police, resulted mostly from efforts by Serbian authorities to suppress and intimi-
 date ethnic minority groups. Xhafer Hajdari of Mitrovica died in January, appar-
 ently from injuries sustained during police torture several weeks earlier. The victim
 had committed no crime, but police alleged that his son had killed a Serbian hunter
 in 1992.
 On June 20, along the FRY border with the7Republika Srpska at Priboj, the police
 killed one Muslim Bosniak and seriously mistreated another. Serbian security forces
 shot and killed several ethnic Albanians, identified by police as terrorists, including
 Adrian Krasniqi, a 21-year-old ethnic Albanian shot and killed by Serbian police on
 October 14.
 At least two ethnic Albanians died while in jail awaiting trials. On February 23,
 Serbian police revealed that Besnik Restelica, an engineer from Podujevo, was killed
 while in police custody. Police claim that Restelica committed suicide, but according
 to reports of the Council forthe Defense of Human Rights and Freedoms, a monitor-
 ing organization based in Pristina, Kosovo, he had bruises on his legs, hands, and
 fingers and showed signs of having been strangled. He was abducted by police in
 late January. On October 17, another ethnic Albanian, Junus Zeneli, died while in
 police custody in Belgrade under suspicious circumstances. In both cases, legal re-
 quirements that family and legal counsel of the detainee -contacted immediately
 were ignored.
 Several violent clashes in Kosovo in late November between the police and
 Kosovar ethnic Albanians apparently resulted in fatalities on both sides.
 Crimes against citizens of ethnic minority group appear to have been rarely in-
 vestigated, nor were polie generally held afor their excesses.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 An ethnic Albanian, Nait Hasani, of Pristina was seized by police on January 28,
 brutally beaten, and then disappeared for 32 days before police acknowledged that
 he was in their custody and charged him with terrorist-related activities.
 The trial of Dsan Ranisavljevic began in April; he is an admitted participant in
 the 1993 Strpi incident, in which 19 Muslims and 1 Croat were taken off a train
 as it passed through Bosnian territory and disappeared (see Section 4). The fate of
 the men remains a mystery, and the Government is clearly reluctant to investigate
 fully the incident, as well as other disappearances. The trial started in April but
 was interrupted for procedural reasons when Montenegrin authorities sought to
 move the venue to a Serbian court in Jagodina, the defendant's hometown.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Torture and other cruel forms of punishment, which are prohibited by law, continue
 to be a problem, particularly in Kosovo directed against ethnic Albanians. Police
 routinely beat people severely when holding them in detention. There were several
 police roundups in Kosovo during the early part of the year of ethnic Albanians
 charged with supporting a separatist agenda and terrorist-related activities. Police
 beat and tortured many of over 60 male and female suspects held in custody. It is
 during the 3 to 4 day period of incommunicado detention allowed by law that the
 worst police brutality takes place. These excesses are now primarily concentrated
 in Kosovo, and to a lesser extent in Sandzak. Serbian police inflicted some abuse
 on prodemocracy demonstrators early in the year and again in the fall (see Section
 2.b.).
 Ethnic Albanians continue to suffer at the hands of security forces conducting
 searches for weapons and explosives. The police, without following proper legal pro-
 
 
 1273
 cedures, frequently extract "confessions" during interrogations that routinely include
 the beating of suspects' feet, hands, genital areas, and sometimes heads. The police
 use their fists nightsticks, and occasionally electric shocks. Apparently confident
 that there would be no reprisals, and, in an attempt to intimidate the wider commu-
 nity, police often beat persons in front of their families. According to various
 sources, ethnic Albanians are frequently too terrified to ask police to follow proper
 legal procedures-such as having the police provide written notification of witness
 interrogation.
 According to Human Rights Watch, police beat at least 24 journalists during
 prodemocracy demonstrations over the winter of 1996-97 in Belgrade alone. Human
 Rights Wa     ited an incident in which police using truncheons brutally beat the
 head of a 21-year-old student journalist, Rastko Kostic. The police stopped only
 when another passerby became involved, and they started beating him. In February
 the Humanitarian Law Center filed criminal charges on behalf of 21 journalists who
 had been beaten, but no action had been taken by the state prosecutor by year's
 end.
 Police also used threats and violence against family members of suspects and
 have held them as hostages. According to Albanian and foreign observers, the worst
 abuses against ethnic Albanians took place not in big towns but in rural enclaves.
 Continuing a longstanding practice, the military conducted exercises using live am-
 munition next to an inhabited village in Sandzak during the summer on the Pester
 pwlain. No one was killed, but the practice showed insensitivity and served to intimi-
 date the local Muslim population and encourage residents to leave.
 Prison conditions meet minimum international standards. There were no con-
 fIrmed reports of the abuse of prisoners, once they were sentenced and serving time.
 The Government generally permits prison visits by human rights monitors. An
 imporant exception was the case of the ethnic Albanians arrestedin a police sweep
 over the winter. The International Committee for the Red Cross was, except for one
 visit, denied access t the prisoners prior to the beginning of their trials in May.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Polie use of arbitrary arrest and deten-
 tion was concentrated primarily in Kosovo and, to a lesser degree, in Sandzak. Po-
 lice often aply certain laws only against ethnic minorities, using force with relative
 impunity. During Belgrade student protests in late September and early October,
 police arbitrarily arrested dozens of citizens, including some who were not even par-
 ticipating in the protests. Police also beat several journalists, photographers, and
 television camera people. Laws regarding conspiracy, threats to the integrity of the
 government, and state secrets are so vague as to allow easy abuse by the regime.
 Federal statutes permit police to detain criminal suspects without a warrant and
 hold them incommunicado for up to 3 days without charging them or granting them
 access to an attorney. Serbian law separately provides for a 24-hour detention pe-
 riod. Police often combine the two for a total 4-day detention period. After this pe-
 riod police must turn a suspect over to an investigative judge, who may order a
 30-day extension and, under certain legal procedures, subsequent extensions of in-
 vestigative detention up to 6 months. In Kosovo police often beat people without
 ever officially charging them and routinely hold suspects well beyond the 3-day stat-
 utry period. However, observers report that the problem is not as pronounced in
 the rest of Serbia-Montenegro as in the past.
 Defense lawyers and human rights workers complained of excessive delays in fil-
 ing formal charges and opening investigations. The ability of defense attorneys to
 challenge the legal basis of their clients detention often was further hampered by
 difficulties in gaining access to detainees or acquiring copies of official indictments
 and decisions to remand defendants into custody. In some cases, judges prevented
 defense attorneys from reading the court file. The investigative judges often dele-
 gated responsibility to the police or state security service and rarely questioned
 their accounts of the investigation even when it was obvious that confessions were
 coerced. According to human rights observers, many of these problems were in evi-
 dence with respect to the ethnic Albanians arrested over the winter and convicted
 in the late spring in Pristina.
 In a country where many if not most of the adult males in the Serbian population
 are armed, the police, according to some members of minorities, selectively enforced
 the laws regulating the possession and registration of firearms so as to harass and
 intimidate ethnic minorities, particularly Albanian Kosovars and Bosniak Muslims.
 The most frequent justification given for searches of homes and arrests was illegal
 possession of weapons. Observers allege that in Kosovo the police are known to use
 the pretext of searching for weapons when in fact they are also searching for hard
 currency. Local police authorities more easily approve the registration of legal weap-
 ons for Kosovo Serbs and frequently turn a blind eye to Serbs' possession of illegal
 weapons.
 
 
 1274
 
 Exile is not legally permitted, and no instances of its use are known to have oc-
 curred. However, the practical effect of police repression in Kosovo and Sandzak has
 been to accentuate political instability, which in turn has limited economic oppor-
 tunity. As a result, many ethnic Albanians and Bosniak Muslims go abroad to es-
 cape persecution, although only in a few cases could direct links to police actions
 be identified.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, but in practice the courts are largely controlled by the Government and rarely
 challenge the will of the state security apparatus. While judges are elected for fixed
 terms, they may be subjected to governmental pressure. The authorities frequently
 deny fair public trial to non-Serbs and to persons they believe oppose the regime.
 The fraud that followed the November 1996 municipal elections was perpetrated
 mainly through the regime's misuse of the judicial system.
 The court system comprises local, district, and supreme courts at the republic
 level, as well as a Federal Court and Federal Constitutional Court to which republic
 supreme court decisions, depending on the subject, may be appealed. There is also
 a military court system. According to the Federal Constitution, the Federal Con-
 stitutional Court rules on the constitutionality of laws and regulations, relying on
 repblic authorities to enforce its rulings.
 e Federal Criminal Code of the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
 still remains in force. Considerable confusion and room for abuse remain in the legal
 system because the 1990 Constitution of Serbia has not yet been brought into con-
 formity with the 1992 Constitution of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Under
 Federal law, defendants have the right to be present at their trial and to have an
 attorney, at public expense if needed. The courts must also provide interpreters. The
 presiding judge decides what is read into the record of the proceedings. Either the
 defendant or the prosecutor may appeal the verdict.
 Although generally respected in form, defense lawyers in Kosovo and Sandzak
 have filed numerous complaints about flagrant breaches of standard procedure
 which they believed undermined their clients' rights. Even when individual judges
 have admitted that the lawyers are correct, courts have ignored or dismissed the
 complaints.
 The Government continues to pursue cases brought previously against targeted
 minority groups under the Yugoslav Criminal Code for jeopardizing the territorial
 integrity of the country and for conspiring or forming a group with intent to commit
 subversive activities--that is, undermining the "constitutional order."
 Three questionable trials took place in Pristina over the summer and fall involv-
 ing 60 ethnic Albanians. In the first trial, 20 individuals, including one woman,
 were charged mainly with preparing to conspire to participate in activities endan-
 gering the territorial integrity of the FRY. The evidence was inadequate and the de-
 fendants were largely denied timely access to their attorneys. U.N. Special
 Rapporteur Rehn noted that several defendants met their defense attorneys for the
 first time only after the investigative judge had already concluded the crucial stage
 of investigation, while other defendants had defense counsel assigned after they en-
 tered the courtroom.
 Much evidence appeared to have been obtained by authorities through forced con-
 fessions of defendants under duress. Other evidence was kept from defense attor-
 neys until right before the trial. Similar problems prevailed during the second and
 third trials, in which suspects were either accused of fornuing a terrorist organiza-
 tion with the aim of endangering the constitutional order or of killing police officers.
 A total of 52 defendants received prison sentences of up to 20 years.
 Another aspect of the FRY's ineffective judicial system is the impunity that exists
 for certain criminal behavior. For example, the bodyguard for Vojislav Seselj, the
 Serbian radical party leader and candid ate for Serbian president, beat up a re-
 spected human rights lawyer, Nikola Barovic, after a television interview debate in
 which Seselj and Barovic disagreed vehemently. Barovic received serious injuries to
 the face, which Seselj dismissed glibly as being the result of the human rights law-
 yer having "slipped on a banana peel. The courts ignored the case for several weeks
 until after Serbian elections. When the case did go to trial, the judge accepted a ba-
 nana peel into evidence. The case was suspended. In a case that demonstrated rel-
 ative impunity, on October 13 the first municipal court of Belgrade found Zivko
 Sandic guilty only of criminal negligence for pulling out a gun and shooting a
 prodemocracy demonstrator in the head during a December 1996 protest. Sandic
 was sentenced to only 2 years in prison, close to the legal minimum. In one case
 with a rare just ending, Zlatibor Jovanovic, an ethnic Serb from Kosovo, was sen-
 tenced to 11 years in prison for murdering an ethnic Albanian student in 1996.
 The Government continues to hold some ethnic Albanians as political prisoners.
 
 
 1275
 
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondenc-Federal
 law gives republic ministries of the interior sole control over the decision to monitor
 potential criminal activities, a power that is routinely abused. It is widely believed
 that authorities monitor opposition and dissident activity, eavesdrop on conversa-
 tions, read mail, and wiretap telephones. Although illegal under provisions of Fed-
 eral and Serbian law, the Federal post office registers all mail from abroad, osten-
 sibly to protect mail carriers from charges of theft.
 Although the law includes restrictions on searches, officials often ignored them.
 In Kosovo and Sandzak, police have systematically subjected ethnic Albanians and
 Bosniak Muslims to random searches of their homes, vehicles, shops, and offices, as-
 serting that they were searching for weapons. According to the Council for the De-
 fense of Human Rights and Freedoms, the police carried out scores of raids on
 homes. Police also used threats and violence against family members of suspects
 and have held them as hostages (see Section 1.c.).
 Ultranationalist local officials in Zemun encouraged the illegal eviction of ethnic
 Croats from their apartments, after which they were replaced-by ethnic Serb refu-
 gees (see Section 5).
 The Government's law requiring universal military service is enforced only spo-
 radically. It was not vigorously enforced in 1997. The informal practice of the mili-
 tary has been not to call up ethnic Albanians. Of approximately 100,000 draft evad-
 ers living abroad to avoid punishment, 40 percent were estimated to be ethnic Alba-
 nian. This number in part reflects the large number of conscription-age men in the
 FRY's Albanian community. The climate appears to be moderating, due to the ces-
 sation of hostilities in Bosnia. Nevertheless, leaders of Kosovo s Albanian and
 Sandzak's Muslim communities have maintained that forced compliance of these
 ethnic groups with universal military service was an attempt to induce young men
 to flee the country. According to an amnesty bill passed in 1996, young men for
 whom criminal prosecution for draft evasion had already started were granted am-
 nesty.
 In a related development, under a 1996 agreement with Germany, ethnic Alba-
 nian refugees repatriated to the FRY were not supposed to be prosecuted for fleeing
 the draft. According to the Humanitarian Law Center (HLC), however, many re-
 turning ethnic Albanians have faced irregular procedures on returning to the FRY.
 The HLC reported many violations by authorities against returned asylum seekers,
 including physical abuse, threats of imprisonment, deportation, confiscation of ID
 cards, and obliging persons to report to their local police stations on a daily basis.
 Returning ethmc Albanians and Sandzak Muslims are routinely detained on their
 arrival at local airports. In many cases FRY officials have refused to issue proper
 travel documents to children born to asylum seekers.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and the Press.-Federal law provides for freedom of speech
 and of the press, but in practice the Government strongly influences much of the
 media. In July several weeks before the Serbian elections, the Milosevic regime tem-
 I   losed scores of private radio and television stations throughout Serbia. The
 RYMnistry of Transport and Telecommunications, which controls broadcast fre-
 quencies, worked in concert with the criminal and financial police to pressure inde-
 pendent media outlets that had not been able to regularize their legal status. Many
 broadcaster applied for frequencies but were left in a state of limbo by the regime.
 Serbia's broadcast laws remain murky, and licenses are not issued in any fashion
 that can remotely be described as transparent.
 While the regime harassed the independent media, an HLC study showed that the
 Government violated the agreement on the presentation of political parties, signed
 before the election season. During the campaign season in August, state-controlled
 Radio and Television Serbia (RTS) openly campaigned for Milosevic's ruling coali-
 tion. According to HLC monitoring, all the other political parties received only one-
 quarter of the broadcast time allocated for political parties, while the RTS regularly
 opened the evening news broadcasts with campaign promotion pieces for the regime.
 The regime lost one of its most important media outlets when it was forced to re-
 verse the theft of the Belgrade municipal elections in February and consent to the
 naming of Democratic Party Leader Zoran Djindic as the city's mayor. Control of
 Belgrade's Studio B radio went from the regime to the opposition, and the manage-
 ment immediately started broadcasting generally balanced news programming. The
 regime, however, reversed the setback when the Zajedno coalition of the political op-
 position fell apart. Studio B's independent management was dismissed a week after
 the first round of Serbian elections on September 21, and the news board's commit-
 ment to journalistic independence is suspect at best. In effect, Studio B is now under
 SPO censorship.
 
 
 1276
 
 The most striking example of media bias came in reaction to the mass demonstra-
 tions from November 1996 to February 1997 that followed widespread government
 theft of the municipal elections. The government-controlled media downplayed the
 size of crowds, sometimes ignoring demonstrations altogether-despite numbers of
 demonstrators in the tens of thousands. When state-run television did cover dem-
 onstrations, it was in an effort to label protesters as "hooligans" and "traitors" deter-
 mined to destroy Serbia.
 The same media tack was used when ethnic Albanian students staged a peaceful
 protest march in Pristina on October 1 only to be accused by the state-controlled
 media of instigating violence in a clash that saw police move in with truncheons,
 tear gas, and water cannons. The state-controlled media, moreover, took advantage
 of the protests to accuse the Belgrade opposition of being in league with "Albanian
 separatists."
 Economic pressure was the usual weapon of the regime against the free press. For
 example state-owned enterprises were dissuaded from advertising in independent
 media. dne of Serbia's leading opposition papers, Nasa Borba, had its bank accounts
 blocked by the regime. Although no longer the persistent problem it was during the
 period of sanctions, the availability of newsprint continued to pose difficulties, espe-
 cially for the independent media. Also, while the state-controlled press obtained
 newsprint at subsidized prices, independent publications paid substantially higher
 market prices.
 Academic freedom exists in a limited fashion. Many leading academicians are ac-
 tive members of the political opposition and human rights groups, and the espousal
 of antiregime positions would likely limit their advancement. At the prestigious Uni-
 versity of Belgrade, half the membership of the governing council that controls the
 university is appointed by the regime and half by the various faculties.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Federal and republic-level
 Constitutions provide for freedom of peaceful assembly and association; however,
 the Government restricted this right. IDuring the early part of 1997, citizens were
 prevented from staging protest marches on numerous occasions before the regime
 finally restored the opposition's victories in several Serbian municipalities. In
 Kosovo the regime cracked down on peaceful demonstrators during their October 1
 and late December protests, when police used tear gas and clubs, injuring several
 passersby. The regime cited the student protesters' unwillingness to apply for a per-
 mit from Serbian authorities. In Sandzak the Milosevic regime banned all outdoor
 rallies, even for election cam paigning.
 The federal and republic level Constitutions provide for freedom of association,
 but the Government restricted this right. Prior to the Serbian elections in the fall,
 officials blocked the coalition Sandzak-Dr. Rasim Ljajic from forming an alliance
 with the Kosovo-based Democratic Reform Party of Muslims, a move that protected
 regime candidates from extra competition.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-There is no state religion, but the Government gives pref-
 erential treatment, including access to state-run television for major religious
 events, to the Serbian Orthodox Church to which the majority of Serbs belong. The
 regime has subjected religious communities in Kosovo to harassment. For example,
 a Roman Catholic parish in Klina has the money, property, and permission (includ-
 ing up to the Supreme Court of Serbia) to build a church for its 6,000 member par-
 ish. However, the local chapter of Milosevic's Socialist Party of Serbia has continued
 to block construction. Other Catholic and Muslim communities in the province had
 similar experiences.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for freedom of movement, and the Govern-
 ment makes passports available to most citizens. However, many inhabitants of Ser-
 bia-Montenegro who were born in other parts of the former Yugoslavia, as well as
 large numbers of refugees, have not been able to establish their citizenship in the
 FRY, leaving them insa stateless limbo.
 According to a report by the Humanitarian Law Center, authorities on several dif-
 ferent occasions barred FRY citizens from reentering the country. The regime also
 continues to restrict the right of Albanian Kosovars and Sandzak Muslims to travel
 by holding up issuance or renewal of passports for an unusually long period of time
 and has reserved the option of prosecuting individuals charged previously with vio-
 lating exit visa requirements.
 FRY citizens reported difficulties at borders and occasional confiscation of their
 passports. Ethnic Albanians, Sandzak Muslims, and Vojvodina Croats frequently
 complained of harassment at border crossings. There were numerous reports that
 border guards confiscated foreign currency or passports from travelers as well as oc-
 csion al complaints of physical mistreatment. The authorities generally allowed po-
 litical opposition leaders to leave the country and return.
 
 
 1277
 
 The Government has been very slow to issue passports to refugees. Albanian
 Kosovars also have problems with the issuance and renewal of passports and are
 sometimes called in for interrogation by state security officers before passports are
 issued. In January a new citizenship law entered into force, which, when fully im-
 plemented, is expected to affect adversely the rights of many inhabitants, including
 those born in other parts of the former Yugoslavia, refugees, and citizens who haa
 migrated to other countries to work or seek asylum. The U.N. Special Rapporteur
 for the former Yugoslavia noted that the new law would give the Ministry of Inte-
 rior almost complete control over the granting of citizenship. The Government
 served notice that it plans to limit severely the granting of citizenship to refugees
 from the conflicts in Bosnia and Croatia. The Government also plans to revise the
 eligibility status of a large number of people- refugees who have been granted citi-
 zenship since 1992 may stand to lose their iRY citizenship if they have acquired
 the citizenship of an ex-Yugoslav republic.
 Observers in the Sandzak region also note that Muslim residents who were forced
 to flee to Bosnia from Sandzak in 1992 and 1993 may not be permitted to return
 to Serbia, particularly if they have obtained Bosnian passports in the interim. In
 violation of the Dayton Accords, Bosniak Muslims and Muslims from Sandzak fre-
 quently have been harassed on attempting to reenter Serbia after visits to Sarajevo
 or the federation.
 Government policy toward refugee and asylum seekers continued to be uneven.
 Refugees, mostly ethnic Serbs who fled Bosnia and Croatia, are often treated as citi-
 zens of Serbia-Montenegro for labor and military purposes but are denied other
 rights such as employment and travel (see Section 1.f.). Refugees were not allowed
 to vote in the 1997 elections in Serbia, although they did vote in some previous elec-
 tions. The Government has cooperated with the U.N. High Commissioner for Refu-
 gees to provide help for the more than 500,000 refugees in Serbia-Montenegro.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The three constitutions-Federal, Serbian, and Montenegrin Republic-provide for
 this right, but in practice citizens are prevented from exercising it by the Govern-
 ment's domination of the mass media and manipulation of the electoral process.
 Only Montenegro's electoral system has shown marked improvement, with the Gov-
 ernment of Prime Minister Djukanovic holding a roundtable with the political oppo-
 sition including ethnic minorities, in September and welcoming observers from the
 OSCd well ahead of Milosevic's grudging invitation to outside monitors shortly be-
 fore Serbian presidential and parliaentary elections in September.
 Serbian elections were seriously flawed. In July the regime repeated its machina-
 tions before 1996 Federal elections and gerrymandered electoral districts to smooth
 the way for candidates in the ruling coalition, expanding the number of districts in
 Serbia from 9 to 29. Most opposition politicians charged that changes in the election
 law implemented since the last election, including the redrawing of districts, were
 designed specifically to favor the ruling party. The redistricting was one factor that
 compelled a number of opposition parties to boycott the elections.
 Slobodan Milosevic dominates the country's political system and is attempting to
 reconsolidate institutional power at the Federa level as a result of his move to the
 Federal presidency. This precipitated a clash with authorities in Montenegro who
 are intent on protecting that republic's autonomy. Manipulating power wi hin the
 federation based on the comparative size of the Serbian and Montenegrin popu-
 lations and economies, Milosevic has been able to circumscribe the Montenegrin
 Government's capacity for independent action. As a result of Serbia's political crisis
 during the winter of 1996-97, Montenegro's then Prime Minister, Milo Djukanovic,
 began to take a steadily more assertive, reformist course. His victory in October
 p residential elections over incumbent Montenegrin president and Milosevic crony,
 Momir Bulatovic, threatened Milosevic's complete control over institutions of power
 and prompted a standoff as the internationally endorsed results were not validated.
 No legal restrictions exist on women's participation in government and politics,
 and women are active in political organizations. However, they are greatly under-
 represented in party and government offices, holding less than 10 percent of min-
 isterial-level positions in the Serbian and Federal governments. An exception is the
 controversial Mira Marovic, wife of Serbian President Milosevic. She is the leading
 force in the neo-Communist United Yugoslav Left Party, through which she exerts
 considerable influence on policymakers.
 No legal restrictions affect the role of minorities in government and politics, but
 ethnic Serbs and Montenegrins dominate the country's political leadership. Few
 members o other ethnic groups play any role at the top levels of government or the
 state-run economy. Ethnic Albanians in Serbia's Kosovo province have refused to
 
 
 1278
 take part in the electoral process, including Serbian elections in the fall. They have
 virtually no representation.
 Ethnic Albanians' refusal to participate in FRY Federal and Serbian elections has
 the practical effect of increasing the political influence of President Milosevic and
 his supporters. Ultranationalist parties, which in the past were occasional Milosevic
 allies, have also taken advantage of the ethnic Albanian boycott to garner represen-
 tation beyond their numbers. Ethnic Albanians in Montenegro do participate in the
 political process, and several towns in Montenegro have Albanian mayors.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Governments of Serbia and Montenegro formally maintain that they have no
 objection to international organizations conducting human rights investigations on
 their territories. It was the report of the OSCE on the fraud that characterized the
 municipal elections that the regime cited in reversing the results and ultimately rec-
 ognizing the final results in February, some 3 months after the vote. The Serbian
 regime sporadically hindered activities and regularly rejected the findings of human
 rights groups. The Montenegrin Government's record toward outside investigations
 was much better, with the Prime Minister taking the initiative to invite OSCE ob-
 servers well in advance of the October presidential election in the Republic.
 A number of independent human rights organizations exist in Serbia-Montenegro,
 researching and gathering information on abuses, and publicizing such cases. The
 Belgrade-based Humanitarian Law Center and Center for Antiwar Action re-
 searches human rights abuses throughout Serbia-Montenegro and, on occasion, else-
 where in the former Yugoslavia. The Belgrade-based Helsinki Committee publishes
 studies on human rights issues and cooperates with the Pristina-based Helsinki
 Committee in monitoring human rights abuses in Kosovo. In Kosovo the Council for
 the Defense of Human Rights and Freedoms collects and collates data on human
 rights abuses and publishes newsletters. In the Sandzak region, two similar commit-
 tees monitor abuses against the local Muslim population and produce comprehen-
 sive reports. Most of these organizations offer advice and help to victims of abuse.
 Local human rights monitors (Serbs as well as members of ethnic minorities) and
 nongovernmental organizations (NGO's) worked under difficult circumstances. Seiko
 Alomerovic, chairman of the Helsinki Committee for Human Rights in Sandzak, was
 formally charged with libel by former FRY President Dobrica Cosic and his advisor
 Vladimi Matovic. Alomerovic had publicly accused Cosic and Matovic of direct com-
 plicity in the 1993 Strpci incident, in which some 20 men, including 19 Muslims,
 disappeared (see Section 1.f.). Alomerovic believes that the Government, and Cosic,
 were responsible for their disappearance. The case continued at year's end.
 Overall, however, most observers say that the situation improved in 1997, with
 slightly less overt obstruction by the Government of human rights NGO's. One prob-
 lem continues to be government foot-dragging in issuing visas to people coming to
 Yugoslavia on human rights matters. After past problems obtaining a visa, the U.N.
 Special Rapporteur for the former Yugoslavia visited Serbia-Montenegro, including
 Pristina, twice in 1997. During the year, the International Committee of the Red
 Cross was allowed to conduct prison visits in Kosovo, but its work was seriously ob-
 structed with respect to visiting the ethnic Albanians charged with terrorist-related
 activities who went on trial beginning in the spring.
 However, the authorities also refused numerous approaches by OSCE representa-
 tives to allow the reintroduction of the OSCE long-duration missions into Kosovo,
 Vojvodina, and Sandzak, maintaining that the FRY must first be "reinstated" in the
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 While Federal and republic laws provide for equal rights for all citizens, regard-
 less of ethnic group, religion, language, or social status, and prohibit discrimination
 against women, in reality the legal systemprovides little protection to such groups.
 Women.-The traditionally high level of domestic violence persisted. The few offi-
 cial agencies dedicated to coping with family violence have inadequate resources and
 are limited in their options by social pressure to keep families together at all costs.
 Few victims of spousal abuse ever file complaints with authorities. The Center for
 Autonomous Women's Rights offers a rape crisis and spousal abuse hot line, as well
 as sponsoring a number of self-help groups. The Center also offered help to refugee
 women, many of whom experienced extreme abuse or rape during the conflict in the
 former Yugoslavia.
 Women do not enjoy status equal to men in the FRY, and relatively few women
 obtain upper level management positions in commerce.
 
 
 1279
 Traditional patriarchal ideas of gender roles, which hold that women should be
 subservient to the male members of their family, have long subjected women to dis-
 crimination. In some rural areas, particularly among minority communities, women
 are little more than serfs without the ability to exercise their right to control prop-
 erty and children. Women in the FRY, however, legally are entitled to egual pay
 for equal work and are granted maternity leave for 1 year, with an additional 6
 months available. Women are active in political and human rights organizations.
 Women's rights groups continue to operate with little or no official acknowledgment.
 Children.-The state attempts to meet the health and educational needs of chil-
 dren. The educational system provides 8 years of mandatory schooling.
 The current division of Kosovo into parallel administrative systems has resulted
 in Serb and Albanian Kosovar elementary age children being taught in separate
 areas of divided schools, or attending classes in shifts. Older Albanian Kosovar chil-
 dren attend school inprivate homes. The quality of the education is thus uneven,
 and the tension and division of society in general has been replicated to the det-
 riment of the children.
 An agreement negotiated under the auspices of the Rome-based Sant-Egidio com-
 munity and signed in 1996 by President Miosevic and Dr. Ibrahim Rugova, the
 leader of the Democratic League of Kosovo, seeks to resolve the division of the edu-
 cational system and lend impetus to efforts to normalize the situation within
 Kosovo. No progress was apparent on implementation of the accord over a year
 later, however, prompting a student protest movement in Kosovo (see Section 2.b.).
 Intransigence in implementing the agreement was detected on both sides.
 Economic distress, due primarily to the Government's total mismanagement, has
 spilled over into the health care system, adversely affecting children. In Kosovo the
 health situation for children remained particularly poor. Humanitarian aid officials
 blamed the high rate of infant and childhood mortality, as well as increasing
 epidemics of preventable diseases, primarily on poverty that led to malnutrition and
 poor hygiene and to the deterioration of public sanitation. Ethnic minorities in some
 cases fear Serb state-run medical facilities, which results in a low rate of immuniza-
 tion and a reluctance to seek timely medical attention. Significant cooperation be-
 tween Serbian medical authorities and ethnic Albanian-run clinics in Kosovo on a
 polio vaccination campaign represented a hopeful development. A similar drive took
 place in Sandzak for Muslim children.
 There is no societal pattern of abuse against children.
 People With Disabilities.-Facilities fr people with disabilities are inadequate,
 but the Government has made some effort to address the problem. The law prohibits
 discrimination against persons with disabilities in employment, education, or in'the
 provision of other state services. The law mandates access to new official buildings,
 and the Government enforces these provisions in practice.
 Religious Minorities.-Religion and ethnicity are so closely intertwined as to be
 inseparable. Serious discrimination against, and harassment of, religious minorities
 continued, especially in the Kosovo and Sandzak regions. Violence against the
 Catholic minority in Vojvodina, largely made up of ethnic Hungarians and Croats,
 has also been reported.
 National /Racal/Ethnic Minorities.-There were credible reports that Muslims
 and ethnic Albanians continued to be driven from their homes or fired from their
 obs on the basis of religion or ethnicity. Other ethnic minorities, including ethnic
 Hungrans in Vojvodina, also allege discrimination. In Zemun the Belgrade Hel-
 sinki Committee office identified at least tee instances where the city government,
 under ultranationalist mayor Vojislav Seseli, encouraged the illegal eviction of eth-
 nic Croats from their apartments, after which they were replacedby ethnic Serb ref-
 ugees.
 The Romani population is generally tolerated, and there is no official discrimina-
 tion. Roma have the right to vote, and there are two small Romani parties. How-
 ever, prejudice against Roma is widespread. Skinheads murdered a Roma boy in
 Belgrade in October. Local authorities often ignore or condone societal intimidation
 of the Roma community.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-All workers except military and police personnel
 have the legal right to join or form unions. Unions are either official (government
 affiliated) or independent. The total labor force is approximately 2.3 million. The
 Government-controlled Alliance of Independent Labor Unions (Samostalnost) claims
 1.8 million members but probably numbers closer to 1 million. The largest independ-
 ent union is the United Branch Independent Labor Unions (Nezavisnost), which
 numbers 157,000 members. Most other independent unions are sector-specific, for
 example, the Independent Union of Bank Employees (12,000 members). Due to the
 
 
 1280
 poor state of the economy, over one-half of union workers are on long-term manda-
 tory leave from their firms pending increases in production. The independent
 unions, while active in recruiting new members, have not yet reached the size need-
 ed to enable countrywide strikes that would force employers to provide concessions
 on workers' rights. The independent unions also claim that the Government has
 managed to prevent effective recruiting through a number of tactics, including pre-
 venting the busing of workers to strikes, threatening the job security of members,
 and failing to grant visas to foreign visitors supporting independent unions. Some
 foreign union organizers managed to secure visas during the year after long delays.
 The largely splintered approach of the independent unions left them little to show
 in terms of increased wages or improved working conditions. The Nezavisnost union
 gained new members as a result of its well-organized and tough bargaining posi-
 tions during strikes of teachers and health workers in the spring. The Samostalnost
 (official) union lost credibility with some of its members because it ultimately accom-
 modated the Government position on these strikes.
 The ability of unions to affiliate internationally remains constrained.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectioely.-While this right is provided
 for under law, collective bargaining remains at a rudimentary level of development.
 Individual unions tend to be very narrow and pragmatic in their aims, unable to
 join with unions in other sectors to bargain for common purposes. The history of
 trade unionism in the country has centered not on bargaining for the collective
 needs of all workers but rather for the specific needs of a given group of workers.
 Thus, coal workers, teachers, health workers, and electric power industry employees
 have been ineffective in finding common denominators (e.g., job security guarantees,
 minimum safety standards, universal workers' benefits, etc.) on which to negotiate.
 The overall result is a highly fragmented labor structure composed of workers who
 relate to the needs of their individual union but rarely to those of other workers.
 Additionally, job security fears, which stem from the high rate of unemployment,
 limited workers' militancy. The massive antigovernment demonstrations that fol-
 lowed the November 1996 elections appear to have helped embolden workers to
 stand up to the Government in strike situations.
 The Government is still seeking to develop free trade zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced labor, including that per-
 formed by children, is prohibited by law and is not known to occur.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The mini-
 mum age for employment is 16 years, although in villages and farming communities
 it is not unusual to find younger children at work assisting their families. With an
 actual unemployment rate (registered unemployed plus redundant workers who
 show up at the workplace but perform oniy minimal work) in excess of 60 percent,
 real employment opportunities for children are nonexistent. Forced and bonded
 labor by children is proibited by law and is not known to occur (see Section 6.c).
 Children can, however, be found in a variety of unofficial "retail" jobs, typically
 washing car windows or selling small items such as cigarettes.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Large government enterprises, including all
 the major banks, industrial, and trading companies generally observe minimum
 wage standards. The current monthly minimum wage i~s approximately $42 to $84
 (250 to 500 Din). This figure, however, is roughly comparable to unemployent en-
 efits and (at least theoretically) is paid to workers who have been placed in a man-
 datry leave status. The actual minimum wage is at the low enof the range of
 average net salaries, $92 to $108 (600 to 700 Din). The minimum wage is insuffi-
 cient to meet basic needs. The cost of food and utilities alone for a family of four
 is estimated to be $231 (1,500 Din) per month. Private enterprises use the minimum
 wages as a guide but tend to pay somewhat higher average wages.
 Reports of sweatshops operating in the country are rare, although some privately-
 owned textile factories operate in very poor conditions. The official workweek, listed
 as 40 hours, had little meaning in an economy with massive underemployment and
 unemployment. Neither employers nor employees tended to give high priority to en-
 forcement of established occupational safety and health regulations, focusing their
 efforts instead on economic survival. In light of the competitio n for employment, and
 the high de     of overnment control over the economy, workers are not free to
 leave hazardous work situations without risking loss of employment.
