Serbia and Montenegro
*he 1995 edition of tiie Critique observed tiiat: "As long as Slobodan Milosevic holds out the promise of cooperation in ending extra-territorial hostilities in Bosnia-Herzegovina, future [State Department] reports are unlikely to change [the] politicized approach" which had compromised the candor of the State Department's human rights reporting. Since the November 1996 elections, no one would seriously argue that Milosevic is holding out any such promise. Nevertheless, the 1996 report on Serbia-Montenegro maintains the same politicized approach as in previous years. The rigidity of the drafting instructions alone cannot explain the report's obfuscation of the overall human rights situation in Serbia-Montenegro, which it accomplishes by listing specific violations at length, instead of situating patterns of violations within a political and historical context. The reader risks missing the forest for all the trees. As in previous years, there is a lack of analysis of the broader political and social context, which would allow one to appreciate the nature of the regime dominated by Slobodan Milosevic.
Since last year, some terminology has been modified in such a way as to suggest a move toward recognizing the state of Serbia-Montenegro. Last year's report avoided using the term FRY, and when it did, the acronym was placed in quotation marks. Although the 1996 report begins with the statement that "[t]he United States and the international community do not recognize Serbia-Montenegro as the successor state to the former Yugoslavia," the rest of the text contains references to the FRY without quotation marks. Since the signing of the Dayton Agreement, Serbia-Montenegro is commonly referred to in diplomatic parlance as the "Federal Republic of Yugoslavia."
The 1996 report contains another change in terminology which is not politically neutral: on several occasions, when speaking of the Muslims from the Sandzak region, the report refers to them as "Bosniak Muslims." One should keep in mind that Muslims were first designated as a national entity in the 1974 Constitution of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (SFRY). The term "Bosniak Muslim" was promoted by Alija Izetbegovic's Party of Democratic Action (SDA) in Sarajevo in 1992-1993, in order to avoid confusion between followers of the Muslim religion and members of the Muslim nation. At about the same time, the
223
Critique 1996
SDA branch of the Sandiak region started referring to local Muslims as "Bosniak Muslims." In its 1996 report, the State Department uses one and the same designation.
The report contains no substantial mistakes except in its discussion of the Strbci case; it incorrectly states that there were no developments in this case during 1996. In fact, there were, and they will continue in 1997: Nebojsa Ranisavljevic, who admitted to having participated in the abduction and killing of 17 Muslim and two Croat passengers from the Belgrade-Bar train on February 27, 1993, was arrested in Montenegro at the end of 1996 and charged in March 1997. His trial began in April 1997, but was interrupted for procedural reasons as the prosecutor claimed the Jagodina court had jurisdiction to judge this case instead of the Bijelo Polje court, where it was pending. This question has still not been resolved. Developments in this case should be carefully scrutinized in the 1997 State Department report.
Although quite detailed, the report is sometimes rather vague; worse, it is silent on a number of important issues, or misinterprets them. As in 1995, the report states without qualification that "[a]s a key element of his hold on power, President Milosevic controls the police, a heavily armed force of over 100,000 that is responsible for internal security." This statement is insufficiently nuanced. The police are indeed responsible for "extensive and systematic human rights abuses," as the report states. But they are also the FRYs biggest importer of weapons. As in 1995, the report does not clarify the relationship between the police and the ruling Socialist Party of Serbia (SPS). Any examination of this relationship would have to recognize that the FRY is a police state controlled by one man, who also controls the ruling party. Last year's Critique suggested a more accurate assessment, commenting that "the FRY is controlled by a single political party, which is controlled by one man, and. . .the state security apparatus is an instrument of that ruUng party." Unfortunately, the State Department has yet to acknowledge the nature of Milosevic's regime.
Another inaccuracy, which occurs twice in the report, relates to the period of time for which the police hold suspects incommunicado without charge or access to attorneys. Last year's mistake has been partially
224
Serbia and Montenegro
corrected since the report has added reference to a fourth day beyond the three provided by the law to "establish the suspect's identity." However, it does not sufficiently explain that the three-day statutory period is allowed only in limited cases provided by the law, and this exceptional procedure, which encourages police abuse, has actually become the rule, especially in the Kosovo region. The Federal Law on Criminal Procedure permits the police to hold a person incommunicado for 72 hours without charge, if s/he is suspected of having committed a criminal offense or was apprehended at the moment of committing such an offense. The Law on Internal Affairs of Serbia provides that the police also have the right to hold a person whose identity is unknown until his/her identity is established, for a maximum period of 24 hours. In practice, the police frequently aggregate these two periods of time and illegally hold suspects for four days, even when a suspect's identity is known. Worse, the police commonly start counting 96 hours from the moment they make a formal decision of arrest {reSenje o pritvoru), and not from the moment of the actual arrest, which might have occurred several hours before.
The report is wrong when it describes the four days as a period of "informative talks." This is a completely different procedure which does not involve detention by the police and which cannot exceed six hours of interrogation by police in the case of a potential witness. As the report indicates, during the 96-hour detentions, police interrogations are carried out and suspects are interrogated, usually beaten and find themselves deprived of all rights. In some cases, suspects have been held at police stations in inhumane conditions, blindfolded, handcuffed to heaters or kept in basements rather than in proper ceils. Such treatment, intended to force a suspect to incriminate himself or someone else, ends when the suspect signs a statement admitting guilt or accusing another individual. This statement then becomes part of the formal charges brought against the suspect and is used as a basis for further investigation. It is also common for judges considering petty offenses {sudija za prekrSaje) to sentence a suspect to a prison term for a minor offense. This leaves the person, who is now serving his/her sentence on prison premises, in the hands of the police for interrogation in connection with the more serious crime of which s/he is suspected.
225
Critique 1996
In the case of petty offenses, when the accused is sent immediately to jail, the prison administration in Belgrade has invented a procedure that violates federal law on criminal procedure. During the time when prisoners should be able to submit a written defense to the court, defense attorneys are not allowed access to their clients. This is in and of itself a violation of criminal procedure and deprives the accused of the right to defense. When defense attorneys succeed in getting access to their clients, they must interview them in the presence of police, which also violates criminal procedure and inhibits the accused from speaking freely to counsel.
Inaccuracies are not the report's only shortcoming; facts and events are omitted, serving to obscure a part of the human rights situation in Serbia-Montenegro. When it describes human rights violations committed against Albanians from Kosovo, Muslims from Sandiak, or even opponents of the present government, this year's report, like last year's, gives the impression that the remaining population of Serbia is spared from human rights abuses. This is not the case. Although human rights violations are committed on a larger scale against members of national minorities in the regions of Kosovo and Sandiak, police abuse and violence take place throughout Serbia and are directed against all citizens, regardless of nationality. To illustrate this point, one need only point to the brutality of the police directed against demonstrators in Belgrade and other cities throughout Serbia. Demonstrators were beaten, some suffered broken limbs, others had their jaws broken and teeth knocked out. None of this universal police brutality had any relationship to the nationality of the victim.
The report neglects to mention that the Serbian and Montenegrin regime is very closely connected to organized crime, leading to the increasing criminalization of politics and politicization of criminality. Furthermore, according to reliable sources, criminals as well as special plainclothes police units of the Ministry of Interior were present when citizens were attacked during the demonstrations of December 24, 26 and 27, 1996. Many who were injured by the police refused medical attention out of fear that medical personnel were police collaborators, and would report their participation in the demonstrations to police. According to
226
Serbia and Montenegro
other reports, medical personnel regularly omitted mentioning that demonstrators' injuries were caused by pohce. Only on the repeated insistence of the injured was this fact included in the medical reports. There were in fact police agents in emergency rooms who listened in on demonstrators' intake interviews with medical personnel.
Although the dysfunctional justice system encourages many human rights abuses, the report does not describe it in enough relevant detail. The report speaks about "government pressure" on the judiciary rather than political corruption. It also mentions, without elaboration, that judges are elected for life. It is not irrelevant to note that this life tenure was only introduced following the 1993 elections, when the SPS and its coalition parties won a majority in the republic's parliament. The reelection process of judges started and ended in 1994. While the new law might seem to be intended as a guarantee of judicial independence, in fact the re-election of judges became a way of purging the courts of all those who might be insufficiently loyal to the SPS and Milosevic, including members of national minorities. A decline in the professional caliber of judges accompanied an increase in their political "suitability." Many judges and prosecutors in Serbia-Montenegro today do not satisfy minimum standards of professional qualifications and experience and accordingly, fail to guarantee impartial justice for dtizens. The politicized nature of the judiciary is reflected in the various privileges accorded to compliant judges and prosecutors, such as appointments to higher courts, apartments, etc.
Even more critical, and altogether absent from the report, is the rise of corruption in the judidary in recent years. In this regard, the Minister of Justice of Serbia was heavily critidzed in connection with charges of corruption against the president of the Òaéak Municipal Court. He dedined to reprimand the judge, saying "[w]e have no better." Corruption also affects attorneys, many of whom are former judges or prosecutors. It is not uncommon for them to offer to resolve their clients' cases out of the courtroom, for cash.
In last year's report, prison conditions in Serbia-Montenegro were described as "adequate," an assessment that was criticized in the 1995 Critique. This year's report states that "prison conditions meet minimum
227
Critique 1996
international standards." However, local observers report that this is far from true. The treatment of prisoners depends almost exclusively on their social status, as well as on the goodwill of the guards and the prison director. Furthermore, it is not uncommon for prison staff to ask prisoners to become informers.
The report fails to provide information on conditions in local police stations during police arrest (policiski pritvor). Some demonstrators who were prosecuted for petty offenses and placed under police arrest in Belgrade and other Serbian cities at the end of 1996 were subjected to conditions that fell short of minimum international standards. Moreover, the police did not notify the detainees' families during the first 24 hours after arrest, as the law stipulates. Most did not have access to defense counsel. Some, like Dejan Bulatovic, were severely beaten. Bulatovic was subsequently charged for petty offenses. It should be noted that the report cites his case out of context and without naming him: he was not beaten during the 24 hours provided to establish a suspect's identity, as a reader of the report might infer, but during the petty offenses procedure (also lasting 24 hours), during which the suspect's culpability must be established.
In its discussion of basic political rights, the report accurately describes the mass demonstrations which took place at the end of 1996, but does not sufficiently emphasize the manipulative role of Serbian Radio Television (RTS), the state-run radio and television, nor the fact that RTS was very often the only source of news outside Belgrade. The report states accurately that the demonstrators, who were protesting against the government's annulment of the election results, were labeled "hooligans" and "traitors" by the state-run television, but does not say that RTS also called them "fascists." Slobodan Milosevic and Dragan Tomic, the president of the Serbian parliament, used the same vocabulary. The report is silent on the government's attempt to put Radio-Television Kragujevac under RTS control after the victory of the opposition in the local elections in ICragujevac. Police force was used, but in January 1997, a decision of the Belgrade Commercial Court gave the new local government control of the station in conformity with the law.
228
Serbia and Montenegro
In the section on freedom of movement, it seems that the drafters of the report may have been confused about the relationship between the refugee situation and the 1995 Law on Citizenship, which came into effect on January 1, 1997. Contrary to what a reader might infer from the report, refugees have no right to obtain citizenship under the new FRY law. However, the law does provide refugees with the possibility of acquiring citizenship. Such a decision is entirely in the hands of the Federal Ministry of Interior, which has been granted sweeping powers by a new law permitting arbitrary decisions. The report also should have said that the provision that limits dual citizenship for citizens of a successor state of the former Yugoslavia will have serious consequences for refugees who have fled from other areas of the former Yugoslavia. Similar provisions also exist in the citizenship laws of Bosnia-Herzegovina and Croatia. However, it must be noted that, following international pressure, the FRY has proposed to the Republic of Croatia that the issue of dual citizenship be solved on a bilateral treaty basis.
The report's short paragraph on refugees obscures the fact that the refugee situation in the FRY deteriorated during 1996. Saying that government policy toward refugees was "uneven" is simply a euphemism. On the one hand, there is no coordinated, organized approach with regard to the return of refugees. On the other hand, the declining material conditions of the refugees have resulted in growing mutual antagonism between refugees and the host population. The refugee population, especially in Serbia, is facing permanent insecurity with regard to its status in the FRY. However, there were no cases of work or military duty being imposed on refugees in 1996, although such a possibility is allowed by the Serbian Law of Refugees.
The report often refers to local NGOs and their findings. It says nothing, however, about the large number of so-called NGOs, which, while ostensibly gathering information about human rights violations committed in the former Yugoslavia, actually concentrate exclusively on Croat and Muslim perpetrators and Serb victims and systematically manipulate facts and conclusions. The report's silence on these groups might lead one to suppose that those who purport to be involved in human rights work in Serbia-Montenegro are all reliable and
229
Critique 1996
independent, which is far from the truth. Some NGOs deahng with the human rights of national minorities also exhibit a bias in their research and reporting.
Also problematic are parts of the report dealing with Kosovo. These give the impression of being derived almost exclusively from the Council for the Defense of Human Rights and Freedoms (CDHRF), rather than the drafters' own assessment. The report quotes extensively from the press, but this is not always a reliable source. According to local observers, there have been cases in which Albanians seeking asylum in foreign countries report false information about human rights violations allegedly committed against them to NGOs. This information, which is not verified, is subsequently reported to the media and published. This is not to downplay the significance of human rights violations committed against Albanians in Kosovo, which remain serious and systematic. But the drafters of the report should have used their own sources of information on Kosovo.
The report quotes the CDHRF figure of 14 Albanians killed as a result of mistreatment or beatings while in police custody. But this is contradicted by the CDHRF's own annual report. Indeed, the list of 14 people killed reveals that four of them died in prison or as a result of beatings in police custody, while the others died under different or unknown circumstances. This report does not make clear whether the authorities took the necessary steps to identify and prosecute those responsible.
The enumeration of individual human rights violations committed against Kosovo Albanians tends to conceal the wider context in which these violations take place. For example, the report states that "[e]thnic Albanians continue to suffer at the hands of security forces conducting searches for arms...[p]olice...frequently extract 'confessions' during interrogations...." However, the report neglects to point out that there are cases in which policemen who arrested Albanians for alleged illegal possession of weapons induce them to acquire weapons, promising in exchange to stop the beatings and secure their release. In the same context, there were also reported cases of police officers themselves selling
230
Serbia and Montenegro
weapons to Albanians they had arrested for alleged illegal possession of arms.
Once again, the report does not provide its own assessment of the situation in Kosovo, especially with regard to police violence, but quotes "[o]ther observers" as saying that the situation improved in 1996. On the contrary, the report should have noted that the situation deteriorated after a wave of terrorist attacks which started in April 1996. Although, as the report correctly indicates, there were no new cases brought against Kosovo Albanians under articles 116 and 136 of the Federal Penal Code {Kriviáii Zakon SRJ), at the beginning of 1997, a group of Albanians was charged for the first time with terrorism under article 125 of the Federal Penal Code. This development merits attention in the 1997 State Department report.
Parts of the section dealing with abuses against women are far from accurate. The drafters of the report should bear in mind that women have enjoyed equal status in the FRY for decades, and that many women hold high-level party and government positions. Men and women do receive the same wages for the same types of work. The tax system in the FRY, which is based on the individual rather than the family, tends to encourage the independent status of women. The statement that "women are littie more than serfs without the right to control property and children," actually applies only to rare cases among Kosovo Albanians in rural areas. And it is simply not true that brides are "bought and sold."
All in all, the report fails to provide a complete and accurate assessment of the human rights situation in Serbia, preferring instead to enumerate individual cases of human rights violations at the expense of a proper contextual analysis of why they occur. Serbia's longstanding political infrastructure of repressive, one-party rule does not emerge with sufficient clarity. Furthermore, the report is at times inaccurate in its description of legal provisions in the criminal justice area and their implementation. It is silent on specific categories of human rights violations, and is simply wrong about certain important facts. At the same time, it seriously neglects developments in Montenegro. After this disappointing report, an improvement will be badly needed in 1997, especially in view of the continuing evolution of the political situation in
231
Critique 1996
Serbia itself and at the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia.
232
