Serbia
The government formed in May 2007 signaled a greater willingness to address
accountability for war crimes, although it failed to deliver to justice the most
wanted suspect, Ratko Mladic. There was less progress on other human rights
issues: the situation of ethnic and religious minorities remains of concern, and
independent journalists face threats and violence.
War Crimes Accountability
Serbia improved its cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia (ICTY). The apprehension in May of Bosnian Serb army general
Zdravko Tolimir near Bosnia’s border with Serbia followed Serbian collaboration
with Bosnian authorities and EU peacekeepers in Bosnia. Similar collaboration
between Serbia and Montenegrin authorities contributed to the apprehension of
former Yugoslav Army general Vlastimir Djordjevic in Budva, Montenegro in June.
ICTY Chief Prosecutor Carla Del Ponte positively assessed the two arrests and the
government’s handover of long-requested files related to ongoing cases, during
her visit to Belgrade in June. After reporting a subsequent dip in cooperation, she
gave an upbeat assessment in November.
Indicted war crimes suspect and Bosnian Serb general Ratko Mladic remained at
large in Serbia, despite repeated commitments from Belgrade that he would be
brought to justice.
Prosecutions continued at the ICTY in a number of high-profile cases involving former
Yugoslav and Serbian army and government officials, including Dragoljub
Ojdanic, Sreten Lukic, Milan Milutinovic, Nikola Sainovic, Nebojsa Pavkovic, and
Vladimir Lazarevic. The Serbian public’s largely negative perceptions of the institution
and its work remain.
The Belgrade War Crimes Chamber continued efforts to create accountability for
wartime abuses, despite limited funding, political support, and public awareness
of its work. In April the chamber convicted four former members of the
“Scorpions” paramilitary unit filmed participating in the 1995 killing of six
Bosniaks (Bosnian Muslims), sentencing two to 20 years’ imprisonment and the others to 15 and five years; a fifth defendant was acquitted. The court’s finding
that the crimes were an isolated incident, the relatively short sentences, and the
acquittal, provoked anger from the relatives of the victims and some nongovernmental
organizations. The war crimes prosecutor has appealed against the
acquittal and the five-year sentence.
Notable ongoing prosecutions included the “Suva Reka” trial—related to the
killing of Kosovo Albanian civilians in 1999—and the “Zvornik” trial, in which former
Serbian paramilitaries are charged with the killing of Bosniak civilians in
1992. At this writing around 35 further cases remain in the pretrial or investigative
stage, most relating to killings of non-Serbs by Serbs in Bosnia, Croatia, and
Kosovo. Significant improvements were made in the field of cooperation with
other countries (the joint investigation with Bosnia in the “Zvornik” case being a
notable example). There were improvements to witness protection, allowing witnesses
to give evidence remotely or with their identities concealed, and to outreach
efforts.
In December 2006 the Supreme Court controversially overturned the chamber’s
ruling in the “Ovcara” case (in which 14 people were convicted for the 1991 murder
of 200 non-Serbs in Vukovar, Croatia), ordering a retrial. In April it affirmed
the conviction of Kosovo Albanian Anton Lekaj for the 1999 murder and torture of
Roma in Kosovo.
In February 2007 the International Court of Justice rendered judgment in the case
of Bosnia and Herzegovina v. Serbia and Montenegro, the first-ever ruling on the
application of the 1948 Genocide Convention. While finding that Serbia was not
directly responsible for genocide during the Bosnian war, the court determined
that Serbia was in continuing breach of its obligations under the Genocide
Convention to prevent and punish genocide, including by its failure to arrest
Ratko Mladic and cooperate fully with the ICTY.
Administration of Justice
There were ongoing reports of political interference in the work of prosecutors.
Nevertheless, the verdict in the former Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic assassination
trial, delivered on May 23, demonstrated the courage of prosecutors and judges, who managed to bring 12 individuals to justice despite political pressure
and threats. Milorad “Legija” Lukovic-Ulemek, the most prominent figure among
the accused, was sentenced to 40 years’ imprisonment.
Treatment of Minorities
There was limited progress toward improving the status of the Albanian minority
in southern Serbia and Bosniaks in Sandzak, despite Serbia’s welcome ratification
of the European Charter of Self-Government in September. Negotiations continued
over increasing budgetary control for minority-run municipalities, improving
minority input into school curricula, and greater official use of minority languages.
In a positive development, textbooks in five minority languages were
approved for use in state schools.
Roma continued to face substandard economic and social conditions as well as
instances of verbal abuse and physical assault. In August around 100 Serbian
Roma were caught crossing illegally into Romania. The group claimed asylum,
saying they had fled harassment and ill-treatment in Serbia. In April the Belgrade
Municipal Court handed down a six-month suspended sentence to a nightclub
doorman for racial discrimination after he denied three Roma access to a club.
More than 30 attacks on religious minorities were recorded during the year.
Churches, cemeteries, and religious community centers were damaged or desecrated
across Serbia, with Catholic, Jewish, Protestant, and Muslim communities
targeted, as well as Jehovah’s Witnesses and Hare Krishna devotees. The Serbian
government usually condemned these attacks, and the police opened investigations
in most cases, but few led to perpetrators being punished.
Internally Displaced Persons and Refugees
With large numbers of internally displaced persons (around 208,000) and
refugees (around 106,000), Serbia has one of the highest proportions of displaced
people among its population in Europe. Around 6,000 displaced persons
from Bosnia, Croatia, and Kosovo remain in collective centers, often in substandard
conditions. IDPs and refugees continue to experience severe problems with obtaining documentation, and accessing housing and employment. Elderly and
unaccompanied child IDPs and refugees are particularly vulnerable.
Forced removals of Roma from Western Europe continued, including Kosovo Roma
sent to other parts of Serbia, placing a burden on the already limited resources
within Roma communities in the absence of any programs to assist forced
returnees.
Media Freedom
Independent journalists faced threats and violence. In April a hand grenade
exploded outside an apartment of Dejan Anastasijevic from the Vreme daily
newspaper. The same month Dinko Gruhonjic from the Beta news agency
received death threats from nationalist organization Nacjonalni Stroj. In August
Stefan Cvetkovic from the radio-TV station TNT received an anonymous death
threat. The police opened investigations into these incidents, but at this writing
no one has been charged. All three journalists are renowned for their high-quality
journalism and willingness to tackle difficult topics, including organized crime.
There was no progress in solving earlier murders of journalists, including Slavko
Curuvija in 1999 and Milan Pantic in 2001.
Human Rights Defenders
In July neo-Nazis repeatedly attacked young human rights activists from Serbia,
Bosnia, and Croatia during a “Caravan of Differences” peace and tolerance festival
in Novi Sad. According to the organizers, Youth Initiative for Human Rights,
the police failed to provide security despite several requests. In September 2007
President Boris Tadic pardoned a member of the same group, Maja Stojanovic,
following her 2005 conviction for unauthorized public display of posters urging
Ratko Mladic’s arrest.
Key International Actors
After the ICTY prosecutor’s November assessment, European Union Enlargement
Commissioner Olli Rehn initialed a Stabilization and Association Agreement (SAA)
with Serbia the same month. The EU had resumed negotiations with the SAA in June after suspending them for over a year because of Belgrade’s failure to hand
over Ratko Mladic and otherwise to cooperate with the ICTY. The resumption drew
criticism from the human rights community as unjustified and premature, given
Serbian authorities’ continued failure to transfer Mladic to The Hague. The EU
indicated that signing of the SAA would still depend on full cooperation with the
ICTY, despite some member states arguing for a more lenient approach.
Serbia’s admission to the NATO Partnership for Peace program in December 2006
drew criticism for rewarding Serbia while Mladic remained at large. Proponents
claimed it would stimulate long-awaited reforms in the army, aimed at introducing
more democratic oversight and transparency into the institution.
Russia’s veto threat in the United Nations Security Council derailed the UNbacked
settlement for Kosovo (see also below). Russia’s unqualified support for
Serbia’s position in the status process, and the scale of its investment helped to
cement its renewed influence in Serbia.
Kosovo
Kosovo’s final status negotiations overshadowed its bleak human rights situation.
Minorities continued to face violence, intimidation, discrimination, and difficulties
accessing public services. There was limited progress on the return of displaced
persons and refugees to their homes. Weaknesses in the criminal justice
system frustrated efforts to create accountability. Elections to the Kosovo
Assembly (parliament) took place on November 17. Many Serbs heeded
Belgrade’s call to boycott.
Protection of Minorities
Roma, Ashkali, and Egyptian (RAE) communities remain the most vulnerable and
marginalized in Kosovo. Their political, economic, and social demands were largely
ignored during the final status negotiations. RAE face persistent discrimination,
particularly in employment and access to public services, and have the highest
unemployment, school drop-out, and mortality rates in the province. Measures to
improve their access to education were inadequate.
Violence against minorities continued, although the number of registered cases
continued to fall. The decline reflected the geographic separation of communities
and the practice of classifying offenses as “regular crimes” before ethnic motivation
is determined. In April a bus carrying Kosovo Serbs was stoned in Rudnik,
and the same happened to a train in Lipjan carrying Serbs in August. In March a
mortar-grenade was detonated in the vicinity of the Visoki Decani Serbian
Orthodox monastery. Six Serbian Orthodox churches and monasteries experienced
lesser incidents. Overall, almost 200 inter-ethnic incidents have been registered
in 2007 at this writing, most in ethnically mixed locations, with robbery,
threats, and assault being most common. The victims were mainly Kosovo Serbs,
but Bosniaks, Roma, Croats, and Montenegrins were also affected.
Return of Refugees and Displaced Persons
The number of voluntary returns to Kosovo, including from Serbia, remains small.
In the first half of 2007, 308 persons were registered as voluntary returnees.
Internally displaced RAE inside Kosovo are a target group for organized return.
Plementina, one of the largest RAE camps in Kosovo, was largely dismantled during
2007, with the majority of its inhabitants moved to newly constructed housing
located close to the camp in Obilic municipality. Fifty-seven families returned in
September and October from the lead-contaminated area near the Trepca mine to
South Mitrovica’s “Roma Mahalla,” the first returns to the area since 1999. While
there were no reports of violence against returnees during 2007, those who
returned were subject to verbal harassment. Around 800 RAE remain displaced in
Kosovo, with thousands more in Serbia.
Forced returns to Kosovo continued. Some 1,900 individuals, around 10 percent
of them from RAE communities, have been forcibly returned to Kosovo in 2007
from Western European countries at this writing. They include more than 550 people,
the majority ethnic Albanian, returned from Germany under a 2004 readmission
agreement between the UN Interim Administration in Kosovo (UNMIK) and
the German government.
UNHCR guidelines indicate that Serbs, Roma, and Albanians risk persecution if
returned to areas where they would be in a minority. While the guidelines assess that Ashkali and Egyptians are generally not at risk on return, those subject to
forced return are ineligible for international or local assistance, imposing a significant
burden on the already limited resources of existing RAE communities. In
November the provisional government and UNMIK agreed a draft readmission and
reintegration policy covering forced returns to Kosovo. At this writing it awaits parliamentary
approval.
Impunity and Access to Justice
Kosovo’s criminal justice system remains its weakest governmental institution,
despite ongoing reform efforts. Coordination between international and local
judges and prosecutors is insufficient, despite attempts to provide mentoring and
foster collaboration. Implementation of an electronic case management system
remains poor, with court staff reluctant to use it. Oversight by the newly created
Kosovo Judicial Council of local judges and prosecutors has improved accountability,
but international judges and prosecutors remain answerable only to the
special representative of the UN secretary-general (SRSG). The absence of designated
judicial police hampers the ability of the Kosovo Police Service to meaningfully
assist prosecutors.
Inadequate witness protection has created mistrust and a reluctance to cooperate
with prosecutors. Arrangements for protection continue to be made on an ad hoc
basis while comprehensive legislation is drafted. Reluctance on the part of
Western governments to host witnesses and their families hampers witness relocation.
Progress has, however, been made in supplying all regional courts with
booths, video links, and other means to disguise the voices and identities of witnesses.
There was belated progress in bringing to justice persons involved in the March
2004 riots. During the first eight months of 2007, 29 defendants were convicted
on charges of arson, looting, inciting racial, religious and ethnic hatred, and
assault, in cases managed mainly by international prosecutors. Twelve of the convicted
received prison terms ranging from six months to 18 years. One suspect
was acquitted. At this writing, seven additional defendants awaited trial.
There was movement on several notorious crimes against minorities. In October
the trial of Florim Ejupi, the main suspect in the February 2001 “Nis Express” bus
bombing, began in the Pristina District Court. Ejupi is accused of blowing up a
bus full of Serbs in Kosovo, killing 10 people and injuring 40. Also in October
UNMIK police arrested an ethnic Albanian man suspected of the 1999 killing of 14
Serb farmers in the village of Staro Gracko.
UNMIK’s lack of accountability was highlighted in February when a Romanian
police unit, acting under the command of UNMIK police, responded to a violent
protest with rubber bullets and teargas, killing two protesters and injuring many
others. The UNMIK police commissioner subsequently resigned, but an international
investigation led by the UNMIK chief prosecutor was unable to assign criminal
responsibility for the deaths. After initially good cooperation, the Romanian
police contingent left Kosovo in March while the investigation was ongoing, leading
to accusations from the media and local campaigners that their departure had
impeded the investigation.
There were concerns around UNMIK’s prosecution of Albin Kurti, leader of the
Vetevendosje Self-Determination Movement, for directing the violence at the
February protest. Several international and local nongovernmental organizations
and the Kosovo Ombudsperson criticized the duration and scope of Albin Kurti’s
house arrest, and expressed concerns about possible bias on the part of international
judges. In November 2007 the house arrest conditions were significantly
relaxed.
In May 2007, After a six-year wait, the Grand Chamber of the European Court of
Human Rights ruled inadmissible two cases filed by Kosovo Albanian families
against contingents of the NATO-led Kosovo peacekeeping force (KFOR) from
France, Norway, and Germany. The Behrami family had sought redress for the
death of a child killed by an unexploded cluster bomb in 2000, while Ruzhdi
Saramati challenged his extrajudicial detention by KFOR during 2001-2002. The
court reasoned that it lacked jurisdiction because the KFOR troops were operating
under a UN mandate and outside the territories of the respondent countries.
The trial of former Kosovo Prime Minister Ramush Haradinaj at the ICTY began in
March. Haradinaj had returned to The Hague the previous month for the start of the trial, after spending more than a year on provisional release with the unprecedented
ability to engage in political activities. Haradinaj was permitted by UNMIK
to top the list of his Alliance for the Future of Kosovo party in the November 2007
elections.
The total number of domestic war crimes prosecutions remained low. In August
the war crimes trial of Miroslav Vuckovic resumed in the Mitrovica District Court.
Vuckovic is accused of manslaughter, assault, and other crimes against Kosovo
Albanians in the town of Suvi Do in 1999. In June Idriz Gashi was sentenced to 15
years’ imprisonment in the Pristina District Court for involvement in killing a
Kosovo Albanian alleged collaborator with Serbian forces, and in imprisoning and
torturing others.
There was little progress in determining the fate of missing persons. As of August
2007, 2,047 persons, the majority Kosovo Albanian, remained missing. All known
remains exhumed in Serbia have been transferred to Kosovo.
Human Rights Defenders
Human rights defenders are largely free to operate without hindrance from UNMIK
or the provisional government. An arson attack in September on the home of
independent journalist Milaim Zeka, known for investigating organized crime,
highlighted the potential for violence against those who document abuse, however.
The important work of the Ombudsperson Institution was overshadowed by the
continued failure of the Kosovo Assembly to appoint an ombudsperson and
uncertainty over its mandate. UNMIK indicated that the institution’s old mandate
to oversee UNMIK (ostensibly removed in 2006) applies while the institution has
an acting ombudsperson. In practice, however, UNMIK’s cooperation was limited.
The appointment process was also marred by criticism that the shortlisted candidates
lacked human rights experience necessary for the position.
The Human Rights Advisory Panel held its inaugural session in Pristina in
November, more than a year-and-a-half after it was first mandated by UNMIK. The
body was created to oversee UNMIK following the change in the Ombudsperson’s
mandate.
Key International Actors
The UN-sponsored status proposal for Kosovo, presented in February, recommended
internationally supervised independence with broad guarantees for the
rights of the Serb minority. The proposal was removed from Security Council consideration
after a Russian veto threat. A “troika” consisting of the EU, the United
States, and Russia was created in July to oversee fresh talks between Pristina and
Belgrade, with a December 10, 2007 deadline.
Planning continued for an EU-led international mission, including an EU police
and justice component, but deployment remained contingent on settlement of
Kosovo’s status. In the interim, UNMIK continued to act as Kosovo’s international
administrator under UN Security Council resolution 1244.
In April UNMIK and KFOR facilitated a visit by the Council of Europe Committee for
the Prevention of Torture (CPT), permitting access to all detention facilities in
Kosovo, including the US KFOR Bondsteel camp.