 sERBIA-MONTENEGRO
 Serbia-Montenegro, a constitutional republic, is dominated by Federal President
 Slobodan Miosevic. President Miosevic continues to control the country through his
 role as President of the Socialist Party of Serbia (SPS)-a dual role arrangement
 proscribed by the federal Constitution-and his domination of other formal and in-
 formal institutions. Although the SPS lacks majorities in both the Federal and Ser-
 bian Parliaments, it controls governing coalitions and holds the key administrative
 positions. The Milosevic regime effectively controls the judiciary and respects the
 country's legal framework only when it suits the regime's immediate political inter-
 ests.
 Serbia abolished the political autonomy of Kosovo and Vojvodina-in 1990, and all
 significant decisionmaking since that time has been centralized under Milosevic in
 Belgrade. The Milosevic regime's repressive policies quashed any prospect of inter-
 ethnic cooperation with Kosovo's e~tnic Albanians and led to a full-fledged separat-
 ist insurgency that erupted early in the-year. The regime undertook a brutal police
 and military crackdown against separatist insurgents in Kosovo-a crackdown that
 by some measures resulted in the deaths of about 2,000 persons by year's end, the
 vast majoriof whom were ethnic Albanians.
 The international community does not recognize the Federal Republic of Yugo-
 slavia (FRY)-Serbia-Montenegro-as the sole successor state to the former Yugo-
 slavia. Accordingly, the "FRY" still is not permitted to participate in the United Na-
 tions (U.N.), the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), or
 other international organizations and financial organizations.
 As a key element of his hold on power, President Milosevic effectively controls the
 Serbian police, a heavily armed force of some 100,000 officers that is responsible for
 internal security. Serbian police committed numerous serious and systematic human
 rights abuses.
 Despite the suspension of certain U.N. economic sanctions, economic performance
 was anemic due to the imposition of new sanctions as a response to the situation
 in Kosovo and the FRY's continued exclusion from international financial institu-
 tions. Unemployment and underemployment remained high (about 60 percent),
 since the Government was unable or unwilling to introduce necessary restructuring
 measures. The Government failed to implement needed- sweeping economic reforms,
 including privatization, which would help the economy but could undermine the re-
 gime's crony system.
 
 
 1475
 The Government's human rights record worsened significantly, and there were
 problems in many areas. Serbian police committed numerous serious abuses includ-
 ing extrajudicial killings, disappearances, torture, brutal beatings, and arbitrary ar-
 rests and detentions. The judicial system is not independent of the Government, suf-
 fers from corruption, and does not ensure fair trials. The authorities infringed on
 citizens' right to privacy. The Government severely restricted freedom of speech and
 of the press, and used overbearing police intimidation and economic pressure to con-
 trol tightly the independent press and media. The Government restricted freedom
 of assembl and association. While under the Constitution citizens have a right to
 stage peaceful demonstrations, in practice the police seriously beat scores of protest-
 ers throughout the republic of Serbia, sending many to hospitals. The Government
 infringed on freedom of worship by minority religions and restricted freedom of
 movement. The Milosevic regime used its continued domination of Parliament and
 the media to enact legislation to manipulate the electoral process. In practice citi-
 zens cannot exercise the right to change their government. The most recent electoral
 manipulation by the regime was in the Serbian parliamentary and presidential elec-
 tions in the fall of 1997. The Federal and Serbian Governments' record of coopera-
 tion with international human rights and monitoring organizations was poor. The
 Federal Government remained uncooperative with the International Criminal Tribu-
 nal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY): it failed to meet its obligations under numer-
 ous U.N. Security Council Resolutions to comply fully with the Tribunal's orders,
 failed to issue visas to allow ICTY investigators into Kosovo (and, in the last quarter
 of the year, even into the rest of Serbia), and failed to transfer or facilitate the sur-
 render to the Tribunal of persons on Serbian territory indicted for war crimes or
 other crimes against humanity under the jurisdiction of the Tribunal. Instead, the
 Milosevic Government openly harbored indicted war criminals-three of whom the
 Government openly acknowledged were present on Serbian territory-and publicly
 rejected the Tribunal's jurisdiction over events in Kosovo. Discrimination and vio-
 lence against women remained serious problems. Discrimination against ethnic Al-
 banians, Muslims, Roma, and other religious and ethnic minorities worsened during
 the year. Police repression continued to be directed against ethnic minorities, and
 police committed the most widespread and worst abuses against Kosovo's 90 percent
 ethnic Albanian population. Police repression also was directed against Muslims in
 the Sandzak region and other citizens who protested against the Government. The
 regime limits unions not affiliated with the Government in their attempts to ad-
 vance worker rights.
 Montenegro continued to be the only bright spot in the FRY, although Miosevic's
 influence threatens to complicate the Republic's efforts at democratization. In Janu-
 ary 1998, Milo Djukanovic became Montenegro's President after November 1997
 elections judged by international monitors to be free and fair, and his reform coali-
 tion won parliamentary elections in May. The Milosevic regime continued a relent-
 less campaign to undermine Djukanovic's popular support, including by refusing to
 accept his choice of delegates to the upper house of the Federal Parliament; refusing
 to accept a Montenegrin Government choice for the new Federal Prime Minister;
 and withholding financial contributions owed to the Montenegrin pension system.
 Moreover, the Milosevic regime was believed to be behind a violent campaign to
 wreak havoc at the time of Djukanovic's inauguration. In his effort to crush Mon-
 tenegrin democratization, Milosevic violated the Federal and Montenegrin Constitu-
 tions by persuading the federal Constitutional Court to review Montenegrin elec-
 toral legislation and by using his influence over Federal judges to have Montenegrin
 legislation declared unconstitutional.
 Elements of the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA, an armed ethnic Albanian group
 that seeks independence for Kosovo) were also responsible for abuses. They commit-
 ted killings, were responsible for disappearances, abducted and detained Serbian po-
 lice, as well as Serb and Albanian civilians (those suspected of loyalty to the Serbian
 Government), and in a few isolated cases "tried" suspects without due process.
 There are also credible reports of instances of torture by the KLA
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS'
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Political violence, including killings
 by police, became a significant problem during the year as a result of the conflict
 in Kosovo (see Section 1.g.). Beginning in the early spring and again throughout the
 year, Serbian police killed scores of ethnic Albanians often in brutal fashion. In
 Likosane in early March police entered the family compound of the Ahmeti family,
 rounded up the male members of the clan plus one acquaintance-12 individuals-
 and summarily executed them. A few days later, in Donji Prekaz, police surrounded
 
 
 1476
 the family compound of Adem Jashari, whom they believed to be well armed- and
 a member of the KLA, and -destroyed it. Over 80 persons died in the siege, including
 women and children.
 On May 25, police in Ljubenic entered the compound of the Hamzaj clan and al-
 legedly executed at least five male members of the family. According to witnesses
 who spoke to the Humanitarian Law Center, police lined up the victims and forced
 them to strip down to their underpants before killing them. News of the atrocities
 committed by the police spread rapidly in Kosovo, fed the separatist insurgency, and
 led to more violence.
 Rexhep Bislimi, an activist of the Urosevac chapter of the Pristina-based Council
 for the Defense of Human Rights and Freedoms, died as a result of injuries inflicted
 by Serbian security forces while in detention in July. Serbian authorities denied
 Bislimi's family access to. him, both while he was in detention and after he was
 transferred to Pristina hospital with serious injuries (see Section 4). Three humani-
 tarian aid workers were killed by Serbian mortar fire while trying to deliver food
 near Kijevo on-August 24 (see Section 1.g.). .
 On September 26 in Gornje Obrinje, Serbian special police allegedly killed 18
 members of an ethnic Albanian family, including women and infants. In December
 Serbian and FRY officials blocked access for a team of inde pendent international fo-
 rensic experts to~he site of the grave where those killed in Gornje Obrinje weie bur-
 ied. On May 31, Serbian security forces attacked the village of Novi Pokiek, near
 Glogovac. 7Polce seized 10 ethnic Albanian men in the raid, one of-whom was found
 dead later that day. The other nine were still missing at year's end and presumed
 dead. According to eyewitness accounts of international human rights groups, Ser-
 bian special police summarily executed 13 ethnic Albanian men in Golubovac on
 September 26.
 1he FRY, in contravention of repeated U.N. Security Council Resolutions, denied
 investigators from the ICTY access to any part of Kosovo, preventing them from un-
 dertaking a thorough and independent investigation into these and other atrocities
 committed in the province that fall under the Tribunal's jurisdiction (see Section 4).
 On December 29 the bodies of five Kosovo Albanians were found alongside roads
 or bridges, two in Prizren, two in Kosovska Mitrovica, and one on the. Pec-Decani
 road. On December 30 a Kosovo Albanian was killed near the village of Dremnjak.
 By year's end according to credible reports, about 2,000 persons were dead as a re-
 sult of the conflict in Kosovo, the vast majority of whom were ethnic Albanians: The
 domestic Pristina-based Council for the Defense of Human Rights and Freedoms re-
 ported in late December that the bulk of casualties among ethnic Albanians. were
 unarmed civilians.
 According to an international human rights NGO, at least five persons died from
 abuse in prison during the year in Serbia (see Section 1.c.).
 There were reports of many extrajudicial killings by members of the armed ethnic
 Albanian insurgency, including of several so-called ethnic Albanian "collaborators"
 and several Serb civilians near one of the strongholds of the KLA in Glodjane in
 the late summer (see Section 1.g.). Forces alleged to be from the KLA kidnaped and
 killed the deputy mayor of Kosovo Polje, Zvonko Bojanic, on December 17. According
 to international observers, two masked persons entered a cafe in Pec during the
 night of December 14 and began firing at customers. Six Serbs were killed in the
 attack, and three others were hospitalized. Police identified 14 suspects and ar-
 rested 3 between December 15 and 17. In late December, a local police inspector
 was killed in central Podujevo, an elderly Serb man was shot dead in the village
 of Obranza, and a Serb janitor was killed in Urosevac, all in circumstances that led
 to suspicion that the KLA was responsible for the killings.
 On December 27, three Roma were found dead in Kosovska Mitrovica. The Roma
 community reportedly attributed responsibility for the deaths to the KLA. On De-
 cember 31- a Serb janitor in the Urosevac agricultural school was found dead on the
 outskirts of town.
 b. Disappearance.-There were unconfirmed reports of hundreds of disappear-
 ances. According to Human Rights Watch, at least a hundred ethnic Albanians dis-
 appeared in Kosovo during the worst fighting between February and September,
 a bout half of whom were last seen in police custody.
 In one instance several corpses were found hastily buried by Serbian forces in a
 garbage dump near Orahovac in July. There were also reports of mass graves, which
 Serbian authorities strongly denied. However, Serbian and federal authorities failed
 to grant investigators from the ICTY access to the gravesites. Among the persons
 who disappeared was Dr. Hafir Shala, a medical doctor, who was apprehended on
 April 10 by police near Glogovac, taken to the central police station in Pristina, and
 never heard from again. The Belgrade-based Humanitarian Law Center documented
 numerous cases of ethnic Albanians who were apprehended by police over the sum-
 
 
 1477
 mer months and were still missing at year's end. Access for international humani-
 tarian organizations such as the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
 to those detained was impeded by the Serbian Government throughout most of the
 year, but slightly improved after October.
 The fate of some 136 Serbs and Montenegrins reported missing and presumed to
 have been abducted by the KLA or other ethnic Albanian insurgent fighters was
 still unknown at year's end, according to international intergovernmental organiza-
 tions, based on reports from family members of the missing. Up to 280 Serbs were
 reported missing throughout the year. Several Serbs reported cases of family mem-
 bers-mostly civilians-taken hostage by separatist fighters and not heard from
 again, including many reportedly taken after fighting between police and insurgent
 forces at Orahovac in July. Many of those still missing are believed to have been
 killed; others are presumed to be still alive. The KLA kidnaped a Serb policeman
 on November 19 in the Podujevo area; after intervention by the Kosovo Diplomatic
 Observer Mission (KDOM) the KLA released the policeman on November 24. Inter-
 national organizations and diplomatic observers had very little success in winning
 access to those believed to be detained by armed Albanian groups.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The law prohibits torture and other cruel forms of punishment; however, Serbian
 security forces regularly and systematically used torture, beatings in detention, and
 other forms of abuse against the ethnic Albanian population after fighting erupted
 in Kosovo early in the year. There were several police roundups in Kosovo during
 the year of ethnic Albanians charged by the Serb authorities with supporting terror-
 ism. The worst police brutality takes place during the 3 to 4 day period of incommu-
 nicado detention allowed by law. According to credible reports, police also used elec-
 tric shock and sleep deprivation to torture detainees. In one incident, Serbian police
 took into custody Sokol Rugovci, an ethnic Albanian from Montenegro. According to
 the Helsinki Committee for Human Rights in Sandzak, when Rugovci admitted dur-
 ing an interrogation that he supported the reform government of Milo Djukanovic,
 the police use a welding machine to brand "Milo" on his chest. In another incident,
 police carved a cross on the chest of Arsim Krasnici, an ethnic Albanian, in a
 Pristina hospital. In another incident, an ethnic Serb woman reported to authorities
 that police threatened to carve off her genitals because she worked in a Muslim res-
 taurant. One of three policemen involved in the incident was sentenced to 20 days
 in prison but by year's end had not served his sentence. According to the Center
 for the Protection of Women and Children in Pristina, Serb security forces report-
 edly engaged in the rape of Albanian women in Kosovo. Two girls who reportedly
 were raped by Yugoslav Army members committed suicide near the end of the year
 (see Section 1.c.). At least five Kosovo Albanian males died in custody during the
 year-all individuals who were in good health prior to their detention by Serbian
 police, according to international human rights groups. Evidence of torture in deten-
 tion is widespread.
 Human rights lawyer Destan Rukiqi, who defended dozens of ethnic Albanian po-
 litical prisoners in Kosovo in recent years, was arrested on July 23 and then se-
 verely beaten by the police. On his third day of detention he was beaten with rubber
 batons on the kidneys and spent 2 weeks on dialysis. On July 30, he was taken from
 Lipljan prison to Pristina hospital with serious injuries to his kidneys. Rukiqi was
 sentenced the same day in an expedited procedure to the maximum 60 days in pris-
 on for the misdemeanor offense of disturbing public order. His arrest was related
 to an incident in which he raised his voice to a judge who refused to let him review
 the case file of his client. Serb authorities denied Rukiqi's wife and his lawyers, as
 well as diplomatic and human rights observers, access to him in prison and in the
 hospital. Rukiqi was released on August 22 after 30 days in prison.
 Ethnic Albanians continued to suffer at the hands of security forces conducting
 searches for weapons, ammunition, and explosives. The police, without following
 proper legal procedures, frequently extract "confessions" during interrogations that
 routinely include the beating of suspects' feet, hands, genital areas, and sometimes
 heads. The police use their fists, nightsticks, and occasionally electric shocks. Appar-
 ently confident that there would be no reprisals, and in an attempt to intimidate
 the wider community, police often beat persons in front of their families. There has
 been virtually no prosecution of those responsible, despite a public commitment from
 the President of the Government of Serbia in October to do so and despite repeated
 demands from the international community calling on the Miosevic Government to
 cooperate in the investigation and prosecution of those responsible. According to var-
 ious sources, ethnic Albanians are frequently too terrified to ask police to follow
 proper legal procedures-such as having them provide written notice of witness in-
 terrogation. In some cases, Serbian police also used threats and violence against
 family members of suspects and held them as hostages. Local human rights mon-
 
 
 1478
 
 itors report that Serbian police threatened and intimidated doctors working in
 Kosovo to prevent them from treating KIA members. One doctor reported that po-
 lice entered his private clinic, held him at gunpoint, and threatened him for treating
 suspected terrorists. According to Albanian and foreign observers, the worst abuses
 against ethnic Albanians took place not in big towns but in rural enclaves-a pat-
 tern which, according to many observers, increased separatist sentiment and pro-
 vided the basis for the strong support for the KLA in these areas.
 On December 15, police in Belgrade detained and beat a student activist from the
 "Student Resistance Movement" Otpor, Srdjan Popovic. On December 29, unknown
 thugs (possibly special police forces) beat another prominent Otpor activist, Boris
 Karajcic, just weeks after considerable media exposure of his trip abroad to publicize
 the Miosevic regime's human rights abuses (see Section 2.a.).
 Police beat an APTV cameraman in. Pristina in October (see Section 2.a.). Police
 occasionally attacked Roma (also see Section 5). Police used truncheons, tear gas,
 and water canons against student demonstrators in Belgrade (see Section 2.b.).
 The police harassed persons connected with the distribution of the Belgrade inde-
 pendent newspaper Dnevni Telegraf. Kiosk owners were approached and told that
 if they sold the newspaper the financial police -would look into their operations.
 Throughout the year the police systematically intimidated printing houses-includ-
 ing in November the Forum of Novi Sad-to prevent them from printing independ-
 ent newspapers (see Section 2.a.).
 In a country where many of the adult males are armed, the Serbian government
 and police, according to some members of ethnic minorities, selectively enforced the
 laws regulating the possession and registration of firearms during the year so as
 to harass and intimidate ethnic -minorities, particularly Kosovo Albanians and
 Bosniak Muslims. The most frequent justification given for searches of homes and
 arrests was the illegal possession of weapons. Observers allege that in Kosovo the
 police use the pretext of searching for weapons when in fact they are also searching
 for hard currency. It is reported that local police authorities more easily approve the
 registration of legal weapons for Kosovo Serbs and frequently turn a blind eye to
 Serbs' possession of illegal weapons. In fact, the Serbian police in some cases report-
 edly activelypromoted the arming of local Kosovo Serb civilians.
 Prison conditions meet minimum international standards. According to human
 rights monitors based in Belgrade, prison conditions deteriorated in recent years.
 However, there were few confirmed reports of the abuse of prisoners once they were
 sentenced and serving time. The vast majority of cases of torture-occur before the
 detainees are charged with offenses or during the period between the filing of
 charges and the commencement of the trial.
 The Government generally permits prison visits by human rights monitors, al-
 though access is sporadic and subject to the whim of local officials. Access was poor
 for much of the year but improved, slightly by October. On several occasions, outside
 monitors, including representatives of the ICRC, were denied access to individuals
 held by Serbian police. For example, in September although the Government agreed
 to allow access to the 523 persons it acknowledged to have in custody then, the
 ICRC gained access to less than 30 of them.
 After poor cooperation between the ICRC and the Serbian authorities, relations
 improved significantly after Milosevic reached agreements with international inter-
 locutors in June and October. At year's end the Ministry of Justice improved its
 record in notifying the ICRC of detainees. According to Ministry of Justice statistics,
 771 persons were detained on charges relating to the conflict in Kosovo at year's
 end. The ICRC visited 421 of those detained; 276 of the 771 had been in detention
 since October. However, the ICRC was denied access to persons detained by the
 Ministry of Defense, which only- has heightened international concern for the condi-
 tion and treatment of those prisoners. The ICRC estimates that the Ministry of De-
 fense had 40 persons in custody. Access to those civilians alleged by the Government
 or by family members to be detained by the KLA has been almost nonexistent.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Police use of arbitrary arrest and deten-
 tion was concentrated primarilyin Kosovo and, to a lesser degree, in Sandzak. Ser-
 bian police often apply certain laws only against ethnic minorities and used force
 with relative impunity. Sandzak Muslims as well as Kosovo Albanians were sub-
 jected to trumped up or exaggerated charges, ranging from unlawful possession of
 firearms to willfully- undermining the country's territorial integrity. According to
 Serbian Ministry of Justice statistics, the authorities were in the process of charging
 or trying approximately 1,500 persons for activities related to the Kosovo conflict.
 Serbian securityforces arrested Sylejman Bytyci, a member of the local leadership
 of the LDK (Democratic League of Kosovo) Party, as well as Milam Jashari, a sen-
 ior member of the local chapter of the Council for the Defense of Human Rights and
 Freedoms, and his 2.-year-old son, Zylbehar Jashari, during a large-scale raid in
 
 
 1479
 Urosevac. In July Serbian police arrested several seasonal workers from Kosovo in
 Novi Pazar without cause and kept them overnight before releasing them the follow-
 ing day. According to the Helsinki Committee in Sandzak, the police feared dem-
 onstrations on the first anniversary of appointed rule, July 10 in Novi Pazar, which
 marked the date when the Milosevic regime forcibly removed the elected local gov-
 ernment in the predominantly Muslim municipality. The police arrested many non-
 Serbs to avoid problems. Earlier, without cause, the police on June 16 arrested stu-
 dent activists in Novi Pazar who were involved in a national antiwar campaign
 against the regime's Kosovo policy.
 Laws regarding conspiracy, threats to the integrity of the government, and state
 secrets are so vague as to allow easy abuse by the regime.
 Federal statutes permit the police to detain criminal suspects without a warrant
 and hold them incommunicado for up to 3 days without charging them or granting
 them access to an attorney. Serbian law separately provides for a 24-hour detention
 period. The police often combine the two for a total 4-day detention period. After
 this period, police must turn a suspect over to an investigative judge, who may order
 a 30-day extension and, under certain legal procedures, subsequent extensions of in-
 vestigative detention up to 6 months. In Kosovo, Serbian police often detain and
 beat persons without ever officially charging them and routinely hold suspects well
 beyond the 3-day statutory period. Bail rarely is granted.
 Defense lawyers and human rights workers complained of excessive delays by Ser-
 bian authorities in filing formal charges and opening investigations. The ability of
 defense attorneys to challenge the legal basis of their clients' detention often was
 hampered further by difficulties in gaining access to detainees or acquiring copies
 of official indictments and decisions to remand defendants into custody. In some
 cases, judges prevented defense attorneys from reading the court file. Investigative
 judges in Serbia often delegated their responsibility for carrying out investigations
 to the police or members of the state security service and rarely questioned their
 accounts of the investigation--even when it was obvious that confessions were co-
 erced from the accused. Results of such sham investigations were then used in court
 to convict defendants on trumped up charges.
 The regime ignored its pledge to grant amnesty for "crimes related to the conflict
 in Kosovo," a pledge that was part of Milosevic's October agreement to end the re-
 pression there. Humanitarian organizations reported in December that there were
 no reported cases of amnesty for individuals charged with terrorist acts. As a result,
 about 1,500 ethnic Albanians remained in custody at years end charged with com-
 mitting terrorist acts or with "anti-State activities" related to the conflict in Kosovo.
 According to an international human rights NGO, prosecutors in the Pec district in
 Kosovo were increasing the charges in many cases to crimes against humanity in
 an effort to circumvent the Serbian government's own pledge in October to grant
 an amnesty for conflict-related crimes.
 Four members of the "Student Resistance Movement" protesting Serbia's repres-
 sive new information law and the removal of faculty from a university for political
 reasons were arrested in late fall for spraying anti-Fascist graffiti (see Section 2.a.).
 In November three of the four students were sentenced to 10 days in jail and were
 released from custody. The four were convicted in a hastily staged trial, and their
 sentences were considered harsh for first-time offenders. Also unusual in such cases,
 the sentences were served before the appeal was heard.
 According to the Ministry of Justice, at year's end 771 persons were detained on
 charges relating to the conflict on Kosovo.
 The KLA kidnaped two journalists of the state-run news agency Tanjug on Octo-
 ber 18. On October 30 the "military court" of the KLA sentenced them to 60 days
 in prison for violating the civilian and military regulations of the KLA and the regu-
 lations of the KLA "police." The journalists were given 7 days to appeal their sen-
 tences, according to the KLA. The ICRC announced that it was unsuccessful in its
 repeated attempts to visit the two (see Section 2.a.). The KLA finally released the
 pair in late November. In October the KLA detained 13 Albanian politicians, includ-
 ing members of the Kosovo Albanian Shadow Parliament, in Cirez for 2 days. The
 KLA forces are reported to have repeatedly tortured 6 of the 13 detainees, whom
 they considered to be too close to the Serbian Government. International intergov-
 ernmental human rights organizations believe that the KLA held at most a rel-
 atively small number of hostages/prisoners at year's end.
 Exile is not permitted legally, and no instances of its use are known to have oc-
 curred. However, the practical effect of police repression in Kosovo and Sandzak has
 been to accentuate political instability, which in turn has limited economic oppor-
 tunity. As a result, many ethnic Albanians and Bosniak Muslims go abroad to es-
 cape persecution, although only in a few cases could direct links to police actions
 be identified.
 
 
 1480
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, but in practice, Federal and Serbian courts largely are controlled by the Gov-
 ernment and rarely challenge the will of the, state security apparatus. Judicial cor-
 ruption is also -widespread. While judges are elected for fixed terms, they may be
 subjected to governmental pressure. Serbian authorities frequently deny fair public
 trial to non-Serbs and to persons whom they believe oppose the regime. The fraud
 that followed- the November 1996 municipal elections was perpetrated mainly
 through the regime's misuse of the judicial system. In Milosevic's FRY, the key per-
 petrator of that fraud, president of the First Belgrade Municipal Court Dragoljub
 ankovic, became the Serbian Justice Minister. Another perpetrator, Balsa
 Grovedarica, at the time the presiding judge of the Serbian Supreme Court, was
 awarded an extra official position: he became president of the Serbian Electoral
 Commission.
 The court system comprises local, district, and supreme courts at the republic
 level, as well as a Federal Court and Federal Constitutional Court to which republic
 supreme court decisions, depending on the subject; may be appealed. There is also
 a military court system. According to the Federal Constitution, the Federal Con-
 stitutional Court rules on the constitutionality of laws and, regulations and relies
 on the constituent republic authorities to enforce its rulings.
 The Federal Criminal Code of the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
 remains in force. Considerable confusion and room for abuse remain in the legal sys-
 tem because the 1990 Constitution of Serbia has not yet been brought into conform-
 ity -with the 1992 Constitution of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Under federal
 law, defendants have-the right to be present at their trial and to have an attorney
 represent them, at public expense if needed. The -courts also must provide inter-
 preters. The presiding judge decides what is read into the record of the proceedings.
 Either the defendant or the prosecutor may appeal the verdict.
 Although generally respected in form, defense lawyers in Kosovo and Sandzak
 have filed numerous complaints about flagrant breaches of standard procedure,
 which they believed undermined -their clients' rights. Even when individual judges
 admitted that the lawyers were correct, the courts ignored or dismissed the com-
 plaints.
 Human rights lawyer Destan Rukiqi, who defended dozens of ethnic Albanian po-
 litical prisoners in Kosovo in recent years, was arrested on July 23 and severely
 beaten by Serbian police (see Section 1.c.). His arrest was related to an incident in
 which he raised his voice to a judge who refused to let him review the case file of
 his client.
 In November police in Belgrade arrested four students with the Otpor student re-
 sistance movement, and a court sentenced them to 10-day prison terms in a sum-
 mary trial with no right of appeal (see Section 2.a.).
 The Government continues to pursue cases previously brought against targeted
 minority groups 'under the Yugoslav Criminal Code for jeopardizing the territorial
 integrity of the country and for conspiring or forming a group with intent to commit
 subversive, activities-that is, undermining the "constitutional order." Numerous
 questionable trials took place in Kosovo during the year involving almost 500 ethnic
 Albanians. Over 90 percent of the cases involved alleged violations under the Fed-
 eral Penal Code of Article 136 related to "association to conduct enemy activity," or
 Article 125 concerning "terrorism." According to the Ministry of Justice, as of Dd-
 cember some 1,500 Kosovo Albanians were being charged or tried for crimes related
 to the Kosovo conflict. According to the ICRC, the Justice Ministry stated that some
 500 were being tried in absentia. The Office of the U.N. High Commissioner for
 Human Rights was monitoring the cases of 1,350 prisoners in the Pec and Prizren
 regional courts at year's end.
 Generally, the evidence in these cases was inadequate, and the defendants largely
 were denied timely access to their attorneys. According to international civilian ver-
 ifiers from the OSCE Kosovo Verification- Mission (KVM) office in Pee, some 80
 "nonprofessional"-judges work in the district and municipal courts there, of whom
 the vast majority are former police officers. Although there are two courtrooms in
 the court building, many trials are held in the offices of the judges on the upper
 floors where no members of the public are present. International human rights mon-
 itors observed a lack of impartiality by Serb judges in the municipal and district
 court system in the province. They also noted the absence of legal counsel for the
 defense, the absence of witnesses or experts during 'proceedings, and a failure to
 provide medical care during proceedings to defendants obviously in need of imme-
 diate attention. Continuing a common pattern of abuse, independent observers re-
 ported that several defendants met their defense attorneys for the first time only
 after the investigative judge already concluded the crucial investigation stage, while
 other defendants had defense counsel assigned after they entered the courtroom.
 
 
 1481
 Much evidence appeared to have been obtained by authorities through forced confes-
 sions of defendants under duress. Other evidence was kept from defense attorneys
 until just before the trial. Other international observers monitoring the trials of al-
 leged terrorists in Pristina complained of irregularities in the process involving evi-
 dentiary standards, the nonuse of native languages, and the failure to respect the
 presumption of innocence.
 Many legal scholars expressed concern in July over the passage of the Act on
 Lawyers, which is said to be an attempt to restrict the freedoms of lawyers and to
 interfere with the independence of lawyers in their dealings with clients. In particu-
 lar, according to an analysis done by the Helsinki Committee for Human Rights in
 Serbia, the law is said to give too much authority to the lawyers' chambers-both
 at the republic and federal levels-which the Helsinki Committee alleges would en-
 able the regime to exercise stricter control over the profession. According to a Ser-
 bian Constitutional Court- Judge, the law will also enable the regime to interfere
 with the lawyer-client relationship, which, even during the Communist era, was
 upheld to a greater degree.
 Ulsin Hoti, leader of UNIKOM, a political party that advocates Kosovo's unifica-
 tion with Albania, was in detention for the entire year. Hoti was in a Nis jail and
 was reportedly in poor health. His lawyers have been denied access to him since
 February.
 The Government introduced a constitutional initiative in July to rein in republic-
 level judges by discarding the provision that gives them their mandates for life and
 requiring that they seek office periodically through election. This process would in-
 volve obtaining Justice Ministry approval for each judge's candidacy. Local observ-
 ers fear that the provision would in effect make judges functionaries of the regime,
 easily removed if they do not cooperate.
 The Government continues to hold some ethnic Albanians as political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The au-
 thorities infringed on citizens' privacy rights. Federal law gives republic ministries
 of the interior sole control over the decision to monitor potential criminal activities,
 a power that routinely is abused. It is widely believed that authorities monitor oppo-
 sition and dissident activity, eavesdrop on conversations, read mail, and tap tele-
 phones. Although illegal under provisions of Federal and Serbian law, the Federal
 post office registers all mail from abroad, ostensibly to protect mail carriers from
 charges of theft.
 Although the law includes restrictions on searches, officials often ignored them.
 In Kosovo and Sandzak, Serbian police systematically subjected ethnic Albanians
 and Bosniak Muslims to random searches of their homes, vehicles, shops, and of-
 fices, asserting that they were searching for weapons. According to the Kosovo
 Council for the Defense of Human Rights and Freedoms, the police carried out
 scores of raids on homes, including in areas not affected by the fighting. Police used
 threats and violence against family members of suspects.
 Serbian security forces systematically destroyed entire villages in Kosovo by burn-
 ing and shelling houses, contaminating water wells, and killing livestock (see Sec-
 tion 1.g.).
 A government law requiring universal military service is enforced only sporadi-
 cally; it was not vigorously enforced during the year. The informal practice of the
 military has been not to call up ethnic Albanians. Of approximately 100,000 draft
 evaders living abroad to avoid punishment, 40 percent were estimated to be ethnic
 Albanian. This number in part reflects the large number of conscription-age men in
 the FRY's Albanian community. Leaders of Kosovo's Albanian and Sandzak's Mus-
 lim communities maintained that forced compliance of these ethnic groups with uni-
 versal military service was an attempt to induce young men to flee the country. Ac-
 cording to an amnesty bill passed in 1996, up to 12,000 young men for whom crimi-
 nal prosecution for draft evasion already had started were granted amnesty. Others
 who did not fall into this category were told that if they returned to the FRY their
 cases would be reviewed on a "case by case" basis, a policy that has not inspired
 confidence among offenders. Another law passed in October stated that draft dodg-
 ers who did not report for military service would forfeit their right to inheritance.
 In a related development, under a 1996 agreement with Germany, ethnic Alba-
 nian refugees repatriated to the FRY were not supposed to be prosecuted for fleeing
 the draft. However, according to the Humanitarian Law Center, many returning
 ethnic Albanians faced irregular procedures on returning to the FRY. The Center
 reported many misdeeds by authorities against returned asylum seekers, including
 physical abuse, threats of imprisonment, deportation, confiscation of identification
 cards, and a requirement that persons report to their local police stations on a daily
 basis. Returning ethnic Albanians and Sandzak Muslims are detained routinely on
 
 
 1482
 
 their arrival at local airports. In many cases FRY officials have refused to issue
 proper travel documents to children born to asylum seekers.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-The conflict in Kosovo placed civilian populations on both sides of the ethnic
 divide in an unusually vulnerable position. The excessive and indiscriminate use of
 force by Serbian police forces and the Yugoslav Army (VJ) resulted in widespread
 civilian casualties and the mass forced displacement of up to 250,000 persons by
 September, the vast majority of whom were displaced within Kosovo while tns of
 thousands sought refuge in Montenegro. The Milosevic Government's actions and
 the ensuing humanitarian crisis nearly resulted in a humanitarian catastrophe in
 the full.
 In Likosane in early March police entered the-family compound of the Ahmeti
 family, rounded up the male members of the clan plus one acquaintance-12 indi-
 viduals-and summarily executed them. A few days later, in Donji Prekaz, police
 surrounded the family compound of Adem Jashari, whom they believed to be well
 armed and a member of the KLA, and destroyed it. Over 80 persons died in the
 siege, including women and children.
 On September 26 in Gornje Obrinje, Serbian special police allegedly killed 18
 members .of an ethnic Albanian family, including women and infants. In December
 Serbian and FRY.officials blocked access for a team of independent international fo-
 rensic experts to the gravesites of those killed in Gornje Obrinje. On May 31, Ser-
 bian security forces attacked the village of Novi Poklek, near Glogovac.-Police seized
 10 ethnic Albanian men in the raid, one of whom was found dead later that day.
 The other nine were still missing at year's end and presumed dead. According to
 eyewitness accounts of international human rights groups, Serbian special police
 summarily executed 13 ethnic Albanian men in Golubovac on September 26. The
 FRY, in contravention of repeated U.N. Security Council Resolutions, denied inves-
 tigators from the ICTY access to any part of Kosovo, preventing them from under-
 taking a thorough and independent investigation 'into these and other atrocities
 committed in the province that fall under the Tribunal's jurisdiction (see Section 4).
 According to international observers, two masked persons entered a cafe in Pec
 during the .night of December 14 and began firing at customers. Six Serbs were
 killed in the attack,-and three others were hospitalized. Police identified 14 suspects
 and arrested 3 between December 15 and 17. In late December, a local police inspec-
 tor was killed in central Podujevo, an elderly Serb man was shot dead in the vilage
 of Obranza, and a Serb janitor was killed in Urosevac, all in circumstances that led
 to suspicion that the KLA was responsible for the killings. ,
 On December 27, three Roma were found dead in Kosovska Mitrovica. The Roma
 community reportedly attributed responsibility for the deaths to the KLA.
 The international community was engaged continuously during-the year in an ef-
 fort to compel Milosevic to act constructively to find -a peaceful solution to the
 Kosovo crisis. After police killed scores of civilians in late February in the process
 of trying to eliminate what the regime alleged was -a "terrorist" cell, the inter-
 national community imposed further sanctions, including an investment ban, which
 went into effect in the summer. However, further violence followed, and the North
 Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) allies stepped up pressure on the regime in
 the fall. In the face of the threat of NATO air raids, Milosevic agreed to steps aimed
 at mitigating the humanitarian disaster unfolding in the province. He undertook to
 comply fully with the terms of U.N. Security Council Resolution (UNSCR) 1199
 (adopted in September), which included demands that the FRY cease all action by
 the security forces affecting the civilian population, order the withdrawal of security
 forces used for civilian repression, cooperate with the ICTY, and allow full and
 unimpeded access for all international humanitarian aid organizations to Kosovo,
 including the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the ICRC.
 Miosevic also agreed to allow a NATO air verification mission to verify compliance
 with UNSCR 1199 from the air and to allow 2,000 unarmed civilian "verifiers" of
 the OSCE KVM to verify compliance on the ground in Kosovo. Agreements estab-
 lishing these missions were signed separately by the FRY, with NATO and the
 OSCE-respectively, in mid-October. In subsequent meetings with NATO representa-
 tives, Milosevic agreed to specific limits on Serbian police and Yugoslav Army pres-
 ence in Kosovo.
 According to a resolution adopted by the U.N. Third Committee in November, Ser-
 bian security forces damaged by arson or artillery over 20,000 houses in Kosovo, and
 the fighting resulted in over 1,000 documented deaths, including many small chil-
 dren and the elderly. International diplomatic observers witnessed Serbian armed
 forces purposefully destroying civilian property: police systematically looted,
 trashed, and burned villages and shot livestock with the intention of depopulating
 certain regions, especially the villages near the border with Albania. In the summer,
 
 
 1483
 international diplomatic observers and members of intergovernmental organizations
 witnessed Serbian security forces torching and vandalizing homes of ethnic Alba-
 nians after fighting between police forces and insurgents had already ceased in
 those villages. Other NGO's reported that areas that were occupied by Serbian secu-
 rity forces were at high risk for well water contamination. The security forces used
 the wells for waste disposal (i.e., garbage, animal remains, and other contaminants)
 when they departed. Numerous credible incidents were reported in which civilians
 were seized from intercity buses and held hostage by both Serbian security forces
 and Albanian insurgents. By year's end, the UNHCR estimated that there were still
 over 180,000 internally displaced persons (IDP's) as a result of the conflict in
 Kosovo. According to the Pristina-based Center for the Protection of Women and
 children, 89 percent of the IDP's are women and children.
 In addition to the terror tactics employed by Serbian security forces against the
 ethnic Albanian civilian population of Kosovo, credible sources indicated that the
 Miosevic regime sought to block some shipments of food into the province. When
 presented with a list alleged to have been prepared by Belgrade authorities of prod-
 ucts to be stopped from entering the province, Serbian police in Kosovo did not deny
 the operation, but stated that it was part of a countrywide campaign to stop "tax
 avoidance." At the same time, the Milosevic regime compiled at best an uneven
 record of cooperation and hostility toward nongovernmental organizations that
 sought to deliver humanitarian shipments to the needy in Kosovo, including to IDP's
 forcibly displaced by the police campaign of shelling, looting, and burning ethnic ,Al-
 banians' homes after fighting had concluded.
 Three local humanitarian aid workers were killed by mortar fire from Serbian
 forces in the summer, and others were harassed and detained on trumped up
 charges of "aiding and abetting" terrorist groups. On September 30 one ICRC em-
 ployee was killed and three others were wounded after their vehicle hit a land mine
 at Gornje Obrinje. On September 14 a KDOM vehicle also struck a land mine in
 the area.
 Separatist fighters set up roadblocks and denied passage to Serbs, including civil-
 ians attempting to get to and from work. In Kijevo over the summer, the KLA block-
 aded the Pristina-Pec road, forcing Serbian police to extract some Serbian civil-
 ians-including a pregnant woman-from the village by helicopter. Separatist fight-
 ers harassed Serbian journalists and took some hostage. In addition to credible
 cases in which so-called "collaborators" were killed, some ethnic Albanians employed
 by state-owned enterprises were threatened.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Federal law provides for freedom of speech and
 of the press; however, the Serbian and Federal Governments severely restricted this
 right in practice. The Milosevic regime's assault on these freedoms during the year
 was the most pronounced since Milosevic came to power over a decade ago.
 In October, after NATO threatened to intervene because of the deteriorating hu-
 manitarian situation in Kosovo, the Serbian Government issued a decree effectively
 allowing press censorship, possibly as a response to the perceived threat to the re-
 gime of the free flow of information and ideas. It later passed a new information
 law, which incorporated many of the decree's strict provisions that left the country's
 independent media severely constrained. Under the law, private citizens or organi-
 zations can bring suit against media outlets for printing materials not sufficiently
 patriotic, or "against the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of the
 country." Media outlets also can be fined for publishing items of a personal nature
 without the consent of the individual concerned (an apparent reference to political
 cartoons). The rebroadcast of foreign news programs, including from the British
 Broadcasting Corporation and the Voice of America, was banned. Media outlets
 whose practices do not conform to the new law may be subjected to exorbitant fines,
 which must be paid within a 24-hour period. Two independent radio stations, Radio
 Indeks and Radio Senta, were shut down. On October 28, criminal charges were
 filed against Nenad Cekic, the editor in chief of Radio Indeks. In October independ-
 ent radio stations Radio/Television Kursumlija, Radio Globus Kraljevo, and Radio
 Velika Kikinda stopped broadcasting altogether after government pressure to stop
 broadcasting foreign programs. According to its management, the Government froze
 the bank accounts of Belgrade City Television Studio B in early December, although
 the station was associated with a coalition partner in the Government. The Govern-
 ment annulled existing contracts with Studio B on frequencies and offered new con-
 tracts effective retroactively to June, which offered fewer frequencies at a signifi-
 cantly increased cost: $100,000 per month. Since Studio B refused to sign the con-
 tracts, according to the director, the station was already operating illegally, effec-
 tively providing the Government with grounds for closing the station.
 
 
 1484
 The Government shut down several other stations during the year, using confus-
 ing regulations governing frequency allocations, including Radio Kontact in Pristina
 in July, the independent city radio in Nis in August, and STV Negotin in Septem-
 ber. A problem Tat often renders independent electronic media outlets vulnerable
 is the deliberate vagueness of the relevant laws. Radio and television stations, de-
 pending on their political dispositions, can be harassed bureaucratically. Instead of
 obtaining long-term licenses to broadcast, stations receive only 1-year temporary li-
 censes if they are approved at all: The bureaucratic procedures are so difficult that
 stations frequently cannot possibly fulfill the requirem-ents-leaving them at the
 mercy of the regime. For example, under current law, to obtain a license to broad-
 cast, a station must obtain approval of a government "construction inspector" on its
 office space. But to obtain a construction inspector's approval, a station needs a
 broadcast license. In another example, in the spring authorities closed Feman, a
 newly opened television station in Jagodina and justified their action by the fact
 that the station was operating without a license. The station editor in chief claimed
 that the Federal Telecommunications Ministry had informed him that he did not
 need a licenseprior to opening the station- and led him to believe that there was
 a grace period during which to obtain proper documentation. Two other private tele-
 vision stations in Jagodina operate without licenses. The day after the station
 broadcast a program critical of the Government's financial policies, an inspector
 from the Telecommunications -Ministry,- escorted by five police 'officers, closed the
 station. According to the NGO Fund for Humanitarian Law, in the spring authori-
 ties closed downRadio Lazarevac, Radio/Television Studio M in Vranje, and Radio
 Herc in Zitoradje, much in the same manner as the Feman television station.
 In addition to license problems, those stations that do obtain licenses are forced
 to pay exorbitantly high fees, the nonpayment of which is enforced selectively by
 Serbian authorities to close down those stations that do not adhere to the Govern-
 menfs line.
 Although there are many independent television and radio stations operating
 throughout the country, their broadcasts typically cannot be received beyond the
 major cities. The only network that covers the entire country is the Serbian State
 Television and Radio Network RTS.An -estimated one-third of the population of Ser-
 bia only receives RTS, the official voice of President Milosevic.
 In October police beat an APTV cameraman in Pristina (see Section l.c.).
 According to independent journalists, most journalists started practicing self-cen-
 sorship in an effort to avoid a violation under the media law. Journalists had. been
 informed that printing anything that was not true-even an advertisement or a
 death announcement--could be punished under the information law. One independ-
 ent newspaper reported that it was publishing half as many articles as usual, in
 view of the new need to check extensively the facts in every article. The weekly
 Zrenjanin decided not to publish public statements after it was sued for publishing
 false statements made at a press conference, since such comments cannot be verified
 easily.
 The police harassed persons connected with the distribution of the widely cir-
 culated Belgrade independent daily Dnevni Telegraf. Kiosk owners were approached
 and told that if they sold the newspaper the financial police would look into their
 operations. Days after the repressive new Serbian information law was passed in
 late October, it was used to justify the imposition of an exorbitant fine on Slavko
 Curuvija, the newspaper's publisher. Police barged into the paper's offices, con-
 fiscated property, and prompted the-publisher to move his operations to Podgorica,
 the capital of Montenegro. According to the newspaper's management, it wanted to
 pay the fine and return operations to something like the conditions that prevailed
 before the crackdown, but the regime was more interested in keeping the newspaper
 off the streets. As a result of the media crackdown and its changed circumstances,
 the daily circulation of Dnevni Telegraf dropped from 60,000 to 70,000 copies to
 10,000 to 12,000 copies.
 Dnevni Telegrafs experience had a chilling effect on other independent dailies, in-
 cluding Danas and Nasa Borba. Both newspapers, less financially secure than
 Dnevni Telegraf, suspended operations to avoid fines that could destroy them. By
 year's end, Danas was publishing using a printing house in Montenegro. In Novem-
 ber Serbian authorities confiscated shipments of Montenegro's only weekly inde-
 pendent newsmagazine, Monitor. Although the magazine is completely Montenegrin-
 owned, Serbian authorities claimed that the law on information covered distribution
 channels as well. In November the regime attempted to levy a large fine under the
 Serbian information law on the publisher of Monitor. The Federal Government
 issued a decree in November that the independent magazine Ekonomska Politika
 would from that point on be part of the Borba publishing house. Borba's first act
 was to replace the director and managing director of Ekonomska Politika with indi-
 
 
 1485
 viduals close to the Yugoslav Left Party (JUL), the neo-Communist Party headed
 by Mira Markovic, wife of FRY President Milosevic. Publication of the magazine was
 stopped completely just as an issue highly critical of the Government's economic
 planning policies was going to press in late December. Nasa Borba and NT Plus,
 another independent daily, were still shut down at year's end.
 After the media law went into effect the Serbian Government started prosecuting
 the owner and editor of the newsmagazine Evropljanin. On December 17, Serbia's
 Ministry of Information issued threatening letters to five Albanian-language news-
 papers and magazines in Kosovo to the effect that they were in violation of the new
 public information law. Shortly thereafter, the newspaper Bujku was effectively
 closed down. Editors from Koha Ditore, the leading Albanian-language daily, Zeri,
 an intellectual Albanian weekly, and Kosovo Sot, a new Albanian daily, reported
 that threats against the Albanian language media, which began with warning let-
 ters from the Serbian Ministry of Information, were escalating.
 Throughout the year Serbian police systematically intimidated printing houses-
 including in November the Forum of Novi Sad-to prevent them from printing inde-
 pendent newspapers.
 Before the Montenegrin parliamentary elections in 1998, state-controlled RTS
 openly campaigned on behalf of Momir Bulatovic's Socialist Peoples Party (SNP),
 considered to be Milosevic's surrogate political party in the republic of Montenegro.
 In March Belgradepublic prosecutor Miodrag Tmusic called on police to inves-
 tigate five major independent newspapers (Nasa Borba, Blic, Danas, Dnevni
 Telegraf, and Demokratija) along with some unidentified television stations to deter-
 mine whether there were elements of "biased reporting" that incited terrorist acts
 or condoned terrorism.
 On December 10, the new government-appointed Dean of Belgrade University's
 School of Electrical Engineering Vlada Teodosic, ordered "filters' to prevent users
 of the academic Internet network from accessing the OpenNet web site, a major
 source of independent news and information. The measure also affects the independ-
 ent media and NGO's in the country, many of which access OpenNet through the
 university. According to Human Rights Watch, the filters appeared to have been
 prompted by a link on the web site to a political cartoon that showed Teodosic in
 a Nazi uniform and portrayed Milos Laban, another newly appointed administrator,
 as a monkey.
 Montenegrin newspaper publishers not friendly to the Belgrade regime frequently
 had their papers removed from trains and buses entering Serbia (see Section 2.d.).
 The KLA kidnaped two Serbian journalists for the state-run news agency Tanjug
 on October 13. The KLA finally released the two journalists in late November (see
 Section 1.d.) after a "trial."
 In May the Serbian Parliament passed the new Universities Law. It severely cur-
 tails academic freedom by allowing the Government to appoint rectors and govern-
 ing boards and hire and fire deans of faculties. Deans in turn under the new law
 can hire and fire professors-in effect taking away tenure and promoting regime loy-
 alists inside the universities. The law also discourages political activism among stu-
 dents, who were a mainstay of the antigovernment protests of 1996-97. According
 to the Belgrade Center for Human Rights, some 22 professors were fired and 30
 were suspended after the law went into effect for refusing to sign new contracts,
 as required by the law. By year's end, protests over the law were gathering force.
 In November police arrested four students affiliated with the Student Resistance
 Movement Otpor, and a court sentenced them to 10-day prison terms in a summary
 trial with no right of appeal (see Section I.e.). In one incident on December 29, un-
 known thugs (allegedly special police forces) beat a prominent student activist from
 the Otpor movement, Boris Karajcic, after considerable media exposure and his trip
 abroad to publicize human rights abuses in Serbia. Serbian police detained and beat
 another Otpor activist, Srdjan Popovic, in Belgrade on December 15 (see Section
 1.c.).
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Federal and republic-level
 Constitutions provide for freedom of peaceful assembly and association; however,
 the Serbian and Federal Governments restricted this right. In Belgrade in May the
 police beat university protesters over passage of the new universities law. In No-
 vember four students with the Otpor movement were arrested and convicted and
 given 10-day prison sentences in a summary trial with no right of appeal (see Sec-
 tion I.e.). In Kosovo the regime cracked down on peaceful demonstrators during the
 1997-98 academic year. When ethnic Albanian students in Kosovo staged peaceful
 protest marches in Pristina during the 1997-98 academic year, they were accused
 by the state-controlled media of instigating violence in one clash during the winter
 when police moved in with truncheons, tear gas, and water cannons. The regime
 cited the student protesters' unwillingness to apply for demonstration permits from
 
 
 1486
 the authorities. Moreover, the state-controlled media took advantage of the protests
 to accuse the Belgrade opposition of being in league with "Albanian separatists." In
 Sandzak the Milosevic regime banned all outdoor rallies, even for election cam-
 paigning.
 According to the president of the Presevo city assembly, police officers in Presevo
 (southern Serbia, bordering Kosovo and Macedonia) beat peaceful protestors dem-
 onstrating against the Serbian police campaign against Kosovo Albanians in the
 Drenica region of Kosovo. The police reportedly attacked the ethnic Albanian politi-
 cal leaders who were attempting to control the crowds. The police arrested and de-
 tained several ethnic Albanian leaders for 5 hours in connection with the protest.
 The Assembly of Presevo issued a declaration against the police actioi. The Assem-
 bly claimed that one leader was denied medical treatment and that an ethnic Alba-
 man journalist -was given a 15-day prison sentence.
 In response to the passage of the new law on universities (see Section 2.a.), be-
 tween 2,000 and 3,000 students protested in Belgrade on May 27, but police blocked
 the students from marching to the Parliament. No violence was reported. According
 to Serb authorities, the students blocked traffic and police were required to ensure
 that traffic through the city was undisturbed.
 The Federal and republic level Constitutions provide for freedom of association,
 but the Serbian and Federal Governments restricted this right. Prior to the most
 recent Serbian elections, in the fall of 1997, officials blocked the coalition Sandzak-
 Dr. Rasim-Ljajic from forming an alliance with the Kosovo-based Democratic Reform
 Party of Muslims, a move that protected regime candidates from additional competi-
 tion. During the year Serb authorities obstructed the registration of an NGO, the
 Independent Jurists' Association.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-There is no state religion, but the Milosevic regime gives
 preferential treatment, including access to state-run television for major religious
 -events, to the Serbian Orthodox Church to which the majority of Serbs belong. The
 regime subjected religious communities in Kosovo to harassment. For example, in
 1998 a Roman Catholic parish in Klina had the money, property, and permission
 (including up to the supreme court of Serbia) to build a church for its 6,000 member
 parish. However, the local chapter of Milosevic's Socialist Party of Serbia continued
 to block construction. Other Catholic and Muslim communities in the province had
 similar experiences.
 The Serbian Government made no progress in the restitution of property that be-
 longed -to the Jewish community, despite President Miosevic's promises to resolve
 the disputes. The Orthodox and Catholic Churches have had similar difficulties with
 the ristitution of their property.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for freedom of movement; however, the Fed-
 eral and Serbian Governments restrict this right in practice. The FRY Government
 makes passports available to most citizens; however, the authorities frequently bar
 FRY citizens from reentering the country. The Milosevic regime also continues to
 restrict the right of Kosovo Albanians and Sandzak Muslims to travel by holding
 up the issuance or renewal of passports for an unusually long period of time and
 reserves the option of prosecuting individuals charged previously with violating exit
 visa requirements. Kosovo Albanians also have problems with the issuance and re-
 newal of passports and are sometimes called in for interrogation by state security
 officers before passports are issued.
 Citizens reported difficulties at borders and the occasional confiscation of their
 passports. Ethnic Albanians, Sandzak Muslims, and Vojvodina Croats frequently
 complained of harassment at border crossings. There were numerous reports that
 border guards confiscated foreign currency or passports from travelers, as well as
 occasional complaints of physical mistreatment. The authorities generally allowed
 political opposition leaders to leave the country and return. FRY embassies overseas
 generally are considered to apply a double standard in issuing passports to their
 citizens; ethnic Serbs have a much easier time obtaining passports than members
 of ethnic minorities.
 Many inhabitants of Serbia-Montenegro who were born in other parts of the
 former Yugoslavia, as well as large numbers of refugees, have not been able to es-
 tablish their citizenship in the FRY, leaving them in a stateless limbo.
 The FRY Government has been very slow to issue passports to refugees. This is
 a particular problem for asylum-seeking parents. For example, German authorities
 issue such children born in Germany a document certifying their birth. FRY officials
 in Germany refuse to issue passports to such children. When these asylum seekers
 who have been refused in Germany return to the FRY with their children, the chil-
 dren travel on the basis of this document. FRY authorities take the paper at the
 port of entry and issue a receipt for it. Then the children have no documentation
 
 
 1487
 
 in a country where documentation is a basic requirement. In January 1997 a new
 citizenship law entered into force, which, when fully implemented, is expected to af-
 fect adversely the rights of many inhabitants, including those born in other parts
 of the former Yugoslavia, refugees, and citizens who migrated to other countries to
 work or seek asylum.
 The U.N. Special Rapporteur for the former Yugoslavia noted in 1997 that the
 new law would give the Ministry of Interior almost complete control over the grant-
 ing of citizenship. The Government served notice that it plans to limit severely the
 granting of citizenship to refugees from the conflicts in Bosnia and Croatia. The
 Government also plans to revise the eligibility status of a large number of persons;
 refugees who have been granted citizenship since 1992 may stand to lose their FRY
 citizenship if they have acquired the citizenship of a former Yugoslav republic.
 Observers in the Sandzak region also noted that Muslim residents who were
 forced to flee to Bosnia from Sandzak in 1992 and 1993 may not be permitted to
 return to Serbia, particularly if they obtained Bosnian passports in the interim. In
 violation of the Dayton Accords, Muslims from Sandzak frequently have been har-
 assed on attempting to reenter Serbia after visits to Sarajevo or elsewhere in the
 Federation entity of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
 As part of its campaign to undermine the reform government in Montenegro, the
 Milosevic regime also implemented a commercial blockade against the FRY's junior
 republic, a direct violation of the FRY Constitution's protection of the free flow of
 goods. Businesses frequently had their goods confiscated without cause by Serbian
 police. Newspaper publishers not friendly to the regime frequently had their papers
 removed from trains and buses entering Serbia (see Section 2.a.).
 The FRY Government cooperated to a large extent with the Office of the UNHCR
 in assisting (predominantly Serb) refugees who fled to the FRY from neighboring
 Croatia and Bosnia-Herzegovina.
 In sharp contrast to the record of the Federal and Serbian governments in this
 area, the Government of the Republic of Montenegro actually accepted tens of thou-
 sands of IDP's fleeing the fighting in the neighboring Kosovo province in Serbia. The
 international community contributed financial support to the IDP's in Montenegro
 through the UNHCR and other intergovernmental and nongovernmental humani-
 tarian organizations. In September the Montenegrin Government temporarily closed
 its border to Kosovo Albanian IDP's after almost 50,000 had entered the republic.
 The Montenegrin Government stated that the IDP's, when combined with 30,000
 refugees from Croatia and Bosnia, put too much pressure on the infrastructure of
 the junior republic, where the total population is only 600,000. Many speculated
 that the Milosevic regime deliberately channeled the IDP's in the direction of Mon-
 tenegro to undermine its multiethnic reform government. The issue of first asylum
 did not arise during the year.
 There were no reports of the forced return of persons to a country where they
 feared persecution during the year.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The three Constitutions-the Federal constitution and those of the Serbian and
 Montenegrin Republics-provide for this right, but in practice citizens in Serbia are
 prevented from exercising it by the Milosevic regime's domination of the mass media
 and manipulation of the electoral process. Through its control of the purse strings
 at the Serbian republic level, the regime sought to undermine the effectiveness of
 the opposition leadership of most major cities. Only Montenegro's electoral system
 showed marked improvement, with the Government of then-Prime Minister
 Djukanovic holding a roundtable with the political opposition, including ethnic mi-
 norities, in September 1997. The Montenegrin government invited the OSCE to take
 part in preparing election legislation in time for Montenegrin parliamentary elec-
 tions in May. Montenegrin presidential elections in late 1997 and the subsequent
 May parliamentary elections were judged by the OSCE to be free and fair.
 Djukanovies invitation to outside observers came in stark contrast to the grudging
 last-minute acceptance of monitors by Milosevic during the fall 1997 Serbian elec-
 tions. In February the Montenegrin Parliament approved a third law changing the
 electoral process and fulfilled the major recommendations of the OSCE. The law
 lowered the threshold for party representation from 4 percent to 3 percent of votes
 cast and established strict procedures to prevent vote fraud. The other two laws con-
 cerned voter lists and the media. The law also granted Albanians special status in
 accordance with an agreement reached by a consensus among all parties in the
 Montenegrin Parliament. The law combined regions where Albanians constitute a
 majority that are spread out among different cities into one parliamentary district
 
 
 1488
 
 that elects 5 of the 78 seats in Parliament. Minorities won seats both in the Repub-
 lic's Assembly and in the Republic's coalition government.
 The most recent Serbian elections, held in the fall of 1997, were seriously flawed.
 According to a 1998 study by the Belgrade-based Center for Free Elections and De-
 mocracy, both rounds of the Serbian presidential elections in September and Decem-
 ber 1997 involved widespread fraud. In the latter campaign, the Center estimated
 that 500,000 votes were stolen to give the victory for the Serbian presidency to
 Milosevic ally Milan Milutinovic. Several disaffected SRS members charged in the
 fall that the Milosevic regime extracted mandates from the Radical Party of Serbia
 in exchange for giving the Radical Party a role in the Government.
 Earlier, in July 1997, the regime gerrymandered electoral districts to smooth the
 way for candidates in the ruling coalition, expanding the number of districts in Ser-
 bia from 9 to 29. Most opposition politicians charged that changes in the election
 law, including the redrawing of districts, were designed specifically to favor the rul-
 ing party. The redistricting was one factor- that compelled a number of opposition
 parties to boycott the last Serbian elections
 Slobodan Milosevic dominates the country's political- system and is attempting to
 consolidate institutional power at the federal level as a result of his move from the
 Serbian republic-level presidency to the federal presidency. This precipitated a clash
 with authorities in Montenegro,, who were intent on protecting that republic's rights
 under constitutional arrangements and its position within the FRY, which is made
 up of Serbia and Montenegro. Manipulating power within the federation based on
 the comparative size of the Serbian and Montenegrin populations and economies,
 Milosevic has been able to circumscribe the-Montenegrin Government's capacity for
 independent action. As a result of Serbia's political crisis during the winter of 1996-
 97, Montenegro's then Prime Minister, Milo Djukanovic, began to take a steadily
 more assertive, reformist course. Djukanovic's victory in November 1997 presi-
 dential elections and his coalition's victory in the May parliamentary elections over
 forces led by incumbent Montenegrin president and Milosevic crony Momir
 Bulatovic threatened Milosevic's complete control over the institutions of power in
 the FRY and prompted a standoff. Bulatovic's supporters-likely with the backing
 of the Milosevic regime-attempted to thwart Djukanovic's victory by staging violent
 protests against Djukanovic's inauguration as President in January.
 Despite the Montenegrin Government's legal rights under the FRY Constitution,
 federal authorities under Milosevic's control by year's end had not recognized the
 20 Montenegrin members to the upper chamber of the Federal Assembly designtaed
 by the Montenegrin President The Montenegrins in the federal body, including the
 speaker of the-upper house, were not changed to reflect the results of Montenegrin
 elections. Moreover, in violation of the law, Milosevic installed Momir Bulatovic as
 Federal Prime Minister and ignored the Montenegrin Government's wish to have
 some voice in who was picked for this key position in the Federal power structure.
 Milosevic's antidemocratic control over Federal courts was demonstrated when the
 Federal Constitutional Court ruled against the Montenegrin Government late in the
 year in disallowing the Montenegrin president's attempt to select all 20 Montene-
 grin representatives to the Federal Assembly's Chamber of the Republics. The rul-
 ing was a complete reversal of a 1994 decision, which allowed Milosevic's ruling coa-
 lition in Serbia at the time to name all 20 Serbian representatives to the upper
 chamber while he was the President of the Serbian republic.
 No legal restrictions exist on women's participation in government and politics,
 and women are active in political organizations. However, they are greatly under-
 represented in party and government offices, holding less than 10 percent of min-
 isterial-level positions in the Serbian and Federal Governments. An exception is the
 controversial Mira Markovic, wife of Federal President Milosevic. She is the leading
 force in the neo-Communist Yugoslav Left Party (JUL), through which she exerts
 extraordinary and disproportionate influence on policy makers. (In Montenegrin
 elections in May, JUL obtained 0.1 percent of the vote, which according to press re-
 ports was less than the Party of Universal Flying Yogis. To avoid humiliation, the
 Party pulled out of the race at the last moment.) In Kosovo, a woman leads one
 wing of the Social Democratic Party of Kosovo, and the LDK has three women in
 its 12-member presidency. However, according to Albanian women's groups, those
 women are exceptional in their political participation, and few Albanian women
 enter Kosovo politics because of a lack of interest, money, and family support.
 No legal restrictions affect the role of minorities in government and politics, but
 ethnic Serbs and Montenegrins dominate the country's political leadership. Few
 members of other ethnic groups play any role at the top levels of government or the
 state-run economy. Ethnic Albanians in Kosovo refused to take part in the electoral
 process at the Serbian republic and federal level, including most recently in Serbian
 
 
 1489
 elections in 1997. They have virtually no representation in the Serbian republic and
 FRY government structures. However, this situation is not the case in Montenegro.
 Ethnic Albanians' refusal to participate in FRY and Serbian elections has the
 practical effect of increasing the political influence of President Miosevic and his
 supporters. Ultranationalist parties, including Milosevic's coalition partner the Radi-
 cal Party of Serbia, also have taken advantage of the ethnic Albanian boycott to gar-
 ner representation beyond their numbers. Ethnic Albanians in the republic of Mon-
 tenegro do participate in the political process. Albanian parties, candidates, and vot-
 ers participated to a large degree in the republic's parliamentary elections in May
 and won a handful of seats in the republic's assembly. Several towns in Montenegro
 have Albanian mayors. Montenegro's current ruling coalition is multiethnic. Alba-
 nians and Muslims hold posts at the ministerial and deputy ministerial levels in
 the new Government formed in July.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Governments of the republics of Serbia and Montenegro formally maintain
 that they have no objection to international organizations conducting human rights
 investigations on their territories. However, the Serbian regime routinely hindered
 the activities of and regularly rejected the findings of human rights groups. With
 some exceptions, the Miosevic Government's Federal Ministry of Foreign Affairs
 systematically denied visas to international nongovernmental human rights organi-
 zations and denied entry visas to investigators from the ICTY who wished to con-
 duct impartial investigations into allegations of atrocities committed by Serbian
 forces and Albanian paramilitary groups in Kosovo. In October the Government
 agreed to the establishment of the OSCE Kosovo Verification Mission (KVM). By
 year's end, the KVM had expanded to several hundred international verifiers, in-
 cluding human rights personnel, who verified civilian aspects of implementation of
 U.N. Security Council Resolution 1199. The Montenegrin Government's record to-
 ward outside investigations was much more cooperative, with the then Prime Min-
 ister taking the initiative to invite OSCE observers well in advance of presidential
 and parliamentary elections in the Republic.
 The Milosevic regime repeatedly has ignored the ICTY's orders to transfer in-
 dicted war criminals known to be living in Serbia, in blatant defiance of the U.N.
 Security Council, which created the Tribunal. It also publicly rejected the Tribunals'
 mandate in Kosovo and obstructed all efforts by the ICTY to investigate allegations
 of crimes in Kosovo.
 A number of independent human rights organizations operate in the country, re-
 searching and gathering information on abuses, and publicizing such cases. The Bel-
 grade-based Humanitarian Law Center and Center for Antiwar Action researches
 human rights abuses throughout Serbia-Montenegro and, on occasion, elsewhere in
 the former Yugoslavia. The Belgrade-based Helsinki Committee for Human Rights
 in Serbia publishes studies on human rights issues and cooperates with the
 Pristina-based Helsinki Committee in monitoring human rights abuses in Kosovo.
 In Kosovo the Council for the Defense of Human Rights and Freedoms (CDHRF) col-
 lects and collates data on human rights abuses and publishes newsletters. A num-
 ber of reliable international human rights monitors reported that one worker of the
 CDHRF was missing at year's end, and all the organization's workers are routinely
 and severely harassed and distrusted by Serbian authorities. In the Sandzak region,
 two committees monitor abuses against the local Muslim population and produce
 comprehensive reports. Most of these organizations offer advice and help to victims
 of abuse.
 Local human rights monitors (Serbs as well as members of ethnic minorities) and
 NGO's worked under difficult circumstances. Human Rights Watch reports that
 three humanitarian aid workers were killed by mortar fire from Serbian forces while
 trying to deliver food near Kijevo on August 24. Rexhep Bislimi, an activist of the
 Urosevac chapter of the Pristina-based CDHRF died as the result of injuries in-
 flicted by Serbian security forces while in detention (see Section L.a.). Police ar-
 rested Bislimi on July 6 and later took him to Pristina hospital in critical condition,
 with several broken ribs. He underwent surgery on his kidneys and died after sev-
 eral days in a coma.
 In May according to the ethnic Albanian Kosovo Information Center, Serbian po-
 lice raided the premises of the local LDK party branch and the local chapter of the
 CDHRF in Glogovac. Police broke into the offices, destroyed furniture, and seized
 written materials. The Council reported that the police seized written materials, in-
 cluding copies of all recent human rights reports.
 Serbian police arrested a local human rights activist, Zahrida Podrimcaku, in
 Pristina in June. She had been investigating events on May 31 in the village of
 
 
 1490
 
 Poklek, where police sletained 10 ethnic Albanian men during an attack on the vil-
 lage. The body of one of the men was found the next day; the other nine are missing
 and presumed dead. Podrimcaku was charged with supporting terrorists and was
 awaiting trial as of the end of September.
 NGO's reported several iblockages to the deliverydof humanitarian commodities.
 The Mother Teresa Society, a local humanitarian aid NGO, reported consistent har-
 assment and detention of its staff. NGO's and the press reported that some 50 hu-
 -manitarian aid workers were missing from Prizren. Mercy Corps-Pristina reported
 that police raided the warehouse of the Mother Teresa Society in Vucitrn in July.
 Serbian police confiscated 12.5 metric tons of flour and about 350 pounds (800 kg)
 of detergent during the distribution of relief supplies. Police also beat two aid work-
 ers and their driver.
 ICRC officials complained in September of difficulties in securing access to detain-
 ees. However, by year's end ICRO officials reported that access to detainees im-
 proved (see Section 1.d.).c
 On December 10, Serbian police in armored ehicles prevented a Finnish forensic
 team from visiting the" site of an alleged massacre of ethnic Albanians at Gornje
 Obrinje. Serbian authorities insisted on accompanying the team but would not per-
 mit ethnic Albanian observers to participate as well. Serbian authorities also failed
 to allow access to ICTY investigators to the Kosovo province, preventing the ICTY
 from carrying out independent and objective investigations into crimes within the
 Tribunal's jurisdiction.-
 Several NGO's and international organizations reported to international observers
 'in December that they were experiencing xmnacceptable delays of up to a month or
 more in obtaining Serbian government approval of visas for international humani-
 tarian aid workers for Kosovo.                 .
 As a signatory of the 1995 Dayton Accords that enddd the war in Bosnia and
 Herzegovina, Serbia-Montenegro is obliged to cooperate fully with the ICTY by turn-
 ing over to the Tribunal the persons on its territory who were indicted for war
 crimes or other crimes against humanity under the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.
 In December, in open defiance oftUNSaR 1207 and previous resolutions that de-
 manded that the FRY turn over all indicted war criminals on its territory, a Bel-
 grade military court invited three Yugoslav generals, two retired and one active,
 who were indicted by the- ICTY to "hearings." The Vukovar Three" as they are
 known-Veselin Slivancanin, Mile Mrksic, and Miroslav Radic-were indited by
 the Tribunal in 1995 for their role in the murder of over 200 unarmed men at
 Vukovar Hospital in Croatia 1991. They appeared at the hearings in Belgrade in
 late December, in open defiance of the Tribunal's request for deferment of the case
 to its jurisdiction. The Milosevic government's actions constituted an open acknowl-
 edgment that itlharbors indicted war criminals. In the 5 years since the Tribunal
 was established, the Milosevic regime has yet to transfer one Serbian or Bosnian
 Serb indictee to the Hague, in violation of its obligations under repeated U.N. Secu-
 rity Council resolutions and its commitments under the Dayton Accords. Some of
 those indictad live openly in Serbia, and others travel freely in and out of Serbia.
 It is widely alleged that Ratko Mladic, who was indicted by the Tribunal in 1995
 for his command and responsibility role in crimes against humanity, grave breaches
 of the Geneva Conventions, and violations of the laws and customs of war commit-
 ted during the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina, continues to travel in and out
 of the country. In August indicted war crimes suspect Slobodan Miljkovic was killed
 in a barroom brawl in the Serbian city of Kragujevac.
 The Mlosevic regime's brutal crackdown in Kosovo prompted calls for the ICTY
 to conduct investigations into alleged atrocities committed there. The ICTY's juris-
 '-diction also is delineated clearly under UNSRe 827 of 1993 and many subsequent
 resolutions. The regime so far has been uncooperative, claiming that the violence
 in Kosovo does not constitute an "armed confict." In contrast, authorities in Mon-
 tenegro have cooperated with the ICTY.    -
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 While Federal and republic laws provide for equal rights for all citizens, regard-
 less of ethnic group, religion, language, or social status, and prohibit discrimination
 against women, in reality the legal systemprvides little protection to such groups.
 Women.-he traditionally high level of domestic violence persisted. The few offi-
 cial agencies dedicated to coping with family violence have inadequate resources and
 are limited in their activity by social pressure to keep families together at all costs.
 Few victims of spousal abuse ever file complaints with the authorities. The Center
 for Autonomous Women's Rights offers a rape and spousal abuse hot line, as well
 as sponsors a number of self-help groups. The Center alsO offered help to refugee
 
 
 1491
 
 women, many of whom experienced extreme abuse or rape during the conflict in the
 former Yugoslavia. However, tradition prevents much discussion of the topic of rape
 among Albanians, since the act is seen as dishonoring the entire family. According
 to the Center for the Protection of Women and Children in Pristina, rape is not rec-
 ognized as a crime in Albanian society, making the subject even more secretive.
 Women do not enjoy status equal to men in the FRY, and relatively few women
 obtain upper level management positions in commerce. Traditional patriarchal ideas
 of gender roles, which hold that women should be subservient to the male members
 of their family, have long subjected women to discrimination. In some rural areas,
 particularly among minority communities, women are little more than serfs without
 the ability to exercise their right to control property and children. However, women
 in the FRY legally are entitled to equal pay for equal work and are granted mater-
 nity leave for 1 year, with an additional 6 months available. Moreover, the lack of
 job opportunities for women in Kosovo has reinforced the traditional culture in
 which women remain at home. The cost of an education in Kosovo--fees for enroll-
 ment in the parallel system, transportation, clothes, and school supplies-made fam-
 ilies reluctant to send girls to school since the prospect of future employment was
 slim. Women are active in political and human rights organizations. Women's rights
 groups continue to operate with little or no officialacknowledgment.
 Children.-The State attempts to meet the health and educational needs of chil-
 dren. The educational system provides 8 years of mandatory schooling. Montenegrin
 authorities at one point denied the children of IDP's from Kosovo basic education,
 claiming that the republic lacked sufficient resources to educate this group. Mon-
 tenegrin officials were working with international organizations in the second half
 of the year to seek assistance that would allow them to ensure education benefits
 to the IDP's.
 The current division of Kosovo into parallel administrative systems results in
 Serb and Albanian Kosovar elementary age children hei  taught in separate areas
 of divided schools, or attending classes in shifts. Older Albanian Kosovar children
 attend school in private homes. The quality of the education thus was uneven before
 the conflict started, and the tension and division oi ty in general has been rep-
 licated to the detriment of the children.
 An agreement negotiated under the auspices of the Rome-based Sant-Egidio com-
 munity and signed in 1996 by President Milosevic and Dr. Ibrahim Rugova, the
 leader of the Democratic Leage of Kosovo, sought to resolve the division of the edu-
 cational system  and lend impetus to efforts to normalize te situation within
 Kosovo. An "implementation" ageement was signed in March, but it unraveled as
 a result of the outbreak of conflict in Kosovo at about the same time. Small gains
 remain, including the turnover of a large classroom facility to the ethnic Albanian
 parallel university in Pristina. In November the U.N. Children's Fund estimated
 that between 55,000 and 60,000 Albanian children were not in school in the Alba-
 nian parallel educational system because schools were not functioning in Decane,
 Klina, Glogovac, Srbica, and Djakovica. According to ethnic Albanian educational
 authorities, there were 100 destroyed or damaged schools throughout Kosovo. In De-
 cember international observers reported multiple incidents of police being stationed
 near schools in Kosovo. Albanian villagers claimed that they were intimidated by
 the police presence and that consequently children would not return to those
 schools.
 Economic distress spilled over into the health care system, adversely affecting
 children. In Kosovo the health situation for children remained particularly poor. Hu-
 manitarian aid officials blamed the high rate of infant and childhood mortality, as
 well as increasing epidemics of preventable diseases, primarily on poverty that led
 to malnutrition and poor hygiene and to the deterioration of public sanitation. Eth-
 nic minorities in some cases fear Serb state-run medical facilities, which results in
 a low rate of immunization and a reluctance to seek timely medical attention. Ac-
 cording to the Center for Protection of Women and Children in Pristina, 63 percent
 of Kosovo IDP's are children
 There is no societal pattern of abuse of children.
 EcopeWith Disabilities.-Facilities for persons with disabilities are inadequate,
 but the Government made some effort to address the problem. The law prohibits
 discrimination against persons with disabilities in employment, education, or in the
 provision of other state services. The law mandates access to new official buildings,
 and the Government enforces these provisions in practice.
 Religious Minorities.-Religion and ethnicity are so closely intertwined as to be
 inseparable. Serious discrimination against, and harassment of, religious minorities
 continued, especially in Kosovo and Serbian Sandzak. Violence against the Catholic
 minority in Vojvodina, largely made up of ethnic Hungarians and Croats, also was
 reported.
 
 
 1492
 
 National/RaciallEthnic Minorities.-There were credible reports that ethnic Al-
 banians and Muslims in Serbia continued to be driven from their homes or fired
 from their jobs on the basis of religion or ethnicity. Other ethnic minorities, includ-
 ing ethnic Hungarians in Vojvodina, also allege discrimination. Vojvodina Croats re-
 ported no progress during the year on their demand for separate curriculums in the
 schools or programs in the media in the Croatian language. However, an hour was
 set aside for programs in Croatian on the local radio station, Radio Subotica.
 The Romani population generally is tolerated, and there is no official discrimina-
 tion. Roma have the right to vote, and there are two small Romani parties. How-
 ever, prejudice against Roma is widespread. Local authorities often ignore or con-
 done societal intimidation of the Romani community. Skinheads and police occasion-
 ally violently attacked Roma (see Section 1.c.).
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-All workers except military and police personnel
 have the legal right to join or form unions. Unions are either official (government
 affiliated) or independent. The total labor force is approximately 2.3 million. The
 government-controlled Alliance of Independent Labor Unions (Samostalni Sindikati)
 claims 1.8 million members but probably numbers closer to 1 million in reality. The
 largest independent union is the United Branch Independent Labor Unions
 (Nezavisnost), which has about 170,000 members. Most other independent unions
 are sector specific, for example, the Independent Union of Bank Employees (12,000
 members). Due to the poor state of the economy, over one-half of union workers are
 on long-term mandatory leave from their firms pending increases in production. The
 independent unions, while active in recruiting new members, have not yet reached
 the size needed to enable countrywide strikes. The independent unions also claim
 that the Government prevents effective recruiting through a number of tactics,
 which include preventing the busing of workers to strikes, threatening the job secu-
 rityof members, and failing to grant visas to foreign visitors who support independ-
 ent inions. Some foreign union organizers managed to secure visas during the year
 after long delays. ,
 The largely splintered approach of the independent unions left them little to show
 in terms of increased wages or improved working conditions. The Nezavisnost union
 gained new members as a result of its well-organized and tough bargaining posi-
 tions during strikes of teachers and health workers in the spring. The official union
 lost credibility with some of its members because it ultimately accommodated the
 government's position on these strikes. The ability of unions to affiliate internation-
 ally remains constrained.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-While this right is provided
 for under law, collective bargaining remains at a rudimentary level of development.
 Individual unions tend to be very narrow and pragmatic in their aims, unable to
 join with unions in other sectors to bargain for common purposes. The history of
 trade unionism in the country has centered not on bargaining for the collective
 needs of all workers but rather for the specific needs of a given group of workers.
 Thus, coal workers, teachers, health workers, and electric power industry employees
 have been ineffective in finding common denominators (e.g., job security protection,
 minimum safety standards, universal workers' benefits, etc.) on which to negotiate.
 The overall result is a highly fragmented labor structure composed of workers who
 relate to the needs of their individual union but rarely to those of other workers.
 Additionally, job security fears, which stem from the high rate of unemployment,
 limited workers' militancy.
 The Government still is seeking to develop free trade zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced labor, including that per-
 formed by children, is prohibited by law and is not known to occur.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The mini-
 mum age for employment is 16 years, although in villages and farming communities
 it is not unusual to find younger children at work assisting their families. With an
 actual unemployment rate (registered unemployed plus redundant workers who
 show up at the workplace but perform only minimal work) in excess of 60 percent,
 real employment opportunities for children are nonexistent. Forced and bonded
 labor by children is prohibited by law and is not known to occur (see Section 6.c.).
 However, children can be found in a variety: of unofficial "retail" jobs, typically
 washing car windows or selling small items such as cigarettes.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Large government enterprises, including all
 the major banks, industrial, and trading companies generally observe minimum
 wage standards. The monthly minimum wage is approximately $20 to $40 (Din 250
 to 500). However, this figure is roughly comparable to unemployment benefits and
 (at least theoretically) is paid to workers who have been placed in a mandatory
 
 
 1493
 leave status. The actual minimum wage is at the low end of the range of average
 net salaries, $85 to $106 (Din 700 to 1,200). The minimum wage is insufficient to
 provide a decent standard of living for a worker and family. The cost of food and
 utilities alone for a family of four is estimated to be $230 (Din 2,150) per month.
 Private enterprises use the minimum wage as a guide but tend to pay somewhat
 higher average wages.
 Reports of sweatshops operating in the country are rare, although some privately
 owned textile factories operate in very poor conditions. The official workweek, listed
 as 40 hours, had little meaning in an economy with massive underemployment and
 unemployment. Neither employers nor employees tended to give high priority to the
 enforcement of established occupational safety and health regulations, focusing their
 efforts instead on economic survival. In light of the competition for employment, and
 the high degree of government control over the economy, workers are not free to
 leave hazardous work situations without risking the loss of their employment.
