 SERBIA-MONTENEGRO
 The United States and the international community do not recognize Serbia-
 Montenegro as the successor state to the former Yugoslavia and have suspended the
 "Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" ( FRY") from participation in the United Nations,
 the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE), and other inter-
 national organizations.
 Serbia-Montenegro is dominated by Slobodan Milosevic, who is serving his second
 5-year term as President of Serbia. He controls the country through his Socialist
 Party of Serbia (SPS), which lacks majorities in both the "Federal" and Serbian Par-
 liaments but holds the key administrative positions. The SPS abolished the political
 autonomy of Kosovo and Vojvodina in 1990, and all significant decisionmaking since
 that time has been centralized under Milosevic in Belgrade.
 As a key element of his hold on power, Milosevic wields strong control over the
 Serbian police, a heavily armed force of perhaps 100,000 which is guilty of exten-
 sive, brutal, and systematic human righs abuses, including extrajudicial killings.
 Another important factor in Milosevic's rise to power and almost total domination
 of the Government is his control and manipulation of the media. Freedom of the
 press is greatly circumscribed. The Government discouraged independent media and
 resorted to surveillance, harassment, and eventual suppression to inhibit the media
 from reporting its repressive and violent acts. At year's end, the Government's legal
 moves against a major independent newspaper threatened to still its voice. Police
 elements routinely monitor opposition leaders, human rights workers, and political
 dissidents.
 In addition to the absolute power which Milosevic wields over Serbia-Montenegro,
 until Augst his Government actively fostered violence in Bosnia and Herzegovina
 by providing military, economic, political, and moral support to ethnic Serbs respon-
 sible for massive human rights abuses including "ethnic cleansing." The Govern-
 
 
 950
 ment of Serbia-Montenegro announced at that time that it would stop the flow of
 all nonhumanitarian aid across its boundaries into Bosnia and Herzegovina; in Sep-
 tember, it allowed the deployment of a mission sponsored by the International Con-
 ference on the Former Yugoslavia (ICFY) to observe adherence to border controls.
 In return, the United Nations Security Council voted to suspend temporarily some
 of the sanctions previously imposed on Serbia-Montenegro so long as ICFY observers
 continue to verify that the border remains closed.
 U.N. economic sanctions continued to impact the economy for the third successive
 year. An economic stabilization program introduced in January succeeded in bring-
 ing hyperinflation under control, but by year's end the program was beginning to
 show serious cracks. The hard currency black market had reappeared, consumers
 struggled under the double burden of high prices and a shortage of local currency,
 unemployment continued at levels in excess of 50 percent, and independent labor
 unions tried unsuccessfully to mobilize labor protests. The net results were the re-
 duction of a once thriving middle class to near subsistence levels and concomitant
 increases in crime, including organized drug trafficking.
 The Government continued to inflict egregious abuses on the one-third of the pop-
 ulation who are not ethnic Serbs, and repressed voices of opposition in the ethnic
 Serb community as well. Government officials carried out sanctioned extrajudicial
 killings, torture, brutal beatings, arbitrary arrest, and a general campaign to keep
 the non-Serb populations repressed. While an atmosphere of fear and violence per-
 vades all of Serbia-Montenegro, the ethnic Albanians of Kosovo and the Muslims of
 Sandzak suffer the heaviest abuses. Repressive acts against these minorities in-
 creased dramatically after the Government refused to extend the mandate of the
 CSCE monitoring missions in 1993.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial K1dling.-Political violence in Serbia-
 Montenegro, including killings by police, resulted mostly from direct and indirect ef-
 forts by Serbian authorities to suppress and intimidate ethnic majority groups.
 Leaders of minority communities in Kosovo and Sandzak, and to a lesser extent
 Vojvodina, reported numerous acts of violence and intimidation aimed at repressing
 non-Serbs and Muslims. The level of violence was most severe in the Albanian- pop-
 ulated region of Kosovo, where police repressed expressions of political and commu-
 nity life, and in the Muslim-populated region of Sandzak, where "ethnic cleansing"
 continued, with homes inhabited by Muslims being turned over to Serbs.
 According to the Council for the Defense of Human Rights and Freedoms
 (CDIRF), a monitoring organization based in Pristina, Kosovo, 17 ethnic Albanians
 were killed by police during the year;, 11 of them were shot by police, and the others
 died while in police custody, reportedly due to mistreatment or beatings. In most
 cases, the authorities claimed that those killed were shot while fleeing or resisting
 arrest. Police, however, appear to have resorted to deadly force with little or no at-
 tempt to apprehend the alleged suspects by other means. A Serbian police officer
 in July shot and killed a 6-year-old ethnic Albanian boy Fidan Brestovci, while he
 was riding in his parents' car. The officer later claimed he had mistaken the car
 for one driven by a wanted felon.
 In March, following an argument in a Kosovo Poije restaurant, a Serbian police
 officer shot and killedFaik Maloku and seriously wounded Xhevat Bejzaku. Maloku
 evidently failed to produce a personal identity card on demand. The officer was de-
 tained for investigation, but no formal charges were filed against him. In early Au-
 gust, a large Serbian police contingent killed Hasan Ramadani, a former political
 prisoner, while searching his house in Podujevo for illegal weapons. In September,
 when violence broke out in the town of Decani during a police raid on market day,
 Serbian police fired indiscriminately, according to eyewitnesses, and killed a young
 Albanian mother of two while she was watehing from a window.
 b. Disappearance.-The reduced level of paramilitary    activity in  Serbia-
 Montenegro led to a sharp drop in the number of kidnapings and disappearances.
 Human rights agencies reported no new cases of disappearance or officially sanc-
 tioned kidnaping.
 In May Serbian authorities "extradtd" the notorious paramilitary figure Milan
 Lukic to Bosnian Serb authorities in the "Serbian Republic" (RS) where he is be-
 lieved to have been set free. Lukic was scheduled to stand trial for his role in the
 Strpci kidnapings in February 1993 when 17 ethnic Muslims and 2 Greats were
 taken from the Belgde-Bar train as it crossed a narrow strip of Bosnian territory.
 None of those who disappeared have been heard from. Paramilitary forces are pre-
 
 
 sumed to have murdered them, but their families continued to petition the Govern-
 ment for information on their fate.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 While the law prohibits torture, police in Serbia routinely beat people severely when
 holding them under detention or stopping them at police checkpoints, especially
 targeting ethnic Albanians. According to human rights agencies, police beat thou-
 sands of Kosovar Albanisns and SandzkMuss during searches for illegal weap-
 ons, and extracted "confessions" during interrogations that routinely udd bat-
 nthe suspects' feet, hands, and genital areas with fists and nightsticks, use of
 electric shocks, and verbal intimidation. In late November, Ismail Raka, an ethnic
 Albanian from Kaganik in southeast Kosvo died while in police custody. His family
 was told he had committed suicide by jumping from a fifh-floor window; photo-
 graphs of his body show evidence of torture a, severe beatings. Sabit Vlahia died
 in Podujevo in early December, and Hasan Cubolli, age 81, died in Podujevo on De-
 cember 27 while being held by the Serbian police.
 The use of excessive force in Kosovo and Sandzak was both routine and capri-
 cious. Police allegedly beat Sylejman Bytuqi when they raided his home in
 Malisheva and found an unregistered gun. Four days later, local police severely beat
 Mustafe Rukovci in Gnjilane after failing to uncover any weapons in a search of his
 home. Serbian police beat and harassed the family members of suspected political
 activists or those they believed to be in possession of illegal weapons.
 Apparently confident there would be no reprisals police often beat their victims
 in public view or in front of their families. On February 21, police reportedly
 searched the house of Ibrahim Havoli, an ethnic Albanian, and, because Havoli was
 not at home, beat his brother. Amnesty International reported that 2 days later, 40
 police officers searched the home of Shemsi Gashi in Pristina, brutally beating him,
 his 2 sons, and 2 guests in front of the rest of the family. In Pec, police took an
 ethnic Albanian secondary student off a school bus in April, beat him, and carved
 Serbian nationalist symbols into his chest.
 Police allegedly told one beaten man that they would drop criminal charges
 against him if he signed a statement saying he had not been beaten. They warned
 another one that he would have trouble with notorious paramilitary leaders Zeljko
 "Arkan" Raznjatovic and Vojislav Seselj if he talked. In May police in Kosovo
 stopped two men for no apparent reason as they drove their children to school and
 beat them so severely they were hospitalized for 3 days. When it turned out that
 the men were ethnic Serbs, officials at all levels demanded that proceedings be
 started against the police.
 Prior to 1994, the Government of Montenegro had generally displayed more toler-
 ance toward its ethnic minorities than had its Serbian counterpart. In February and
 March, however, Montenegrin police beat and tortured 25 Sandzak Muslims active
 in the Party of Democratic Action (SDA) whom they had arrested on a variety of
 weapons charges. According to defense lawyers, Hanm Hadzic was beaten for 48
 hours without a break, given electric shocks, and forced to wear a painfully hot as-
 bestos cap. Police beat Hadzic and the other victims with truncheons, making them
 count the number of blows out loud, tied them to radiators, deprived them of food,
 water, and sleep, and threatened to kill them. Police allegedly forced a truncheon
 first into Avdea Ciguljin's anus and then into his mouth. Sandzak Muslim political
 leaders and human rights activists believed the beatings were aimed at creating a
 climate of fear in the Muslim community to destroy the SDA and ultimately alter
 the demographic balance in the region by causing Muslims to flee.
 In the Sandzak region, Serbian authorities were similarly abusive. The Humani-
 tarian Law Fund (HLF), a Belgrade-based human rights organization, documented
 numerous instances in which local authorities used torture and physical abuse dur-
 ing a series of massive house-to-house searches carried out in Prijepolje between
 January 27 and February 17. Many of those beaten singled out district chief Mileta
 Novakovic as having been particularly brutal. Some beatings were clearly politically
 motivated. One victim told an HLF representative that his interrogation began with
 a berating for his political activities followed by a severe beating. Fadil Osmanovic,
 a teacher and vice president of the SDA in Berane, committed suicide after being
 torturd at a police station and ordered to report to the police again. In May police
 beat Mustafa Dzigal in a Novi Pazar prison afer questioning him about his contacts
 with CSCE representatives.
 Nearly 100 Kosovar Albanians and Sandzak Muslims have been convicted over
 the past 2 years and are serving prison terms on the unsubstantiated grounds of
 conspiring to undermine the integrity of the State. Insofar as the real grounds for
 these charges appear to have been that these persons were active in ethnic Albanian
 and Sandzak Mtuslim political parties, they may be said to have been prosecuted for
 their political associations rather than for criminal activity.
 
 
 952
 
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Federal law permits police to detain sus-
 pects without a warrant and hold them incommunicado for up to 3 days without
 charging them or granting them access to an attorney. After this period, police must
 turn a suspect over to an investigative judge, who may order a 30-day extension
 and, under certain legal procedures, subsequent extensions of investigative deten-
 tion up to 6 months. Police routinely held suspects well beyond the 3-day statutory
 period. It is generally during this initial period that detainees experience the worst
 treatment and abuse. During investigative detention, detainees theoretically have
 access to legal counsel, although in practice access is only occasionally granted.
 Defense lawyers in Kosovo and Sanlzak have filed numerous complaints about
 flagrant breaches of standard procedure which they believed undermined their cli-
 ents' rights. The courts ignored those complaints. In November and December, po-
 lice began a massive roundup of some 200 ethnic Albanian former members of police
 and security forces in Kosovo. Lawyers reported that most of those detained were
 subjected to harsh beatings and electric shock torture, held longer than the law per-
 mits before charges were brought, and subjected to more beatings after appearing
 in court.
 A group of 25 Montenegrin Sandzak Muslims arrested between January 26 and
 March 20, most of them active in the SDA, were held without charge for longer than
 the law allows. They were not allowed to contact defense lawyers until February 8,
 when the high court in Bijelo Polje, Montenegro, overturned a ruling by the inves-
 tigative judge that suspended their right to counsel. In the interim, police interro-
 gated the defendants in the absence of their lawyers and, after subjecting them to
 brutal physical torture including the use of cattle prods, obtained incriminating
 statements from them. In June the Montenegrin investigative judge widened the
 scope of the investigation to include another 12 suspects, further delaying the trial
 date. On December 28, 21 defendants were sentenced to prison terms ranging from
 2 to 7 years for 'attempting to undermine the territorial integrity of the State." The
 head of the Party of Democratic Action (SDA) in Montenegro, Hajrun Hadzic, re-
 ceived the stiffest sentence of 7 years, to begin immediately rather than after the
 appeals process.
 Defense lawyers and human rights workers have also complained of excessive
 delays in filing formal charges and opening investigations. The ability of the defense
 to challenge the legal basis of their cients' detenti'on was further hampered by the
 difficlty they encountered in gaining access to copies of the official indictment and
 the decision to remand the defendant into custody. In some cases, prosecutors have
 failed to share material evidence with the defense in a timely fashion, and Judges
 have prevented defense attorneys from reading the court file. The investigative
 judges, formally responsible for every aspect of the investigation, often delegate
 most or all responsibility to the police or state security service. Although this is al-
 lowed under law, the free hand given to the police often reduced the role of the in-
 vestigative judge to one of pure formalism. Defense lawyers frequently complained
 of difficulty in gaining access to their clients, even during questioningby the inves-
 tigative judge, a restriction rarely placed on public prosecutors.
 in a country where the majority of ethnic Serbs are armed, police selectively en-
 force the laws regulating the possession and registration of firearms so as to harass
 and intimidate ethnic minorities. Serbs are rarely, if ever, charged with similar
 crimes although they are equally well armed, generally with ilegal or unregistered
 weapons. An exception occurred in September when Serbian President Milosevic
 moved against members of the ultranationalist Serbian Radical Party (SRS). One
 SRS parliamentary deputy, Vakic was stripped of his parliamentary immunity for
 illegal possession of explosives and automatic weapons.
 Often, police in Sandzak and Kosovo simply order a member of an ethnic minority
 to turn in a certain weapon and a specified number of bullets within a set time,
 on threat of detention or torture. The victim, if not in possession of a weapon, is
 generall forced to purchase one on the black market in order to turn it in to the
 police. olice do not similarly harass ethnic Serbs, and despite high crime rates ar-
 rests of Serbs for possession of illegal weapons are rare.
 In January Serbian police arrested Rivzat Halilovic, leader of a faction of the Mac-
 edonian Party of Democratic Action while he was in Serbia, on highly suspect
 charges of espionage. The "secrt maps" that he was accused of handing over to
 Pakistani agents could be purchased at any Belgrade book store.
 In Kosvo, Serbian police continued a policy of frequent, arbitrary detention of po-
 litical activists. Following a concert in Urosevac commemorating the death of 5 eth-
 nic Albanians in violent clashes with police, Serbian authorities ordered the arrest
 of some 40 of those present, including prominent members of several local branches
 of the Democratic League of Kosvo (LDK). The police allegedly beat them in the
 
 
 course of interrogation. The arrests were designed strictly to intimidate and were
 not connected to the concert in any way.
 On February 4, three unidentified men kidnaped Veliko Dzakula, a former "vice
 president" in the self-proclaimed 'Republic of Serbian Krajina" (RSK), from a busy
 street in downtown Belgrade. The night before his disappearance, he gave an inter-
 view to independent television Studio B highly critical of the Yugoslav army. Five
 days after he disappeared, representatives of the RSK "interior ministry" admitted
 to holding Dza    a in Glina prison on charges of espionage. A Belgrade-based
 human rights lawyer claimed that Serbian police, working closely with the RSK
 state security service, kidnaped Dzaku a and extradited" him to the "RSI without
 allowing him to defend himself. Although the territory of the "RSK is internation-
 ally recognized as a part of Croatia, Dzakula was charged with a crime under the
 "FRY" Criminal Code.
 Exile is neither legally permitted nor routinely practiced. No specific instances of
 the imposition of exile as a form of judicial punishment are known to have occurred.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The authorities frequently deny this right to non-
 Serbs and to persons they believe opose the regime (see below).
 The court system comprises local, district, and supreme courts at the republic
 level, and a Federal Supreme Court to which republic Supreme Court decisions may
 be appealed. There is also a military court system. According to the Federal Con-
 stitution, the Federal Constitutional Court rules on the constitutionality of laws and
 regulations, relying on the republic authorities to enforce its rulings. The Federal
 Criminal Code of the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia still applies.
 Under federal law, defendants have the right to be present at their trials and to
 have an attorney, at public expense if needed. Both the defendant and the prosecu-
 tor may appeal the verdlict.
 Article 116 of the Yugoslav Criminal Code, which allows for sentences of up to
 10 years for "undermining the territorial integrity of the Federal Republic of Yugo-
 slavia," is often used selectively to convict Kosovar Albanians and Sandzak Muslims
 on flimsy or circumstantial evidence. In February Kosovo district courts sentenced
 more than 30 ethnic Albanians to terms ranging from 1 to 10 years under Article
 116 for allegedly organizing "illegal defense forces under an independent Republic
 of Kosovo. According to Amnesty International, defense lawyers complained that
 statements taken during interrogation--and subsequently used in prosecuting the
 Kosovar Albanians-were solicited under severe physical and psychological pres-
 sures.
 Delays and seemingly arbitrary changes in the charges similarly marred the ongo-
 ing trial of another goup of 25 Muslim poitical activists on weapons charges in
 Novi Pazar, Serbia. Defense lawyers did not deny that their clients were in posses-
 sion of illegal arms but maintained that the laws were being selectively enforced
 and used as a means of intimidating the Sandzak Muslim community. The trial
 ended in a conviction, but the original weapons charges were suddenly changed to
 the more serious criminal charge of attempting to undermine the territorial integ-
 rity of the State.
 f.Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Federal
 law gives republic ministries of the interior sole control over the decision to monitor
 potential criminal activities, a power routinely abused. Authorities regularly mon-
 itored opposition and dissident activity, eavesdropped on conversations, read mail,
 and tapped telephones. In December human rights advocates objected to an an-
 nouncement by the Federal post office that it had been registering all mail from
 abroad, ostensibly to protect mail carriers from charges of theft.
 Although the law includes restrictions on searches, officials often ignored such re-
 strictions. In Kosovo and Sandzak, police systematically subjected ethnic Albanians
 to random searches of their homes, vehicles, and offices, asserting they were search-
 ing for weapons. The CDHRF reported that in the first 3 months of 1994 police
 searched over 1,000 Kosovar Albanian homes, often physically abusing the inhab-
 itants.
 As an example of such methods, on a typical day in Kosovo (July 22), police raided
 H     oetmen and Nezir Maol's Pristina home and seized a licensed hunting rifle,
 searched the home of Hysen Hasani and his sons in Lipijan, and raided the home
 of Hasan Fetaj in Suva Reka, threatening to draft him into the Yugoslav army.
 Similar scenes were repeated thousands of times in Kosovo and Sandzak.
 In Januarnd, poice conducted a series of massive house-to-house
 searches in Priepolje (Sandzak). Police also routinely stopped private vehicles in
 Kosovo and Sandzak and searched them and the passengers without probable cause.
 Authorities often confiscated foreign currency from drivers and passengers, although
 it is not illegal to possess foreign currency.
 
 
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-The Government's decision to close the border with Bosnia in August, ex-
 empting only food, clothing, and medicine was an implicit acknowledgement of the
 support it has provided to the Bosnian Serba and their policy of ethnic cleansing
 since the beginning of the Bosnian war. (See the report on Bosnia and Herzegovina
 for an account of excessive force and violations of humanitarian law which the
 Milosevic regime consistently aided and abetted.) There were numerous credible re-
 ports of Yugoslav army units operating in eastern Bosnia as "volunteers." Following
 the downing of four Galeb-type planes by NATO forces in February, an obituary of
 one of the pilots appeared in the major Serbian daily Politika. Although Serbian au-
 thorities officially denied any involvement in the incident, the obituary announced
 that the pilot, a Montenegrin citizen, died fighting for his country-"Greater Ser-
 bia."
 In Serbia itself, authorities frequently subjected members of ethnic minorities to
 intimidation, with the goal of provoking their emigration. Ethnic Albanians and
 Muslims were severely punished for even the slightest violation of laws that were
 selectively enforced by Serbian police and judicial authorities. Harassment and in-
 timidation of ethnic Croats in the multiethnic province of Vojvodina continued. Doc-
 umented incidents of harassment and intimidation of ethnic minorities in Vojvodina
 were at lower levels compared with previous years, but the official statistics pro-
 vided little comfort to those who still retain bitter memories of forced conscription
 and physical abuse from the recent past. While overt forms of harassment were
 down, ethnic Croats and Hungarians complained about more subtle forms of abuse,
 including alleged plans by the Serbian government to alter the ethnic composition
 of communities by forcibly resettling Bosnian and Croatian Serb refugees. In Feb-
 ruary a self-described 'Chetnik" held Sinisa Vidakovic at gunpoint and threatened
 to kill him if he and his family did not move out of town. In Sremska Kamenica
 on May 7, an unknown person threw several crude, home-made bombs at the resi-
 dences of local Croats. A similar bomb exploded in front of the Franciscan church
 in Subotica in June. Local authorities did little to investigate the incidents.
 Although Serbian authorities prosecuted one former paramilitary leader for
 crimes committed in Bosnia and claimed to be about to charge others, many other
 known and suspected war criminals were never the targets of a formal investiga-
 tion. Some individuals suspected of criminal activity connected to the conflict in
 Bosnia and the earlier war with Croatia hold prominent positions in the Serbian,
 Montenegrin, or "FRY" governments. Other suspected war criminals serve as mem-
 bers of Parliament.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and the Press.-Although freedom of press and speech is
 provided for under law, this right is not respected in practice. Republic authorities
 use provisions of the Federal Criminal Code to restrict freedom of speech. For in-
 stance, the person of the President is protected by law from criticism. Federal laws
 are being used to overturn privatization processes and subvert independent media
 into state controlled media (Borba and Studio B). Federal law has also been used
 to set up progovernment radio and television stations run by local party heads
 throughout Serbia. The regime controls frequency allocations for broadcasters and
 has enormous influence on supplies and revenues for the print media. Although it
 continued to tolerate the independent but low-circulation print media of Borba and
 Vreme in Belgrade, both often critical of the Government, most of the population
 nationwide is dependent for its news on electronic media firmly under government
 control. The Government again blocked the attempts of independent television sta-
 tion Studio B and independent radio station B-92 to expand transmission of their
 broadcasts.
 Milosevic's control of the media, particularly state television, is vital to the
 strength of his regime. Through Serbian Radio and Television (RTS), the Govern-
 ment exerts editorial control over all news programming. The regime abandoned the
 most blatant forms of anti-Muslim propaganda in 1994, except in the tabloid press,
 but news concerning non-Serb ethnic minorities continued to receive very slanted
 and hostile coverage. The authorities generally tolerated publication of material crit-
 ical of the Government as long as dissident voices were kept off television and out
 of mass-market publications. They dismissed the editor of the semi-independent Tel-
 evision Politika from his position in August and fired him from the company after
 he gave prime-time coverage to one of Milosevic's most consistent critics.
 Shortages of newsprint caused by the deteriorating economy enabled the Govern-
 ment selectively to direct supplies to favored publications and to reduce financial
 support of independent journals. Serbian customs authorities seized several ship-
 ments of equipment and newsprint provided by the Seros Foundation for Belgrade
 
 
 955
 independent daily Borba and radio B-92. They later negotiated a reduction in the
 initial demand for a ransom amounting to thousands of dollars. In December, Borba
 was forced to reduce its circulation and number of pages because it could not obtain
 sufficient newsprint.
 The Serbian government, a minority shareholder in the semi-independent Bel-
 grade daily Bora, tried to use its 17-percent share to exercise full control over the
 newspaper. In September the Government began court proceedings against Borba
 claiming the means by which it had formed its stock company were illegal. In late
 December, federal government authorities through manipulation of the federal
 courts took over management of Borba, installing the head of the Federal Secretar-
 iat for Information as editor. In Vojvodina, the Hungarian-language independent
 newspaper Magyar Szo continued to resist attempts to merge with a Serbian pub-
 lishing house, fearing financial mismanagement would force it to close. B-92 has not
 yet been officially licensed and must continue to operate as a "pirate" radio station.
 Proposed legislation to regulate foreign investment in domestic media would make
 Serbian press connections with foreigners or foreign support of Serbian media illegal
 under most circumstances. In April the FRY" Ministry of Information stripped a
 total of 13 correspondents and staff working for foreign news agencies (mast or~them
 ethnic Serbs) of their accreditations for allegedly engaging in "anti-erbian activi-
 ties." It did not explain why it had singled out these journalists. One American re-
 porter who spoke with representatives of the Serbian independent media on the
 record about the revocation of credentials was given 5 days to leave the country.
 Studio B continued to struggle for survival. It faced eviction from its premises in
 favor of a proregime firm. Although Serbian authorities finally approved repeater
 stations for it, they refused to vacate the allocated mountaintop areas, preventing
 the station from extending its range of reception beyond Belgrade. Studio B lost an
 important sponsor and was forced to cancel a planned folk festival when RTS
 threatened the sing era with loss of their RTS recording contracts if they cooperated
 with the station.
 In March federal authorities prohibited ham radio operators from transmitting
 messages to Bosnia. For man    ople in Serbia-Montenegro, the estimated 15 pri-
 vate radio clubs were their onlylink to friends and relatives still in Bosnia. Military
 and civilian officials, accusing the radio operators of espionage and passing mil-
 tarly significant messages to the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina, began
 confiscating radio equipment and harassing the operators.
 Despite a precarious existence, the only Albanian-language newspaper, Bujku,
 continued to be published, and a number of new Albanian-language wee    be
 pubication. Bujku, which is independent of Belgrade and uncensored, clearly re-
 flects the views of the Kosvar Albanian LDK leadership. As such, it is the main
 source of information for the Albanian community. Radio and Television Pristina,
 however, remain firmly under the control of UTS and the ruling Socialist Party. In
 June Belgrade student radio Indeks went on strike to prtest the appointment of
 a new editor in chief forced on the station by the Socialist Pa  out movement.
 For same time, Indks played only the MTV satellite audio signal; it is now off the
 air, pending 'studio refurbishment.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assemby and Association.-Although the Federal Con-
 stitution provides for freedom of peaceful assembly and association, the authorities
 severely restricted these freedoms, applying the laws and reglations in a capricious
 fashion, Kosovo was singled out for particular restrictions of assembly, and Serbian
 authorities targeted so-clled parallel ethnic Albanian social structures for harass-
 ment. In February and March, local authorities in Pristina shut down bth the inde-
 pendent Kosovo Academy of Arts and Sciences and the Institute for Albanian Stud-
 ies, beatig Institute director Sadri fetiu and several staff members in the process.
 Local authorities, who had been threatening to close the Academy of Arts and
 Sciences for more than 2 years, considered it a symbol of the Kosovar separatist
 movement.
 As of midyear, police conducted some 420 raids on schools in the parallel Albanian
 educational system. In February they arrested Tafil Bahimja,  etr of an Alba-
 nian-language primary school in Krajane, and interrogated him about the school's
 curriculum, threatening him with physical harm.
 The authorities also severely restricted Albanian political organizations. The then
 Serbian district chief for Kasvo issued two separate public calls for a ban on all
 LDK activity in May. Arkan and his Party of Serbian Unity (SSJ) made similar re-
 pand, ciublic demands. Although the district chief was subsequently dismissed,
 Benira    ti r   did not dispute his contention that the LDK was actively work-
 ing to undermine the Serbian constitutional order. In July police raided a meeting
 of the Social Democratic Party in Kosovo Mitrvica, beting up the general secretary
 
 
 956
 and three members of the presidency. The president, Bilim Bislimi, was subse-
 quently arrested.
 In Sandzak, Serb authorities have arrested and harassed politically active Mus-
 lims, primarily because of their membership in the Party of Democratic Action. With
 most of the Muslim leadership in prison or in exile, the Serbian authorities suc-
 ceeded in forging an association between political involvement and police harass-
 ment that inhibited the exercise of free political expression and made political activ-
 ity a visibly risky prposition.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-There is no state religion, but the Government gives pref-
 erential treatment to the Serbian Orthodox Church, to which the majority of Serbs
 belong-including access to state-run television for religious events.
 There are no legal restrictions on the practice of religion, but police condoned peri-
 odic violence agaist religious facilities used by ethnic minorities and their inves-
 tigations into the fire-bombing attacks on Catholic churches in Vojvodina or vandal-
 ism of mosques in Sandzak were perfunctory.
 One human rights organization based in Novi Pazar reported that police sum-
 moned even more people than usual for interrogation on Muslim religious holidays.
 The Serbian Orthodox hierarchy in 1994 adopted a more stridently nationalistic
 tone in regard to events in Bosnia, a development that had a chilling impact on
 members of other faiths and non-Serb ethnic groups.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emrtation, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for freedom of movement. The regime gen-
 erally does not require exit visas except for travel to Albania, and makes passports
 available to most citizens, while restricting the right to travel of many Kosovar Al-
 banians. Serbian authorities have generally allowed ethnic Albanian leaders, includ-
 ing LDK leader Ibrahim Rugova, to leave the country and return, even though they
 consider his party and other ethnic Albanian parties illegal.
 Ethnic Albanians have frequently complained of harassment at border crossings,
 generally when entering from Hungary or at the border between Kosovo and Mac-
 edonia. There have been numerous reports of border guards confiscating foreign cur-
 rency or passports from travelers, as well as occasional complaints of physical ill-
 treatment. Serbian border guards and customs officials harassed Kosovar Albanians
 returning from abroad, sometimes refusing to recognize the validity of legitimate
 passports held by ethnic Albanians repatriated from Western European countries.
 Montenegrin authorities "deported" Serbian ultranationalist Radical Party leader
 Vojislav Seselj to Serbia for making comments at a political rally that were deemed
 "offensive to the Republic of Montenegro and its leaders." It also expelled 34 other
 Radical Party deputies to Serbia on a government-owned airplane. Seselj's expul-
 sion, almost certainly sanctioned at the-highest political levels, was a direct viola-
 tion of the constitutional guarantees on freedom of movement.
 Many refugees from the Bosnian conflict who had been living in collective centers
 or with host families in Serbia-Montenegro returned to their homes in Bosnia (or
 to homes that had been "cleansed" of their previous Muslim tenants). Serbian and
 Montenegrin authorities encouraged this exodus by threatening to strip refugees of
 their status or force them to serve in the Bosnian Serb army. In violation of both
 international convention and Serbian law, the Yugoslav army cooperated closely
 with the Bosnian Serb military in a roundup of refugees in January and February.
 In May Serbian authorities stripped over 100,000 people of their refugee status. Al-
 though they did not forcibly expel them, they induced many to return to "liberated"
 eastern Bosnia. Lawyers counseling the refugees who were called up for military
 service believed that both the Serbian Red Cross and the Serbian Committee for
 Refugees were supplying the military with the names and addresses of draft-age
 males.
 Many people succeeded in evading military service, and the authorities did not
 pursue draft dodgers systematically. However, the Government threatened to begin
 proceedings against ethnic Albanians living abroad who had avoided military service
 if they were repatriated to the "FRY." More typically, police who picked up young
 Kosovar Albanians found to be evading draft notices took them to army barracks
 where they were beaten and eventually released.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides for this right, but in practice citizens are prevented
 from exercising it by the Milosevic Government's monopoly of mass media and of
 the electoral process. In the December 1993 elections, the authorities denied opposi-
 tion parties equal access to the state-run media and omitted many voters from the
 registration lists. Observers noted numerous voting irregularities and raised serious
 questions as to the accuracy of the vote count.
 
 
 957
 Slobodan Milosevic dominates the political system in Serbia-Montenegro. Al-
 though formally president of Serbia, one of the two constituent republics in the so-
 called Yugoslav Federal Republic, Milosevic first weakened the authorities of the
 Federal Government through his control of the Serbian police, the army, and the
 state administration, and then placed his followers in key positions, including the
 Federal President and the Federal Prime Minister. Milosevic greatly circumscribes
 the Montenegrin government's sphere for independent action as he does not tolerate
 significant divergence from the Serbian party line.
 The domestic political opposition, hamstrung by these extralegal means of politi-
 cal control, proved incapable of providing an effective alternative to the ruling So-
 cialist Party (SPS). Although the SPS does not control an absolute majority of seats
 in the Serbian Parliament, it managed to coopt one of the opposition parties, allow-
 ing the Socialists to form the Government in January. In Montenegro, where the
 ruling Democratic Party of Socialists (DPS) enjoys an absolute majority, opposition
 parliamentarians complained that the Government often railroaded legislation
 through Parliament without time for adequate debate. In both Ser ia and
 Montenegro the ruling parties have effectively blocked legislation that would loosen
 their control over the state-run media.
 Ethnic Serbs dominate the political leadership in Serbia. Few members of other
 ethnic groups play any role at the top levels of government or the state-run econ-
 omy. The same is true of women (see Section 5), although in both instances there
 are no legal restrictions preventing advancement. Ethnic Albanians, as a matter of
 principle, refuse to take part in the electoral process, and therefore have little rep-
 resentation.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Local human rights monitors (Serbs as well as members of ethnic minorities)
 worked under difficult circumstances amid public insinuations by ultranationalist
 leaders and sometimes government officials that they were traitors. Police routinely
 searched human rights offices in Kosovo, confiscated documents, and harassed their
 employees.
 A number of independent human rights organizations exist in Serbia-Montenegro,
 researching and gathering information on abuses and publicizing such cases. Sev-
 eral operate out of Kosovo, including the Council for the Defense of Human Rights
 and Freedoms and the Kosovo Helsinki Committee. In the Sandzak region, a sepa-
 rate Council for the Protection of Human Rights and Freedoms monitors abuses
 against the local Muslim population and produces comprehensive reports.
 The Belgrade-based Humanitarian Law Fund and the Center for Antiwar Action
 (CAA) have a broader scope of activities, researching human rights abuses through-
 out the FRY" and, on occasion, elsewhere in the former Yugoslavia. The CAA also
 sponsors symposia and lectures and runs a small publishing house. CAA members
 set up a hot line providing legal counsel to refugees who received military induction
 notices and formed the Committee to Free Veliko Dzakula when the Serbian secu-
 rity service kidnaped him in January (see Section 1.c.). Serbian authorities carefully
 monitor the activities of independent human rights agencies but generally do not
 subject them to overt harassment.
 The governments of Serbia and Montenegro formally maintain that they have no
 objection to international organizations conducting human rights investigations on
 their territories. However, they hindered such activities and regularly rejected the
 findings of human rights groups. Serbian authorities refused to issue visas to rep-
 resentatives of a number of human rights organizations, including Amnesty Inter-
 national. "FRY" authorities soundly rebuffed numerous approaches about allowing
 the reintroduction of the CSCE Long-Duration Missions to Kosovo, Vojvodina and
 Sandzak. Officials on all levels maintained that the CSCE must first reinstate the
 "FRY" before it would be allowed to operate in Serbia-Montenegro.
 Diplomats from various CSCE countries stationed in Belgrade and traveling in
 groups were frequently denied meetings with Serbian authorities who considered
 them de facto CSCE observers carrying out an expired mandate. In May Foreign
 Ministry officials made veiled threats to expel Embassy  rsonnel who took part in
 CSCE-sponsored trips outside Belgrade. In October the Foreign Ministry again com-
 plained about CSCE Embassy members traveling to Kosovo, Sandzak, and
 Vojvodina. Repressive acts against ethnic minorities have increased significantly
 since the CSCE missions in Kosovo, Sandzak, and Vojvodina departed. In Kosovo,
 five members of the Pec ethnic Albanian communal leadership, on trial in early De-
 cember for "violating the territorial integrity of the state," were questioned exten-
 sively in court about their contacts with the former CSCE observer mission, even
 
 
 958
 
 though they pointed out that the mission had been present legally and with the per-
 mission of Serb authorities.
 In a change from previous public statements that they would not cooperate with
 the U.N. War Crimes Tribunal, Serbian officials in 1994 stated they would offer lim-
 ited cooperation with the Tribunal to the extent the law allowed. Both the Serbian
 and Federal Constitutions forbid extradition. The Government stated it will try
 those who committed war crimes within the country, and has begun proceedings in
 the case of the Vukovic brothers who are accused of killing Muslims in Bosnia.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 While federal and republic laws provide for equal rights to all citizens, regardless
 of ethnic group, religion, language, or social status and prohibits discrimination
 against women, in reality the system provides little protection to such groups.
 Women.-Traditional patriarchal ideas of gender roles, which hold that women
 should be subservient to the male members of their family, have long subjected
 women to discrimination. The hostile atmosphere of oppressive nationalism fostered
 b  the reg   e's war on non-Serbs and the increasingly precarious financial situation
 o most families have exacerbated the traditionally high level of domestic violence.
 The majority of Serb refugees from Bosnia and Herzegovina moved in with relatives
 or friends and received only minimal support from international refugee agencies.
 The strain of living for 2 years in poverty and overcrowded conditions resulted in
 family violence, particularl wife beatings, which human rights organizations report
 was largely ignored by authorities. While legal recourse is theoretically available to
 victims of domestic violence, few women, most of whom are fearful of being rejected
 b, their family, are willing to risk making a formal complaint. Police rarely inves-
 tigate women's complaints seriously.
 In the early 1990s, women's rights organizations in Serbia, originally formed
 around a strictly antiwar agenda, expanded the scope of their activities as they rec-
 ognized the growing need to help female victims of the Yugoslav wars. The Center
 for Antiwar Action, in cooperation with a number of women s rights groups, opened
 a hot line for rape victims. The flood of calls overwhelmed the small staf, and pro-
 grams geared towards assisting and counseling victims of rape have proliferated. In
 the summer of 1994, two of the largest organizations, Women in Black and the SOS
 hot line, opened a center for juvenile females and sponsored assistance programs for
 women refugees in camps throughout the country.
 The apolitical character of Serbia's feminist organizations allowed them to operate
 with little overt opposition from local authorities who, however, regularly ignored
 their protest demonstrations. Women in Black continued to hold weekly silent pro-
 test meetings, for which they received explicit police permission. Police, however, re-
 fused permission for a protest meeting that was to be held on a major Belgrade
 bridge in order to draw attention to the destruction of the Mostar bridge in
 Herzegovina. Feminist groups organized and held conferences in Belgrade and Novi
 Sad with the participation of women activists from abroad.
 Women are entitled to equal pay for equal work. However, they are vastly
 underrepresented at the top levels of government, state-run industry, and academic
 institutions. Maternity leave is usually granted for 1 year. President Milosevic re-
 jected a law limiting the availability of abortion as a restriction on women's rights,
 the first time the feminist community has found itself allied with the Serbian Presi-
 dent.
 Children.-Police violence against non-Serb children (see Section 1.c.) is the pri-
 mary abuse. Otherwise, there is no pattern of governmental or societal abuse
 against children, nor is child prostitution condoned. Children are not conscripted
 into the army.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-The ethnic minorities of Serbia-Montenegro
 suffered discrimination in all respects as the "FRY" continued its policy of "ethnic
 cleansing" as a means of creating "Greater Serbia" (see Section 1). In addition to
 the abuses described elsewhere in this report, there were credible reports that quali-
 fied Muslims or ethnic Albanians continued to be fired from their jobs on the basis
 of religion or ethnicity. Members of ethnic minorities were badly treated in the
 armed forces in which they were viewed with suspicion and often outright hostility.
 In Kosovo, court proceedings, formerly conducted in the defendant's language, are
 now conducted in Serbian; an interpreter is provided if necessary.
 Traditional societal discrimination against the substantial Roma population re-
 mains widespread. The two Roma parties are not well organized and do not play
 a role in the political life of the country commensurate with their numbers. The
 Roma have the right to vote, and there is no legal discrimination. However, local
 
 
 authorities apparently condone and even participate in their harassment and intimi-
 dation.
 Religious Minorities.-In the former Yugoslavia, religion and ethnicity are so
 closely intertwined as to be inseparable. "Muslims," for example, are considered an
 ethnic rather than a religious minority, although they are increasingly referred to
 as "Serbs of Muslim faith! in official propaganda.
 Serious discrimination and harassment of Serbia's religious minorities continued,
 especially in the Kosovo and Sandzak regions. Violence against the Catholic minor-
 ity in Vojvodina-largely made up of ethnic Hungarians and Croatians-is also a
 continuing problem. Individual Catholics were targeted for harassment by Orthodox
 "Chetniks," and a number of Catholic churches were bombed (see Section 2..).
 People With Disabilities.-There is no formal legislation to provide equal rights for
 the disabled. Only public buildings are required to provide access for the disabled.
 Plans for the Belgrade metro envisage elevator access for the disabled at all stops.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-All workers (except military personnel) have the
 legal right to form or join unions. Unions are either official (government-affiliated)
 or independent organizations. Workers in the official unions, whether Serb or non-
 Serb, have little real voice in their unions, and their bargaining leverage is cir-
 cumscribed by the Government. Consequently, they have achieved little in terms of
 bettering their condition. They are ostensibly permitted to join the independent
 unions, but these are so weak that they have been largely ineffective.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-While this right is guaran-
 teed in law, collective bargaining is rudimentary. Individual unions tend to be very
 limited and pragmatic in their aims, unable to join with unions representing work-
 ers in other sectors and bargain together for a common purpose, such as to elimi-
 nate safety hazards in the workplace or to provide certain minimum health condi-
 tions. The overall result is a highly fragmented labor organizational structure com-
 posed of workers who relate to the needs of their individual union but rarely to
 those of other workers.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced labor is prohibited by law
 and is not known to occur.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum age for employment
 is 16, although in villages and farming communities it is not unusual to find young-
 er children at work assisting their families. With the fall in industrial production
 by two-thirds compared with 1989, factories and stores have retained only their
 most experienced and senior workers. Over the past year it was extremely unusual
 to find a teenager in Belgrade working at any full-time or even part-time job. Unem-
 ployment, which unofficially ran in excess of 50 percent, was concentrated more
 highly among young, unskilled workers.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The economic decline, which began at the be-
 ginning in 1991 and was accelerated by the onset of U.N. economic sanctions in May
 1992, continued to exert a major influence on the conditions of work. While the Gov-
 ernment succeeded in stabilizing prices through much of 1994, a large gap remained
 between prices and wages. By November the average monthly wage had risen to
 about $94 (255 dinars) at the current black market rates. While there is no official
 poverty line in Serbia-Montenegro, banking and finance officials have used 250-300
 dnas as an "unofficial" poverty level for the average wage earner. The minimum
 wage, which is established in December by negotiation among the Government, the
 chambers of commerce, and the unions (both official and unofficial) was about $37
 (90 dinars) at the black market exchange rate.
 While the official workweek was listed as 40 hours, many employees worked fewer
 hours due to the economic slowdown. These employees remained, for the most part,
 on enterprise payrolls, continuing to draw a minimum monthly salary-between
 $29.50 and $59 (50 and 100 dinar)--plus food supplements as available. The Gov-
 ernment, which previously assumed responsibility for providing redundant workers
 with a minimum "unemployment" payment, shifted this responsibility in the last
 half of the year to enterprises. Many enterprises attempted to trim these workers,
 but concerted action by both official and independent unions may have helped to
 prevent further massive layoffs in the economy.
 Federal and republic laws and regulations regulate occupational health and safe-
 ty, but enforcement is lax.
 
 
