 SERBIA-MONTENEGRO
 The United States and the international community do not recognize Serbia-
 Montenegro as the successor state to the former Yugoslavia and do not permit the
 participation of the "Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" (FRY) from participation in the
 United Nations, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE),
 and other international organizations. At year's end, the Government was cooperat-
 ing with the international community to end the crisis in the former Yugoslavia, in
 a step-by-step process set out in the accords on ending the war in Bosnia which
 were negotiated in Dayton, Ohio in November.
 Serbia-Montenegro is dominated by Slobodan Milosevic, who is serving his second
 5-year term as President of Serbia. He controls the country through his Socialist
 Party of Serbia (SPS), which lacks majorities in both the Federal and Serbian Par-
 liaments but holds the key administrative positions. The SPS abolished the political
 autonomy of Kosovo and Vojvodina in 1990, and all significant decisionmaking since
 that time has been centralized under Milosevic in Belgrade. As a key element of his
 hold on power, Miosevic wields strong control over the Serbian police, a heavily
 armed force of perhaps 100,000 which is guilty of extensive, brutal, and systematic
 human rights abuses.
 The economy continued to limp along under the impact of the fourth successive
 year of U.N. economic sanctions. An estimated 1.5 million unemployed or redundant
 
 
 1010
 workers, in a workforce of 2.3 million, struggled to make ends meet by smuggling
 gasoline and other contraband goods. Industrial production, hampered by lack of
 raw materials and markets, sputtered along at an average 30 percent of capacity.
 Largely due to the central banl's continued tight monetary policy, the Government
 managed to avoid the hyperinflation that wracked the economy during the winter
 of 1993-94. In November the central bank devalued the currency in an attempt to
 stabilize the exchange rate, but rising prices continued to erode living standards.
 Despite initial euphoria, the suspension of U.N. sanctions in late December with the
 signing of the Dayton Agreement produced no noticeable improvement in the econ-
 The Government's human rights record continued to be poor. The police commit-
 ted numerous serious human rights abuses, including carrying out and condoning
 torture, brutal beatings, and arbitrary arrests. Police repression continued at a high
 level against the ethnic Albanians of Kosovo and the Muslims of Sandzak and re-
 flected a general campaign to keep the one-third of the population who are not eth-
 nic Serbs intimidated and unable to exercise basic human and civil rights. Police
 elements routinely monitor opposition leaders, human rights workers, and political
 dissidents.
 The Government put some 150 ethnic Albanian former security personnel on trial
 in Kosovo for conspiring to undermine the Government, using as evidence confes-
 sions obtained by torture. In Sandzak similar politically inspired trials targeted
 Muslim community leaders. The President of Montenegro at year's end freed his Re-
 public's political prisoners. Denial of fair trial and abuse of the judicial system were
 serious problems. The Government severely restricted the freedom of assembly and
 association, and tacitly condoned societal violence against religious minorities. The
 Government hindered the activities of human rights monitors. Discrimination and
 violence against women were serious problems, as was discrimination against ethnic
 minorities. Nongovernment affiliated unions are circumscribed in their attempts to
 advance workers' rights.
 An important factor in Milosevic's rise to power and almost total domination of
 the political process is his control and manipulation of the state-run media. Freedom
 of the press is greatly circumscribed. The Government discourages independent
 media and resorts to surveillance, harassment, and even suppression to inhibit the
 media from reporting its repressive and violent acts.
 Opposition politicians and minority ethnic groups are routinely denied access to
 the state-run mass media; they are vilified in the government-controlled media, and
 their positions misrepresented. This year the government-controlled press mounted
 a campaign against nongovernmental organizations (NGO's) and international hu-
 manitarian organizations. In some instances personnel of United Nations and reli-
 gious organizations were not granted visas to continue their work; in at least one
 case, the Government revoked the registration of a major NGO.
 Beginning in June, the police assisted in rounding up men of fighting age, mostly
 refugees but also some citizens. The police sent them against their will first to serve
 in Serbian forces in the Krajina and Bosnia, and later to training camps in Eastern
 Slavonia. The Government of Montenegro refused to allow refugees within its bor-
 ders to be forcibly mobilized.
 Already burdened with refugees from the 1991 conflicts in the former Yugoslavia,
 social services were almost overwhelmed by the arrival of some 170,000 largely eth-
 nic Serb refugees from the Krajina in August. In contrast to 1991-92, the police
 acted to prevent the refugees from commandeering the homes of ethnic minority citi-
 zens in Serbia and housed them in public buildings. While relatives and acquaint-
 ances took in many refugees, the Government sent the majority to areas inhabited
 by ethnic minorities, principally Vojvodina and to a much more limited extent
 Kosovo, further intensifying the ethnic tensions within the country.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Political violence in Serbia-
 Montenegro, including killings by police, resulted mostly from efforts by Serbian au-
 thorities to suppress and intimidate ethnic minority groups. Leades of minority
 communities in Kosovo and Sandzk, and to a lesser extent Vojvodina, reported nu-
 merous acts of violence and intimidation aimed at repressing non-Serbs and Mus-
 lims. The level of violence was most severe in the Albanian-populated region of
 Kosovo, where police repressed expressions of political and community life, and in
 the Muslim-populated region of Sandzsk.
 According to the Council for the Defense of Human Rights and Freedoms
 (CDHRF), a monitoring organization based in Pristina, Kosovo, Serbian authorities
 
 
 1011
 killed 16 ethnic Albanians during the year. Ten persons were shot by police or sol-
 diers and six died as a result of mistreatment or beatings while in police custody.
 Serbian police beat Shelka Latifi on June 27, both in his home and at the police
 station, where he was also thrown down the stairs. A friend, who had also been
 beaten, took him to the health center where police later threatened the medical staff
 who were treating him. He was taken home where he died. Photos after the autopsy
 showed that he had been severely beaten on the body and about the head. One of
 the policemen identified in his beating was recognized as the same man who was
 involved in the beating death of Sabiat Vlahia in Podujeva in 1994.
 On June 18, soldiers shot a 10-year-old boy on the grounds of a military barracks
 in Kacanik. Family members were notified that they could find his body at the hos-
 pital. They said that he had gone to fetch a stray goat as he had many times before;
 the soldiers later claimed that they thought the boy was trying to steal cigarettes.
 Crimes against citizens of minority groups were rarely investigated, nor were po-
 lice held accountable for their excesses. On the rare occasion when a policeman was
 detained, the case never came to trial. Kosovar Albanian Abedin Ahmeti was ar-
 rested on April 12 in a village near Mitrovica and taken to the police station. He
 was then brought to his home where he was beaten into unconsciousness in front
 of his family and then taken again to the police station. When his brother inquired
 after him the next morning, he was told Ahmeti had died on the way to the hospital.
 The physician's report showed that the victim had a broken finger, injuries on his
 hands, head, and genitals, and hemorrhaging in the brain. On April 19, two Serbian
 policemen were arrested at the behest of the public prosecutor of the Mitrovica Dis-
 trict Court and charged with the murder of Ahmeti. The case had not come to trial
 by year's end.
 On July 11, Serb policeman Boban Krstic was brought to court for having shot
 dead a 6-year-old boy and wounding his parents in July 1994. Krstic, who had been
 released pending a trial and received a promotion, was charged with "posing a
 threat to the community" rather than a more serious charge. The case was ad-
 journed by the judge pending a "reconstruction of events.
 b. Disappearance.-Aside from   the temporary disappearance of young men
 aribtrarily mobilized to serve in Krajina and Bosnian Serb forces (see Section 1.f.),
 there were no reports of disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Crue7, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 While the law prohibits torture, police routinely beat people severely when holding
 them under detention or stopping them at police checkpoints, especially targeting
 ethnic Albanians in Kosovo. According to human rights agencies, while some
 Sandzak Muslims, Roma, and even ethnic Serbs and Montenegrins suffered beatings
 at the hands of police, thousands of Kosovar Albanians were beaten and tortured
 during supposed searches for illegal weapons. Police extracted "confessions" during
 interrogations that routinely included the beating of suspects' feet, hands, genital
 areas, and sometimes heads with fists and nightsticks, and the use of electric
 shocks. Apparently confident that there would be no reprisals and expecting to have
 a broader impact, police often beat their victims in front of their falies. The police
 also used threats and violence against family members and sometimes held them
 as hostages.
 Observing the trials of former security personnel in Prizren, the Belgrade Hel-
 sinki Committee noted that while the accused had been taken into custody in late
 November and early December 1994, it was not until March 6 that they were in-
 dicted for criminal offenses. To obtain confessions, the committee noted, "torture
 was used extensively and liberally" by the security forces. The committee charged
 that security forces refused to allow medical attention to the detainees either when
 they were ill or when they were badly injured by beatings and torture.
 During his trial in Prizren in June, Blerim Oloni testified that he had been inter-
 rogated 14 times by state security forces since his arrest on November 20, 1994, and
 tortured on almost all the occasions, sometimes with electric shock. Rexhep Oruci
 told the court on June 14, that after his arrest on November 17, he was beaten for
 100 hours until November 21, when he signed a statement the police gave him. He
 said that the Serbian security officers had threatened his children with "liquidation"
 unless he confessed.
 During the trials in Pristina in June, Avdi Mehmedoviq testified that he had been
 beaten bloody several times by security forces. His brother had also been arrested
 and their elderly father was beaten and brought to their cells, on one occasion with
 blood visible on his head. Zeke Bekaj stated that he was injured so badly he had
 to be taken for medical treatment and was threatened that his brother and young
 son would be harmed if he did not confess.
 In May journalists in Montenegro reported an increasing number of police brutal-
 ity cases, some of which they termed torture. According to the weekly journal Mon-
 
 
 1012
 itor, whereas Muslims and ethnic Albanians had been the usual target of the Mon-
 tenegrin police, many of the newer cases were against orthodox Montenegrins and
 members of the Roma community. The Podgorica police chief was dismissed, in part
 in response to public protests against police brutality stemming from a case in the
 town of Spuz where police apprehended a man suspected of planting explosives at
 the homes of Muslim refugees. Local police beat him until he confessed, only to have
 a second person come forward and admit to the crime. He was then also beaten.
 In June the Interior Minister was replaced, and a new head of Montenegrin state
 security appointed.
 Police often administer their own brand of justice without regard to due process.
 On March 5, police broke up a quarrel among neighbors in the village of Seqeva
 in Kosovo and arrested four men, beating two of them on the spot. After the men
 had been sentenced to 30 days imprisonment, one policeman, unsatisfied with the
 sentence, again beat them severely.
 Police in civilian clothes broke down the door of the home of a 60-year-old woman
 on May 7 and threatened to cut off her head with a hatchet if she did not deliver
 weapons they claimed belonged to her son who lived in Germany. Police took her
 to the police station in Istok where she was held for 6 hours before being freed.
 The use of excessive force in Kosovo and Sandzak was both routine and capri-
 cious. The Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK), the leading political party in
 Kosovo, reported that over 4,000 persons had been beaten by police in 1994. In early
 March, two Kosovar Albanians waiting for a bus in Mitrovica were searched by po-
 lice and then taken to the police station and beaten, apparently because the police
 were unable to find foreign currency on them. Police eat Neat Krasniqi in the
 town of Kacanik for failing to halt at a stop sign while driving his tractor. On June
 5, an apparently drunken Serb policeman hit the car of Sedat Bajrmi near Prizren
 and then pointed his gun at him and began to beat him. Other police arrived and
 beat him badly, seized his identification, and left him by the side of the road.
 Prison conditions in Serbia-Montenegro are adequate, and there were no reports
 of abuse of prisoners, once sentenced and serving their time. The Government per-
 mits prison visits by human rights monitors.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Arbitrary arrest and detention carried
 out by the police are the most common abuses of state power in Serbia-Montenegro.
 Police often apply laws only against ethnic minorities, using force with impunity.
 Laws regarding conspiracy, threats to the integrity of the Government, and state
 secrets are so vague as to allow abuse by the state.
 Federal law permits police to detain suspects without a warrant and hold them
 incommunicado up to 3 days without charging them or granting them access to an
 attorney. After this period, police must turn a suspect over to an investigative judge,
 who may order a 30-day extension and, under certain legal procedures, subsequent
 extensions of investigative detention up to 6 months. Police often beat people with-
 out ever officially charging them and routinely held suspects well beyond the 3-day
 statutory period. It was generally during this initial period that detainees experi-
 enced the worst treatment and abuse. During investigative detention, detainees
 theoretically have access to legal counsel, although in practice access was granted
 only occasionally.
 Defense lawyers and human rights workers complained of excessive delays in fil-
 ing formal charges and opening investigations. The ability of the defense to chal-
 leng the legal basis of their clients' detention was further hampered by the dif-
 ficulty he encountered in gaining access to the detainee or acquiring copies of the
 official indictment and the decision to remand the defendant into custody. In some
 cases, judges prevented defense attorneys from reading the court file. The investiga-
 tive judges often delegated responsibility to the police or state security service and
 rar 'y questioned their accounts of the investigation even when it was obvious that
 coercion had been used to obtain confessions.
 Arrests and detentions for alleged crimes were carried out in an arbitrary fashion
 against members of ethnic minorities. In a country where the majority of ethnic
 Serbs are armed, police selectively enforced the laws regulating the possession and
 registration of firearms so as to harass and intimidate ethnic minorities. In March
 19 ethnic Muslims of the Sandzak region were brought to trial in the local court
 at Play for illegal possession of weapons. The most frequent justification given for
 searches of homes and arrests was illegal possession of weapons; Serbs were rarely
 charged with similar crimes although the weapons they possess are typically unreg-
 istered or otherwise illegal.
 Family members were sometimes held hostage by police. On January 7, when Ser-
 bian police failed to find a man they sought in the town of Vitia, they arrested his
 son, age 18, held him and allegedly beat him.
 
 
 1013
 Exile is neither legally permitted nor routinely practiced. No specific instances of
 the imposition of exile as a form of judicial punishment are known to have occurred,
 although the practical effect of police repression in Kosovo is to cause many ethnic
 Albanians togo abroad to escap   rsecution.
 e. Denial  Fair Pubi Trial.The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, but in practice it is largely controlled by the Government and rarely chal-
 lenges the will of the state security apparatus. The authorities frequently deny fair
 public trial to non-Serbs and to persons they believe oppose the regime.
 The court system comprises local, district, and supreme courts at the republic
 level, and a federal Supreme Court to which republic supreme court decisions may
 be appealed. There is also a military court system. According to the Federal Con-
 stitution, the Federal Constitutional Court rules on the constitutionality of laws and
 regulations relying on the republic authorities to enforce its rulings. The Federal
 Criminal dode of the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia still applies.
 There is some confusion and room for abuse in the legal system because the Con-
 stitution of Serbia (1960) has not yet been brought into conformity with the con-
 stitution of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (1992).
 Under federal law, defendants have the right to be present at their trials and to
 have an attorney, at public expense if needed. The courts will also provide inter-
 preters. The presiding judges decide what will be read into the record of the pro-
 ceedings. Both the defendant and the prosecutor may appeal the verdict. Defense
 lawyers in Kosovo and Sandzak have filed numerous complaints about flagrant
 breaches of standard procedure which they believed undermined their clients' rights.
 Even when the judges have admitted that the lawyers were correct, the courts have
 ignored or dismissed the complaints.
 Mass trials were held during 1995 in the district courts of Kosovo of ethnic Alba-
 nian former security officers who were accused of conspiring to overthrow the Gov-
 ernment (see Section 1.d.). In spite of widespread searches of homes and businesses,
 police turned up no credible evidence of such a conspiracy, and the cases presented
 in court were based on confessions obtained by force. The largest trial was held in
 Pristina where 72 were charged and 61 brought to trial, the others having escaped
 arrest. The trials in Pec, Pristina, and Gnjilane were perfunctory. Interpreters were
 provided, defense attorneys were present, and observers, including family members,
 were permitted if they identified themselves to the court.
 The egregious abuses of the justice system took place before the trial when confes-
 sions were obtained by torture (see Section 1.c.). In Pristina, Muhamet Ninami told
 the court that he had signed a confession after being tied in a bent position for 90
 hours, mentally and phyically exhausted, with no opportunity to see a lawyer. At
 the Prizren trials, the Helsinki Committee noted a long list of abuses of correct pro-
 cedure including searching defendants' homes without warrants and ignoring the
 legal stipulation that two witnesses and the defendant must be present during a
 search. Although the defendants testified to brutal beatings and torture used to ob-
 tain the confessions, and the prosecutors did not deny their charges, the court took
 no action. In Pristina the judge backdated the documents after the legal period for
 detention had expired.
 Ethnic Serb lawyers who were p art of the defense team for the trials in Prizren
 attempted to force the court to follow proper procedures. Among other things, the
 lawyers asked, to no avail, that the president of the District Court be disqualified
 because he had conducted the investigations against some of the accused and be-
 cause he refused to allow testimony given by the defendants about police torture to
 be recorded in the minutes of the trial.
 The Government charged targeted groups, under article 116 of the Yugoslav
 Criminal Code, of jeopardizing the territorial integrity of the country and, under ar-
 ticle 136, of conspiring or forming a group with intent to commit subversive activi-
 ties. The Fund for Humanitarian Law found that proceedings on charges of subver-
 sion were initiated exclusively against Kosovar Albanians and Sandjak Muslims.
 Police investigated over 250 Kosovar Albanian former security personnel and con-
 victed 129, handing down sentences ranging from 18 months to 8 years, on the un-
 substantiated grounds of conspiring to undermine the integrity of the state. Those
 given sentences of over 5 years, and thus not freed pending appeal, are in prison.
 Over 200 Kosovar Albanians and Sandzak Muslims are now serving prison terms
 for similar charges. Insofar as the real grounds for these charges appear to have
 been that these persons were active in ethnic political parties, they may be said to
 have been prosecuted for their political associations rather than for criminal activ-
 ity. The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) treats them as political
 prisoners. In December President Bulatovic of Montenegro freed 82 individuals, 50
 of whom were considered to be political prisoners.
 
 
 1014
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home or Correspondence.-Federal
 law gives republic Ministries of the Interior sole control over the decision to monitor
 potential criminal activities, a power routinely abused. Authorities regularly mon-
 itored opposition and dissident activity, eavesdropped on conversations, read mail,
 and tapped telephones. The federal post office registered all mail from abroad, os-
 tensibly to protect mail carriers from charges of theft.
 Although the law includes restrictions on searches, officials often ignored them.
 In Kosovo and Sandzak, police systematically subjected ethnic Albanians to random
 searches of their homes, vehicles, shops, and offices, asserting that they were
 searching for weapons. CDHRF records showed that Serbian police raided 2,324
 Kosovar Albanian homes. Photos of homes which had been searched by police
 showed chaos--furniture broken, bedding tossed around, drawers emptied out. On
 May 21, the home of Heset Vishi, who was living abroad with his family, was raided
 by the police, and in his absence the police arrested his brother, ransacked his
 home, and confiscated his typewriter and a computer.
 Authorities entered a clinic ward in Djakovica on May 31 and interrogated a
 woman about the activities of her husband 4 hours after she had given birth. Two
 plainclothes detectives entered the apartment of Hava Mustafa in Pristina on June
 11 without a search warrant. They beat the daughter who asked who they were and
 why they had burst into the apartment. When the mother intervened, she was
 struck by the police.
 Serb paramilitaries evicted Muslims from land near Priboj on the Bosnian border,
 claiming they might be in danger. The Muslims were not allowed to harvest their
 crops but told that they must pay property taxes or lose their medical benefits. Sev-
 eral of the Muslim-owned homes were set on fire in June.
 In June the Serbian police began to round up men of military age, including offi-
 cial and undocumented refugees and some citizens, to fight with ethnic Serb forces
 in Croatia (the Krajina) and-Bosnia. The men were summarily placed in busses and
 against their will transported across the border without being allowed to commu-
 ncate with their families (see also Section 2.d.). One refugee from Sarajevo, whose
 mother was a Muslim and father a Serb said that he felt like an animal being hunt-
 ed down. A woman who took part in a hunger strike staged in front of the Serbian
 presidency building by relatives of the men who had been forcibly mobilized, said
 that her husband had been taken away in the middle of the night by police on June
 20. Although he showed his valid Serbian identification card, he was seized because
 he had spent his school years in Rijeka (now Croatia, but then part of Yugoslavia).
 In late summer, police continued to stop young men for document checks, reportedly
 sending some to training camps run by the notorious criminal and paramilitary
 "Arkan in Erdut in Eastern Slavonia.
 The laws regarding desertion from the military lent themselves to abuse. While
 compulsory military service was the norm in the former Yugoslavia, there were
 large-scale desertions when the war broke out in 1991 by men of all ethnic groups
 who chose to walk away from the military rather than take part in interethnic con-
 flicts. Men of military age continued to be stopped on the street for identity checks
 and subjected to arbitrary harassment and possible forced recruitment. Young men
 of Croatian or Albanian descent, in particular, refused to fight against Croatia;
 many of them fled the country under the threat of recruitment.
 After doing little for several years to enforce universal military service or track
 down those who had deserted the military during the 1991 conflict, the military and
 police began in 1995 once again to recruit members of minority communities, who
 were understandably reluctant to support conflicts in the former Yugoslavia. Lead-
 ers of the Kosovar Albanian community believe that the reintroduction for ethnic
 Albanians of forced compliance with universal military service was an attempt to
 induce young men to flee the country. Almost two-thirds of the small 10,000-mem-
 ber commumty of Croats who had lived in Kosovo for over 700 years emigrated over
 the past 5 years because of pressure from Serb nationalists and the refusal of the
 Government to exempt young men from the military.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-The Government officially closed the border with Bosnia in August 1994, ex-
 empting only food, clothing, and medicine. There were many reports of unofficial
 support for the cause of ethnic Serbs in Bosnia and Croatia ranging from political
 rallies held by ultra-nationalist leaders who traveled from Serbia, to calls for volun-
 teers by paramilitary groups who took men to the battle areas in Bosnia and Cro-
 atia. The Serbian Government actively assisted in the forced mobilization by police
 of refugees and other men for the conflicts in Bosnia and Croatia (see Section 1.d.).
 Ethnic tensions were high elsewhere in Serbia, and ultra- nationalist Serbian ele-
 ments encouraged hostile acts by private citizens against members of minority eth-
 nic groups. In earlier cases, the local authorities in Vojvodina ignored threats to
 
 
 1015
 members of ethnic minorities who felt that they were being pressured to leave their
 homes. However, when Serb refugees arrived in August, fleeing western Krajina
 after it fell to Croatian attack, special police from Belgrade stepped in to prevent
 the refugees from taking over the homes of ethnic Croats in Vojvodina. Elsewhere
 as well, Serb refugees vented their anger on ethnic Croats. In the Kotor Bay region
 of Montenegro, citizens of Croatian descent were also subject to threats as were
 Roman Catholic and Muslim Albanians in Kosovo. Leaders of Hungarian commu-
 nities in Vojvodina and Kosovar Albanians complained that the Government's policy
 of refugee resettlement was planned to change the ethnic composition of areas with
 significant non-Serb populations.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Federal law provides for freedom of speech and
 the press, but in practice most of the media were controlled by the Government. Ser-
 bian state-run radio and television (RTS), the prime source of news for the  pulace,
 especially outside of Belgrade, has long been under the direct control of resident
 Mlosevic's regime and was his most powerful tool for the manipulation of public
 opinion. The main emphasis of the prime time news program was on the activities
 of the Prsident, the ruling SPS, and JUL (Yugoslav Lftist League), whose leader
 is President Mlosevic's wife, Mirana Markovic.
 Economic pressure was the usual weapon of the regime against the free press. For
 example, state-owned enterprises were not allowed to advertise in independent
 media. A shortage of newsprint continued to be a problem for the press. The main
 newsprint producer in Serbia, Matroz, supplied newsprint to the state-controlled
 press at susidized prices and made independent publications pay the much hiher
 market price; the independent press claimed that newspapers approved by the Gov-
 ernment received priority shipments. Matrz cut production from time to time, re-
 portedly due to unpaid electric bills, tax problems, or a shortage of fuel. When the
 mindependent publications established their own sources of newsprint, helped by do-
 nations from NGO's, customs sometimes delayed or halted border entry. In Pristina,
 the newsprint donated by the international community to the Albanian-language
 daly Bujku was appropriated by the Serbian-language daily, leaving Bujku chron-
 ically short of paper.
 The state agency for prope  transition was used on several occasions to limit
 the free media. On December23, 1994, it cancelled the registration of the Borba
 stock man    and, in a hostile takeover, took control of the outspoken daily, ap-
 pointing the Federal Minister for Information as its new editor-in-chief. The B orbs
 journalists in protest founded a new daily called Nasa Borba using their own finan-
 cial resources. Subsequently the Government initiated a criminal investigation
 against the managers of Nasa Borba in a transparent attempt at intimidation.
 In August President Milosevic abruptly dismissed the head of the state-run radio
 and television for apparent pro-Serb nationalist bias. Also in August, the
 Kragujevac weekly Svetlost, one of the few independent publications outside Bel-
 grade, became the target of the Government. The local city assembly, allegedly on
 orders from the ruling Socialist Party, nationalized the paper and sent dismissalno-
 tices to the staff. Members of the editorial board refused to leave their offices and
 continued to publish under the name Nezavisnost Svetlost (Independent Light) with
 material assistance from the independent weekly Vreone.
 The electronic media also experienced varying forms of harassment from the Gov-
 ernment. Radio and television not under state control were able to broadcast only
 within a limited range in the Belgrade area. Obtaiing a frequency allocation was
 a complicated0 roceueor ebia      private radio stations. Independent radio b-
 92, greater BeIgrade's main source of information not subject to government control,
 was never officially allocated a frequency from the Government, thereby making its
 operations "illeal" and vulnerable to a shutdown. The Belgrade independent tele-
 vision station Studio B endured similar legal pressures and continuing problems
 with its property stats. It cancelled a program about refugees in Augst, appar-
 ently under pressure from the Government. Late in the year, Studio B bradcast
 the B BC five-part documentary "The Death of Yugoslavia" which was critical of the
 Serbian regime and Serbian political leaders such as President Milosevic for causing
 the outbreak of violence in Yugoslavia in 1991-92.
 In Montenegro, journalist Ski Radencic was convicted in May for defamation of
 a high ranking army official after he criticized the Yugoslav army for war and
 human rights abuses in the independent magazine Monitor. He received a 1-year
 suspended sentene and a 2-month prison term. On July 25, a member of
 Montenegro's state security service bought and burned all the copies of the Belgrade
 magazine Interview because it reprinted information from Interpo's most wanted
 list regarding the notorious Serb criminal and paramilitary leader Arkan.
 
 
 1016
 In the Sandzak region in March, Muslim town officials in Tutin accused the Gov-
 ernment of imposing an embargo on information concerning infectious hepatitis in
 the region and appealed to the independent press to investigate the extent of the
 epidemic. Also in March, a correspondent for the Albanian-language newspaper,
 Bujku, was told by police that he would be killed if he reported about Serbian police
 repression in the town of Mitrovica.
 While the ruling SPS exercises control over university and student organizations,
 instructors are generally free to teach their subjects, and some of them are active
 in opposition party politics outside the classroom. In Kosovo ethnic Albanians have
 reected the Serbian education system and established their own parallel system of
 schools and administration. This educational structure is not recognized by the Ser-
 bian Government and is subject to harassment.
 Police raided the home used for a teachers' training college in Prizren on May 31
 and seized administrative materials. On June 19, Haz Rexha was arrested by police
 and charged with holding lectures in the Albanian language. In September police
 ordered 13 teachers and the principal of a primary school in Tankosiq village to re-
 port to the police station. The teachers were soon released, but the principal and
 the owner of the home where classes are conducted were held for 4 hours and mis-
 treated.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Although the Federal Con-
 stitution provides for freedom of peaceful assembly and association, the authorities
 severely restricted these freedoms, applying the laws and regulations in a capricious
 manner. The FRY Government continued to treat political association by members
 of ethnic minorities as a threat to the Government, harassing and arresting leaders
 and members of ethnic Muslim and Albanian parties. On February 24, four mem-
 bers of the Democratic Action Party (SDA) who had been circulating a petition for
 the return of an exiled leader were beaten by Montenegrin police in Rozaj. On May
 26, Serbian police prevented a meeting of the LDK committees in the village of
 Banulla and confiscated their documents. The home of Murat Riza Sylaj, chairman
 of the local LDK branch in the village of Dubrave, was raided on June 4 by a Ser-
 bian police squad which confiscated all LDK documents, took Sylaj to the village
 graveyard and beat him so severely that he had to seek medical care for his injuries.
 In September police arrested and held the bodyguard and the driver of LDK head
 Rugova. Also, the Radical Party of Serbia was prevented from holding a rally in
 Kosovo in June and two of its leaders were jailed (see Section 3).
 Police also engaged in petty harassment of events in Kosovo organized by Kosovar
 Albanians. On April 16, erbian polie broke up 2 soccer matches with some 4,000
 fans in attendance. On June 11 in the Kacank regi, polie prevented a soccer
 match, and brought charges against the captains of th  w teams.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-There is no state religion, but the Government gives pref-
 erential treatment, including access to state-run television for major religious
 events, to the Serbian Orthodox Church to which the majority of Serbs belong. Al-
 though there are no legal restrictions on the practice of religion, police condoned
 periodic violence against religious facilities used by ethnic minorities (see Section 5).
 The State has encouraged the building of Orthodox churches on public land in
 Kosovo, including an Orthodox shrine in the center of Djakovica, a town almost com-
 pletely ethnic Albanian. Work has begun on an Orthodox church in the center of
 Pristina on university land. On June 19, the imam of the mosque in Kacanik was
 taken to the police station for questioning because he had prayed by name for a
 child who had been shot by Serbian soldiers (Section L.a.). On several occasions,
 Muslims have been ordered to remove loudspeakers from mosques.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for freedom of movement, and the Govern-
 ment makes assports available to most citizens. Many inhabitants of Serbia-
 Montenegro who were bern in other parts of the former Yugoslavia, as well as large
 numbers of refugees, have not been able to establish their citizenship in the FRY,
 leaving them in a stateless limbo.
 The Government continues to deny issuance and renewal of passports to many
 Kosovar Albanian intellectuals and political activists. For travel to Albania, all citi-
 zens are required to have an exit visa which is difficult to acquire, with the result
 that Kosovar Albanians often travel to Albania by way of the Former Yugoslav Re-
 public of Macedonia; they are then subject to police harassment and the seizure of
 their passports when they return to Kosovo. In May Zeke Gecaj, a newspaper editor
 accompanying a delegation of the Liberal Party of Kosovo to the United States, was
 stopped at the border and prevented from leaving by police who seized his passport
 because he had traveled without a visa to Albania 3 years ago.
 Citizens who were born in other parts of the former Yugoslavia also reported dif-
 ficulties at borders and occasional confiscation of their passports. Ethnic Albanians
 
 
 1017
 frequently complained of harassment at border crossings. There have been numer-
 ous reports of border guards confiscating foreign currency or passports from travel-
 ers as well as occasional complaints of physical ill-treatment. Serbian authorities
 have generally allowed ethnic Albanian leaders, including LDK head Ibrahim
 Rugova, to leave the ountry and return, even though they onsider his party and
 other ethnic Albanian parties illegal. The vice chairman ofthe LDK, Fehmi Agani,
 was held at the Macedonian border on May 8 for 4 hours by officers who questioned
 him and seized his books, papers, and the abstracts from a conference he had at-
 Although exit visas are required only for travel to Albania, the cost of exiting the
 country rose rapidly during the year. At the height of the summer vacation period
 the exit tax was 60 dinars per person plus 150 dinars for a car, a real impediment
 to foreign travel in a country where the average wage was 300 dinars per month.
 Police stepped up their checks within Serbia during the summer, asking for docu-
 mentation of citizenship and seizing men of military age with unclear or refugee sta-
 tus for mobilization (see Section 1.f.). Citizens complained that police frequently
 took foreign currency from those whom they stopped.
 Serbian police routinely searched citizens of minority groups for hard currency.
 The Serbian police of Prizren on January 28 stopped each pedestrian at a public
 square for identity checks, searched many of them, and took the hard currency they
 found. In June police blocked off the market place in Podujeva on market day and
 took hard currency as well as many goods. The police did not disturb Serb mer-
 chants or confiscate their goods. On July 11, Serbian financial police confiscated 3
 kilograms of gold and I kiloram of silver, as well as other goods, in Prizren, a town
 known for its jewelry workshops. Only Albanian-owned shops were targeted by the
 financial police. During holiday periods, police seized passports from ethnic Alba-
 nian workers who returned home from abroad, giving them the choice of waiting for
 court process or paying the police large sums of hard currency for the return of
 their travel documents.
 The Government has been very slow to issue passports to refugees. Kosovar Alba-
 nians also have problems with issuance and renewal of passports and are sometimes
 called in for interrogations by state security officers before passports are issued. In
 June the Government sent to Parliament a new citizenship law which would in
 practice adversely affect the rights of many inhabitants, including those who had
 en born in other parts of the former Yugoslavia, refugees, and citizens who had
 migrated to other countries to work or seek asylum. The U.N. human rights
 rapporteur noted that the new law would give the Ministry of the Interior almost
 complete control over the granting of citizenship. Although the law had not been en-
 acted by year's end, the Government served notice that it will severely limit the
 granting of citizenship to refugees from the conflicts in Bosnia and Croatia. The
 Government also planned to revise the eligibility status of a large number of people,
 chiefly refugees, who have been granted citizenship since 1992.
 Government policy toward refugees and asylum seekers has been uneven. Refu-
 gees are often treated as citizens of Serbia-Montenegro for labor and military pur-
 poses but denied other rights such as employment and travel (see Section 1.f.). The
 Government has cooperated with the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees to pro-
 vide help for the more than 600,000 refugees in Serbia-Montenegro.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 The Constitution provides for this right, but in practice citizens are prevented
 from exercising it by the Government's monopoly on the mass media and the elec-
 toral process. While there were no elections in 1995, in past years the authorities
 denied opposition parties equal access to the state-run media and omitted many vot-
 ers from the registration lists. Observers have also noted numerous voting irregular-
 ities and raised serious questions as to the accuracy of the vote count.
 Slobodan Milosevic dominates the political system in Serbia-Montenegro. Al-
 though formally President of Serbia, one of the two constituent republics in the so-
 called Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, Milosevic first weakened the authorities of
 the Federal Government through his control of the Serbian police, the army, and
 the state administration, and then placed his followers in key positions, including
 the Federal President and the Federal Prime Minister. In November Milosevic
 abruptly removed from their positions five senior party officials who were appar-
 ently purged for their continued support of Serbian nationalist aims in Croatia and
 Bosnia, a position Milosevic has now discarded. Milosevic greatly circumscribes the
 Montenegrin Government's sphere for independent action and does not tolerate sig-
 nificant divergence from the ruling Socialist Party of Serbia line.
 
 
 1018
 The domestic political opposition continues to be obstructed by these extralegal
 means of political control and has proved incapable of providing an effective alter-
 native to the SPS. Many citizens are afraid to join opposition parties unless they
 are economically self-sufficient because of SPS control over many jobs. Although the
 SPS does not have an absolute majority of seats in the Serbian Parliament, it has
 managed to coopt one of the smaller opposition parties to allow the Socialists to
 form the Government. In Montenegro, the ruling Democratic Party of Socialists en-
 joys an absolute majority. In both Serbia and Montenegro, the ruling parties have
 effectively blocked legislation that would loosen their control over the state-run
 media. In July the SPS ended television coverage of parliamentary debate which
 had been part of the agreement worked out when the Government was formed. Al-
 though the opposition initially walked out, and later demanded an extraordinary
 session to debate the Government's action, its protests were ignored.
 The Government has taken no action when threats have been made against the
 personal security of members of the opposition parties, including death threats to
 parliamentary deputies and their families. The authorities did move against the no-
 torious ultra-nationalist leader of the Serbian Radical Party, Vojislav Seselj, who
 was detained in Gnjilan, Kosovo, in June on a misdemeanor charge but was put
 in jail and given a stiffer sentence, apparently upon orders from Belgrade. At the
 same time, his parliamentary immunity was stripped from him in an irregular pro-
 ceeding.
 Ethnic Serbs dominate the political leadership in Serbia. Few members of other
 ethnic groups play any role at the top levels of government or the state-run econ-
 omy, although there are no legal restrictions preventing advancement. Ethnic Alba-
 nians, as a matter of principle, have refused to take part in the electoral process
 and therefore have virtually no representation.
 Women are greatly underrepresented in party and government positions, holding
 less than 10 percent of ministerial-level positions in the Serbian and federal Govern-
 ments. As with ethnic minorities, there are no legal restrictions on their participa-
 tion, and women are active in political organizations. An exception to the lack of
 women in leading positions in politics is the controversial Mira Markovic, wife of
 Serbian President Milosevic. She is the leading force in the neo-Communist United
 Yugoslav Left Party, through which she exerts considerable influence on policy-
 makers.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Governments of Serbia and Montenegro formally maintain that they-have no
 objection to international organizations conducting human rights investigations on
 their territories. However, they hindered such activities and regularly rejected the
 findings of human rights groups. A number of independent human rights organiza-
 tions exist in Serbia-Montenegro, researching and athering information on abuses
 and publicizing human rights cases. The Belgrade-based Humanitarian Law Fund
 and Center for Antiwar Action researched human rights abuses throughout the FRY
 and, on occasion, elsewhere in the former Yugoslavia. The Belgrade-based Helsinki
 Committee published human rights studies and cooperated with the Pristina-based
 Helsinki Committee in monitoring human rights abuses in Kosovo. In Kosovo the
 Council for the Defense of Human Rights and Freedoms collects and collates data
 on human rights abuses and publishes newsletters. In the Sandzak region, a similar
 council monitors abuses against the local Muslim population and produces com-
 prehensive reports. All of these organizations offer advice and help to victims of
 abuse.
 Local human rights monitors (Serbs as well as members of ethnic minorities) and
 NGO's which supported their efforts worked under difficult circumstances amid pub-
 lic insinuations by ultra-nationalist leaders and the government-controlled media
 that they were traitors. The constant stream of invective levelled against human
 rights activists and NGO's left personnel vulnerable to public animosity. In May
 members of the antiwar Belgrade Circle who had visited Sarajevo received threaten-
 mng phone calls, and one young woman was called to the police station for question-
 ing. Young nationalist thugs trashed the offices shared by the small Civic Alliance
 Party and the Center for Antiwar Action. A Serb told the weekly Interview that he
 would like to "kill all the humanist grandmothers," naming the female head of the
 humanitarian law fund. NGO's had their equipment held up by customs officials,
 and financial police combed through their records. The Government revoked the li-
 cense of the Soros Foundation in May, after subjecting it to sustained attacks in the
 government-controled press. The Sros Foundation appealed to the Supreme Court
 of Serbia but no action has been taken on the case.
 
 
 1019
 Serbian authorities refused to issue visas to representatives of a number of
 human rights organizations, including Amnesty International and the rapporteur
 for the United Nations Committee on Human Rights. The new U.N. rapporteur,
 Elisabeth Rehn, was allowed to visit areas of her choice, including Kosovo, during
 her second trip to the country in December. In general, the Government continued
 to deny visas to visitors whom it believed would visit the ethnic minority areas of
 Serbia, or to delay the issuance until visitors agreed to a restrictive program of
 meetings with Serbian officials. FRY authorities refused numerous approaches by
 OSCE representatives to allow the reintroduction of the OSCE long-duration mis-
 sions to Kosovo, Vojvodina, and Sandzak, maintaining that the FRY must first be
 "reinstated" in the OSCE.
 In spite of a previous agreement that it could visit detainees, the ICRC waited
 7 months for permission to visit men detained in Kosovo awaiting trial for conspir-
 acy to overthrow the Government (see Section 1.d.). The ICRC continues to seek per-
 mission to visit detainees from the time they are held, when most human rights vio-
 lations are thought to occur.
 FRY officials stated in 1994 t   hey would offer limited cooperation with the
 UIn. war crimes tribunal, to the extent that the local law allowed. Both the Serbian
 and Federal Constitutions forbid extradition. Although Serbian authorities prmised
 that they would try war criminals within the country, suspected war criminals were
 never the targets of formal investigations. The paramilitary leader Arkan, suspected
 of war crimes and wanted by Interpol for other crimes, carried on his famoyant
 lifestyle with impunity, traveling between his home in Belgrade and his paramiltary
 activities in Serb-held areas of Croatia.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 While federal and republic laws provide for equal rights for all citizens, regardless
 of ethnic group, religion, languae, or social status and prohibit discrimination
 against women, in reality the legal system provides little protection for such groups.
 Women.-The oppressive nationalism fostered by years of conflict in Bosnia, re-
 flected in the suppression of the rights of non-Serbs in Serbia-Montenegro, and the
 precarious financial situation of most families have exacerbated the traditionally
 high level of domestic violence. Life in cramped apartments, often with the added
 burden of refugees from the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia, led to quarrels which
 often erupted into violence, particularly wife beatings.
 The few official agenies dedicated to coping with family violence have inadequate
 resources and are limited in their options by social pressure to keep families to-
 gether at all costs. Few victims of spousal abuse ever file complaints with authori-
 ties. The Center for Autonomous Women's Rights offered the SOS rape crisis and
 spousal abuse hot line together with a number of self-help groups. The Center also
 offered help to refugee women, many of whom experienced extreme abuse such as
 rap    ie dr te conficts from which they fled.
 Traditional patriarchal ideas of gender roles, which hold that women should be
 subservient to the male members of their family, have long subjected women to dis-
 crimination. In some rural areas, women are little more than serfs without the right
 to contrl property and children; in a few villages, brides are still bought and sld.
 Women are entitled to equal pay for equal     an  are usually granted maternity
 leave for 1 year. According to the Helsinki Committee of Serbia, the collapse of the
 former State and 4 years of war have exacerbated discrimination against women.
 Also, women have lost benefits they einoyed under socialism and thereby their social
 safety net. Women are active in human rights organizations; women s rights whps
 continued to operate with little or no official acknowledgement. "Women in Black,"
 formed in 1990 to protest the war in Croatia, held weekly silent demonstrations for
 which police permission was sought and given. When that organization attempted
 to host a regional conference in August in northern Vojvodina, government officials
 intimidated local supporters to keep them from providing logistical support and re-
 fused to issue tourist visas to participants from other countries.
 Childre . -Cen  n in Kosovo have been particularly disadvantaged by the politi-
 cal struggle for control of the school system. Kosovar Serb and Albanian elementary
 children are taught in separate areas of divided schools or attend in shifts. Older
 Kosovar Albanian children attend school in private homes. A 1995 U.N. Children's
 Fund report found that the health situation for children in Kosovo, already the
 worst in Europe, had deteriorated further. Humanitarian aid officials blamed the
 high rate of infant and childhood death, as well as increasing epidemics of prevent-
 able diseases, primarily on poverty which led to malnutrition and poor hygiene, and
 to the deterioration of pubic saitation. Ethnic minorities in some cases fear Serb
 
 
 1020
 
 state-run medical facilities, which results in a low rate of immunization and a reluc-
 tance to seek timely medical attention.
 There is no pattern of governmental or societal abuse against children, nor is
 child prostitution condoned However, violence against girls within the family is ris-
 ing, with human rights centers reporting that some 1,000 girls approached them to
 report abuse during the year. Children are not conscripted into the army. Police vio-
 lence against non-erb chiln was the primary abuse (see Section 1.c.). A 14-year-
 old boy looking for livestock in the Glogovac area of Kosovo was chased down by
 a police car ana beaten, supposedly because he had whistled.
 People With Diabities.-There is no discrimination against disabled persons in
 employment, education, or in the prvision of other state services. The law man-
 dates access to new official buildings for people with disabilities, and the Govern-
 ment enforces these prvisions in practice. The new metro station in downtown Bel-
 grade provides access for the disabled.
 Religious Minorities.-Reigion and ethnicity are so closely intertwined as to be
 inseparable. Serious discrimination and harassment of Serbia's religious minorities
 continued, especially in the Kosovo and Sandzak regions. Violence against the
 Catholic minority in Vojvodina, largely made up of ethnic Hungarians and Cro-
 atians, was also a roblem and intensified with the arrival of Serb refugees from
 Croatia. Individual ]atholics were targeted for threats and harassment.
 Most threats and attacks against those of other religions were carried out by na-
 tionalist Serbs who associate Orthodoxy with Serb Patriotism. Catholic churches in
 the Vojvodina were often subject to vandalism. On the night of May 5, a Catholic
 cross in the village of Bac was destroyed by an explosive charge. On May 19, a bomb
 was thrown into the churchyard of the Catholic church in Sremska Mitrovica.
 Vasica Catholic church was blown up and destroyed on May 21. In June a Catholic
 church in the Srem region was burned down. A Krajina Serb refugee on September
 10 walked into a Catholic church in Prizren and threatened a Kosovar Albanian
 priest, accusing Catholics of supporting Croatia. Krajina Serb refugees in Vojvodina
 made similar threats to Croatian Catholic priests and congregations in August and
 September. On August 8, young people burst into a Catholic church in Hrtkovci at
 the time of the evening service, evicted the priest and churchgoers, and announced
 that the church could no longer be used.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-The ethnic minorities of Serbia-Montenegro
 suffered discrimination in all respects. In addition to the abuses described elsewhere
 in this report, there were credible reports that qualified Muslims or ethnic Alba-
 nians continued to be driven from their homes or fired from their jobs on the basis
 of religion or ethnicity. The influx of refugees from the Serbian areas of Croatia in
 the summer led to sporadic outbursts of violence and threats against ethnic Croats
 and Hungarians in the Vojvodina. Police responded effectively, however, in most
 cases restoring property to minorities affected. The Romani population is generally
 tolerated, and there is no official discrimination. Roma have the right to vote and
 there are two small Romani parties. However, local authorities often ignore or con-
 done societal intimidation of the Romani community. Romani children are not
 taught in their own language and often cannot afford to buy school materials. Ac-
 cording to the Helsinki Commttee of Serbia, only 20 percent of them complete an
 elementary education.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-All workers (except military personnel) have the
 legal right to form or join unions. Unions are either official (government-affiliated)
 or independent organizations. The official unions are numerically far stronger than
 their independent counterparts, claiming a membership of 2 million, while
 Nezavisnost-the opposition trade union confederation-has a registered member-
 ship of only about 85,000. The imbalance in numbers, however, is of little si." f-
 cance as workers in the official unions have little real voice, and their bargaining
 leverage tends to be highly circumscribed by the Government. The independent
 unions, while active in recruiting new members, have not yet reached the critical
 mass to enable countrywide strikes that would force employers to provide conces-
 sions on workers' rights. The largely splintered approach of the independent unions
 has left them with little to show in terms of gains in either wages or improved work-
 ing conditions. The Nezavisnost leadership has participated actively in international
 organizations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-While this right is guaran-
 teed under law, collective bargaining remains at a rudimentary level of develop-
 ment. Individual unions tend to be very narrow and pragmatic in their aims, unable
 to join with other unions to bargain for a common purpose, such as job security
 guarantees. The overall result is a highly fragmente labor structure composed of
 
 
 1021
 workers who relate to the needs of their individual union but rarely to those of other
 workers. Despite legal guarantees for collective bargaining, the practice was effec-
 tively undermined during the period of the U.N. economic sanctions by the so-called
 Law on Minimum Salaries. Ufnder this law, workers made redundant by sanctions
 were nonetheless guaranteed a minimum salary that was not subject to negotiation
 through collective bargaining. Antiunion discrimination was also evident as the Gov-
 ernment cracked down on independent trade union organizers, declaring their ac-
 tivities illegal and ordering their suspension from the workplace.
 There are no known export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Force or ompulsory Labor.-Forced labor is prohibited by law
 and is not known to occur.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum age for employment
 is 16 years, although in villages and farming communities it is not unusual to find
 younger children at work assisting their families. With an actual unemployment
 rate (registered unemployed plus redundant workers who perform only minimal
 work) in excess of 50 percent, real employment opportunities for children are non-
 existent. Children can, however, be found in a variety of unofficial "retail" jobs, typi-
 cally selling smuggled cigarettes or other small items on the streets.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Minimum wage standards are established by
 the Government and regularly updated to reflect changes in the cost of living. Large
 socially owned enterprises, including all the major banks, industrial plants, and
 trading companies in the country, generally observe minimum wage standards,
 which currently stand at about $100 per month (500 Yugoslav dinars, calculated at
 prevailing black market exchange rates). Private enterprises also use the minimum
 wage as a general guide, but are often more flexible in paying higher wages. Reports
 of sweatshops operating in the country are rare. With the cost of food approaching
 three times the monthly wage, however, most working class families have little dis-
 cretionary income remaining at the end of the month. The official workweek, listed
 as 40 hours, had little meaning in an economy with an unemployment rate over 50
 percent as people tended to work whatever hours were available in order to maxi-
 mize tie-home pay. Similarly neither employers nor employees tended to give high
 priority to enforcement of established occupational safety and health regulations, fo-
 cussing their efforts instead on economic survival.
