Serbia and Montenegro
ili November 22, 1995, media all over the world broadcast the image of U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher sitting at a long conference table with the presidents of Serbia, Bosnia-Herzegovina and Croatia as they initialed the Dayton Agreement. Notably, Christopher sat as far away from Slobodan Milosevic as was possible. Although the distance-measuring skills associated with Kremlinology get little use in the Balkans, they are unusually helpful in analyzing this State Department human rights report. The uncomfortable tableau at Dayton is reflected in the State Department's attempts to come up with language for its 1995 human rights report that reconciles policy and practice and can allow for the Secretary of State's year-end negotiations with Milosevic, who is described as "serving his second flve-year term as President of Serbia," but is not president of "Serbia-Montenegro," an entity which is nonetheless "dominated by" him but not recognized by the United States and the international community as "the successor state to the former Yugoslavia. "
The result of this linguistic exercise is often distractingly awkward — and telling. The carefully crafted language is so colored by political considerations that it dilutes — and, in some instances, negates — the effect of the State Department's revised instructions for drafting the country reports. In general, while describing extensive, brutal and systematic human rights abuses, the 1995 report subtly — and at times not so subtly — distances Milosevic, the government of Serbia, and the ruling Socialist Party of Serbia (SPS) from named responsibility for abuses conducted in Serbia-Montenegro and on the territory of former Yugoslavia. More often than not, the report cites "police" action to violate human rights, but it does not examine the political and legal infrastructure which supports police violence.
Nowhere is this distancing better illustrated than in comparing the 1994 and 1995 excerpts from the report's sections on the Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Conflicts, which deal with an issue crucial to the success of Dayton: the relationship between Belgrade and the Bosnian Serb headquarters at Pale. In 1994, the State Department noted that: "The Government's decision to close the border
199
Critique 1995
with Bosnia in August, exempting only food, clothing, and medicine, was an implicit acknowledgment of the support it has provided to the Bosnian Serbs and their policy of ethnic cleansing since the beginning of the Bosnian war." By 1995, however, the report observed simply that: "The Government officially closed the border with Bosnia in August 1994, exempting only food, clothing and medicine."
Not only did the "implicit acknowledgment" of support to Pale disappear in 1995, but so did references to actions by the government of Serbia that could be construed as involvement in any form of "ethnic cleansing." (The phrase "ethnic cleansing" has itself disappeared from the 1995 report.) For example, in 1994, the State Department charged that: "In Serbia itself [Including Vojvodina and Kosovo] authorities frequently subjected members of ethnic minorities to intimidation, with the goal of provoking their emigration." By 1995, however, the actors cited in the report have altered: "Ethnic tensions were high ... in Serbia, and ultranationalist Serbian elements encouraged hostile acts by private citizens against members of minority ethnic groups." These differences in emphasis and tone are particularly noteworthy in light of the State Department's guidelines to report drafters to "identify abusers, and to indicate whether they have been punished, or to indicate whether they have committed abuses vsdth impunity."
The report consistently identifies one egregious abuser: the Serbian police, "a heavily armed force of perhaps 100,000." As it has done consistently in previous years, the report describes well the pervasive and systematic brutality of the police force, particularly in the Kosovo and Sandzak regions, and credits the work of several local NGOs in documenting individual cases. The report does not, however, make clear the relationship between the police and the ruling SPS party. It notes that Milosevic "controls the country through his [SPS]," and that he "wields strong control" over the police force, which is "a key element of [Milosevic's] hold on power." By neglecting to describe the relationship between police and the SPS, the report creates the impression that no such relationship exists. The report emphasizes the "arbitrary" behavior of the state security apparatus and the control of Milosevic over that apparatus to maintain his hold on power. The implication is that Serbia-
200
Serbia and Montenegro
Montenegro is a police state which is controlled by the one man who also controls the ruling party. (No other government officials, except for Montenegrin President Miomir Bulatovic, are mentioned by name, and even he is treated only in passing. The special issues raised by the "Montenegrin question" are discussed separately below.) A more realistic assessment is that the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY) is controlled by a single political party, which is controlled by one man, and that the state security apparatus is an instrument of that ruling party. The distinction is not just semantic. To suggest that rump Yugoslavia is a "party" state, as opposed to a police state, imparts a connection to history. It acknowledges that the police apparatus, not the army, serves the same purpose for the SPS that the Yugoslav National Army served for the League of Communists of Yugoslavia. It acknowledges a longstanding infrastruaure of repression. It acknowledges that Milosevic is a product of the system, not a brilliantly manipulative historical aberration.
To acknowledge an infrastructure of repression or to draw the connection between effective one-party rule and the state security apparatus would significantly undermine the image and optimism presented at Dayton. An end to extraterritorial warfare among the Dayton participants is the immediate priority. However, as the report on Serbia-Montenegro shows and as other chapters in this volume describe, internal war against civilians continued to be waged throughout 1995. In the FRY, there is little evidence to suggest that the Dayton Agreement, which so colors this human rights report, affected the means by which institutionalized repression continues.
The report's emphasis on ethnicity as the grounds for repressive action by the state needs to be examined more closely. There is absolutely no question that Serbian police, party, and government officials take brutal and repressive measures as a matter of routine against persons on the basis of ethnicity alone. As widely reported by both intergovernmental and non-govemmental organizations, in Kosovo these include police brutality against ethnic Albanians, killings, arbitrary searches, seizures and arrests, torture and ill-treatment of detainees and discrimination, arbitrary dismissals of ethnic Albanian dvil servants, mass
201
Critique 1995
dismissals of ethnic Albanians and intimidation and imprisonment of ethnic Albanian journalists.
Given space limitations, the State Department report provides many individual examples of violence and discrimination against ethnic Albanians.- Reports of independent human rights monitoring and advocacy organizations throughout the FRY contain many others. However, especially in the context of the mass trials of Albanians, which are described briefly in the State Department report, two additional examples deserve mention here. In spring, charges were brought in Prizren against 44 persons — including 43 ethnic Albanian, former Ministry of Internal Affairs security officers — accused of conspiring to form a parallel ministry of internal affairs for the "self-proclaimed Kosovo Republic," whose purpose was the "surveillance and liquidation of prominent Serbs." The 44th man so charged, whom the State Department report does not mention, was Sezair Shaipi, leader of the Turkish national minority party in Kosovo, who had no ties to his fellow defendants. Shaipi was arrested and subjected to heavy, as opposed to customary, torture; before Shaipi's arrest, the only leader of a political party within the FRY who had been tortured so severely was Vuk Draskovic, leader of the Serbian Renewal Movement (SPO). Defense attorneys speculate that Shaipi's arrest and torture was an attempt to decapitate the Turkish poUtical party.
In another instance noteworthy for its display of extraterritorial cooperation, ethnic Albanian Djeljalj Canziba was kidnapped from his workplace in Skopje by Macedonian and Serbian police. After interrogation in Skopje by the Macedonian police, Canziba was transported by representatives of both police across the territorial border to Serbia, where he was further interrogated and tortured by Serbian police. The Canziba case sets a troubling and potentially ominous precedent which the report should not ignore.
These two cases, as well as the findings of the U.N. Special Rapporteur, point out the political nature of violence against Albanians in a manner that differs from the presentation of such violence in the State Department report. By simply listing brutalities committed against ethnic Albanians, the report makes no distinction between traditionally
202
Serbia and Montenegro
criminal violence conducted in a politicized atmosphere and coherent political violence conducted by state and party officials. The distinction is by no means obvious on the territories of the former Yugoslavia; no less a judicial body than the international war crimes tribunal is grappling with its complexities. However, even if it cannot resolve the matter for all individual cases, the report should at least acknowledge the existence of the distinction and attempt to address its significance. To that end, the State Department should pay closer attention to the methodology and form of reports by the U.N. Special Rapporteur.
The report's presentation of ethnic violence and discrimination also fails to make seminal distinctions of degree and duration. For example, the report notes that: "Police repression continued at a high level against the ethnic Albanians of Kosovo and the Muslims of Sandzak and reflected a general campaign to keep the one-third of the population who are not ethnic Serbs intimidated and unable to exercise basic human and civil rights."
Various human rights advocates, both inside and outside the former Yugoslavia, have taken issue with the use of ethnic categorizations to define an individual's legal status. (They include some of those described in the report as the "[e]thnic Serb lawyers who were part of the defense team for the trials in Prizren." Setting aside that issue as debatable, and setting aside the fact that the report does not appear to acknowledge the special problems faced by persons of mixed ethnicity, the State Department's description of ethnic conflict in the FRY still misses several important subtieties. Albanians and Muslims make up the majority of the total population of national minorities in the FRY. The level of repression experienced by these two groups is, in general terms, much greater and more pervasive than that experienced by other national minorities, such as Hungarians, Croats, Slovaks, Romanians and others. The report's summary sentence quoted above creates the impression that national minorities within the FRY experience repression equally. In fact, throughout the FRY, there are significant differences in the level of repression experienced by Albanians and Muslims: Albanians have been the victims of organized repression for decades, while the repression of non-Albanian Muslims is of relatively recent vintage, dating back
203
Critique 1995
approximately to the start of hostilities in Bosnia. Albanian Muslims in the FRY today generally experience more repression than non-Albanian Muslims in the FRY except, of course, in those areas on the Bosnian border. Moreover, the situations of Albarùans and Muslim Slavs differ in Serbia and in Montenegro. And, when discussing the situation in Sandzak, an even finer distinction can be made, since that region falls into both Serbia and northern Montenegro. The State Department's instructions for drafters of the Country Reports stress the need for specificity and "what happens in actual practice." In view of the sensitivity and vast importance of the issues involved, the report's failure to address subtle and not-so-subtle differences in ethnic violence and discrimination is disappointing.
It is not surprising, then, that the State Department report cannot decide what to do about Montenegro. It notes that "Milosevic greatly circumscribes the Montenegrin government's sphere for independent action and does not tolerate significant divergence from the ruling Socialist Party of Serbia line." However, the first we hear of the president of Montenegro, he is "at year's end," i.e., post-Dayton, freeing his republic's political prisoners. And last summer, while police in Serbia were rounding up refugees and sending them to serve against their will in Serbian forces in the Krajina and Bosnia {across the closed border described above), the "[gjovernment of Montenegro refused to allow refugees within its borders to be forcibly mobilized." References to actions by the government of Montenegro are generally positive, while negative actions are attributed to its police force and to unnamed actors threatening Croats in and around Kotor. It is clear that, while the State Department appears to welcome independent initiative on the part of Montenegrin government and party officials, it has not determined the extent of the sphere circumscribed by Milosevic. Judging by the passing attention devoted to Montenegro, we can conclude that the State Department does not deem events there to be of much significance. The report should devote more careful attention to why and how the Montenegrin government has been able to introduce economic reforms and maintain comparatively stable relationships among ethnic groups, including the amnesty granted Muslims originally tried for weapons
204
Serbia and Montenegro
possession in Bijelo Polje and the reasons for successful resettlement of Muslim refugees from Bosnia in Montenegro. It should assess the currency of the relationship between Serbia and Montenegro and the mechanisms of state power within Montenegro itself.
When the report does attempt to describe practical means by which the FRY state and party apparatus exerts internal control, it makes grave errors of fact in several places, exposing fundamental flaws in the State Department's understanding of the FRY's legal code and criminal justice system. Given the report's general emphasis on actions taken by police, these serious errors suggest that the drafters are interested in anecdotal information on arbitrary violence but not in the infrastructure that supports such violence.
The report is simply wrong in describing prison conditions in the FRY as "adequate." In addition to interrogation cells in local police stations, criminal detention facilities established by law fall into two categories: investigative detention jails {istrazni zatvori) and prisons for long-term incarceration (zatvori za izdrzavanje kazne). Both are filthy, insufferably hot in summer and unheated in winter. But these are the least of detainees' problems. Each detention facility has an official physician who is required by law to attend to the health and physical conditions of detainees and to certify whether a prisoner who is to be transferred from jail to prison is fit for long-term incarceration. According to eyewitness reports of defense attorneys, both jail and prison physicians do not describe injuries received by detainees during interrogation, even when those injuries are patently obvious, and do not provide adequate medical treatment. The usual medical treatment for victims of police torture is cold water and aspirin. Jail and prison physicians are often themselves witnesses to torture and mistreatment of prisoners and nonetheless protect the actions of police by certifying that tortured prisoners are fit for incarceration. By law, prisoners have the right to complain of such treatment, but do not do so for fear of provoking even more violence and torture.
The physical conditions endured by detainees are also far from adequate. Vehicles used to transport prisoners have no windows or ventilation. In addition to the rank filth and temperature extremes noted
205
Critique 1995
above, jails and interrogation cells in police stations are often subterranean. They are routinely bloodstained. Physical conditions in longer-term facilities are only slightly better.
The report is also wrong about the length of time police hold suspects incommunicado without charging them or granting them access to attorneys. It is correct that, by law, police can hold suspects under those conditions for three days. However, by law the police can hold suspects for an additional day "to determine identity." Police do so even when an individual is arrested at home and is carrying an identity card. In the Kosovo mass trials, Serbian police held their ethnic Albanian former colleagues, even those who had worked with them in the same local police station, for that extra day "to determine identity." As a rule, suspects — particularly those charged with ethnic-based or political crimes — are held incommunicado and interrogated for four days, not three, as the report states.
The report does not mention that, in Kosovo and Sandzak, a large number of defense attorneys are themselves former police officials. It is difficult for others to be certified for defense practice in those areas and, as a result, those defense attorneys who were police officials bring to the job their experience and identification with the tactics of repression.
The report presents an incomplete explanation of the Ministry of the Interior's routine examination of mail, arbitrary searches of vehicles and homes, and monitoring of contacts from abroad. In the 1970s, Minister of the Interior Stane Dolanc pronounced all of Yugoslavia a single customs zone; in view of this, neither a warrant nor suspicion of criminal activity was required to justify a search. In 1971, after crushing the liberal movement in Serbia and the national movement in Croatia, Tito and Dolanc wished to expand police activity without making it appear that police power was unlimited. When the entire country was proclaimed a customs zone, police surveillance and harassment could masquerade as assistance to customs officials. The law is still in effect in most parts of the former Yugoslavia, which is procedurally why police who wish to search a vehicle nowhere near any international border still ask those they have stopped where their journey originated.
206
Serbia and Montenegro
When discussing the means used to repress civil liberties, the report correctly describes the economic pressure used by the authorities to threaten or shut down independent media. However, it does not even hint at the effect on independent media of the sanctions imposed against the FRY, nor does it mention that the drastic deterioration of living standards and skyrocketing costs of basic necessities have made the purchase of a more expensive independent publication a luxury few can afford. The FRY's ruling party was able to exploit the country's isolation under sanctions to strengthen its control not only over media and educational institutions, but over all aspects of cultural life. Future reports should consider the effect of repression not just on political and social institutions, but on cultural institutions, including popular (as opposed to "high") culture, and especially the cultural forms accessible to children and young people.
The rigid format prescribed by the drafting instructions fragments the presentation of issues relating to freedom of assembly and association, particularly if persons wish to associate in order to advocate political change or to investigate violations of human rights. As a result, the report's section on freedom of assembly focuses exclusively on members of ethnic minorities, creating the impression that those who are not members of ethnic minorities face no restrictions in their attempts at political association. (Even more curious is the fact that the only public assemblies described in this section are soccer matches.) Other sections of the report describe the consequences of attempts at association or assembly by persons who express opposition to the SPS. In describing the harassment in May of members of the Belgrade Circle, however, the report minimizes police reaction to the activity of NGOs. It notes that, after a larger campaign of threatening phone calls, "one young woman was called to the police station for questioning." In fact, hundreds of persons involved in NGOs were called in by the police for "informative conversations" — an "invitation" which can by law be issued only in the event of criminal conduct or to gather information on criminal activity. According to one of the invitees, the large-scale questioning appears to have been intended to disrupt NGO and opposition activity in Belgrade
207
Critique 1995
and to create suspicions among those questioned that others had begun to cooperate with the police.
In !995, the FRY faced a massive challenge to its mechanisms of internal control when, as the State Department estimates, 170,000 persons expelled from the Krajina arrived in the FRY, adding to the hundreds of thousands of refugees already in Serbia-Montenegro. Although the report does intermittently describe the problems faced by refugees within the FRY, it does not coherently address their exploitation by the authorities, their forced resettlement, their mass abduction and forced conscription into military service, their arbitrary treatment by government authorities, their widespread difficulties in obtaining official refugee status, and the lack of clarity in their citizenship status. As the refugees continue to stretch already overburdened social services within the FRY, they challenge the government to maintain internal control and, as the forced conscriptions indicate, foreshadow human rights violations on a massive scale.
In conclusion, the State Department report on Serbia-Montenegro is so colored by considerations of policy in the wake of the Dayton Agreement that it is far more useful as a political document than as a description of the state of human rights in the FRY. Although it provides extensive detail on individual violations of human rights, it does so without sufficiently linking those incidents to a longstanding infrastructure of repression based on what is effectively one-party rule. As long as Slobodan Milosevic holds out the promise of cooperation in ending extraterritorial hostilities in Bosnia-Herzegovina, future reports are unlikely to change this politicized approach.
208
L
