Serbia and Montenegro
Serbia and Montenegro is taking some small steps to promote human
rights, however, its progress is limited by continued impunity for those
who committed war crimes. The government is unwilling to cooperate
fully with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia
and efforts to prosecute war criminals before domestic courts are inadequate.
Additionally, the government has failed to respond effectively to
attacks against ethnic minorities.
International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
Serbia and Montenegro’s cooperation with the ICTY took a marked
turn for the worse after the December 2003 parliamentary elections and
the establishment of a new Serbian government dominated by the
nationalistic Democratic Party of Serbia (DSS). Serbian Prime Minster
Vojislav Kostunica openly opposes the arrests of suspects indicted by the
ICTY, arguing that they should surrender voluntarily.
On October 9, 2004, former Bosnian Serb army general Ljubisa Beara,
charged with genocide for crimes committed against Bosnian Muslims
in Srebrenica in 1995, was transferred to the ICTY. Serbian officials
insisted that Beara surrendered voluntarily, notwithstanding the claims
by the ICTY Office of the Prosecutor that Beara was arrested. As many
as fifteen ICTY indictees remain at large in Serbia and Montenegro, or
traveling back and forth between Serbia and Montenegro and Republika
Srpska (Bosnia and Herzegovina). They include Ratko Mladic, the former
general of the Bosnian Serb army, and Bosnian Serb wartime leader
Radovan Karadzic.
The government has been particularly obstinate in its refusal to transfer
to ICTY custody three former army and police generals—Nebojsa
Pavkovic, Vladimir Lazarevic, and Sreten Lukic—indicted for war
crimes in Kosovo in 1999. Prime Minister Kostunica and his cabinet continue to insist that the ICTY should allow them to be tried in
Serbia. The political climate in Serbia and Montenegro—where the
men are widely regarded as patriots—and the absence of a genuinely
independent judiciary make the chances of a credible prosecution being
mounted against them in Serbia very slim.
Domestic War Crimes Trials
The prosecution of war crimes cases before domestic courts in Serbia is
hampered by a lack of political will on the part of the authorities, and
the unwillingness of the police to provide evidence to the prosecutor’s
office. The creation of a special war crimes chamber in 2003 appeared
to signal an increased seriousness of purpose. But during 2004 the
chamber heard only one trial, yet to be completed at the time of this
writing, in a case arising from the November 1991 killing of 200
Croats, near Vukovar, Croatia. In addition, Sasa Cvjetan was convicted
in March 2004 by the Belgrade district court for killing fourteen
Kosovo Albanian civilians in March 1999 in Podujevo, Kosovo. Cvjetan
was sentenced to twenty years’ imprisonment.
Current legislation in Serbia contains only rudimentary witness protection
mechanisms. The government has drafted a new law on protection
of witnesses and other participants in criminal trials, but as of
November 2004 the draft law had yet to be enacted.
The office of the special war crimes prosecutor with five prosecutors,
and the special war crimes unit within the Serbian police, with eight
inspectors working on war crimes investigations, both remain severely
understaffed. The office of the special war crimes prosecutor is reportedly
preparing several cases pertaining to war crimes in Kosovo in 1999.
However, the security situation in Kosovo, coupled with a lack of initiative
on the part of the office of the special war crimes prosecutor, has
prevented it from getting access to ethnic Albanian witnesses in Kosovo.
The office has yet to prepare any cases arising from crimes committed
in Bosnia or in Croatia.
Ethnic and Religious Minorities
The government failed adequately to respond to the explosion of ethnic
and religious violence in Serbia in March 2004. It is similarly failing to
address a year-long wave of low-level violence against non-Serbs in the
Vojvodina region in northern Serbia.
On March 17, mobs burnt down mosques in Serbia’s biggest towns,
Belgrade and Nis. The violence was sparked by reports from Kosovo of
widespread rioting and attacks on minorities by ethnic Albanians. The
few police officers deployed to protect the mosques were unable to control
the rioters. In a March 17 television interview, Serbian Interior
Minister Vladan Jocic effectively encouraged the rioters, assuring viewers
that the police would not use force against “its own people.” On the
same evening, the police in Novi Sad stood by as demonstrators
attacked and seriously damaged an Islamic community center, as well as
pastry shops and bakeries belonging to ethnic Albanians and Muslims.
In the following months, prosecutors in Nis and Belgrade charged three
dozens rioters with participation in a violent group, rather than with
ethnically- or religiously-aggravated forms of violence. To date, there
have been no indictments for the violence in Novi Sad.
There have been dozens of incidents against ethnic minorities in
Vojvodina since January 2004. The violence ranges from tombstone
desecration and painting of nationalistic graffiti to confrontations
involving young persons of different ethnicities. The government initially
claimed that the incidents were not ethnically motivated. In the
face of mounting evidence that most of incidents had an ethnic motivation,
and European Union and Council of Europe condemnations of
the violence, the government eventually acknowledged there was a
problem. In September, Serbian Prime Minister Kostunica and the Minister of Serbia and Montenegro for Human and Minorities Rights
Rasim Ljajic visited Vojvodina and vowed to end ethnic intolerance. By
October there had been only one case in which a court charged perpetrators
with ethnically motivated crimes. Most other cases have either
not reached trial, or resulted in minor penalties for disturbing the
peace.
In southern Serbia—a predominantly ethnic Albanian area bordering
eastern Kosovo— the school curriculum continues to ignore Albanian
culture and history. There is still no progress on improving educational
opportunities for Roma children in Serbia. Most Roma children drop
out of school altogether at an early stage, or are channeled into the
schools for students with mental disabilities. Thousands of Roma families—
many of them displaced from Kosovo—live in makeshift settlements
on the outskirts of towns, without electricity, running water, sewers,
or access to public health and education services.
Serbia and Montenegro has seen some progress during the year in the
implementation of the 2002 Law on the Rights and Freedoms of
National Minorities. Most minority groups have completed establishing
national councils under the law. The councils play a consultative role in
minority education and cultural matters.
Key International Actors
The United States government enjoys considerable influence with the
authorities in Serbia. Serbia’s failure to cooperate with the ICTY is a
growing cause of friction in their relations. The U.S. suspended
U.S.$26 million in economic assistance to Serbia on March 31, 2004,
over its non-cooperation with the ICTY. It is the first time the U.S. has
taken such a step since the fall of Slobodan Milosevic in October 2000.
The U.S. position has been less than principled, however. The Serbian
government’s request to try Serbian generals wanted by the ICTY in
Serbia rather than handing them over to the tribunal has met with a sympathetic response from two senior U.S. government officials. Mixed
signals from the U.S. encourage the Serbian officials to persist in noncooperation
with the ICTY.
On March 18, the ICTY sentenced former Yugoslav Navy admiral
Miodrag Jokic to seven years in prison for the 1991 shelling of the
Croatian town of Dubrovnik. In February, the ICTY prosecutor rested
its case against the former President Slobodan Milosevic, who faces
crimes against humanity and genocide charges. The beginning of
Milosevic’s defense has been frustrated by his refusal to cooperate with
the lawyers assigned to him on September 2. Milosevic continued to
insist on representing himself, which the trial chamber has determined
was not appropriate given the serious deterioration in his health. On
November 1, ICTY Appeals Chamber confirmed the decision on the
assignment of lawyers, but gave Milosevic greater scope to run his case.
The overall perception of the Tribunal’s work among Serbian public
remains negative, mainly due to the hostility of consecutive Serbian
governments and the media to the work of the tribunal.
The European Union is attempting to make a more effective use of the
association and stabilization process to leverage improvements in
Serbia’s performance on human rights. The Stabilization and
Association report from April 2004, noted progress in the area of
minority rights, but also the slower than hoped-for reform of the police
and judiciary, and shortcomings in the conduct of domestic war crimes
trials. The European Partnership document, adopted by the E.U.
Council on June 14, details a list of short- and medium-term human
rights priorities for Serbia and Montenegro’s further integration with
the E.U. On October 11, the European Commission announced that it
would re-launch the Feasibility Report on a Stabilization and
Association Agreement (SAA) with Serbia and Montenegro. The report,
due to be finalized by spring 2005, will assess the country’s capacity to
negotiate and implement the far-reaching political and economic obligations
the agreement entails. 
Kosovo
In March 2004, the United Nations-administered province of Kosovo
returned to the international agenda. Two days of widespread riots—the
worst violence since 1999—revealed the precarious situation of the
province’s minority population, the weakness of security structures, and
the frustration of the majority population at the international institutions
that govern Kosovo. Lack of security for minorities, coupled with
a continuing accountability gap and uncertainty regarding the province’s
political status, limit the return of internally displaced and refugee
Kosovars to their homes. The impact of Kosovo’s inadequately functioning
judicial institutions is felt by majority and minority populations
alike. October elections for Kosovo’s legislative assembly were free of
violence, but most Serbs did not participate.
Protection of Minorities
The March 17-19 riots shattered the illusion of security for Kosovo’s
minority communities. At least thirty-three major riots took place
across the province, involving an estimated 51,000 predominantly ethnic
Albanian participants. The violence—directed at international
organisations as well as minorities—left twenty-one people dead, more
than 950 wounded, and some 4,100 people displaced, almost all of them
Serbs, Roma, Ashkali, or other non-Albanian minorities. At least 730
minority-owned homes—including some belonging to recent
returnees—and twenty-seven Orthodox churches and monasteries were
burned and looted, together with at least ten public buildings providing
services to minorities, including a hospital, two schools, and a post
office.
During the riots, the security organizations in Kosovo—the NATO-led
Kosovo Force (KFOR), U.N. international civilian police, and the local
Kosovo Police Service (KPS)—almost completely lost control. In too
many cases, minorities under attack were left entirely unprotected. Poor inter-agency coordination, limitations on deployment in individual
KFOR contingents (so-called “caveats”), and lack of riot-control training
and equipment for KPS, U.N. police, and KFOR, provide part of
the explanation.
Beyond the destruction of homes, and the displacement of more than
four thousand people, the violence reinforced existing concerns among
minorities about their personal safety, fuelled by routine—and frequently
unreported—ethnically-motivated harassment and intimidation, verbal
abuse, property defacement, and stone-throwing. Minorities also
face persistent discrimination in the provision of education, social welfare,
and health services, and limited access to administrative offices and
courts. There has been little progress in implementing the new anti-discrimination
law.
Efforts to improve coordination among KFOR and U.N. police have
yet to reassure either minority communities or those agencies working
on their behalf that international security structures would be able
effectively to manage a repeat of March violence. Assurances from the
U.N. Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) that the situation
has stabilized—often supported by crime statistics considered on
par with many Western European countries—ring hollow at a time
when many minorities have little or no freedom of movement, and
remain subject to harassment and intimidation.
Return of Refugees and Internally Displaced Persons
Even before the March violence, the overall picture on returns in
Kosovo was bleak. Fewer than 5 percent of the more than 200,000
internally displaced and refugees from minority communities who left
their homes since 1999 have returned. The majority are in Serbia,
Montenegro, and Macedonia. By the end of September 2004, fewer
than 1,500 voluntary minority returns had occurred. (During the twelve
months of 2003, there were 3,801 minority returns). The figures include returns of displaced ethnic Albanians to locations where they
are in the minority. Those returns that did take place were often incomplete
or partial returns—with only part of the family returning, or the
family returning only for part of the year. As of early October 2004,
2,288 of the 4,100 minorities driven from their homes by the March
violence remained displaced.
Even prior to March, the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) warned against the forced return of minorities,
including ethnic Albanians from areas where they are in the minority,
and those from mixed families. Forced returns of minorities have continued,
however, together with the return of larger numbers of ethnic
Albanians to majority areas.
Impunity and Access to Justice
While there has been progress toward the establishment of a functioning
and sustainable justice system in Kosovo over the past five years, the
current picture of accountability for crimes is one of rampant impunity.
Ongoing legislative drafting, including the recently enacted criminal
procedure, criminal, gender equality, and anti-discrimination laws,
though an important part of the judicial process, can do little to remedy
many of the practical obstacles to accessing justice in Kosovo.
The current justice system continues to suffer from a significant, and
ever increasing, backlog of cases; a shortage of international and local
judges; virtually non-existent mechanisms for witness protection and
relocation; poorly-trained and inadequately supported investigators and
prosecutors; persistent concerns over the perceived bias of ethnic
Albanian judges; and serious problems in ensuring the right to be tried
within a reasonable time, including securing the attendance of the
accused at trial. The problems affect all communities, undermining confidence
in the criminal justice system and the rule of law.
There have been few prosecutions for war crimes committed in 1998
and 1999 and for post-war inter-ethnic and political violence, especially
during the period of late 1999 and 2000. The second major trial of former
Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) members began in October 2004.
All of the alleged victims are ethnic Albanian. Verdicts in the first
domestic war crimes trial, the so-called “Llap” case, were only rendered
in late 2003. All but one of the victims in that case are ethnic Albanian.
There has also been little progress in resolving the more than three
thousand outstanding cases of missing persons from Kosovo.
In comparison to the dismal rate of prosecutions for offences prior to
March—whether for war crimes, inter-ethnic crimes, or ordinary criminal
offences—the response to the March events has been dramatic.
More than 270 people have been arrested for criminal acts relating to
the violence. The bulk of these arrests, however, have resulted in
charges for fairly minor offences, adjudicated by the local Municipal
and Minor Offences Courts. Despite the minor nature of the offences
charged, and the relative speed at which these cases should be adjudicated,
fewer than half had been resolved by late October 2004. Of the
fifty-seven more serious cases relating to murders, ring-leaders, serious
inter-ethnic crime, and major arson attacks, only about one-third were
in the judicial process by late October 2004, with indictments filed in
little more than half of those cases. Cases involving allegations of police
complicity in violence are still under investigation.
Trafficking of women and girls—a significant problem in Kosovo—is
another area where there is a serious accountability gap. There have
been few prosecutions for trafficking. Women and girls rounded up in
police raids have been prosecuted for being unlawfully present in
Kosovo or for prostitution. The inclusion in the UNMIK witness protection
program of trafficking victims facing serious threat as of
September 2004 is a welcome development. 
The problems with the criminal justice system are mirrored in Kosovo’s
civil courts. Case backlogs, access to the courts for ethnic minorities,
and a sometimes chronic failure to implement court decisions, are
among the obstacles.
Key International Actors
The United Nations remains the key international actor in Kosovo.
The appointment of the experienced diplomat Søren Jessen-Petersen as
special representative to the secretary general (SRSG) in August was
broadly welcomed as an opportunity to re-energize the tired U.N. mission
ahead of negotiations on Kosovo’s political status. The new SRSG
faces a major challenge to reinvigorate the U.N.’s work on police and
justice issues, and restore confidence in the mission among Kosovo’s
communities. In October, the U.N. Human Rights Committee requested
that UNMIK submit a report to it on the situation of civil and political
rights in Kosovo.
The first trial of former KLA members at the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia began on November 15. Fatmir
Limaj, Haradin Bala, and Isak Musliu are charged with crimes against
humanity for their alleged role in the torture and murder of Serb and
ethnic Albanian civilians at a KLA prison camp in 1998. The three men
have pleaded not guilty to all charges.
The Contact Group—France, Germany, Italy, Russia, the United
Kingdom, and the United States—renewed their focus on Kosovo in
the wake of the March violence. The group has emphasized that
progress on minority protection and other human rights standards
remain a precondition for a viable political settlement in Kosovo.
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
Mission in Kosovo is increasingly emphasizing the capacity-building
elements of its mandate, including training for judicial officials and officers from the Kosovo Police Service. It continues to monitor the courts
and produce periodic reports on minority rights together with
UNHCR.
NATO has been working at a diplomatic level to remove national
restrictions (“caveats”) on the deployment of NATO contingents in
Kosovo—widely seen as a barrier to a coordinated and effective KFOR
response to security incidents.
The European Union remains the key international player with regard
to economic development, including Kosovo’s vexed privatization
process. The E.U. is assuming a growing importance in the political
sphere—a role suggested in the June 2004 U.N.-commissioned report
by Norwegian NATO Ambassador Kai Eide. New envoys from the
E.U. High Representative on Common Security and Foreign Policy
and the European Commission were dispatched to Pristina/Prishtina in
the wake of the March violence.