S<I9@8
Serbia made little discernible progress on human rights issues in 2011, despite
the European Parliament in January ratifying the European Union’s Stabilization
and Association Agreement with Serbia, and the arrests of Ratko Mladic and
Goran Hadzic, the two remaining fugitives wanted by the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). The situation of ethnic minorities
remains concerning, independent journalists face threats and violence, and the
weak asylum system needs reform. Rising tensions with Kosovo have exacerbated
Serbia’s dialogue with the EU.
In late July the Kosovo government sent armored units to Kosovo’s northern border,
populated by Kosovo Serbs, in an unsuccessful attempt to seize control of
two crossing points. Local Serbs erected roadblocks to stop them and a
shootout erupted, killing one Kosovo policeman. In late August German
Chancellor Angela Merkel visited Belgrade and warned Serbian authorities they
must normalize relations with Kosovo for Serbia to move closer to EU membership.
War Crimes Accountability
In May and July, respectively, the two remaining ICTY war crimes suspects Ratko
Mladic, wartime Bosnian Serb military commander, and Goran Hadzic, wartime
leader of the Croatian Serb separatist forces, were arrested on Serbian soil,
ending the long period of impunity for war crimes committed in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Croatia. In his visit to Serbia in September, ICTY Chief
Prosecutor Serge Brammertz commended the Serbian government for arresting
Mladic and Hadzic, but also stressed the importance of Serbia’s technical cooperation
with the tribunal regarding ongoing trials. Additionally, he underlined
the importance of regional cooperation in prosecuting war criminals.
Domestic war crimes prosecutions have proceeded steadily, although the
Serbian War Crimes Chamber has faced increasing criticism for limited progress
in domestic war-related criminal proceedings, and for indictments of individuals
for war crimes that were eventually dropped due to lack of evidence.
In March Jovan Divjak, a Bosnian army wartime general, was arrested by
Austrian police under a Serbian arrest warrant in Austria over charges that he
committed war crimes in 1991 against Yugoslav People’s Army (JNA) troops on
Dobrovoljacka Street in Sarajevo. Many NGOs and NGO spokespeople, including
the president of the Helsinki Committee of Serbia, condemned the indictment
as shameful and provocative, especially because Divjak is an active member
of the NGO community. The Korneuburg District Court in Austria declined
Serbia’s request for extradition, and Divjak was released in July. There have
been several other high-profile indictments and arrests for war crimes against
the JNA—including against Ejup Ganic, former de facto Bosnian vice-president
during the war, and Ilija Jurisic, former wartime high ranking official in the
Ministry of Interior—all of which were eventually dropped due to lack of evidence
and pressure from NGOs and government officials.
Freedom of Media
Hostile acts against independent media outlets and journalists remained a serious
problem. Milan Savatovic was sentenced to 10 months of house arrest in
May, three years after the 2008 brutal attack on Bosko Brankovic, a cameraman
with the B92 media company, during a protest against Radovan Karadzic’s
arrest. Savatovic’s two accomplices received suspended sentences. Journalistic
associations criticized the light sentences, arguing that Serbian law does not
adequately protect journalists.
In January and February the Insider television show reported in a series entitled
“Fraud of the Century” on alleged financial abuses in the mining basin of
Kolubara, near the town of Lazarevac. In an apparent act of intimidation after
the report, unknown perpetrators in Lazarevac put up posters “announcing” the
death of Insider journalists.
Danilo Zuza and Milos Mladenovic, who are believed to be associated with
extremist nationalist groups, were arrested for the July 2010 beating of Teofil
Pancic, a political commentator. In September 2010 they were sentenced to
three months in prison, although the legally proscribed penalty for the crime is
six months to five years. However, due to their lack of previous criminal records
and their ages (both 20-years-old) they were sentenced below the legal minimum. Pancic appealed the low sentences. In November the Court of Appeals in
Belgrade sentenced Mladenovic and Zuza to seven additional months.
Serbia’s government is currently examining a long-awaited draft law on media
strategy forwarded by the Ministry of Culture. Journalist NGOs and associations
in Serbia have criticized the draft for allowing continued state ownership of
media and for what they say are inadequate safeguards against political interference
regarding media content.
Treatment of Minorities
Roma continue to suffer discrimination and attacks. In March a Roma boy was
repeatedly verbally insulted and beaten outside his high school; the young men
responsible were arrested but have not yet been charged. In a similar incident
in May three individuals beat a young Roma adult in a Belgrade bus. They have
been arrested but not yet charged.
Roma families living in informal settlements in Belgrade face forced evictions
with little access to alternative housing. Twelve Roma families were evicted
from their homes under Pancevo Bridge in June without notice. Police escorted
them to the outskirts of Belgrade to live in metal containers without sanitation
or electricity. Five families were evicted from their homes in Skadarska Street,
Belgrade, and spent the next night sleeping in city parks, despite a coalition of
22 NGOs urging the authorities to provide alternative housing.
Human Rights Defenders
A gay rights pride parade set for October 2 was cancelled over fears of mass
violence. Police security assessments showed there could have been riots and
clashes between extremist right-wing groups and marchers. Many local and
international NGOs accused the authorities of giving into threats and for not
adequately tackling hate speech. In her statement, Antje Rothemund, head of
the Council of Europe Office in Belgrade, said she was deeply concerned about
the degree of hatred and violence in Serbian society that led to the event’s cancellation.
In April 2011 a Serbian court sentenced far right leader Mladen Obradovic to
two years in prison for inciting violence during the 2010 gay pride march.
Belgrade’s Higher Court ruled that Obradovic, leader of extremist group Honor,
used violence to disrupt the gathering in order to incite hatred and discrimination.
The court sentenced 13 others to prison terms of 8 to 18 months. Gay
activists and liberals said the sentences were important as the first ever in
Serbia for discrimination against gays, but complained they were too lenient.
Asylum Seekers and Internally Displaced Persons
Serbia’s law on asylum went into effect in April 2008, transferring the power for
making asylum decisions from the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to the Serbian asylum office. According to
Ministry of Interior figures, 2,134 asylum seekers were registered in Serbia
between the start of January and end of August, a striking jump from 522 in
2010. The rise appears to be due to an influx of migrants through Greece,
Turkey, and Macedonia. There are currently two centers for asylum seekers in
Banja Koviljaca and Bogovadja in Serbia; the one in Bogovadja opened in June
and is already at capacity. There have been no reports of poor treatment or
abuse so far, but UNHCR reports that overcrowding is likely.
In March the Serbian Commissariat for Refugees and Internally Displaced
People (IDP), in cooperation with UNHCR, published an IDP vulnerability assessment.
It showed there were 73,358 refugees in Serbia, most of them of Croatian
origin, and 97,286 persons from Kosovo with displacement-related needs in
Serbia.
UNHCR reported in March that Serbia (including Kosovo) sent 28,900 asylum
seekers to Europe and North America in 2010. The largest group of asylum seekers
in the world in 2010 were from Serbia (including Kosovo), according to
UNHCR. According to Serbia’s minister of interior, 95 percent of Serbian asylum
applicants in Western European countries belong to ethnic minorities, many of
them Roma of Serbian and Kosovo origin.
Key International Actors
The European Parliament’s ratification of the EU’s Stabilisation and Association
Agreement with Serbia marked a key step toward the latter’s membership in the
union. The resolution particularly underlined the importance of eliminating
parallel structures in the north of Kosovo and the need to improve treatment of
minorities.
In October the European Commission recommended that Serbia become a candidate
to join the EU “on the understanding that Serbia reengages on the dialogue
with Kosovo .” The accompanying progress report commended Serbia’s
judicial reform efforts and improved legal and policy frameworks for human
rights protection, but called for greater efforts to counter threats and violence
against journalists and the media and to improve the status of Roma.
Following a review in March the UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination urged Serbian authorities to halt forced evictions for Roma and
improve their access to education and registration. In a September report on
Serbia Thomas Hammarberg, Council of Europe commissioner for human rights,
stressed the need to counter hate speech by extreme right groups, ensure protection
of journalists, and improve human rights for Roma.
Kosovo
Kosovo’s human rights situation improved little in 2011, amid faltering negotiations
with Serbia and tensions between Serbs and Albanians at the northern
border that sometimes led to violence. The justice system remained weak,
despite efforts to prosecute individuals for corruption and war crimes. Kosovo’s
Roma, Ashkali, and Egyptian (an Albanian speaking group with supposed origins
in Egypt) remained marginalized and vulnerable to discrimination. General
elections in December 2010 occurred without violence, but were marred by
irregularities that international observers said called the results into question.
Key International Actors
The European Parliament’s ratification of the EU’s Stabilisation and Association
Agreement with Serbia marked a key step toward the latter’s membership in the
union. The resolution particularly underlined the importance of eliminating
parallel structures in the north of Kosovo and the need to improve treatment of
minorities.
In October the European Commission recommended that Serbia become a candidate
to join the EU “on the understanding that Serbia reengages on the dialogue
with Kosovo .” The accompanying progress report commended Serbia’s
judicial reform efforts and improved legal and policy frameworks for human
rights protection, but called for greater efforts to counter threats and violence
against journalists and the media and to improve the status of Roma.
Following a review in March the UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination urged Serbian authorities to halt forced evictions for Roma and
improve their access to education and registration. In a September report on
Serbia Thomas Hammarberg, Council of Europe commissioner for human rights,
stressed the need to counter hate speech by extreme right groups, ensure protection
of journalists, and improve human rights for Roma.
Kosovo
Kosovo’s human rights situation improved little in 2011, amid faltering negotiations
with Serbia and tensions between Serbs and Albanians at the northern
border that sometimes led to violence. The justice system remained weak,
despite efforts to prosecute individuals for corruption and war crimes. Kosovo’s
Roma, Ashkali, and Egyptian (an Albanian speaking group with supposed origins
in Egypt) remained marginalized and vulnerable to discrimination. General
elections in December 2010 occurred without violence, but were marred by
irregularities that international observers said called the results into question.
Return of Refugees and Internally Displaced Persons
In March UNHCR reported that Serbia and Kosovo produced the highest number
of asylum applicants in “industrialized” countries in 2010. The trend was attributed
to the EU visa liberalization with Serbia and the economic problems and
discrimination that minorities face in Kosovo. Most claims were lodged in
Europe. According to UNHCR, many claimants were Roma, Ashkali, and
Egyptians from Kosovo. Almost all were rejected.
UNHCR Kosovo registered a total of 695 voluntary minority returns in the first
seven months of the year, a decline from the peak in 2010: 237 Serb, 76 Roma,
187 Ashkali and Egyptian, 36 Bosniak, 68 Gorani, 12 Albanian (to Serbian
majority areas, mainly Mitrovica), and 7 Montenegrins.
Deportations of Kosovars from Western Europe continued, with little assistance
for returnees once in Kosovo. According to UNHCR, 1,334 Kosovars were deported
from Western Europe during the first seven months of 2011, including 336
people to areas where they were in a minority: 168 Roma, 76 Ashkali, 5
Egyptians, 22 Bosniaks, 8 Gorani, 3 Turks, 16 Albanians, and 38 Serbs.
Deportations continued to disproportionately impact Roma, Ashkali, and
Egyptian communities, with most returnees living in informal settlements and
lacking basic utilities such as running water and electricity. The UN Children’s
Fund reported in August that most Roma, Ashkali, and Egyptian children
returned to Kosovo were now on the national registry, giving them a legal right
to access education and other social services. Three-quarters still do not attend
school due to poverty, curriculum differences, and language barriers.
The state of North Rhine-Westphalia, which hosts the largest number of Kosovo
Roma, Ashkali, and Egyptians in Germany, suspended forced returns of Roma,
Ashkali, and Egyptians for the winter months of 2010 and 2011, due to concerns
about their safety in Kosovo. Forced returns from North Rhine-Westphalia
resumed in April 2011, although more nuanced assessments introduced in
September 2010 meant that school-age children were less likely to be deported.
Activists and Roma leaders voiced concerns in March and April 2011 about lack
of treatment for poisoning for most former inhabitants of a lead-contaminated
camp in Mitrovica that closed in October 2010. A similar lead-contaminated
camp at Osterode remained open as approximately 20 families remaining there
feared violence and discrimination if they returned to their former homes in
southern Mitrovica. In July 2011 the authorities in north Mitrovica reached an
agreement with Mercy Corps and the European Commission to provide land for
homes for these families.
Impunity, Accountability, and Access to Justice
The partial retrial at the ICTY of Ramush Haradinaj, former Kosovo prime minister,
and Idriz Balaj and Lahi Brahimaj, Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) commanders,
began in August on charges related to wartime prisoner abuse at a KLA
detention facility. A key prosecution witness who had declined to testify in the
first trial again refused to give evidence citing fears over his safety, reawakening
concerns over witness security that the ICTY appeals chamber had cited
when ordering the retrial.
In January the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe adopted a
report by Swiss parliamentarian Dick Marty, alleging that some KLA members,
including current senior officials in Kosovo, had participated in the post-war
abductions, enforced disappearances, and killing of Serbs, as well as alleged
organ trafficking and organized crime including weapons and drug smuggling.
In May the EU approved a special task force in its Rule of Law and Police
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) to investigate the allegations. In August EULEX
appointed an experienced American prosecutor to head the investigation.
In October the trial of seven Kosovoar Albanians accused of separate allegations
of organ trafficking and human trafficking, known as the Medicus case,
opened in Pristina. The defendants are accused of luring donors from poor
countries to Kosovo with false promises of high payments for their kidneys.
During the period from July 2010 to June 2011, EULEX completed five war crime
cases, with three more ongoing and 67 in pre-trial stages.
The war crimes prosecution of Fatmir Limaj, a Kosovo member of parliament in
the ruling party, was delayed from March until September because of confusion
about whether he had parliamentary immunity from prosecution. In September
the Constitutional Court of Kosovo ruled that lawmakers are not immune from
prosecution and a district court ordered him placed under house arrest. Limaj is
accused of torturing and killing Serbian and Albanian prisoners in the town of
Klecka in 1999.
The impending trial faced a setback in late September when a key witness
under witness protection, Agim Zogaj, was found dead in a park in Germany.
While German police investigations indicated suicide, Zogaj’s family criticized
the protection offered to him by EULEX and said Zogaj had been under intense
pressure. The Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights noted that
the case highlighted the wider challenge of effective witness protection in
Kosovo.
Freedom of Media
In an open letter in February Christopher Dell, the United States ambassador to
Kosovo, accused three media outlets—Koha Ditore, Koha Vision TV, and
Express—of illegal conduct after they obtained and reported on text messages
and a tape recorded conversation between Ambassador Dell and Kosovo politicians
during that month’s presidential elections. The Independent Media
Commission in Kosovo cleared the three publications of wrongdoing the same
month. In March Reporters without Borders criticized Dell’s intervention as
“unacceptable harassment.”
In August EULEX issued indictments against Rexhep Hoti and four other staff at
the Kosovo daily Infopress after threats made in the paper in May and June
2009 against a prominent journalist, Jeta Xharra. The threats followed Xharra’s
reporting on threats to media freedom in Kosovo. The indicted individuals could
face up to five years in prison if convicted.
Human Rights Defenders
The EULEX Human Rights Review Panel (HRRP), an advisory body that adjudicates
claims brought by individuals against EULEX, issued its first decision in
April (an employment case) and a second in June (non-implementation of a
court judgment) finding that EULEX had breached property rights in both and
the right to fair hearing in the second.
Key International Actors
In February the head of the UN Mission in Kosovo, Lamberto Zannier, highlighted
before the Security Council the need for a speedy investigation into war
crimes and organ trafficking allegations in the Council of Europe report. He also
noted “widespread irregularities and manipulation of votes” during the
December 2010 elections. Election irregularities were also criticized in January
by Ulrike Lunacek, the European Parliament rapporteur on Kosovo.
The Committee for the Prevention of Torture, a Council of Europe body, released
a report in October after a July visit that found persistent ill-treatment in Kosovo
police custody and lack of legal safeguards for those forcibly placed in psychiatric
facilities.
In October the European Commission’s annual progress report highlighted
“serious shortcomings” in the December 2010 elections and the need for
greater efforts to tackle organized crime, citing “weak” witness protection as a
particular obstacle. The report noted lack of progress on refugees and IDP
returns, and difficult conditions for displaced persons. It called on the authorities
to do more to tackle access to “education, healthcare, housing and social
protection” for Roma, Ashkali, and Egyptians.