Serbia
Serbia continued on the path toward greater domestic accountability for war
crimes, but the government failed to arrest the region’s most wanted war crimes
suspect Ratko Mladic. Tensions in the Albanian-majority Presevo valley flared into
instances of violence in July. The forced eviction of more than 100 Roma from their
homes in Belgrade underscored that minority’s vulnerable position in Serbia as a
whole. The cancellation of the Gay Pride Parade in Belgrade illustrated continuing
intolerance toward lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) people.
War Crimes Accountability
Serbia failed to bring to justice Ratko Mladic and Goran Hadzic, both indicted by
the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and believed to
be in Serbia. The Serbian government has repeatedly undertaken (including in
2009) to arrest Mladic, a precondition for closer ties with the European Union.
In February the ICTY convicted five former top Serbian officials for war crimes and
crimes against humanity in Kosovo. Nikola Sainovic, Nebojsa Pavkovic, Sreten
Lukic, Vladimir Lazarevic, and Dragoljub Ojdanic were given prison sentences
ranging from 15 to 22 years. A sixth defendant, former Serbian president Milan
Milutinovic, was acquitted of similar charges.
In July the ICTY sentenced Vojislav Seselj, the former leader of the Serbian Radical
Party, to 15 months’ imprisonment for breaching witness protection rules. Seselj
is currently on trial before the Tribunal for alleged war crimes in Bosnia and
Croatia.
The Belgrade War Crimes Chamber continued its efforts to hold alleged perpetrators
accountable for wartime abuses, despite limited funding, inadequate political
support, and little public awareness of its work. In March the Chamber convicted
13 former Yugoslav army reservists for their participation in the 1991 massacre
of around 200 Croats in Ovcara, Croatia, sentencing them to up to 20 years’
imprisonment. In June the Chamber sentenced four members of the “Scorpions”
paramilitary unit to prison terms of between 15 and 20 years for crimes against
Kosovo Albanian civilians committed in 1999.
Significant ongoing trials in the Chamber during 2009 and relating to alleged
crimes in Bosnia, Croatia, and Kosovo include the Zvornik trial, the “Tuzla
Column” trial, the Lovas trial, the Suva Reka trial, the Banski Kovacevac trial, the
Trbojevic trial, the “Bytyqi Brothers” trial (named after the victims), the Podujevo
trial, and the Morina trial. Notable new indictments include charges in June
against 17 former members of the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA)’s “Gnjilane
group” for alleged war crimes against Serbs, Roma, and Albanians in 1999, and
charges in July against Nenad Malic for alleged war crimes against Bosniak
(Bosnian Muslim) civilians in 1992.
In September 2009 the Supreme Court delivered the final decision in the “Zvornik
I” case, reducing the sentences of two former Bosnian Serb paramilitaries and
confirming the sentence and acquittal of two others.
Treatment of Minorities
Forced evictions in Belgrade in April underscored the fact that Roma in Serbia
continue to lack full enjoyment of their rights. On April 3, police forcibly evicted
128 Roma people, some of them displaced from Kosovo and including women
and children, from their informal homes in a poor neighborhood in New Belgrade.
On April 2 the Roma had received official notification from Belgrade municipal
authorities that they had 15 days to leave. Less than 24 hours later police arrived
with bulldozers to destroy their makeshift homes. The evicted families were left
homeless and lost most of their belongings. At this writing they have not been
compensated for their lost property.
The evicted Roma are currently living in metal containers in another municipality,
near Belgrade. Their move there was initially blocked by local residents, illustrating
the widespread discrimination and hostility Roma face in Serbia.
In July the United Nations Committee against Torture found Serbia to have violated
the Convention against Torture in the case of Besim Osmani, a Roma man, who
had been beaten by police together with his four-year-old son in June 2000 during
a forced eviction and demolition operation in an informal settlement in
Belgrade. At this writing the Serbian government has yet to respond to the decision.
Longstanding tensions in the Albanian-majority Presevo valley area occasionally
flared into violence in 2009. The most serious incidents occurred in July: two
Serbian police officers were injured in a grenade attack, and two days later two
ethnic Albanians were injured in a bomb explosion in the village of Lucani,
prompting the Serbian government to raise the level of alert in the region, which
resulted in additional police forces being deployed. Five days later the Presevo
municipal assembly requested the withdrawal of the additional police and condemned
alleged “general police brutality.” In August the regional assembly of
Presevo, Medvedja, and Bujanovac passed a declaration demanding the establishment
of a separate autonomous region with its own institutions.
In a positive move, the Serbian parliament in March approved an anti-discrimination
law, prohibiting discrimination on the basis of race, religion, gender, and
sexual orientation, despite opposition to the inclusion of protection for LGBT people
from a coalition of churches led by the Serbian Orthodox Church.
In September Prime Minister Mirko Cvetkovic advised the organizers of the Gay
Pride Parade in Belgrade to move the event from the streets to a city park, saying
the police were otherwise unable to guarantee security to the participants (the
only previous parade, in 2001, had ended in violence). The marchers called this
“unacceptable” and cancelled the event. Less than a week later, Serbia’s public
prosecutor called on the government to ban two far right groups linked to the
threats that led to the cancellation.
Integration of Refugees and Displaced Persons
According to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), as of
August 2009 there were 309,171 internally displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees
in Serbia. Many continue to face problems obtaining documentation, accessing
housing and other social services, and finding employment. Around 6,000 displaced
persons from Bosnia, Croatia, and Kosovo remain in collective centers in
Serbia, often in substandard conditions. Roma IDPs from Kosovo face particularly
poor economic and social conditions.
Forced returns of Roma from Western Europe continued, absent any program to
assist them, placing a particular burden on Roma host communities. According to UNHCR, between January and May, 163 individuals, including 110 Roma, were
involuntarily deported to Serbia from Western European countries. UNHCR did not
record any Kosovo Roma being involuntarily returned to Serbia during the first five
months of 2009.
Media Freedom
Amendments to the Law on Public Information entered into force in July, prompting
widespread criticism by Serbian media and international press freedom
organizations because of the excessive size of permissible fines for libel. Critics
fear this could discourage investigative journalism and stifle press freedom.
Human Rights Defenders
The LGBT NGO Gay-Straight Alliance came under pressure in 2009. In February the
organization was prohibited from holding a news conference in Belgrade’s Sava
Congress Center by municipal officials. After criticism in the media and by
Serbia’s human rights minister, the director of the center and Belgrade’s mayor
both apologized for the decision. In March hooligans threw stones at the door of
a conference center in Kragujevac where the organization was holding a press
conference to present its annual report. Police arrested and fined three people
(including one minor). The Kragujevac city council condemned the attack.
In February a Belgrade municipal court found Natasa Kandic, director of the
Humanitarian Law Center, guilty of criminal libel against Tomislav Nikolic, an MP,
member of the Serbian Progressive Party and former Radical Party leader, and
ordered her to pay Nikolic 200,000 dinars (approximately €2,000) in damages.
The suit arose from comments by Kandic that Radical Party members should be
investigated for war crimes committed against Croatian civilians in 1992. The
Belgrade district court quashed the judgment in June. The government was silent
throughout the episode.
Key International Actors
The European Union’s Stabilization and Association Agreement (SAA) with Serbia
was stalled due to Serbia’s failure to apprehend Ratko Mladic. However, in July  the European Commission proposed that Serbian citizens should be allowed to
travel visa-free to the EU’s Schengen area as of early 2010. Approval of the proposal
is pending at this writing. The European Commission’s annual progress
report on Serbia in October 2009 highlighted the need to apprehend Mladic and
address the plight of Roma.
During a visit to Serbia in May 2009, US Vice President Joe Biden expressed the
Obama administration’s desire to “deepen relations with Serbia,” stating that
Washington supported its plan to join the EU.
During the Universal Periodic Review of Serbia at the UN Human Rights Council in
December 2008, key concerns raised included the treatment of Roma, protection
of minorities, violence against and trafficking of women, the plight of human
rights defenders and independent journalists, and war crimes accountability.
In July 2009 the UN representative on the human rights of IDPs, Walter Kalin, published
a report following his visit to Serbia earlier that month, pointing to the
ongoing problems with housing and employment faced by Roma and other IDPs
from Kosovo.
Political tensions surrounding the status of Kosovo continued. Serbia’s claim
against Kosovo following its declaration of independence remained pending at
the International Court of Justice. A September police cooperation agreement
between the Serbian government and the EU police and justice mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) stirred political controversy in Belgrade and Pristina. In October, Serbian
authorities agreed to collaborate with EULEX on identification of the remains of
victims in mass graves from the Kosovo conflict.
Kosovo
The lack of international agreement on Kosovo’s status continues to impede
efforts to protect the human rights of its inhabitants. Caught between disagreements
among its member states, and between Belgrade and Pristina, EULEX
struggled in 2009 to fully deploy throughout Kosovo and execute its task of building
a functioning justice system. The Kosovo authorities again failed to demonstrate
unequivocal commitment to minority rights and the rule of law.
Protection of Minorities
According to data from the UN Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), 275 inter-ethnic incidents
took place during the first eight months of 2009. Roma, Ashkali, and
Egyptian (RAE) communities remain the most vulnerable in Kosovo.
There were numerous clashes between Albanian and Serb residents in Mitrovica
in July and August, linked to efforts to return Albanians to reconstructed homes in
a neighborhood in the town’s Serb-controlled north. Renewed clashes on
September 4 prompted an intervention by EULEX police and the NATO-led Kosovo
Force. In August an elderly Serb couple, Bogdan and Trajanka Petkovic, was found
shot dead in their house in Partes near Gnjilane. EULEX and the Kosovo Police
Service (KPS) opened an investigation into the killings.
A series of attacks on Roma in the town of Gnjilane in the last week of August
raised concern among rights groups about rising hostility in previously peaceful
areas. The KPS was slow to respond to these incidents, but eventually opened
investigations into all cases reported to the police. On August 25 a group of Roma
families from Urosevac petitioned municipal authorities and the KPS, alleging
they were being verbally and physically harassed by “unknown perpetrators.”
While the KPS initiated an investigation into these allegations, neither Kosovo nor
international authorities have publicly condemned the incidents.
Return of Refugees and Displaced Persons
Voluntary returns to Kosovo, including from Serbia, continued to decline, with
only 508, including 132 Serbs, registered by UNHCR during the first seven months
of 2009. The volatile political situation, continuing inter-ethnic incidents in some
areas, and poor economic conditions hampered sustainable return.
Forced returns from Western Europe continued, with 3,324 persons returned in
the first seven months of 2009. According to UNHCR, Kosovo Serbs, Roma, and
Albanians from areas where they are in the minority remain in need of international
protection. Despite that, 107 people belonging to UNHCR-protected categories
were returned during the first seven months of 2009. In November 2008
Kosovo authorities assumed responsibility for managing forced returns from third
countries, a role previously played by UNMIK. At this writing the authorities are negotiating bilateral readmission agreements with Western European countries
seeking further forced returns.
Forced returnees experience a host of problems beyond security, many linked to
the lack of any assistance or programs to reintegrate them. Roma returnees face
particular difficulties accessing housing, education (many children no longer
speak Albanian or Serbian), and employment. They depend on help from settled
Roma, placing a further burden on Kosovo’s poorest group.
Ten years after the destruction of the Roma Mahalla in Mitrovica, its former inhabitants
remain in camps in north Mitrovica (Cesmin Lug and Osterode) and in
Leposavic. Roma in Cesmin Lug and Osterode are exposed to ongoing and harmful
lead contamination, adversely affecting their health, especially children’s
health. At this writing there is no medical treatment for lead contamination available
to current or former camp residents.
A United States Agency for International Development pilot project to relocate 50
families from the Osterode and Cesmin Lug camps to the rebuilt Mahalla or
another unspecified place of their choice is in its early stages. The NGO-funded
reconstruction of two additional apartment blocks to accommodate 24 families is
also underway. Many displaced Roma from the Mahalla are reluctant to return
there, with lack of access to Kosovo welfare and problems accessing employment
cited as reasons. Many of those who returned there in a 2007 pilot project subsequently
returned to northern Kosovo, and some of those who remain are considering
doing the same. The reluctance of key donors to engage fully with Serb
authorities in the north on resettlement for those unwilling to return to the
Mahalla stands in the way of a complete solution.
Impunity and Access to Justice
Despite the new energy and optimism that the deployment of the EULEX rule of
law mission brought to Kosovo, the judicial branch remains the weakest of
Kosovo’s main institutions. At this writing, EULEX has yet to prioritize cases related
to the March 2004 anti-Serbian and anti-Roma riots, or to develop a strategy
for prioritizing the large number of war crimes files it inherited from UNMIK.
EULEX prosecutors and judges concluded three high-profile cases during 2009.
The sole defendant charged with the 2001 bombing of the “Nis Express” bus,
which killed 12 Serbs, was acquitted in March. The same month Gani Gashi was
convicted and sentenced to 17 years’ imprisonment for kidnapping and killing a
fellow ethnic Albanian in central Kosovo in 1998. In April Gjelosh Krasniqi was
convicted for the 1999 kidnap and murder of a Kosovo Albanian man and sentenced
to seven years’ imprisonment. In September EULEX arrested four Kosovo
Serbs (including one woman) on suspicion of committing war crimes against
Kosovo Albanians in 1999 around Novo Brdo.
Shortcomings in witness protection continue to impede justice for the most serious
crimes, with witnesses unwilling to testify for fear for their safety. Kosovo still
lacks a witness protection law, but the courts regularly fail to employ the array of
protective measures that are available to them. EU and other western governments
remain reluctant to accept witnesses and their families, despite the widespread
recognition that it is the only effective means to protect witnesses in the
most serious cases. The lack of EU consensus on Kosovo’s status stands in the
way of a common EU position on such relocation.
In July the ICTY Appeals Chamber affirmed the conviction and three-month sentence
of Bajrush Mornia for intimidating a protected witness in an ICTY trial about
alleged wartime abuses in Kosovo. It overturned the conviction of Astrit Haraqija
for the same offense. Both men were on provisional release at the time of the verdict,
having served the duration of the sentences imposed.
In March EULEX opened what it termed a “preliminary investigation” into the
alleged transfers by the KLA in 1999 of around 400 Serbian and other captives to
detention facilities in Albania. The Council of Europe investigation into the allegations
by Swiss senator Dick Marty continued, but his visit to Kosovo, scheduled
for 2009, was postponed for unspecified reasons. The Serbian War Crimes
Prosecutor has also initiated an investigation. The Kosovo authorities have dismissed
the allegations and refused to investigate them.
In July EULEX and KPS exhumed a mass grave containing remains of 11 individuals,
presumed to be missing persons, in the village of Kmetovce, close to
Gnjilane. According to the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
Kosovo, 1,885 persons, the majority Kosovo Albanian, remain missing from the
1999 conflict.
Human Rights Defenders
For most of the year the international Human Rights Advisory Panel (HRAP) continued
to process its busy caseload of complaints against UNMIK, despite being
understaffed and located in an office to which the public have no access, and a
lack of cooperation from UNMIK. In October, however, UNMIK passed an administrative
directive with immediate effect that effectively suspended the Panel’s
operations by requiring, at a time when one panel member post is vacant, that it
can only sit with all three members present. The directive also removes jurisdiction
over any alleged violations taking place after March 31, 2010.
In November 2008 the Panel ruled that UNMIK had violated the right to life by failing
to conduct an adequate investigation into the February 2000 murder of the
wife of the complainant Shaip Canhasi; at this writing UNMIK has yet to respond
to the ruling. In June 2009 the Panel deemed admissible a claim by a group of
Roma current and former residents of the lead-contaminated camps in Mitrovica,
including in relation to alleged violations of the right to life, housing, and health,
and the prohibition of inhuman and degrading treatment.
In March a public hearing was cancelled in the HRAP case against UNMIK brought
by the families of the two Kosovo Albanian men killed by UNMIK police during a
February 2007 demonstration. The cancellation followed EULEX and UNMIK statements
that they could not guarantee security for such a hearing at any venue. The
applicants’ families refused to continue the hearing in private, and it was
adjourned indefinitely. In September UNMIK offered financial compensation to
the families of the two men if they agreed to drop their claims. The families rejected
the offer.
In June, after a three-year delay in making an appointment, the Kosovo Assembly
elected Sami Kurteshi as Kosovo’s ombudsperson, with a five-year mandate.
Acting ombudsperson Hilmi Jashari will remain as his deputy.
At this writing, almost 12 months after EULEX’s full deployment, the EU Council
has yet to approve the creation of an independent review mechanism for EULEX,Kosovo, 1,885 persons, the majority Kosovo Albanian, remain missing from the
1999 conflict.
Human Rights Defenders
For most of the year the international Human Rights Advisory Panel (HRAP) continued
to process its busy caseload of complaints against UNMIK, despite being
understaffed and located in an office to which the public have no access, and a
lack of cooperation from UNMIK. In October, however, UNMIK passed an administrative
directive with immediate effect that effectively suspended the Panel’s
operations by requiring, at a time when one panel member post is vacant, that it
can only sit with all three members present. The directive also removes jurisdiction
over any alleged violations taking place after March 31, 2010.
In November 2008 the Panel ruled that UNMIK had violated the right to life by failing
to conduct an adequate investigation into the February 2000 murder of the
wife of the complainant Shaip Canhasi; at this writing UNMIK has yet to respond
to the ruling. In June 2009 the Panel deemed admissible a claim by a group of
Roma current and former residents of the lead-contaminated camps in Mitrovica,
including in relation to alleged violations of the right to life, housing, and health,
and the prohibition of inhuman and degrading treatment.
In March a public hearing was cancelled in the HRAP case against UNMIK brought
by the families of the two Kosovo Albanian men killed by UNMIK police during a
February 2007 demonstration. The cancellation followed EULEX and UNMIK statements
that they could not guarantee security for such a hearing at any venue. The
applicants’ families refused to continue the hearing in private, and it was
adjourned indefinitely. In September UNMIK offered financial compensation to
the families of the two men if they agreed to drop their claims. The families rejected
the offer.
In June, after a three-year delay in making an appointment, the Kosovo Assembly
elected Sami Kurteshi as Kosovo’s ombudsperson, with a five-year mandate.
Acting ombudsperson Hilmi Jashari will remain as his deputy.
At this writing, almost 12 months after EULEX’s full deployment, the EU Council
has yet to approve the creation of an independent review mechanism for EULEX, or to give the mission authorization to initiate formal cooperation with the HRAP
or Kosovo Ombudsperson, calling into question the EU’s commitment to accountability
for potential abuses arising from the exercise of the executive mandate of
a flagship European Security and Defence Policy mission.
Key International Actors
Kosovo’s international status remains uncertain. At this writing 63 countries have
recognized Kosovo’s independence, including 22 EU member states. Kosovo
joined the World Bank and International Monetary Fund during 2009, but the
decision of several EU states to intervene in support of Serbia’s claim against
Kosovo at the International Court of Justice underscored how divided the EU and
United Nations remain on the issue.
The February 2009 visit by US Vice President Joe Biden underscored the Obama
administration’s continuation of Washington’s financial and political support for
an independent Kosovo.
In August NATO Secretary General Anders Fogh Rasmussen announced a downsizing
of the Kosovo peacekeeping Force (KFOR) from 13,800 to 10,000 by January
2010.