Serbia and Montenegro
The 1992 State Department report on the human rights situation in the territory of Serbia and Montenegro attempts to describe the human rights implications of the complete collapse of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia which began in 1991. Although Serbia and Montenegro, two of the remaining constituent republics of the former Yugoslavia, proclaimed in 1992 the establishment of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY), the international community, including the United States, refused to recognize the FRY as the sole successor to the former Yugoslavia. Fierce fighting followed the collapse. First, Serbian and Croatian forces battled over the division of Yugoslavia. Then, Serbian forces within Bosnia (in effect, successors to the Yugoslav National Army units which had been based in Bosnia) began a lopsided and vicious campaign to control what had been a multi-ethnic territory. Through all of this, Serbian leaders, rather than leaders in Montenegro, have provided the primary force behind this unrest.
Although these horrific abuses in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in Croatia did not occur on Serbian territory, Serbia and its nationalist political leaders were clearly behind the systematic human rights violations occurring in the former Yugoslavia --providing critical logistical and military support for the Serbian national paramilitary forces in the territories of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia. In fact, the overall tone of the State Department report, particularly the section devoted to Bosnia and Herzegovina, commendably does not shy away from assigning blame to the Serbian forces and their Belgrade
paymasters in their efforts at ethnic cleansing and other atrocities.
With respect to Serbia itself, the report effectively catalogues many of the abuses which occurred there and does not attempt to minimize the severity of the ongoing violations. In comparison to what has occurred in Bosnia with Serbian assistance, however, the abuses committed by the Serbians in their own territory have been far less severe. Yet, the intellectual and political will to commit comparable abuses is very much in evidence in Serbia. The very same type of political philosophy which led to the abuses in Bosnia is operating in Serbia itself, and could have particularly dire consequences in the province of Kosovo.
Thus, despite the extensive reporting on events in Serbia, the report does not do enough to put the abuses in a larger political context. The reader is not given enough of a sense of how central the resolution of the human rights situation in Serbia is to the future of the political balance in the area. For example, the report does not connect the litany of abuses to the Serbian leaders' fixation on ethnicity and nationalism, particularly as it relates to the province of Kosovo. Although the report does not shy away from noting that Serbian police "extensively, brutally, and systematically violated human rights . . . continuing the pattern of gross human rights violations and systematic repression of Kosovo's majority population," it does not explain the underlying causes leading to these abuses. Without this type of background, a reader loses the sense that the human
335
Serbia arid Montenegro
rights abuses undertaken by the Serbian regime of Slobodan Milosevic in Belgrade are not simply blind acts of cruelty, but part of a larger strategy by the Serbian government to hold on to power.
Moreover, absent from the report is appropriate emphasis on the criminal underpinnings of the Milosevic strategy. The Serbian government has employed criminal groups to perform the "dirty work" of ethnic cleansing. For example, Zeljko "Arkan" Raznjatovic, the leader of the paramilitary Tigers and a newly elected parliamentarian (where, ironically, he represents Kosovo), is a convicted felon. Most members of his group belong to Belgrade criminal circles. He is wanted by Interpol for armed robbery and murder and a request for his extradition has been pending for years. In return for the efforts of groups such as those led by Arkan, they have been rewarded with the freedom to loot in Bosnia and Croatia, which they have done openly and systematically, often through the use of convoys of trucks. Within Serbia, they have been allowed to engage in black market operations, taking advantage of UN sanctions to reap huge profits, all the while being glorified through the state-controlled media as war heroes. The most telling example of this subornation was the creation with state capital of two "private banks" which robbed private citizens of hundreds of millions of dollars through the use of a "Ponzi scheme." The banks failed in 1992, but only after Arkan and the other beneficiaries of the scheme had withdrawn their deposits and interest. The criminal purposes of these banks were well-known, yet the government failed to stop or even investigate their operation. Following their demise, no
action has been taken to punish those responsible.
Kosovo is by far the most important part of the Milosevic political equation and the likely spot of Bosnian-like atrocities in the future. Kosovo, a province of Serbia, is the home to almost two million people, 90% of them ethnic Albanians who are predominantly Muslim. Tension has been high in the province since 1989 when Serbia stripped Kosovo of the autonomy it had been granted under Yugoslavia's constitution. Since that time, Albanians have engaged in a peaceful campaign of political resistance leading them to declare Kosovo as an independent republic with its own parliament in May 1992. Serbian authorities refused to recognize the validity of the election of a president and parliament in Kosovo, and prevented the holding of the first session of the parliament in June.
Despite its large Albanian population, Kosovo is considered by the Serbs to be the "Cradle of Serbia." Kosovo Polja is the site of the Battle of Kosovo, where in 1389, Serb Prince Lazar was defeated by the Turks, ushering in a 500-year domination of the Orthodox Serbs by the Muslim Turks. The town of Pec has been the seat of the Patriarch of the Serbian Orthodox Church since the 14th century. In the late 1980s, President Milosevic began his rise to power by giving nationalist speeches saying Kosovo's Albanians would no longer "beat the [Serbs]." Now, some right-wing Serbian leaders promise ethnic cleansing in Kosovo in the name of protecting the Serbian minority.
Additional background and context would have been particularly helpful given
336
Serbia arid Montenegro
the important role that human rights questions play in the formation of U.S. policy toward the region. Interestingly, Kosovo is the only area of the former Yugoslavia in which the United States has pledged to deploy military force in the event of Serbian aggression -- even though Kosovo is legally a part of Serbia. President Bush wrote President Milosevic in late 1992 that "(i)n the event of conflict in Kosovo caused by Serbian action, the United States will be prepared to employ military force against Serbians in Kosovo and Serbia proper." President Clinton has not backed away from that commitment.
The Serbian fixation on ethnicity, particularly in Kosovo, motivates virtually every type of abuse described in the report. In its discussion of political and other extrajudicial killing, the report notes that political violence in Serbia resulted primarily from efforts by Serbian authorities to "suppress other ethnic groups." Although it is true as the report notes that Serbians seek the "ethnic cleansing" of the Serbian territory, principally in the minority communities centered in Voj-vodina, Sandzak and Kosovo, it is not clear to the reader why. Even when the report does detail the impact of ethnic cleansing, it fails to list all of the most serious incidents. For example, massive population transfers have occurred within Serbia; reports that up to 70,000 Serb Muslims had fled Sandzak out of fear of. ethnic cleansing should have been addressed in the report.
The most glaring example of other omitted events is the accusations concerning 11 concentration camps established in Serbia and Montenegro during
1992. These camps were allegedly established to accommodate persons who had been removed from their homes in Bosnia. They were alleged to be the site of horrific abuses of men, women and children who had been captured in the course of the war in Bosnia. The reports released in Newsday were some of the first indications that violations occurring within Bosnia with Serbian help had reached a level and intensity not seen in Europe since the Second World War.
In its discussion of violations of personal integrity, the report should also focus on those alleged to have committed the abuses. Given the important role Serbian leaders have in directing abuses, the report loses a valuable opportunity to join the effort to begin assigning blame for human rights violations under international law to those responsible. The report would do well to focus on the war criminal status that is already being considered for a number of Serbian leaders. Given the international community's willingness to consider prosecuting individuals in connection with war crimes and other violations of international law, it is no longer enough to attribute abuses to "Serbian government" forces or other anonymous entities. For example, three Serbian leaders - President Slobodan Milosevic, Vojislav Seselj, the emerging number two in the Serbian state, and Zeljko "Arkan" Raznjatovic --already have been identified elsewhere by the U.S. government as possible defendants before any war crimes tribunal.
In the section relating to arbitrary arrest, detention or exile, the report would benefit from more explanation of the use of short-term detention (i.e., 60-
337
Serbia arid Montenegro
day periods) as a method of intimidating political opponents. One of the techniques of the Serbian forces in Kosovo has been to detain individuals for brief periods of time before international public opinion can focus on these individuals. Although no one would advocate longer prison terms, the report understates the adverse impact short-term detention have on the detainees, keeping the population constantly fearful and off balance, and its effectiveness as a tool of repression in Serbia.
In the area of labor rights, the report does not capture the extent to which the labor force in Kosovo has been dismissed on a wholesale basis. More than 10,000 ethnic Albanians have been dismissed from their jobs. As a result, the shortage of doctors and teachers has made medical care and education scarce commodities. In addition, ethnic Albanian police and judges have been dismissed after refusing to take a loyalty oath to Serbia which has resulted in a justice system administered almost entirely by Serbs.
In its treatment of attacks on the press and other limitations'on free expression, the report properly notes the extent to which the Serbian government has curtailed free expression in order to control any political dissent. In particular, freedom of expression in Serbia has been severely limited in all mass media outlets. For example, electronic and print media are controlled by the state with very few exceptions. What the report does not explain, however, is that there are a limited number of democratic political alternatives to Milosevic. One element that is particularly distressing when analyzing the situation in Serbia is the extent
to which the population appears to be supporting the nationalist leaders. This is one of the strongest reasons why greater access to mass media would allow opposition points of view to be heard and might make it possible for some change to come from within Serbia.
Without some type of fundamental political change in Serbia or a concerted and effective policy engineered by the United Nations, it is likely that the grave abuses of human rights in Serbia will only worsen in the coming year.
338
