SFLK? SL;8E
Following an overwhelming vote for secession from Sudan in the January 2011
referendum, South Sudan declared independence on July 9. The new nation
faces major human rights challenges. However, officials have expressed the
new government’s intention to ratify major human rights treaties.
An influx of refugees and returnees from the North has presented severe
humanitarian challenges to South Sudan. Between January and August political,
inter-communal, and resource-driven clashes killed over 2,600 people,
according to the United Nations. The government failed to fulfill its responsibility
to protect civilians from this violence, as security forces fighting against
armed militias committed serious abuses against civilians. Across the country,
lack of capacity and inadequate training of police, prosecutors, and judges
have resulted in numerous human rights violations in law enforcement and in
the administration of justice.
Political and Legislative Developments
The January referendum was held under the terms of Sudan’s 2005
Comprehensive Peace Agreement, which ended over two decades of civil war.
Southern Sudanese cast ballots either for the continued unity of Sudan or for
secession from the North. Over 98 percent of votes were cast in favor of
separation.
In late January the president of the new nation, Salva Kiir, established a constitutional
review committee to draft a transitional constitution. Opposition political
parties complained of the committee’s work being dominated by the ruling
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement (SPLM), and several withdrew in protest.
The Transitional Constitution entered into force on July 9 for a period of four
years, to be followed by national elections and the adoption of a permanent
constitution. It expanded presidential powers and created a new and enlarged
bicameral legislative body, which incorporated South Sudanese who left legislative
positions in Sudan’s former Government of National Unity. It also provided for the transformation of the Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA)
into the South Sudan Armed Forces.
Tensions along the North-South Border
Tensions between Sudan and South Sudan rose steadily throughout 2011.
Negotiations between the southern ruling SPLM and the Sudan’s ruling National
Congress Party (NCP) regarding post-secession issues—such as oil revenue
sharing, border management, and the status of the contested area of Abyei—
stalled on several occasions. Many issues remain unresolved.
Conflict in border areas has had a significant impact on South Sudan. In May
Sudan’s violent occupation of Abyei displaced an estimated 110,000 people,
mostly to Warrap state in South Sudan. Fighting between the Sudan Armed
Forces (SAF) and elements of the SPLA in Southern Kordofan drove some
20,000 people to South Sudan’s Unity state. Approximately 4,000 more people
arrived in Upper Nile state following the September clashes between Sudanese
government forces and the SPLM-North in Southern Kordofan. Humanitarian
agencies are struggling to meet the health, nutrition, and security needs of
these displaced people and refugees.
South Sudanese continue to return from the North, with over 340,000 arriving
between October 2010 and October 2011, according to the UN. Many moved in
the months prior to the referendum. Returnees cited a rise in anti-southerner
sentiments and uncertainty of citizenship status in the North as reasons for
their decision to return. Less than two weeks after the secession of the South,
Sudan amended its nationality law, raising concerns that people of South
Sudanese origin residing in Sudan will be discriminatorily stripped of citizenship,
and as a consequence might be made stateless.
Clashes between SPLA and Armed Militia Groups
Armed insurgencies by rebel militia groups against the South Sudan government,
originally triggered by disapproval of the outcome of the April 2010 general
elections, continued in 2011. Hundreds of civilians, including women and children, were killed, and tens of thousands of people were displaced, primarily
in Upper Nile, Unity, and Jonglei states.
Both opposition militias and government soldiers have failed to take adequate
precautions to protect civilians. Human Rights Watch documented grave human
rights abuses and violations of humanitarian law by SPLA soldiers in the course
of fighting in Upper Nile, including unlawful killings of civilians and the destruction
of homes and civilian property. According to UN reports, SPLA soldiers in
May opened fire indiscriminately on civilians during a confrontation with a militia
group in Jonglei.
President Kiir has offered a general amnesty for armed militias in exchange for
the promise to lay down arms and integrate their forces into the national military.
Several militia leaders have entered into ceasefire agreements with the
government, but others continue to clash with government forces.
Inter-Communal Violence
Cyclical fighting between ethnic communities caused by cattle-raiding, competition
over land resources, and kidnapping of women and children continued to
put civilians at risk of injury and death. The most intense clashes occurred
between the Lou Nuer and Murle communities in Jonglei state, where over
1,000 people were killed between April and August.
The government has taken some steps to promote reconciliation between
neighboring communities. However, both the government and the UN peacekeepers
have been unable to protect civilians and prevent these often predictable
outbreaks of violence. Land mines and ongoing insecurity have hampered
humanitarian access. The government has also failed to conduct public
investigations into abuses against civilians and ensure accountability.
Attacks by the Lord’s Resistance Army
Attacks and abductions by the Lord’s Resistance Army, a Ugandan rebel group,
continued to pose a threat to civilians. The UN reported over 25 separate
attacks in 2011, mostly in western areas of the country bordering the Democratic Republic of Congo and Central African Republic. The displacement
of populations in response to this violence has threatened food security,
according to local officials. The SPLA and Ugandan People Defence Force (UPDF)
continued efforts to improve safety, relying frequently on a local defense group
known as the Arrow Boys.
Law Enforcement and the Administration of Justice
Human Rights Watch has documented numerous violations by security forces.
These include unlawful killings, beatings, and looting, particularly when conducting
forcible community disarmament operations, as well as unlawful
arrests and detentions. Security forces have also used arrests and intimidation
to suppress opponents of the ruling party and independent journalists.
UN and humanitarian aid groups have reported that police, soldiers, and local
authorities have harassed staff, hijacked vehicles, and stolen aid supplies. In
August police officers in Juba severely assaulted the UN human rights chief in
South Sudan, forcing him to seek medical treatment. President Kiir has warned
security forces against such abuses.
There are serious human rights violations in the administration of justice such
as prolonged periods of pre-trial detention and poor conditions of detention.
Children are often detained with adults, while persons with mental disabilities
languish in prison without any legal basis for their detention and do not receive
treatment. Lack of legal aid also renders defendants vulnerable to due process
violations.
Economic and Social Rights
Millions of South Sudanese suffer from lack of access to education, health
care, food, and water. The government estimates that 47 percent are undernourished.
Less than half of primary school age children are in schools and
only 16 percent of women are literate. The maternal mortality rate of 2,054 per
100,000 live births is the highest in the world.
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
Women and girls are routinely deprived of the right to choose a spouse or to
own and inherit property. They are subjected to degrading practices such as
forced and early marriage, wife-inheritance, the use of girls to pay debts, and
various forms of domestic violence. Domestic disputes are resolved by traditional
courts that often apply discriminatory customs.
Key International Actors
There was a high level of international engagement in support of the January
referendum. Some 600 international observers—including delegations from the
African Union (AU), the Arab League, the European Union, and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development—monitored the polling process,
which was found to comply with international standards
Sudan officially recognized the Republic of South Sudan on July 8, and many
other countries immediately followed suit. Approximately 30 heads of state as
well as UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon attended independence ceremonies
in Juba. South Sudan became a UN member on July 14 and joined the AU on July
27.
When the mandate of the UN Mission in Sudan (UNMIS) expired with the independence
of South Sudan, the Security Council unanimously approved a successor
mission, the UN Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), to include 7,000 military
personnel. It has the mandate to “consolidate peace and security,” to help
establish conditions for development, and to strengthen the capacity of South
Sudan to govern effectively and democratically.
The AU’s High-Level Implementation Panel continued to play a key role in facilitating
negotiations between the SPLM and the NCP, including a June agreement
for the demilitarization of Abyei and monitoring by Ethiopian troops. This led
the Security Council to establish the UN Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA),
to comprise a maximum of 4,200 troops.
At its 18th session, the UN Human Rights Council did not appoint an independent
expert as it did for Sudan, but instead called for the identification of areas for technical assistance and capacity-building to promote respect for human
rights in South Sudan and requested that the high commissioner for human
rights present a report on the human rights situation in the country at its
September 2012 session.