South Sudan
South Sudan’s second year as an independent nation was marked by political
and economic uncertainty, violence in the eastern state of Jonglei, and ongoing
repression of civil and political rights.
South Sudan and Sudan signed a series of agreements to resolve various outstanding
issues in September 2012, but the relations between the two governments
remain tense. Southern oil began flowing again through Sudan in April
after a 2012 shutdown by South Sudan, but in June Khartoum threatened to
stop transportation, accusing Juba of supporting rebels in its territory.
In July, President Salva Kiir dismissed his entire cabinet and appointed a new
vice president and 21 new ministers, downsizing the cabinet from 28 ministries.
In Jonglei state, an abusive government anti-insurgency operation against a
rebel group in the area worsened brutal ethnic violence in 2013.
The government has not adequately responded to unlawful killings, arrests and
detentions, and other human rights violations by its security forces. Lack of
capacity and inadequate training of police, prosecutors, and judges give rise to
numerous human rights violations in the administration of justice.
Legislative Developments
The South Sudan Legislative Assembly (SSLA) passed three media bills in July,
including a Right of Access to Information bill, more than six years after the
bills were drafted. President Kiir had yet to sign the bills into law at time of writing.
Journalists hope the legislation will reduce unlawful arrests and harassment
of media workers, including by officers from the National Security Service
(NSS) who continue to operate without legal authority.
Kiir’s cabinet endorsed the ratification of seven core international human rights
instruments in early 2013, including the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights. The SSLA ratified the African Charter on Human and Peoples’
Rights and the AU Convention Governing Specific Aspects of Refugee Problems
in Africa, the UN Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment and the Convention on the Rights of the
Child in late 2013, but others were still pending approval at time of writing.
South Sudan’s first elections since independence are due in 2015, but preparations
have lagged. The mandate of the National Constitution Review
Commission, tasked with conducting broad consultation ahead of drafting a
new constitution by January 9, 2013, was extended to December 31, 2014. At
time of writing, President Kiir had not sworn in members of the political parties’
council, delaying registration and re-registration of all political parties, required
under the 2012 Political Parties Act. Parties cannot conduct any political work or
other activities until registered.
Weaknesses in the justice system give rise to human rights violations, including
prolonged periods of pretrial detention, lack of defense counsel, and poor
detention conditions. Although South Sudan voted in favor of the UN General
Assembly moratorium on the use of the death penalty in December 2012, at
least four people were reported to have been executed in November.
South Sudan’s laws on marriage, separation, divorce, and related matters
requires urgent reform, as almost half of South Sudanese girls between 15 and
19 are married, some as young as 12. South Sudan has no legislation that clearly
sets 18 as the minimum age of marriage. Lack of a national plan of action
that sets out comprehensive strategies to address child marriage has undermined
efforts to curb the practice. Marital rape is also still not recognized as a
criminal offense.
Anti-Insurgency Abuses and Ethnic Conflict in Jonglei State
Conflict between South Sudan’s army and a rebel group largely drawing support
from the Murle ethnic group continued in 2013. Inter-ethnic conflict has intensified
in recent years in Jonglei, with thousands killed.
An abusive 2012 government disarmament campaign helped reignite an earlier
Murle insurgency. During its counterinsurgency the Sudan People’s Liberation
Army (SPLA) committed serious violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law, especially in Murle areas. Soldiers unlawfully targeted and
killed Murle civilians and caused thousands to flee their homes out of fear of
attack. Soldiers also looted or destroyed homes, schools, churches, and the
compounds of aid agencies, deepening Murle perceptions of persecution. At
least three health facilities in Murle areas were looted and almost completely
destroyed by government soldiers and rebels.
The government is conducting the anti-insurgency operation amid intense interethnic
fighting between Lou Nuer, Murle, and Dinka groups, often provoked by
cattle raids and other attacks. The government has repeatedly failed to protect
communities from these clashes or arrest or prosecute those responsible.
In revenge for Murle attacks on Lou Nuer in 2012 and in February 2013 in which
at least 85 people were killed, thousands of armed Lou Nuer attacked Murle
areas in July, killing over 300 Murle according to local government officials. The
army did not attempt to protect Murle civilians, many of whom had fled towns
to the bush because of army abuses. Credible allegations that the Lou Nuer
were given ammunition by South Sudan’s army have not been fully investigated.
An investigation committee established by the government in 2012 to
research human rights abuses and causes of violence in Jonglei state has still
not received funds to begin its work.
Abuses by Security Forces
Soldiers detained, beat, and attacked civilians and civilian property in various
locations across the country during 2013.
Citing worsening criminality including armed robbery and inter-clan attacks, the
president in January replaced the elected governor of Lakes state with military
strongman Matur Chuot Dhuol. Dhuol sidestepped the courts, police, and the
prisons service and ordered the army to arrest and detain suspects. Soldiers
rounded up dozens of men in February and March 2013, often detaining others
from the same village if they could not find the suspects, and held them in military
facilities in extremely harsh conditions for weeks or months and subjected
many to severe beatings.
In Eastern Equatoria, soldiers reportedly killed six civilians when soldiers
attacked Orema village on April 15, 2013, apparently in revenge for the killing of
security forces by armed civilians during an earlier cattle raiding incident.
Soldiers continue to occupy schools, and 26 schools were occupied at some
point in 2013, mostly in Jonglei and Eastern Equatoria states. On August 14, the
army announced a zero tolerance policy of child recruitment or the occupation
of schools.
Freedom of Expression and Association
Authorities have not fully investigated the killings of eight peaceful protesters
in Wau in December 2012 by security forces or dozens of unlawful arrests of
others, many from the Fertit ethnic group, who openly opposed the decision of
the governor of Western Bahr el Ghazal state’s to move a county headquarters.
The courts conducted trials of individuals accused of ethnically-motivated
crimes and perceived government opponents on a variety of charges. None of
the cases brought before the court related to the protester shootings.
In January, three NSS officers arrested a journalist at gunpoint in Juba, slapped
him in the face, and held him overnight in an NSS detention center. A radio
journalist and two public commentators fled South Sudan after receiving
threats in early 2013, including from government officials. In May, the editor
and managing editor of the Juba Monitor were arrested, detained, and subsequently
released for allegedly defaming the deputy minister of the interior. A
government investigation into the killing on December 5, 2012, of a well-known
commentator and journalist, Isaiah Abraham, by unidentified gunmen outside
his home in Juba has stalled.
Two lawyers from South Sudan’s Law Society received death threats after
launching a legal challenge against a presidential decree that forbade Pagan
Amum, former secretary general of South Sudan’s leading Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement (SPLM) political party, from speaking to media.
Political Instability
Power plays within the ruling SPLM continued with Vice President Riek Machar
announcing on July 4 that he will contest South Sudan’s presidency in 2015. In
mid-April, President Kiir, by presidential decree, withdrew executive powers delegated
to Machar and replaced him with Archbishop Daniel Deng as head of the
national reconciliation process.
In a sweeping move on July 23, President Kiir fired Machar and all national ministers
and undersecretaries by presidential decree. He then appointed James
Wani Igga as vice president and appointed a new, smaller cabinet of ministers.
Kiir also sacked Pagan Amum on the same day for insubordination, including
using public media to discredit the party.
Kiir removed governors of Unity and Lakes states in 2013, appointing new governors
without holding fresh elections, as required under South Sudan’s transitional
constitution, triggering complaints of presidential heavy-handedness by
some members of civil society.
Meanwhile, South Sudan’s relations with Sudan remained tense. Both countries
accused the other of supporting rebel groups in their territory. South
Sudan halted oil production in February 2012 after a row between the two countries
over oil transportation fees through Sudan’s territory. A September 2012
agreement paved the way for the resolution of outstanding issues including oil
flows, but implementation has been troubled with both sides threatening to cut
oil flow and disagreements over the status of Abyei.
Key International Actors
The United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) has a mandate to use
force to protect civilians under imminent threat of serious harm, but its failure
to intervene against a clear pattern of unlawful killings and other serious violations
by South Sudan’s army in Murle areas of Pibor state has undermined public
confidence in the peacekeepers.
In addition, the mission failed to publicly report on violations by security forces
in Jonglei and other locations where serious abuses occurred in 2012 such as in
Wau and Rumbek, reinforcing a perception that the mission values its relationship
with the government over holding authorities to account for violations.
South Sudan’s army shot down an UNMISS helicopter in December 2012 in
Jonglei, and peacekeepers have been attacked there several times by unknown
attackers. On April 9, unknown gunmen killed five peacekeepers and seven
civilian staff in Pibor county.
The mandate for the UN Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) peacekeeping
force was renewed on May 29, increasing its authorized force number from
4,200 to 5,326 troops.
The United States, United Kingdom, and other western supporters of South
Sudan’s government were critical of the government’s human rights record and
especially violations in Jonglei state. The African Union continued to play a
mediation role between Sudan and South Sudan.