 ST. LUCIA
 St. Lucia, independent since February 22, 1979, experi-
 enced a change of government in a democratic election
 on July 2, 1979, when the St. Lucia Labor Party came
 to power.
 The island was ruled by the United Kingdom until 1967,
 when it attained internal self-government as a British
 Associated State. When full independence followed in
 1979, St. Lucia had a well-developed parliamentary system
 and considerable experience in local administration.
 The constitution of independent St. Lucia includes specific
 safeguards for the preservation of human rights.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Torture is prohibited by the constitution and is not
 practiced in St. Lucia.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 The constitution prohibits inhuman or degrading punishment.
 There have been no allegations of such treatment in St.
 Lucia.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 Arbitrary arrest or imprisonment is constitutionally
 prohibited and this prohibition is respected in practice..
 The constitution contains a provision for preventive
 detention when a state of emergency is declared. No
 state of emergency was declared in 1979.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 "A fair hearing.., by an independent and impartial court
 established by law" is required under the constitution.
 The constitution also provides for the presumption of
 innocence and for the provision of legal counsel. There
 have been no allegations of denial of these rights.
 The country's appeals court is the regional West Indies
 Court of Appeal, which has a widely-held reputation for
 impartiality.
 
 (399)
 
 
 400
 e. Invasion of the Home
 Arbitrary search and entry is prohibited by the consti-
 tution and this prohibition is respected in practice.
 2. Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education:
 St. Lucia has a mixed economy. The Governor-General's
 statement of government policy in the 1979 speech from
 the throne called for "changes through which the masses
 may be firmly placed in the mainstream of the economic
 life of the nation and into power-houses of profitable
 economic activity." Foreign investment is encouraged,
 particularly in labor-intensive industry. There have
 been efforts to encourage greater St. Lucian partici-
 pation in the tourist industry. The government is faced
 with severe fiscal constraints, but within its capacity
 is committed to education and health care for all. There
 is a modest welfare scheme for indigents, which the new
 government has promised to expand. Over the past five
 years, St. Lucia has channeled approximately 21.5 percent
 of its total recurrent expenditures towards education
 and health, reflecting the high priority given to those
 areas. Elementary school enrollment includes 95 percent
 of those eligible.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion, and Assembly
 The St. Lucian Constitution provides for all of these
 freedoms, and they are generally respected in practice.
 St. Lucia has three newspapers, which represent all shades
 of opinion. There are also privately-owned radio and
 television stations, in addition to the government-owned
 Radio St. Lucia. There is no censorship of the media.
 One incident in July 1979, in which an opposition political
 meeting was broken up by an unruly crowd unrestrained
 by the police, caused some public expressions of concern
 about the new government's commitment to freedom of assembly.
 The Prime Minister, however, subsequently defended the
 rights of the opposition in Parliament. The incident
 appears to have been an isolated one and has not been
 repeated at any of several subsequent meetings.
 
 
 401
 b. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 These rights are all guaranteed in the constitution and
 are honored in practice. The new government has acted
 to lower barriers to foreign travel by agreeing "in prin-
 ciple" with two neighboring countries to eliminate passport
 requirements for inter-island travel.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 The vigor of St. Lucia's two-party system was demonstrated
 in the general election of July 2, 1979, when the ruling
 United Workers Party (UWP) lost a fair election and turned
 over power to the successful Labor Party. Although the
 campaign was marred by incidents of violence, all sides
 respected the electoral process. Participation in the
 electoral process is open to all.
 There is no bar to women's participation in government,
 and women hold prominent positions in-the St. Lucia Civil
 Service. In elective office, however, their role is
 more limited. The previous government had a female min-
 ister; the present government had a female candidate
 for parliament who was defeated. The manifesto of the
 ruling party includes a commitment to ensure equality
 of treatment of women in all spheres of St. Lucian life,
 including wages.
 There is an active trade union movement in St. Lucia.
 Trade unionism is freely practiced and workers have full
 rights to organize, bargain collectively, and strike.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged
 Violations of Human Rights:
 There have been no reports on St. Lucia by international
 human rights bodies nor any requests for investigation.
 St. Lucia has not yet signed the American Convention
 on Human Rights.
 
 
 SURINAME
 
 Suriname, which gained independence in 1975, has an ex-
 cellent human rights record. Composed of diverse ethnic
 groups including Africans, East Indians, Indonesians,
 Amerindians and Chinese, the Surinamese have made good
 progress in creating an atmosphere of racial harmony.
 Respect for the integrity of the individual and for civil
 and political liberties is deeply grounded in the country's
 history and traditions. Government responsibility for
 basic human rights and needs is supported by all Surinamese.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Torture is prohibited by law and there have been no allega-
 tions of its use.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 Such treatment is prohibited by law and there have been
 no reports of it use. Earlier this year, public interest
 focused on the trial of three policemen accused of roughing
 up several prisoners at the time of arrest. All three
 were found guilty and given stiff punishment. There
 have been no summary executions. Treatment of prisoners
 is humane. Though facilities are basic, prisoners are
 adequately housed, fed and clothed, conditions are sani-
 tary, and adequate health care is provided.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 There are no political prisoners in Suriname. Habeas
 corpus exists; detainees may be held a maximum of six
 hours after arrest, at which point they must be brought
 before a police magistrate and either released or bound
 over for investigation. Decisions to remand for investi-
 gation are judicially appealable. The maximum period
 for such detention is one week (extendable once, upon
 hearing). After arrest, prisoners have the right to
 counsel at all times. For the indigent, attorneys are
 provided at no cost from the public defender pool. No
 provisions for bail exist in Suriname law, because of
 the belief that bail provisions discriminate economically
 against lower income groups. The average time from arrest
 to trial is about 30 days. Thus the average defendant,
 after investigation and arraignment, spends an additional
 
 (402)
 
 
 403
 two weeks in jail if the public prosecutor can convince
 a judge a case for trial exists. The law does not permit
 "preventive detention" or "open arrest". There are no
 reported cases of clandestine incarceration or "disappear-
 ances".
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Though trial is not by jury, the right to fair, public
 trial is a basic guarantee of the Constitution and is
 honored in practice. Defendants are entitled to counsel
 at state expense and may consult with attorneys in private
 at all times. There have been no incidents of police
 or other harassment of defense counsel. Defendants must
 be informed in writing of charges against them; the Gov-
 ernment is not obligated to make such charges available
 for examination by others. Courts are fully independent
 of executive, military or other external control. There
 are no special courts for political or security offenses.
 There is a military-justice system -- with appeal to
 the regular courts -- for members of Suriname's 1,000-
 man defense force. Civilians may not, by law, be tried
 in military courts. No provisions exist in Surinamese
 law for declaration of martial law or a state of emergency
 which might restrict the normal legal process.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 Surinamese law upholds the sancity of the home. Police
 entry, generally, may take place, only upon presentation
 of a judicial warrant based upon probable cause. While
 entry by police may take place during hot pursuit, there
 are no reports that this practice has been abused, and
 no allegations that illegal entry has occurred. Evidence
 obtained illegally is not admissible in court.
 2. Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care,
 and Education:
 The Constitution specifically directs the Government
 to protect the livelihoods of the population and to provide
 social assistance for those who need it. The economic
 system is based on private ownership, but some production
 facilities are state-owned. While there are wide dispar-
 ities, incomes in Suriname average about $1300 (1978)
 per capita annually, a figure that puts the country near
 the top of the scale for developing nations. Most Suri-
 namese are well able to meet their basic human needs.
 Amerindians and Blacks living in remote areas of the
 interior have very low cash income levels but, as outlined
 below, free medical care and education are available
 to many, and their environment provides access to food
 and shelter. Taxes are progressive, to a maximum 40
 
 
 404
 percent of income and there is some limited income redis-
 tribution through government programs. Land is privately
 held, and government programs include promotion of private
 agriculture.
 Paramaribo, the capital, faces a continuing inflow of
 rural dwellers seeking better opportunities. Ambitious
 government low-cost housing schemes have fallen behind
 in 1979, in large part due to lack of coordination and
 contractor failure to meet contractual deadlines.
 The public health system gives coverage to more than
 half the population of the rural districts, as well as
 to all city dwellers. A national health insurance scheme
 now being implemented will make health care free, or
 nearly so, to all.
 Education is free and compulsory through the twelfth
 year. The school system covers all city dwellers and
 more than half the population in the remote interior.
 Most city children complete 12 to 14 years of schooling.
 Many go on to the small but vigorous university. The
 Government also has an active educational program for
 people living in the interior.
 Cases of corruption are infrequent and subject to intensive
 public scrutiny. Corruption has not seriously impeded
 the country's progress toward fulfilling vital human
 needs.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 These rights are guaranteed by the Constitution and scrupul-
 ously upheld. There is no censorship or other control
 on the press or media. Criticism of the Government is
 a popular pastime, opposition views get the fullest possi-
 ble airing, and there have been no known cases of intimi-
 dation or other measures by the authorities against the
 media. There is no religious discrimination, and numerous
 religious groups practice their faiths freely. There
 are no impediments to peaceful assembly, public meeting,
 or association. No limitations exist on labor, political
 or other groups so long as their activities do not infringe
 on the rights of others.
 b. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 There are no restrictions on travel into, out of, or
 within the country for Surinamese citizens. These rights
 are guaranteed by law, and respected in practice.
 
 
 405
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 The political system is democratic, based on a multiplicity
 of parties generally organized along ethnic lines. Amer-
 indians and other minority groups have formed their own
 parties and aggressively seek a stronger political voice
 through coalition. No party is outlawed, and all have
 access to the media, function freely and may hold public
 meetings. Citizens 21 or over may vote. Women are guar-
 anteed equality under the Constitution. While women
 are found in Government and the professions, as yet few
 women have reached the highest levels. However, women
 now comprise the majority of new enrollers in the law
 and medical schools of the university.
 Organized labor is one of the most active elements in
 the political process. Unions have traditionally been
 a typical path to power in traditional Surinamese politics.
 Labor is, by law, granted the right to organize, strike,
 bargain collectively and lobby, all of which it does
 actively. These rights are scrupulously protected.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights:
 Two Surinamese are members of a seven-person International
 Committee of Jurists (ICJ) sponsored "Standing Committee
 of Jurists for Promotion of Human Rights in the Caribbean."
 The University faculty and students run an energetic
 legal assistance program. The Caribbean Human Rights
 and Legal Aid Corporation, has its secretariat in Suriname;
 its Secretary General and Vice President are both local
 law school professors. The organization complements
 the work of the more theoretical ICJ Standing Committee.
 There have been no requests for international investiga-
 tions of human rights conditions in Suriname. Suriname
 has adhered to the American Convention on Human Rights
 and has been supportive of initiatives on human rights
 in the OAS and other international fora.
 
 
 406
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: SURINAME
 1977     1978     1979
 -----------------------------------------------------
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL..           0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS...........          0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.AID ..................         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 (SECSUPPASSIST.)..          0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE ...            0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS..............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL ....    ,         0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS ....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR ....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE 1I-TOTAL.........          0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.OEV & WFP.          0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY...            0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST-            0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS...............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 CONTR. TO IF   !..         0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPSe.....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHEP.............      . 0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL, ASSIST.-TOTAL,..          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS...............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS.......            0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREOIT SALES-FNS .           0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.EO.TRNG..            0.0      0.0      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK,..          0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS,.....            0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL FCON, & MIL...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ....o .........     0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 -----------------------------------------------------
 OTHER US LOANS,.........          0.0      0.0      0.4
 EX-IM BANK LOANS ......          0.0      0.0      0.4
 ALL OTHER..............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 --...... .-----------------------------------------------
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES-COMMITMENTS
 1977     1978     1979      1946-79
 -----------------------------------------------------
 TOTAL...... o..    0.0      0.5      0.9     58.1
 IBRD               0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 IFC                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDA                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDB                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADB                 0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFDB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNDP                0.0      0.5      0.9      9.6
 OTHER-UN            0.0      0.0      0.0      0.7
 EEC                 0.0      0.0      0.0     47.8
 
 
