 SAO TOME AND PRINCIPE*
 Sao Tome and Principe held its first ever multiparty elections
 in early 1991, resulting in the defeat of the former
 Marxist-oriented ruling party and its president. The new
 President, Miguel Trovoada, is a former prime minister who
 returned to Sao Tome in 1990 after 10 years in exile. The
 multiparty National Assembly--now dominated by the former
 opposition, with the former sole party relegated to a minority
 role--is taking a more *active part in the governing process,
 including in some cases,, introducing significant changes in
 legislation.
 Police power is administered by a 300-member paramilitary force
 which reports to the chief of security police in the Ministry
 of Defense. The Angolan contingent, which supplemented Sao
 Tome's small armed forces since 1978, withdrew completely in
 1991, following the opposition victory. The approximately 30
 Cuban advisers in the country have been shifted to medical and
 development roles, and Cuban security advisers have been
 withdrawn..
 The Sao Tome economy is characterized by heavy dependence on
 one crop, cocoa, and large state-owned plantations. In 1991
 the National Assembly passed a law permitting private ownership
 of land, specifying criteria to prevent unbridled foreign
 ownership of land. In addition, several former state cocoa
 plantations are now being managed by private foreign or
 nongovernmental.organizations. Despite these positive steps,
 the Sao Tomean economy is virtually prostrate due to the
 downturn in world cocoa prices and years of mismanagement.
 Stringent austerity measures were adopted in August at the
 insistence of the World Bank.
 The human rights situation improved markedly in 1991 with the
 peaceful, democratic transfer of power, the first in the
 country's history. The elections were characterized by the
 free expression of opposing views and the absence of violence
 or evidence of significant fraud. The country now faces the
 much more difficult task of making a multiparty system work and
 ensuring that the Constitution's guarantees of rights and
 freedoms continue to be observed in practice.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no reports of political or other extrajudicial
 killing by the Government in 1991.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of disappearance.
 *There is no resident American Ambassador in Sao Tome and
 Principe. Information on the human rights situation is
 therefore limited.
 
 
 313
 SAO TOME AND PRINCIPE
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 There were no reports of such abuses in 1991. The new
 Constitution states explicitly that no one shall be subjected
 to torture or cruel and inhuman punishment. Prison conditions
 are known to be harsh and unpleasant, but did not result in
 known deaths during 1991.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 There was no evidence of arbitrary arrest or detention in 1991,
 but there is very little information available on the laws
 reguLating these practices or the manner in which the
 authorities carry them out. The 1990 Constitution provides for
 the right to challenge the legality of detention through habeas
 corpus procedures.
 In August five former senior officials were prevented from
 leaving the country. Formal charges were later filed against
 two of them for criminal misuse of foreign assistance funds;
 the others were permitted to travel outside Sao Tome.
 With the election of Miguel Trovoada (himself a former exile)
 as President, political exile is no longer used as a means of
 suppressing opposition. Some opponents of the former
 government may voluntarily remain outside the country.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The new Constitution states that all citizens, regardless of
 economic means, have the right of access to the courts, for
 redress of any action that violates rights recognized by the
 Constitution. The right to a fair public trial and appeal is
 explicitly provided for in the'Constitution and is-protected in
 practice. In most criminal cases, the accused are given a
 heariig and are-sentenced by a judge. There is no tradition of
 independent defense counsel or jury, though there is a
 provision for court-appointed counsel for indigent defendants.
 However, these rights are exercised within the context of an
 overburdened judicial system marked by a shortage of judges,
 lawyers, and operating funds, which.results in long delays in
 judicial proceedings. Under the previous goyernment, the
 courts were not independent in political and security cases,
 and it remains to be seen if the 1990 political reforms will
 result in a fully independent judiciary. At year's end, there
 were no political detainees or prisoners, and no recent cases
 of charges being brought for political offenses.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Constitutionally, personal identity and the right to privacy
 are inviolate, as are-privacy'of the home, correspondence, and
 private communication. Foreign advisers in the security
 services have left the country, and the new Government has
 ended the intrusive practice& of the past.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of expression and freedom of the press are provided for
 in the new Constitution. The legislative and presidential
 campaigns in January and March were conducted openly, with full
 
 
 314
 SAO TOME AND PRINCIPE
 opposition access to government-controlled print and broadcast
 media, which include a television station, a radio station, and
 an intermittent newspaper. Broadsides and pamphlets critical
 of the Government have begun to appear and circulate freely.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Under the new Constitution, citizens have the right to meet
 peacefully anywhere, to demonstrate within the provisions of
 the law, and freely to form associations. Under its terms, no
 citizen may be forced to belong to an association or forced to
 remain in one. The multiparty electoral process in early 1991
 involved many meetings of different groups, including those
 opposed to the former government. In addition to the political
 parties (including the former sole party) nongovernment-
 sanctioned professional and social organizations have emerged
 and operate without apparent hindrance from the authorities.
 Functions sponsored by cultural and social organizations, as
 well as cooperative and professional associations, still
 require government authorization. This is customarily given,
 however.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Religious freedom is provided for'in the new Constitution and
 observed in practice. The three major religious communities
 are Roman Catholic, Protestant, and Seventh-Day Adventist.
 There are no restrictions on the activities of foreign clergy.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Citizens move freely around and between the island of Sao Tome
 and the smaller island of Principe, 90 miles away. Because
 interisland transport is only by slow ferry or twice weekly
 flights by propeller airplane, such travel is difficult. Under
 the new Constitution, citizens have the specific right to move
 freely to any part of the national territory and are free to
 emigrate and to return. The Government continues to require
 exit visas for Sao Tomeans wishing to travel abroad.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 In 1991 Sao Tomeans exercised their right to change their
 Government. The legislative elections in January resulted in a
 stinging defeat for the former sole party, the Movement for the
 Liberation of Sao Tome and Principe (MLSTP), which garnered
 only 30 percent of the vote and was reduced to a minority role
 in the National Assembly. In presidential polling in March,
 Miguel Trovoada, who had returned only 9 months before from 10
 years of exile in France, received 81 percent of the vote after
 then president Pinto da Costa withdrew, and his party did not
 field a candidate. The MLSTP accepted its defeat with some
 difficulty but in 1991 increasingly assumed its role as an
 opposition party. In addition to the MLSTP, four parties
 contested the legislative elections. President Trovoada was
 elected independently of any party affiliation, though it was
 understood throughout the electoral process that he and the PCD
 (Partida de Convergencia Democratica) were committed to working
 together should they be elected.
 Political power is exercised by the directly elected President
 through the Prime Minister and Cabinet appointed from the
 
 
 315
 SAO TOME AND PRINCIPE
 majority party in the National Assembly. The President has
 explicit, direct authority in foreign affairs and defense, but
 economic and social policy are formulated by the Prime Minister
 and his Cabinet. Women have the'right to participate fully in
 the political life of the country and to hold public office.
 However, for cultural reasons, only a few have gained such
 office.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human' Rights
 Since the elections, a few small domestic groups, which have
 the monitoring of human rights as one of their objectives, have
 formed' Sao Tome and Principe traditionally has had limited
 contact with international human rights groups, though this may
 change as the country relies more heavily on United Nations,
 World Bank and International Monetary Fund support and advice.
 The previous government invited Portuguese observers to monitor
 the elections. They certified them as free and fair.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Sao Tomean population (94,000 on Sao Tome, 20,000 on
 Principe) is relatively homogeneous within a common
 Luso-African culture. The inhabitants of Principe often feel
 neglected by the central-Government, an attitude exacerbated by
 the current economic crisis. The new Constitution states that
 all citizens are equal before the law regardless of sex, race,
 social origin, political tendency, creed, or philosophic
 conviction, and that women are equal to men in rights and
 duties, with the right to full participation in political,
 economic, social, and cultural life.
 Notwithstanding this constitutional provision, women encounter
 substantial discrimination. Even more than men, women face
 drudgery and low wages on the large cocoa plantations. Only a
 small number of women have gained access to professional
 positions. violence against women in Sao Tome and Principe is
 believed to be infrequent and is not part of the traditional
 social context. There is no specific information available,
 however, on the frequency of wife beating or other forms of
 domestic violence. Police rarely intervene in domestic
 disputes, and, as far as is known, the Government has not
 addressed publicly the issue of violence against women.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The new Constitution guarantees freedom-of association and
 provides for the right of workers to strike within the terms of
 the law. The former ruling party MLSTP had an affiliated trade
 union, which existed mainly on paper. Since the political
 changes that swept the country, workers have not yet organized
 new unions. Most'salaried workers in the country work on the
 large state-owned "empresas" (plantation-like agricultural
 enterprises) and do not often leave the estate, which generally
 provides all community facilities. Since the transition to
 multiparty democracy began, there have been a number of strikes
 over pay, benefits, and working conditions in the public
 sector. Workers at the central bank, several of the government
 ministries, and the electrical and water monopoly all struck
 for pay increases and job security. These strikes were outside
 
 
 316
 SAO TOME AND PRINCIPE
 the framework of any formal union, however. No punitive action
 was taken against the strikers, many of whose demands were
 satisfied as a result of the strikes. There are no legal
 barriers to the ability of trade unions to federate and to
 affiliate internationally.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The new Constitution provides for the right of workers to
 organize, and collective bargaining is now legally permitted.
 However, the Government remains the determining force in
 setting wages and working conditions, and, as the country's
 main employer, it will likely retain this role for the
 immediate future. Because of mismanagement, neglect, and
 unproductivity of state-run empresas, workers are sometimes not
 paid salaries for up to 6 months, though this situation is
 better on the eight empresas now under private management.
 There are no laws prohibiting antiunion discrimination. There
 are no expcrt processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced or compulsory labor is prohibited by law and is not
 practiced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 A legal minimum employment age of 18 years in the modern wage
 economy is generally respected in practice. The Ministry of
 Justice, Labor, and Public Administration is responsible for
 enforcing this law. However, in the subsistence agricultural
 sector, children work on family plots from an early age.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 There is no legally mandated minimum wage, though it is set as
 an administrative requirement. The beginning salary for an
 empresa worker is not sufficient to provide a decent living for
 workers and their families. Empresa workers surviveby running
 up debts at the company store, which are deducted from their
 'paper" wages. Workers are provided free (but poor) housing,
 rudimentary medical care, and access to the subsidized company
 store. The standard workweek is 40 hours. The implementation
 of a structural adjustment program (backed by the World Bank)
 has led to measures such as a sharp devaluation of the currency
 and reductions in food subsidies, which have caused short-term
 economic hardships for empresa workers and others. Eight of
 the 15 state-owned farms are now under private management, and
 the conditions of workers on these estates are slowly improving
 as cocoa production increases and modern management techniques
 replace Socialist collective farming. Basic occupational
 health and safety standards are contained in the Social
 Security Law of 1979. These are ostensibly enforced by
 inspectors from the Ministry of Justice, Labor, and Public
 Adi.inistration, but how effectively is not known.
 
 
