 SAO TOME AND PRINCIPE
 Sao Tome and Principe, one of the newest nations
 in Africa, received its independence in July 1975
 after five centuries of Portuguese colonial rule.
 It is a mini-state with 372 square miles of island
 territory and approximately 75,000 people. The
 new Government has instituted a single-party poli-
 tical system which protects most internationally
 recognized human rights. The Sao Tomean Constitu-
 tion pledges the state to respect the Universal Decla-
 ration of Human Rights.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom From:
 a. Torture
 The Department of State has no evidence or reason
 to believe that torture is used in Sao Tome and
 Principe.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 There is no evidence that such treatment or punish-
 ment occurs.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 Sao Tome's Constitution prohibits arbitrary imprisonment,
 and there are no reports or evidence that such imprison-
 ment has occurred.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Department has no information that a fair public
 trial is denied to citizens of Sao Tome and Principe.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 According to the best information available to the
 (147)
 
 
 Department of State, invasion of the home is not
 practiced.
 2. Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 After five centuries of Portuguese colonial rule,
 the Government of independent Sao Tome and Principe
 has as a fundamental goal the improvement of the
 quality of life of the population. However, the
 Government's socialist policies, in the judgment
 of some observers, risk damaging its efforts to
 meet the basic needs for food, shelter, health
 care and education.
 The economy is based on plantation agriculture
 producing cash crops for export. The state's
 management of the former Portuguese-owned planta-
 tions is designed to respond directly to the needs
 of those who work on them. After a slow beginning,
 production of the state farms has risen somewhat
 during the past year, reflecting the Government's
 modernization efforts. In 1978, development ex-
 penditures accounted for 74 percent of the country's
 total budget.
 International assistance has been sought and re-
 ceived for programs to improve education and health
 care. Virtually the total development effort is
 designed primarily to respond to the needs of the
 common citizen. Sao Tomean society is not marked
 by any notable disequilibrium in the distribution
 of wealth or by flagrant cases of corruption.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Includ-
 ing:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion
 and Assembly
 The Constitution guarantees the basic freedoms of
 thought, religion and assembly, but political expres-
 sion is limited by the country's single political
 
 
 149
 party. The press is government-controlled. Assembly
 for political purposes must have the sanction of
 the ruling party. Women enjoy constitutional guar-
 antees of equality with men; many are active in
 public life and several have attained ministerial
 rank within the Sao Tomean Government. Labor or-
 ganizations are affiliated with Sao Tome and Principe's
 single political party and do not play an indepen-
 dent role in the political process.
 b. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 The requirement of exit visas and the physical
 isolation of the islands are the only barriers to
 movement out of the country, including emigration.
 There are no known controls on internal travel.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 All political activity is controlled by the Move-
 ment for the Liberation of Sao Tome and Principe
 (MLSTP), the country's single party. Former mem-
 bers of the now disbanded opposition groups who
 remain in the country appear to suffer no prejudi-
 cial treatment at the hands of the Government.
 Several political opponents of the Government are
 thought to be in exile, but President Da Costa has
 announced that exiles are free to return whenever
 they wish.
 The President is elected by the Popular Assembly
 from a list of candidates named by the MLSTP. Under
 the Constitution, the Assembly is the supreme organ
 of the state. Legislators are elected for a period
 of four years by universal suffrage. The first post-
 independence election is scheduled to take place in
 1979.
 4.   Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-Governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Department of State is not aware that any out-
 side groups have sought to investigate human rights
 conditions in Sao Tome and Principe.
 
 
