 SAO TOME AND PRINCIPE
 The Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe is a multiparty democracy.
 The Government is comprised of an independent judiciary, a unicameral legislature
 (National Assembly), and an executive branch in which power is divided between
 the President and the Prime Minister. The Party of Democratic Convergence (PCD)
 won parliamentary elections in 1991 and thereby earned the right to name the
 Prime Minister and form a government. Miguel Trovoada, an independent, won
 Presidential election in 1991. Longstanding disagreement between the President
 and Prime Minister over interpretation of their respective constitutional powers,
 among other issues, culminated in July when Trovoada dismissed the Cabinet and
 the National Assembly and called for early legislative elections. The Movement for
 the Liberation of Sao Tome and Principe (MISTP), which had ruled prior to 1990
 as the sole legal party, won a plurality in free and fair parliamentary elections in
 October and formed the new Government.
 The Ministry of Defense, Security, and Internal Order supervises the military,
 many of whose members are part-time farmers or fishermen. It also supervises the
 police.
 The economy is based on a single product, cocoa, and an archaic, state-run system
 of plantations called "empresas.7 Despite initial progress in a land redistribution
 program, there was little movement toward privatization, and the economy contin-
 ued to face serious difficulties.
 The Government continued to respect the rights of its citizens and managed to
 resolve serious internal conflicts within the country's legal and constitutional frame-
 work without violence or retribution. Nevertheless, the principal human rights prob-
 lems continued to be an inefficient judicial system, societal discrimination against
 women, and outdated plantation labor practices that limited workers' rights.
 
 
 209
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN EIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits torture or cruel and inhuman punishment. There were
 anecdotal reports of overzealous security forces using excessive force during an ar-
 rest on at least one occasion, but no reports of gross violations, such as beatings
 or other cruel treatment during interrogations. Prison conditions are harsh but not
 life-threatening.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution provides for procedural
 protections in case of detention. There was no evidence of arbitrary arrest or deten-
 tion. Exile is not used as a punishment and all those exiled under the former regime
 have been given the opportunity to return.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for the right to fair
 public trial and the right of appeal in civil cases. For criminal cases, it provides for
 the right to legal representation and a public trial before a judge. In practice, how-
 ever, the judicial infrastructure suffers from severe budgetary restraints, inadequate
 facilities, and a shortage of trained judges and lawyers, causing long delays in
 bringing cases to court and greatly hindering investigations in criminal cases. The
 judiciary is independent of both the President and the Government and has re-
 turned verdicts to the displeasure of both. The government determines salaries for
 all ministerial employees in accordance with standard government salary guidelines.
 All Government salaries are extremely low, but there were no reports of judges ac-
 cepting bribes or being pressured by the Government.
 There were no known political prisoners or detainees.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the integrity of the person and the right to privacy of
 home, correspondence, and private communication. The Government does not en-
 gage in intrusive practices, such as surveillance of individuals or communications.
 The Judicial Police are responsible for criminal investigations and must obtain au-
 thorization from the Ministry of Justice to conduct searches.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of expres-
 sion and freedom of the press, and the Government generally respects thdse in prac-
 tice. One government-run and four independent newspapers publish periodically;
 none appeared during the second half of the year, due to financial constraints. Tele-
 vision and radio are state-operated, while no independent stations currently exist,
 there are no laws forbidding their operation.
 The law grants all opposition parties access to the state-run media, including a
 minimum of 3 minutes per month on television. In late December 1993, then Sec-
 retary of State for Social Communications Gustavo dos Anjos suspended this right,
 reportedly in reaction to a televised press conference in which the MLSTP strongly
 criticized the PCD Government. When journalists protested in January by covering
 a second MISTP conference "without authorization," dos Anjos fired television direc-
 tor Carlos Teixera. By May the Government had restored opposition telecast access,
 and since the naming of the interim Government in July, opposition parties--includ-
 ing the ousted PCD-have enjoyed steadily increasing access to the media.
 e campaign by all parties for October's legislative elections was active and out-
 spoken. In the absence of a facility to produce newspapers, all parties freely distrib-
 uted newsletters and press releases, criticizing the Government, the President, and
 one another. There were no reports of government censorship or threats of censor-
 ship from any group, nor assertions of national security to suppress criticism.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 the right to associate freely and to demonstrate publicly, and the Government re-
 spects this right in practice. The Government requires that requests for authoriza-
 tion of large-scale events be filed 48 hours in advance, and usually grants the appro-
 priate permits. Although bureaucratic delays often occur, there were no instances
 of authorizations being withheld for political reasons. Numerous rallies and gather-
 ings took place peacefully during the legislative election campaign, and there were
 no reports of interference with those that occurred spontaneously or lacked author-
 ization. There were no reports of forced restrictions on meetings of municipal com-
 mittees.
 
 
 210
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for religious freedom, and the
 Government respects this right in practice. There are no restrictions on the activi-
 ties of foreign clergy.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Em  ation, and Re-
 patriation.-Under the Constitution and in practice, citizens have the right to move
 freely within the country and to emigrate and return. Exit visas are not required.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights.- The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens exercised this right for the first time in free and fair presidential and
 legislative elections in 1991, and again in the legislative elections held October 2,
 1994, which resulted in the peaceful transfer of power to the opposition MI  P
 party. The MLSTP won 27 seats while the PCD won 14. A third party, the Inde-
 pendent Democratic Action Party, headed by the President's son Patrice, also won
 14 seats. Elections are by secret ballot on the basis of universal suffrage at 18 years
 of age.
 There are no restrictions in law or practice on the participation of women in poli-
 tics. Three women currently hold seats in the National Assembly, and women oc-
 cupy important posts in the Government. There are no women in te Cabinet.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A small number of local human rights groups have formed since 1991 without re-
 striction or governmental interference. There were no known requests by inter-
 national human rights groups to visit the country.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides that all citizens, regardless of sex, race, racial origin,
 political tendency, creed or philosophic conviction, are equal under the law.
 Women.-The Constitution stipulates that women and men have equal rights to
 full political, economic, and social participation. Women have access to opportunities
 in education, business, and government, and many women occupy positions of lead-
 ership in the private and public sectors. In practice, however, women still encounter
 substantial discrimination. Traditional beliefs concerning the division of labor be-
 tween men and women leave women with much of the hard work in agriculture,
 most child-rearing responsibilities, and less access to education and the professions.
 Sonme'evidence indicates that violence against women is a growing problem. Medi-
 cal professionals, officials from the Ministry of Health and the United Nations re-
 port first-hand experience in dealing with violence, including rape. They also report
 that although women have the right to legal recourse-including against spouses-
 many are reluctant to complain or are ignorant of their rights under the law. Tradi-
 tional beliefs and practices also inhibit women from taking domestic disputes out-
 side the family.
 Children.-A number of government and donor-funded programs are established
 to improve conditions for children. There has been improvement in maternity and
 infant care, nutrition and access to basic health services, especially in urban areas.
 Although no reliable statistics exist on abuse of children, serious mistreatment of
 children is not widespread.
 People With Disabilities.-The law does not mandate accessibility for persons with
 disabilities.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution provides for freedom of association
 and the right to strike. Few unions exist in the very small modern wage sector. One
 confederation, the Independent Union Federation, has been attempting to organize
 workers on the large state-owned plantations, but organizational difficulties and the
 country's poverty hindered its efforts. Independent cooperatives, on the other hand,
 have taken advantage of the government land distribution program to attract work-
 ers and, in many cases, significantly improve production and incomes.
 With slow progress in the Government's efforts to privatize state-owned indus-
 tries, state employees continue to comprise the vast majority of the wage-earning
 work force. Government and other essential workers are allowed to strike. In May,
 when the Government announced plans to reduce government positions by 18 per-
 cent, employees struck for 10 days in protest. In late October, employees in the
 banking sector also staged a brief strike or iger wages.
 There are no restrictions barring trade unions from joining federations or
 affiliating with international bodies.
 
 
 211
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Constitution provides
 that workers may organize and bargain collectively. However, due to its role as the
 principal employer in the wage sector, the Government remains the key interlocutor
 for labor on all matters, including wages. There are no known laws prohibiting
 antiunion discrimination.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced or com-
 pulsory labor and it is not practiced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Employers generally respect the
 legally mandated minimum employment age of 18 years in the modern wage sector.
 The Ministry of Justice and Labor is responsible for enforcing this law. In subsist-
 ence agriculture, on plantations, and in informal commerce, however, children do
 work, sometimes from an early age.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Working conditions on many of the state-
 owned plantations-the biggest wage employment sector-border on medieval.
 There is no legally mandated minimum wage, and the average salary for plantation
 workers not only does not permit a decent standard of living, but is constantly being
 eroded by inflation and the depreciating exchange rate. In principle, workers are
 provided free (but poor) housing, rudimentary education and health care and the
 right to reduced prices and credit at the "company store." Clothes and food are sub-
 sidized. Corruption is rampant, however, and international lending institutions have
 criticized the Government for ineffective administration of subsidies. Workers are
 often forced to purchase the same goods they should receive at government-man-
 dated prices for much greater prices on a paraflel market.
 The Social Security Law of 1979 prescribes basic occupational health and safety
 standards. Inspectors from the Ministry of Justice and Labor are responsible for en-
 forcement of these standards, but their efforts are ineffective and often nonexistent.
 The legal workweek is 40 hours with 48 consecutive hours mandated for a rest
 riod. Officials enforce these laws in the modern wage sector. Employees have te
 right under the law to leave unsafe working conditions.
