 SAO TOME AND PRINCIPE *
 The Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe is a multiparty democracy.
 The Government is composed of an executive branch, a unicameral legislature (the
 National Assembly), and an independent judiciary. The President appoints the
 Prime Minister, who in turn appoints the ministers of the Government. Miguel
 Trovoada, an independent, was elected President in 1991 for a 5-year term. The
 Movement for the Liberation of Sao Tome and Principe (MLSTP), which had ruled
 prior to 1990 as the sole legal party, won a plurality in free and fair legislative elec-
 tions in 1994 and formed the new Government led by Prime Minister Carlos da
 Graca.
 The Minister of National Defense, Security, and Internal Order supervises the
 military, many of whose members are part-time farmers or fishermen, and the po-
 lice. In August a group of military officers attempted a coup d'etat, killing one per-
 son and holding the Prsident hostage for a week. The Angolan Foreign Minister
 mediated an agreement whereby the officers involved in the coup attempt released
 President Trovoada and received a parliamentary amnesty, endorsed by Presidential
 decree. As another condition of his return to power, the President agreed to give
 the military officers' council a greater voice in decisions affecting the military.
 The economy is based on the export of a single product, cocoa, produced in an ar-
 chaic state-run system of plantations called "empresas." The Government has
 privatized some of the state-held land but has had limited success in privatizing
 state-owned enterprises. The Government began a new structural adjustment pro-
 gram, but the economy continues to face serious difficulties. The annual inflation
 rate is 35 percent, unemployment is 27 percent, total external debt is 15 times gross
 domestic product, and the country is highly dependent on foreign aid. Per capita in-
 come is less than $250 per year.
 The Government continued to respect the rights of its citizens. The principal
 human rights problems continued to be an inefficient judicial system, harsh prison
 conditions, discrimination and violence against women, and outdated plantation
 labor practices that limit worker rights.
 *There is no U.S. Embassy in Sao Tome and Principe. Information available on the human
 rights situation is limited.
 
 
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-In August military officers seized
 the presidential palace and killed a guard who sought to stop them. In the settle-
 ment restoring civilian rule, the National Assembly passed an amnesty sheltering
 the officers involved from prosecution.
 b. Disappearane.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits torture or cruel and inhuman punishment. There were
 no reports of violations such as beatings or other cruel treatment during arrests or
 interrogations.
 Prison conditions are harsh but not life threatening. While there is no indication
 that human rights monitors have requested permission to make prison visits, it is
 believed the Government would permit such visits if requested.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution provides for procedural
 Protections in case of detention. The President was held hostage for a week by the
 tary but was released after mediation by the Angolan Foreign Minister. There
 was no evidence of any other arbitrary arrest or detention.
 Exile is not used as a punishment, and all those exiled under the one-party re-
 gime of 1975-1990 are free to return.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, and the judiciary has returned verdicts against both the Presi en and the
 Government. The legal system is based on Portuguese law and customary law, with
 the Supreme Court at the apex. The Government has important appointive and
 other judicial powers, including setting salaries for judges and all ministerial em-
 ployees in accordance with standrrar  ret    ry guidelines. Government sal-
 aries are extremely low, and the authorities are concerned that judges may be
 tempted to accept bribes. The authorities maintain that they continue to respect the
 independence of the judiciary.
 The Constitution provides for the right to fair public trial, the right of appeal, and
 the right to legal representation. In practice, however, the judicial infrastructure
 suffers from severe budgetary constraints, inadequate facilitiesiand a shortage of
 trained judges and lawyers, causing long delays in bringing cases to court and
 greatly hindering investigations in criminal cases.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Corresponnce.-The
 Constitution provides for the integrity of the person and the right to privacy of
 home, correspondence, and private communication. The Government does not en-
 gage in intrusive practices, such as surveillance of people or the monitoring of com-
 munications. The judicial police are responsible for criminal investigations and must
 obtain authorization from the Ministry of Justice to conduct searches.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Libertics, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of expres-
 sion and freedom of the press, and the Government generally respects these rights
 in practice. One government-run and four independent newspapers have published
 in the past; none appeared in 1995 due to financial constraints and to the lack of
 printing facilities.
 Television and radio are state operated. While there are no independent local sta-
 tions, there are no laws forbidding them. The Voice of America and Radio France
 International arerenbroadcast locay. The law grants all opposition parties access
 to the state-run media, including a minimum of 3 minutes per month on television.
 All parties freely distribute newsletters and press releases giving their views and
 criticizing the Government, the President, and one another. There were no reports
 of government censorship or threats of censorship from any group, nor any reports
 of efforts by national security forces to suppress criticism. During the short military
 intervention in August, national television and radio carried no reporting on the do-
 mestic political situation except for press conferences given by the military. Inter-
 national telecommunications continued to function normally. Subsequently, the Gov-
 ernment invited Cable News Network to visit the country to prepare a report on
 the event.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 these rights, and the Government respects them in practice. The Government re-
 quires that requests for authorization of large-scale events be filed 48 hours in ad-
 vance and usually grants the appropriate permits.
 
 
 218
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for religious freedom, and the
 Government respects this right in practice. There are no restrictions on the activi-
 ties of foreign clergy.  "
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Under the Constitution and in practice, citizens have the right to move
 freely within the country, to travel abroad, and to emigrate and return. The Govern-
 ment has traditionally welcomed those seeking refuge or asylum.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens exercised this right for the first time in free and fair presidential and
 legislative elections in 1991 and again in the legislative elections of October 1994.
 These elections resulted in the peaceful transfer of power between political party
 coalitions. Each of the three principal political parties has significant representation
 in the unicameral National Assembly. Elections are by secret ballot on the basis of
 universal suffrage for citizens 18 years of age or older.
 The Constitution provides for the election of the President, who as Head of State
 names the Prime Minister. The Prime Minister appoints members of the Govern-
 ment. Following restoration of constitutional government after the August coup at-
 tempt, the President asserted that "political forces" had sought to take advantage
 of the military. He declined to name any persons or parties in this regard. Presi-
 dential elections are scheduled for 1996.
 There are no restrictions in law or in practice on the participation of women in
 politics. However, women are underrepresented in the legislature. They currently
 hold 3 of the 55 seats in the National Assembly, and there are no women in the
 Cabinet. A woman elected in December to chair a major opposition party declared
 herself an independent candidate for the presidential election in 1996.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A small number of local human rights groups have formed since 1991 and operate
 without restriction or governmental interference. There were no known requests by
 international human rights groups to visit the country.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for the equality of all citizens regardless of sex, race,
 racial origin, political tendency, creed, or philosophic conviction. However, the Gov-
 ernment has not sought actively to enforce these provisions.
 Women.-While the extent of the problem is unknown, violence against women oc-
 curs, and medical professionals and officials report firsthand experience in dealing
 with violence, including rape. They also report that although women have the right
 to legal recourse-including against spouses-many are reluctant to bring a com-
 plaint or are ignorant of their rights under the law. Traditional beliefs and practices
 also inhibit women from taking domestic disputes outside the family.
 While the Constitution stipulates that women and men have equal political, eco-
 nomic, and social rights, andwhile many women do have access to opportunities in
 education, business, and government, in practice women still encounter significant
 societal discrimination. Traditional beliefs concerning the division of labor between
 men and women leave wcmen with much of the hard work in agriculture, with most
 child-rearing responsibiLties, and with less access to education and to the profes-
 sions. Female literacy is approximately 62 percent (compared to male literacy of 85
 percent).
 Children.-A number of government and donor-funded programs have been estab-
 lished to improve conditions for children. There has been improvement in maternity
 and infant care, in nutrition, and in access to basic health services, especially in
 urban areas. Mistreatment of children is not widespread.
 People With Disabilities.-The law does not mandate arrangements to provide ac-
 cess to buildings, transportation, or services for persons with disabilities.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution provides for freedom of association
 and the right to strike. Few unions exist in the very small modern wage sector. One
 confederation, the Independent Union Federation, has been attempting to organize
 workers on the large state-owned plantations, but it has met with only limited suc-
 cess. Independent cooperatives, on the other hand, have taken advantage of the gov-
 ernment land distribution program to attract workers and in many cases signifi-
 cantly to improve production and incomes. Public sector employees still comprise the
 great majority of wage earners. Government employees and other essential workers
 
 
 219
 are allowed to strike and did so repeatedly. There are no laws or regulations prohib-
 iting employers from retaliating against strikers.
 There are no restrictions barring trade unions from joining federations or
 affiliating with international bodies.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Constitution provides
 that workers may organize and bargain collectively. However, due to its role as the
 principal employer in the wage sector, the Government remains the key interlocutor
 or aor on all matters, including wages. There are no laws prohiitig antiunion
 discrimination.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced or com-
 pulsory labor, and such labor is not practiced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Employers in the modern wage
 sector generally respect the legally mandated minimum employment age of 18
 years. The Ministry of Justice and Labor is responsible for enforcing this law. In
 subsistence agriculture, on plantations, and in informal commerce, children do work,
 sometimes from an early age.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Working conditions on many of the state-
 owned plantations-the biggest wage employment sector-border on the medieval.
 There is no legally mandated minimum wage. The average salary for plantation
 workers does not permit a decent standard of living, and its real value is constantly
 eroded by high rates of inflation. In principle, workers are provided free (but inad-
 euate) housing, rudimentary education, and health care, as well as the privilege
 of reduced prices and credit at the "company store:' These arrangements are in-
 tended to subsidize food and clothing. Corruption is an everyday fact, however, and
 international lending institutions have criticized the Government for ineffective ad-
 ministration of these subsidies. Workers are often forced to pay higher prices on the
 parallel market to obtain the goods theoretically provided at a di~scount as part of
 their compensation.
 The legal workweek is 40 hours with 48 consecutive hours mandated for a rest
 period, a norm respected in the modemn wage sector. The Social Security Law of
 1979 prescribes basic occupational health andsafety standards. Inspectors from the
 Ministry of Justice and Labor are responsible for enforcement of these standards,
 but their efforts are ineffective. Employees have the right under the law to leave
 unsafe working conditions.
