 SAO TOME AND PRINCTPE*
 Sao Tome and Principe held its first multiparty elections in early 1991, resulting
 in the defeat of the former Socialist ruling party and its president. The new Presi-
 dent, Miguel Trovoada, is a former Prime Minister who returned to Sao Tome after
 10 years exile. The multiparty National Assembly is now dominated by the former
 opposition, with the former sole prty now in a minority role.
 Police power is administered   a 300-member paramilitary security police force
 which reports to the chief of security police in the Ministry of Defense. Total mili-
 tary expenditures for 1989, the last year for which the US. Arms Control and Dis-
 armament Agency conducted a detailed analysis, were roughly estimated to be
 $500,000. The Government has announced its desire to cut its military force by half,
 transferring a portion of its military personnel to civilian law enforcement. However,
 there is as yet no schedule for implementation of this force reduction. The Angolan,
 Cuban, and Soviet military advisers, in residence in Sao Tome for over a decade,
 all left the island in 1991.
 The Sao Tomean economy is characterized by heavy dependence on one crop,
 cocoa, and by large state-owned plantations. Only one state-owned cocoa plantation
 is currently privately managed, but there are plans to subdivide several more lan-
 tations into individual plots to be farmed by the workers on site. Despite these
 steps, the Sao Tomean economy remains virtually prostrate due to the downturn in
 the world cocoa market and years of mismanagement. In order to reduce its $200
 million foreign debt, the Government, at the behest of the World Bank and the
 Internationa Monetary Fund (IMF), adopted a structural adustment plan. The im-
 plementation of this austerity plan combined with strong inflationary pressures and
 static wages, has contributed to a aeclie in the Government's popularity.
 The human rights situation improved markedly following the peaceful transfer of
 power in 1991. However, continuing rancor between the country's President, who
 ran as an independent candidate, and some ruling party legislators provoked in
 1992 a constitutional crisis over the roles of these two branches of government. Al-
 though the conflict was resolved peacefully, the underlying disagreement over the
 interpretation of the Constitution remains, with no agreed-upon method for settling
 constitutional disputes.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killing by the Government in 1992.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of disappearances.
 C.Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 There were no reports of such abuss in 1992. The Sso Tomean Constitution, pro-
 mulgated in 1990, states explicitly that no one shall be subjected to torture or cruel
 and inhuman punishment. Prison conditions are known to be harsh and unpleasant
 but did not result in any known deaths in 1992.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-There was no evidence of arbitrary arrest
 or detention in 1992, but there was very little information available on the laws reg-
 ulating these practices or the manner in which the authorities carry them out. The
 Constitution provides for the right to challenge the legality of detention through ha-
 beas corpus procedures.
 *There is no American Embassy in Sao Tome and Principe. Information on the human rights
 situation is therefore limited.
 
 
 215
 Political exile is no longer forced on oppositionists in Sao Tome. However, some
 opponents of the former government remain outside the country of their own voli-
 tion.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution states that all citizens, regard-
 less of economic means, have the right of access to the courts for any action that
 violates rights recognized by the Constitution.
 The right to a fair public trial and appeal is explicitly provided for in the Con-
 stitution and is protected inpractice. In most criminal cases, the accused are given
 a hearing and are sentenced by a judge, but there is no tradition of independent
 defense counsel for indigent defendants. These rights are exercised within the con-
 text of an overburdened judicial system, marked by a shortage of judges, lawyers,
 and operating funds, all of which result in long delays in judicial proceedings. As
 of year's end, there were no known political detainees or prisoners and no recent
 cases of charges being brought for political offenses.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution states that personal identity and the right to privacy are inviolable; it
 provides for privacy of the home, correspondence, and private communication. For-
 eign advisers in the security services have left the country, and the new Govern.
 ment has ended the intrusive practices of the past.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Freedom of expression and freedom of the press
 are provided for in the Constitution. The legislative and presidential campaigns of
 1991 were conducted openly, with full opposition access to government-controlled
 print and broadcast media, which include a television station, a radio station, and
 an intermittently published newspaper. Broadsides and pamphlets critical of the
 Government continue to appear and circulate freely.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Under the Constitution, citi-
 zens have the right to associate freely and to demonstrate within the provisions of
 the law, which requires 48-hours' advance notice of any planned demonstration, and
 to associate freely. The authorities usually grant permission for demonstrations if
 requested within the required time frame. In the spring, Sao Tomeans demonstrated
 in the capital city in protest against the Government a stringent economic policies.
 Some 1,000 to 2,000 people gathered in front of the presidential palace to demand
 the resignation of the Prime Minister and his Government. Although the Govern-
 ment the week before had denied the demonstration a permit, citing the 48-hour no-
 tification requirement, the permit was ultimately granted, and the rally concluded
 without incident.
 During the presidential campaign of 1991, Sao Tomeans exercised the rights of
 assembly and association freely, organizing meetings and forming political confed-
 erations, many of them in opposition to the then rulingparty. No one may be forced
 to belong to an organization. In addition to the po itical parties, including the
 former sole party, professional and social organizations operate without apparent
 hindrance from authorities.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Religious freedom is provided for in the Constitution, and
 the three major religious communities--Roman Catholic, Protestant, and Seventh-
 Day Adventist-are allowed to practice freely. There are no restrictions on the ac-
 tivities of foreign clergy.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Citizens move freely around the island of Sao Tome, as well as between
 it and the smaller island of Principe, 90 miles away. Because interisland transport
 is only by slow ferry or twice-w eekly flights by propeller airplane, such travel is dif-
 ficult. Under the Constitution, citizens have the specific right to move freely to any
 p art of the national territory and are free to emigrate and to return. However, the
 Government continues to require exit visas for Sao Tomeans wishing to travel
 abroad.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 In 1991 Sao Tomeans exercised their right to change their government; the former
 sole party, the Movement For The Liberation Of Sao Tome (MLSTP) garnered only
 30 percent of the vote in the January 1991 elections and was reduced to a minority
 role in the multiparty National Assembly. In the March 1991 presidential election,
 Miguel Trovoada, who had returned only 9 months before from 10 years of exile in
 France, received 81 percent of the vote after then-president Pinto da Costa with-
 drew and his party decided not to run a candidate.
 The MLSTP accepted these defeats with some difficulty but over time has accept-
 ed its role as the loyal opposition. President Trovoada was elected indeoendentlv of
 
 
 216
 any party affiliation, though it was understood throughout the electoral process that
 he and the PCD (Democratic Convergence Party) headed by Daniel Daio, were com-
 mitted to working together should they be elected.
 Political power is exercised both by the directly elected President and by his
 Prime Minister and Cabinet, appointed from the majority party in the National As-
 sembly. The Constitution gives the President authority in foreign affairs and de-
 fense, but economic and social policy are formulated by the Prime Minister and his
 Cabinet.
 In 1992 differing views on implementing World Bank-mandated economic reforms,
 combined with divergent interpretations of the Constitution, caused the newly
 democratic republic's first serious governmental crisis. In April the opposition, with
 at least the tacit support of the President, organized a massive demonstration call-
 ing for Prime Minister Daio's recall, further widening the gap separating the legisla-
 ture from the President. The President and the National Asembly also clashed over
 which branch of government *as authorized to negotiate agreements with foreign
 governments.
 In an attempt to resolve this problem, Portuguese jurists were brought in to inter-
 pret the Constitution. This panel decided in favor of the Presidency, ruling that the
 Constitution granted the President the leading role in foreign af   and national
 defense, the power to veto the appointments of nominees for those portfolios, and
 the right to dissolve the National Assembly and call for new elections. The National
 Assembly, however, refused to accept the panel's fimdings. In May 1992, President
 Trovoada dismissed Prime Minister Daio. The PCD Government subsequently
 named as the new Prime Minister the former Minister of Finance, Norberto Costa
 Allegre. While he did not favor this appointment, the President accepted the new
 Prime Minister rather than call for new legislative elections. On December 6, 1992,
 Sao Tome conducted its first multip y municipal elections, with the former ruling
 party, the MISTP, winning a landslide victory.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Since the elections of 1991, a few small domestic groups have formed with various
 objectives, including the protection of human and civil rights. Traditionally, Sao
 Tome and Principe has had limited contact with international human rights groups,
 mainly due to its small population and the absence of allegations of human rights
 abuses. Such contact may     me more frequent as the country relies more heavily
 on the United Nations, World Bank, and International Monetary Fund for financial
 support and advice.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Language, or Social Status
 The Sao Tomean population (94 000 on Sao Tome, 20,000 on Principe) is relatively
 homogeneous within a common Luso-African culture. However, the inhabitants of
 Principe often feel neglected by the central Government, an attitude exacerbated by
 the current economic crisis. The Constitution states that all citizens are equal before
 the law regardless of sex, race, social origin, political tendency, creed, or philosophic
 conviction. It also specifies that women are equal to men in rights and duties, with
 the right to full participation in political, economic, social, 'and cultural life.
 Notwithstanding this constitutional provision, women encounter substantial dis-
 crimination. Even more than men, women face drudgery and low wages on the large
 cocoa plantations. Although a few women have access to the professions or to official
 positions of prominence, most notably the Minister of Health and the former Min-
 ister of Foreign Affairs, these are the exception rather than the rule. Violence
 against women in Sao Tome and Principe is believed to be infrequent and is not
 part of the traditional social pattern. There is no specific information available, how-
 ever, on the frequency of beatings or other forms of domestic violence. Police rarely
 intervene in domestic disputes, and as far as is known, the Government has not ad-
 dressed publicly the issue of.violence against women.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution guarantees freedom of association
 and the right to strike, and a newly formed union federation began to take advan-
 tage of these provisions during 1992. Unrelated to the former sole union and unaf-
 filiated with any political party, the nascent Independent Union Federation (IUF)
 is still in its organizational stages and hobbled by the country's general poverty.
 Nevertheless, it seeks to represent workers in all sectors, including the large state-
 owned 'empresas" (plantation-like agricultural enterprises) which employ a majority
 of the working population. The LUF is specifically attempting to organize plantation
 workers. Workers do not often leave the estates, which generally provide all commu-
 
 
 217
 
 nity facilities. Several of these plantations are in the process of being privatized or
 transferred to private management.
 The sporadic strikes in the government sector-the central bank and the water
 and electric monopoly-that marked 1991 continued in 1992 as privatization and
 layoffs proceeded. Though these strikes were outside a formal umon structure and
 technically illegal, the strikers were not the target of police action. There are no
 legal barriers to the ability of trade unions to federate and to affiliate internation-
 a.The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Workers may organize and
 bargain collectively under the Constitution. While growing privatization reduced the
 relative role of the Government as employer, the Government nonetheless remains
 the key interlocutor for labor. As far as is known, there are no laws prohibiting
 antiunion discrimination, though jurisprudence is in flux and information scarce.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced or compulsory labor is pro-
 hibited by law and is not practiced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The legally mandated minimum
 employment age of 18 years in the modern wage economy is generally respected in
 practice. The Ministry of Justice, Labor, and Public Administration is responsible
 or enorcing this law. However, in the subsistence agricultural sector, children work
 on family p ots from an early age.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no legally mandated minimum wage,
 though it is set as an administrative requirement. The beginning salary for an
 empress worker is not sufficient to provide a decent living for a worker and family.
 Empresa workers survive by running up debts at the company store which are de-
 ducted from their "papr" wages. Workers are provided free (but poor5 housing, rudi-
 mentary medical care, and access to the subsidized company store. The standard
 workweek is 40 hours. The implementation of a World Bank and IMP structural ad-
 justment progam continues to affect workers, both on the emprsas and off, as sub-
 sidies are reduced, civil service ranks are thinned, and the currency is devalued
 Basic occupational health and safety standards are contained in the Social Security
 Law of 1979. Thes are aostensibly enforced by inspers from the Ministry of Jus-
 tice, Labor, and Public Administration, but how effectively is not known.
