 SAO TOME & PRINCIPE*
 Sao Tome and Principe has been a one-party state since gaining
 independence from Portugal in July 1975. Effective political
 power is concentrated in the Presidency and the party, the
 Movement for the Liberation of Sao Tome and Principe (MLSTP).
 The country is composed of two small islands off the west
 coast of Africa with a total population of just over 100,000.
 At independence, Manuel Pinto da Costa, the leader of the
 MLSTP, was chosen to be President by the party and the Popular
 Assembly, constitutionally the supreme organ of state and
 highest legislative body, in an uncontested election. The
 party reconfirmed him for a third 5-year term in September
 1985.
 There are approximately 75 Cuban technical advisers, and the
 small Sao Tomean army is reinforced by 500 troops from
 Angola. Small opposition groups in exile in Portugal and
 Gabon have thus far shown no evidence of being able to
 influence events on the islands.
 In the past the Government drew heavily on Marxist-Leninist
 principles, but -with a deteriorating economic situation state
 control has been reduced and the private sector strengthened.
 The steady decline in cocoa exports, which account for 90
 percent of Sao Tome's exports, reflected both lower world
 prices and serious management problems on the nationalized
 plantations. Inadequate rainfall since 1983 has further
 reduced the production of all crops, resulting in serious food
 shortages and the need for food assistance from the United
 States and other Western countries. President da Costa
 reaffirmed in July 1987 the determination of his Government
 to follow rigorous International Monetary Fund reform
 prescriptions in an effort to reinvigorate the flagging
 economy.
 There was little known change in the overall human rights
 situation in 1987. However, President da Costa announced in
 July that local cooperatives and professional associations
 could now nominate candidates for election to the Popular
 Assembly. This move could modestly widen political
 participation within the one-party system.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There mere no reports of politically motivated killings.
 1b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of politically motivated disappearance.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 No reports of such abuses were received in 1987.
 *There is no American Embassy in Sao Tome- Information on the
 human rights situation is therefore limited.
 
 
 241
 SAO TOME & PRINCIPE
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, Exile, or Forced Labor
 Although in the past some Sao Tomeans have been arrested and
 detained without trial for public'criticism of the Government,
 there were no reports of such abuses in 1987.
 According to the Government, the several opposition politicians
 living in exile, e.g., former Prime Minister Miguel Trovoada,
 and former Minister of Health Carlos da Graca (see Section 3),
 are free to return.
 In March 1987, UNICEF's representative in Sao Tome was
 arrested by Sao Tomaen security forces and charged with the
 murderof his wife. Consular representatives of the arrested
 official's country were denied access to him, and repeated
 protests by high United Nations officials were ignored; other
 U.N. officials who tried to visit the UNICEF official were
 roughed up: The official was released in May 1987 after
 high-level intervention by his Government.
 There have been no reports of the use of forced labor.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Justice is administered at the highest level by the Supreme
 Tribunal, named by and responsible to the Popular Assembly.
 Lower tribunals are appointed to try military cases.
 The Constitution does not address the right to a public trial,
 but there have been instances of public trials of persons
 accused of common crimes in recent years. Criminal trials are
 occasionally reported by the local media. In most cases,
 however, common criminals are given a hearing and are
 sentenced by a judge. To date, the only political prisoners
 given trials were those accused of plotting a coup in 1977.
 In those trials and in criminal trials since that time, the
 accused were assigned counsel by the Government. There is no
 tradition of independent defense counsel.
 As of the end of 1987, the Government claimed that it held no
 political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Because of Sao Tome's geographic isolation and its small
 population, the Government does not have a highly intrusive
 security system to detect opposition opinion. However, the
 Government's loosely organized system of informers and its
 monitoring of political activities ensure that potential
 dissidents are identified.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The security services are alert and react quickly to public
 expressions of opposition or dissatisfaction with the
 Government. All Sao Tomean media are government organs. They
 consist of one television station which broadcasts 2 days per
 week; a radio station which carries music, government news
 releases, and instructional programs; and a weekly two-to-four
 page newspaper of government news releases. No public written
 criticism of the Government seems to be tolerated, but oral
 criticism at party-sponsored meetings exists. The only
 
 
 242
 SAO TOME & PRINCIPE
 foreign wire service items are occasional pieces from Soviet
 and Angolan sources. Voice of America Portuguese language
 programs reach Sao Tome and are listened to without
 interference. Sao Tome Radio also uses VOA taped music
 programs.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 In the past, political assembly and activity were legal only
 within the country's sole political party, the MLSTP.
 Recently, however, President da Costa announced that Sao
 Tomaens could form cooperative and professional associations
 unaffiliated with the party, and that such organizations could
 nominate candidates for election to the Popular Assembly.
 Cultural and social organizations require government approval,
 which is believed to be easily obtained.
 The sole trade union, affiliated with the party, exists mainly
 on paper. There is no explicit legislation forbidding strikes,
 but it is doubtful that strikes would be permitted by the
 Government. There is no information currently available on
 whether collective bargaining is legally permitted.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Religious freedom is guaranteed by the Constitution. The
 three religious communities--Roman Catholic, Evangelical
 Protestant, and Seventh-Day Adventist-are allowed to practice
 freely. The Government provides some funding for a school and
 a social services center managed by the Catholic Church.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The geographic isolation and poverty of the country severely
 limit foreign travel and emigration. In addition, the
 Government closely controls exit visas for the few people who
 travel. Almost all trips outside the islands are for
 governmental missions or medical evacuation. Domestic travel
 is not controlled by the Government, and people move freely on
 the islands of Sao Tome and Principe. The lack of reliable
 and affordable air service severely limits interisland travel.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The present political system makes no provision for change of
 government through the electoral process. Government policy
 is determined by President da Costa, in consultation with his
 key cabinet and security officials. The leadership uses the
 MLSTP to consolidate its rule at the local level and to assist
 in selecting candidates for the Popular Assembly.
 Nevertheless, President da Costa has embarked on a political
 opening intended to widen the political debate on the island
 and encourage participation. He has called for the formation
 of local cooperatives and professional associations--without
 stipulating that the organizations be affiliated with the
 party--and announced that such organizations will be permitted
 to nominate candidates for election to the Popular Assembly.
 Recent constitutional changes stipulate that the President and
 Members of the Popular Assembly are to be elected through
 universal suffrage and that voting will be done by secret
 ballot.
 
 
 243
 SAO TOME & PRINCIPE
 There are small exile groups in Portugal and Gabon. In May
 1986, former Minister of Health Carlos da Graca resigned the
 chairmanship of the National Resistance Front of Sao Tome and
 Principe (FRNSTP) based in Libreville, saying that the recent
 economic liberalization by the Government and its opening to
 moderate African states made his further leadership of the
 FRNSTP unnecessary. Da Graca said he would remain in exile
 until Angolan troops withdrew from the country.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights.
 The extent to which the Government is aware of, or influenced
 by, international human rights organizations is not known. On
 May 23, 1986, Sao Tome and Principe ratified the African
 Charter ofi Human and Peoples' Rights.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Sao Tome population is relatively homogeneous, and there
 have been no reports of policy discrimination on a tribal,
 regional, sex, or religious basis among Sao Tomean citizens.
 As energetic outsiders, Cape Verdeans in Sao Tome do suffer
 some informal discrimination.
 Women have constitutional assurances of equality, and several
 are active in public life. The President of the Popular
 (National) Assembly is a woman. There are at least two female
 members of the Central Committee of the party. Cultural
 factors, rather than legal restraints, limit the actual
 participation of women in government.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 Legislation requires that a minimum wage of approximately $55
 per month be paid to-workers. There were reports that workers
 at several cocoa estates were not-paid for several months or
 did not receive the minimum wage for an extended period of
 time. A legal minimum employment age of 18 years is apparently
 observed in practice. Basic occupational health and safety
 standards are contained in the Social Security Law of 1979.
 It is not known to what extent they are enforced.
 
 
 244
