 SAO TOME AND PRINCIPE*
 Sao Tome and Principe is a one-party state which has been
 headed by President Manuel Pinto da Costa since its
 independence from Portugal in 1975. He also leads the sole
 legal party, the Movement for the Liberation of Sao Tome and
 Principe (MLSTP), whose-Central Committee is the country's key
 policymaking body. Most of the Ministers and Ministers-
 Delegate in the 15-member Cabinet (headed by the Prime
 Minister) are members of the Central Committee. The country's
 legislative body, the Popular Assembly, acts only to ratify
 bills proposed by the President.
 A series of radical political reforms was endorsed by the
 MLSTP Central Committee and a widely attended national party
 conference in December,1989. The recommended changes include
 the establishment of a multiparty democracy, liberalization of
 the economy,-direct election of the President by universal
 suffrage,.the creation ofran-independent judiciary, and a
 guarantee of the Dight to strike. To be enacted, these
 reforms would require a rewriting of the party manifesto and
 national Constitution.
 The police.power is held by a 300-member.paramilitary Security
 Police Forge which reports to the Chief of Security Police in
 the Ministry of Defense. Sao Tome's small armed forces are
 supplemented by,450 Angolan soldiers, who have been present on
 Sao Tome since a'1978 invasion threat and who help guard the
 airport and other strategic locations. There are approximately
 40 Cuban technical security advisers. Sao Tomean armed
 forces, acting with the help of the Angolan troops,
 -successfully repulsed a March 1988 invasion attempt by 43
 mostly unarmed icommandqs," part of an exile group located in
 Portugal.
 Since 1984 the Government has moved away from Marxist-Leninist
 economic practices and sought help from Western nations and
 international institutions to help reinvigorate the economy.
 Previous inefficient, state-directed agricultural practices
 and policies, combined with a birth rate of about 3 percent,
 had resulted in serious need for international food
 assistance,'primarily from the United Nations' World Food
 Program. President Pinto da Costa reorganized his Government
 in January 1988 to try tocope more effectively with the
 continuing economic crisis and to implement reforms being
 negotiated with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the
 World Bank., One key aspect of the economic reforms is a land
 distribution:-plan which will allow individual farmers and
 cooperatives to obtain multiyear leases to farmland.
 Human rights-are tightly circumscribed in Sao Tome and
 Principe.- Principal problem areas include: the use of
 incommuncado- detention; restrictions on freedom of speech and
 press, assembly and association, and the right of citizens to
 change their government; and .limitations on worker rights.
 The Government publicly committed itself in 1988 to permit due
 -,process, including an open trial, for the 41 commandos
 detained after the coup attempt. The trial ended in September
 with four of the accused acquitted and the remainder sentenced
 to jail terms ranging from 2 to 22 years.
 *There is no American Embassy in Sao Tome and Principe.
 Information on the human rights situation is therefore limited.
 
 
 292
 SAO TOME AND PRINCIPE
 xESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no reports of such killings by the Government in
 1989.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 There is little information available on this subject. Prison
 conditions are known to be severe. Amnesty International (AI)
 made a special appeal to the Government in 1988 expressing
 concern about possible mistreatment of the arrested
 commandos. AI reported that the detainees were held
 incommunicado for a lengthy period, without access to family
 or legal counsel, although families ultimately were allowed
 access to the prisoners. The authorities claimed that none of
 the detainees had been ill-treated while in custody.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 There is very little information available on the laws
 regulating arrest and detention or the manner in which the
 authorities carry out these powers. Political/security cases
 normally come under the jurisdiction of the Special Court for
 Counterrevolutionary Acts established in 1975. In these
 cases, suspects may be held for 30 days for interrogation
 before being released or charged. In actual practice, the
 Government can detain security suspects for much longer
 periods, without charge and usually incommunicado, as in the
 case of the commandos arrested in 1988.
 At the end of 1989, the number of political detainees still
 being held was unknown but was believed to be small. It is
 known that in addition to the commandos, several other people
 were arrested in the wake of the coup attempt and presumably
 they were tried in 1989 with the others (see Section l.e.).
 Fears that the Government might use the "invasion" as an
 excuse for wide-scale arrests of suspected government critics
 did not materialize.
 Carlos da Graca, former Minister of Health, accepted President
 Pinto da Costa's standing invitation to return home in 1988
 and subsequently was named Foreign Minister. Former Prime
 Minister Miguel Trovoada and several lesser known government
 opponents still remain in self-exile.
 With regard'to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Justice is administered at the highest level by the Supreme
 Tribunal, named by and responsible to the Popular Assembly.
 Thus the judiciary's independence is limited. Lower tribunals
 are appointed to try military cases. In most cases, common
 criminals are given a hearing and are sentenced by a judge.
 There is no tradition of independent defense counsel or jury.
 
 
 293
 SAO TOME AND PRINCIPE
 The Constitution-does not address the right to a public trial,
 but there-have been instances of public trials in recent
 years. -Crimifial trials occasionally are reported by the local
 media.
 The trial of 41 persons accused of involvement in the*1988
 coup attempt took place in 1989 before the Special Court for
 ,Counterrevolutionary Acts. The defendants had access to legal
 counsel, and-the trial was open to the public, including the
 -government-controlled press. In September the Court acquitted
 four persons and sentenced the others to prison terms from 2
 to 22 years.. There was no information available on appeal
 procedures.
 f: Arbitrary-Iaterference.with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Gorreapofidence
 The Government seeks to identify- potential dissidents through
 a loosely 'organized system of informers and monitoring of
 political activities.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom-of-Speech and Press
 The national party conference in December was broadcast live
 by national radio and television and showed wide-ranging
 debate and at times sharp criticiam of the party and
 Government. Previous to this event, little public criticism
 of, or opposition to, the Government was tolerated.
 Sao Tome media, consisting of a television station, a radio
 station, and occasionally a newspaper, are government
 controlled and reflect faithfully the government and party
 line.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 These freedoms are strictly limited. Historically, political
 assembly and activity have been legal only within the context
 of the MLSTP'and its mass organizations. Since 1987, when the
 MLSTP Central Committee authorized a constitutional amendment
 permitting nonparty groups to propose candidates for election
 to the Popular Assembly, there has been an easing of assembly
 and association restrictions. Functions sponsored by cultural
 and social organizations require government authorization. In
 another recent development, cooperative and professional
 associations are now permitted with government approval.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Religious freedom is provided for in the Constitution, and the
 three majoY religious communities--Roman Catholic, Protestant,
 and Seventh-Day Adventist--are allowed to practice freely.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The geographic isolation and poverty of this country severely
 limit foreign travel by its citizens. The Government closely
 controls exit visas for the few people who travel--almost
 exclusively those on government missions or medical evacuation
 
 
 294
 SAO TOME AND PRINCIPE
 trips. Citizens move freely around and between the island of
 Sao Tome and the smaller island of Principe, 90 miles away.
 Because interisland transport is only by slow ferry or twice
 weekly propeller airplane, such travel is difficult. Many Sao
 Tomeans live in Gabon and Angola, due mostly to the lack of
 employment opportunities on the islands.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: the Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Goyernment
 Citzens did not have the right to change their government
 through democratic means in 1989. However, prospects for a
 pluralist democracy appeared to be enhanced by the December
 1989 recommendations of the Central Committee and national
 party congress to establish a multiparty system. To maintain
 his leadership position, the President requires the support of
 a majority of the MLSTP Central Committee, a group which
 represents diverse economic and political ideologies.
 Government policy is formulated by President Pinto da Costa in
 consultation with the Prime Minister and other key cabinet and
 security officials.
 Following changes in the party constitution proposed in
 October 1987, the MLSTP now encourages multicandidate
 elections for Popular Assembly seats and direct election by
 secret ballot of the President of the Republic (previously,
 election was by vote of the members of the Popular Assembly).
 All candidates must still be approved by the MLSTP, although
 they need not be party members. Elections of the President
 and the members of the Popular Assembly are held every 5
 years, most recently in September 1985.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Sao Tome and Principe is an isolated nation with little
 outside contact. The Government reacted positively--promising
 and delivering an open trial for the perpetrators of the coup
 attempt--to Amnesty International's 1988 appeal for the
 well-being of, and due process for, those arrested invaders.
 No groups in the country are known to monitor human rights
 developments. Sao Tome is a member of the U.N. Commission on
 Human Rights.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Sao Tomean population (94,000 on Sao Tome, 20,000 on
 Principe) is relatively homogeneous in a common Luso-African
 culture. There have been no reports of political
 discrimination on a tribal, regional, sexual, or religious
 basis. Sao Tome citizens of Cape Verdean origin are regarded
 as overly ambitious, and there is resentment of them by the
 rest of the populace. The inhabitants of Principe often feel
 neglected by the central Government, an attitude accentuated
 by the current economic crisis.
 Like men, women face drudgery and low wages on the large cocoa
 plantations. Only a small number of women have gained access
 to professional positions. Violence against women in Sao Tome
 and Principe is believed to be infrequent and is not part of
 the traditional social context. The few incidents reported
 from time to time generally are presented within the context
 of domestic disputes. There is no information on the
 
 
 295
 SAO TOME AND'PRINCIPE
 frequency of wife beating or other forms of domestic
 violence. As far as is knownk the Government has not
 addressed this issue publicly.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The right of association is restricted. The sole trade union
 exists mainly on paper. The National Organization of Workers
 of Sao Tome and Principe was formed in September 1989, but
 little is known of it apart from the fact that it is
 affiliated with the MLSTP. Most salaried workers in the
 country are on the large state-owned empresas (plantation-like
 agricul-tural enterprises) and do not often leave the estate,
 which includes all community facilities.
 There is no explicit legislation forbidding strikes, but no
 strikes have been held, although the new political reforms,
 when implemented, would legalize the right to strike. Sao
 Tome and Principe joined the International Labor Organization
 in 1982 but has not yet ratified either Convention 87 on
 Freedom of Association or Convention 98 on the Right to
 Organize and Bargain Collectively. The sole trade union
 organization is nominally affiliated to the Organization of
 African Trade Union Unity.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 There is no information currently available on whether
 collective bargaining is legally permitted, but the Government
 is the determining force in setting wages and working
 conditions. Because of mismanagement, neglect, and
 unproductivity of state-run empresas, workers are sometimes
 not paid salaries for up to 6 months. Labor legislation and
 practice are uniform throughout the country, and there are no
 export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Thgxe is no forced or compulsory labor, which is prohibited by
 law.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 A legal minimum employment age of 18 years in the modern wage
 economy is generally respected in practice. However, in the
 subsistence agricultural sector, children work on family plots
 at all ages.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The beginning basic salary for an empresa worker is about $34
 per month, with the median salary about $50 per month. These
 wages are not sufficient to provide a decent living for
 workers and their families. The empresa workers survive by
 running up debts at the company store, which are deducted from
 their "paper" wages. Workers are provided free (but very
 poor) housing, rudimentary medical care, and access to the
 subsidized company store. The standard workweek is 40 hours.
 The implementation of a structural adjustment program (backed
 by the World Bank) has led to measures such as a sharp
 devaluation of the currency and reductions in food subsidies
 which have caused short-term economic hardships for empresa
 
 
 296
 SAO TOME AND PRXNCIPE
 workers and others. A few state-owned- farms-are now under
 private management, and the conditions of workers on these
 estates is slowly improving as cocoa production increases and
 modern management techniques replace Socialist collective
 farming.
 Basic occupational health and safety standards are contained
 in the Social Security Law of 1979. It is not known to what
 extent they are enforced.
 
 
 297
