 SAO TOME AND PRINCIPE*
 Sao Tome and Principe is a one-party state led by President
 Manuel Pinto da Costa since winning its independence from
 Portugal in 1975. He also leads its sole legal party, the
 Movement for the Liberation of Sao Tome and Principe (MLSTP),
 whose Central Committee is the key policymaking body. Most of
 the Ministers and Ministers-Delegate in the 12-member Cabinet
 (headed by the Prime Minister) are members of the Central
 Committee. The Popular Assembly is the country's, legislative
 body and acts to ratify bills proposed by the President. In
 the postindependence period, the MLSTP prevailed over a more
 radical group, the Civic Association, some of whose members
 went into exile.
 The 300-member paramilitary Security Police Force reports to
 the Chief of Security Police in the Ministry of Defense. Sao
 Tome's small armed forces are supplemented by 300 Angolan
 soldiers, who have been present on Sao Tome since a 1978
 invasion threat and who help guard the airport and other
 strategic locations. There are now less than 50 Cuban
 technical advisers. Sao Tomean armed forces, acting without
 the help of the Angolan troops, successfully repulsed a March
 invasion attempt by 42 mostly unarmed "commandos," part of an
 exile group located in Portugal, who landed on Sao Tome
 expecting the island's population to rise up against the
 Government. They were quickly defeated.
 In 1984 the Government, recognizing that Marxist-Leninist
 economic practices had brought the economy to ruin, turned to
 Western nations and international financial and development
 institutions to help reinvigorate the economy. Previous
 inefficient, state-directed agricultural practices and
 policies, combined with a birth rate of about 3 percent, had
 resulted in serious food shortages and the need for food
 assistance, primarily from the United Nations' World Food
 Program. President Pinto da Costa reorganized his Government
 in January to try to cope more effectively with the continuing
 economic crisis and to implement reforms being negotiated with
 the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank. One
 key aspect of the economic reforms is a land privatization
 plan which will turn state-owned plantation land back to
 private farmers.
 Human rights are tightly circumscribed in Sao Tome and
 Principe. Constitutional changes begun in 1987 may broaden
 political participation somewhat. For example, organizations
 other than the MLSTP will be allowed to run candidates for the
 Popular Assembly elections. The Government also moved in 1988
 to include some of the former exile leaders, notably the
 present Foreign Minister, Dr. Carlos da Graca. The Government
 publicly committed itself in 1988 to permit due process,
 including an open trial, for the 40 commandos detained-after
 the coup attempt. The trial had not begun by the end of the
 year.
 *There is no American Embassy in Sao Tome. Information on the
 human rights situation is therefore limited.
 
 
 280
 SAO TOME AND PRINCIPE
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no reports of political killings by the
 Government. However, two commandos were killed by security
 forces during the March 8 invasion.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 There is little information available on this subject. Prison
 conditions are known to be severe. Amnesty International (AI)
 made a special appeal to the Government in 1988 expressing
 concern about possible mistreatment of the arrested
 commandos. About 20 of the detainees were interviewed on
 television a-few days after the arrests, and many viewers
 observed that the face of one of the commando leaders appeared
 bruised and swollen. AI reported that the detainees were held
 incommunicado, without access to family or legal counsel.
 Since spring, families have had access to prisoners.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The 40 opposition commandos are in prison awaiting trial. The
 Foreign Minister told the press in September that these
 persons would be brought to trial soon, that they would be
 provided defense counsel, and that the trial would be open to
 the press. However, at the end of 1988 the trial had not
 begun. Several other people also were arrested in the wake of
 the coup attempt, but fears that the Government might use the
 "invasion" as an excuse for-wide-scale arrests of government
 critics did not materialize.
 With the return to Sao Tome of Carlos da Graca, former
 Minister of Health and currently Foreign Minister, one of the
 country's two most important exile figures has accepted
 President Pinto da Costa's standing invitation to return to
 the islands. Former Prime Minister Miguel Trovoada and many
 lesser known government opponents still remain in self-exile.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Justice is administered at the highest level by the Supreme
 Tribunal, named by and responsible to the Popular Assembly.
 Thus the judiciary's independence is limited. Lower tribunals
 are appointed to try military cases. The Constitution does
 not address the right to a public trial, but there have been
 instances of public trials in recent years. Criminal trials
 occasionally are reported by the local media. In most cases,
 common criminals are given a hearing and are sentenced by a
 judge. There is no tradition of independent defense counsel
 or jury.
 
 
 281
 SAO TOME AND PRINCIPE
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Government ensures that potential dissidents are
 identified through a loosely organized system of informers and
 monitoring of political activities.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 No public criticism of, or opposition, to the Government is
 tolerated, but MLSTP Central Committee members have criticized
 government policies and personalities in closed sessions.
 These criticisms rapidly become public knowledge after the
 sessions, with no apparent adverse consequences for the
 critics. Sao Tome media, consisting of a television station,
 a radio station, and occasionally a newspaper, are government
 controlled and reflect faithfully the government and party
 line.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 These freedoms are limited. Historically, political assembly
 and activity have been legal only within the context of the
 MLSTP. Since October 1987, there has been an easing of
 assembly and association requirements. The MLSTP Central
 Committee authorized a constitutional amendment permitting
 nonparty groups to propose candidates for election to the
 Popular Assembly, which may lead to more open discussions and
 meetings. Functions sponsored by cultural and social
 organizations require government authorization.  In another
 recent development, cooperative and professional associations
 are now permitted with government approval.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Religious freedom is provided for in the Constitution. The
 three major religious communities--Roman Catholic, Protestant,
 and Seventh-Day Adventist--are allowed to practice freely.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The geographic isolation and poverty of this island country
 severely limit foreign travel by its citizens. The Government
 closely controls exit visas for the few people who
 travel--almost exclusively those on government missions or
 medical evacuation trips. Citizens move freely around and
 between the island of Sao Tome and the smaller island of
 Principe, 90 miles away. But the lack of interisland
 transport (by slow ferry or twice-a-week propeller plane)
 makes such travel difficult. Many Sao Tomeans live in Gabon
 and Angola, due mostly to the lack of employment opportunities
 on the islands.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The present one-party political system does not accord
 citizens the right to change their government through the
 electoral process. Political power is exercised by the ruling
 
 
 282
 SAO TOME AND PRINCIPE
 sole political party, the Movement for the Liberation of Sao
 Tome and Principe (MLSTP), and its leader, Sao Tome President
 Manuel Pinto da Costa. To maintain his leadership position,
 the President requires the support of a majority of the MLSTP
 Central Committee, a group which represents diverse economic
 and political ideologies and can be fractious on occasion.
 Government policy is formulated by President Pinto da Costa in
 consultation with the Prime Minister and other key cabinet and
 security officials.
 Following changes in the party constitution proposed in
 October 1987, the MLSTP now encourages multicandidate
 elections for Popular Assembly seats and direct election of
 the President of the Republic (previously election was by vote
 of the members of the Popular Assembly) by secret ballot. All
 candidates must still be approved by the MLSTP. Elections of
 the President and the members of the Popular Assembly are held
 every 5 years. The last elections were held in September 1985.
 Two women hold important positions in the Government--
 the President of the Popular Assembly and Minister of
 Education and Culture. However, in general women play a
 limited role in political life.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Sao Tome is an isolated nation with little outside contact.
 The Government reacted postively--promising an open trial for
 the invaders--to Amnesty International's 1988 appeal for the
 well-being of, and due process treatment for the arrested
 commandos. No groups in the country are known to monitor
 human rights developments. Sao Tome is a member of the U.N.
 Commission on Human Rights.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Sao Tomean population (94,000 on Sao Tome, 20,000 on
 Principe) is relatively homogeneous in a common Luso-African
 culture. There have been no reports of political
 discrimination on a tribal, regional, sexual, or religious
 basis. Sao Tome citizens of Cape Verdean origin are regarded
 as overly ambitious, and there is resentment of them by the
 rest of the populace. The inhabitants of Principe often feel
 neglected by the central Government, an attitude accentuated
 by the current economic crisis.
 Like men, women face drudgery and low wages on the large cocoa
 plantations. A disproportionately small number of women have
 gained access to government and professional positions.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The right of association is restricted. The sole trade union
 is affiliated with the party and exists mainly on paper. Most
 salaried workers in the country are on the large state-owned
 empresas (plantation-like agricultural enterprises) and
 generally do not leave the estate, which includes all
 community facilities.
 
 
 283
 SAO TOME AND PRINCIPE
 There is no explicit legislation forbidding strikes, but no
 strikes have been held, and it is doubtful that strikes would
 be permitted by the Government. Sao Tome and Principe is a
 member of the International Labor Organization (ILO) but does
 not always send worker delegations to ILO conferences.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 There is no information currently available on whether
 collective bargaining is legally permitted, but the Government
 is the determining force in setting wages and working
 conditions. Because of mismanagement, neglect, and
 unproductivity of state-run empresa, workers are sometimes not
 paid salaries for up to 6 months.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 There is no forced or compulsory labor.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 A legal minimum employment age of 18 years is observed,
 although children perform agricultural work on family plots.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The beginning basic salary for an empresa worker is about $34
 per month, with the median salary being around $50 per month.
 These wages are not sufficient to provide a decent living for
 workers and their families. The empresa workers survive by
 running up debts at the company store, which are deducted from
 their "paper" wages. Workers are provided free (but very
 poor) housing, rudimentary medical care, and access to the
 subsidized company store. Implementation of IMF-imposed
 measures (such as devaluation of the currency and reductions
 in food subsidies) will make the empresa workers situation
 even more difficult in the short run. However, a few empresa
 have been turned over to private entrepreneurs, and the
 condition of workers on these estates is slowly improving as
 cocoa production increases and modern management techniques
 replace Socialist collective farming.
 Basic occupational health and safety standards are contained
 in the Social Security law of 1979. It is not known to what
 extent they are enforced.
 
 
 284
