 SAO TOME AND PRINCIPE*
 In 1990 the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe, a
 small island country off the West Coast of Africa, continued
 to be ruled by President Pinto da Costa and the leadership of
 the Movement for the Liberation of Sao Tome and Principe
 (MLSTP), formerly the sole legal party. Most of the current
 Ministers and Ministers-Delegate in the 15-member Cabinet
 (headed by the Prime Minister) are also members of the MLSTP
 Central Committee. The country's legislative body, the
 Popular Assembly, has acted largely to ratify bills proposed
 by the President, although the role of the Assembly may change
 in the near future. Responding to pressures for change,
 inspired in part by moves toward political liberalization in
 1990 in other parts of the world, the President took a number
 of concrete steps during the year to move the country from a
 single-party state to a multiparty system of government. As a
 result, a new Constitution providing for fundamental human
 rights was drafted and approved by a wide margin in a national
 referendum in August. The MLSTP relinquished its status as
 sole political party, and multiparty legislative and
 presidential elections were scheduled for January and March
 1991, respectively.
 Police power is administered by a 300-member paramilitary
 Security Police Force which reports to the Chief of Security
 Police in the Ministry of Defense. Sao Tome's small armed
 forces have been supplemented since 1978 by between 450 and
 600 Angolan soldiers, who help guard the airport and other
 strategic locations. There are approximately 45 Cuban
 security, education, and development advisers in the country.
 Since 1984 the Government has moved away from Marxist-Leninist
 economic practices and sought help from Western nations and
 especially the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World
 Bank to help reinvigorate the economy. Economic reforms
 include a land distribution plan that allows individual
 farmers and cooperatives to obtain multiyear leases to
 farmland. The Government has been slow to implement the
 program, but some farmers have obtained title to multiyear
 leases on land previously held by the State. In addition,
 several former state farms are now being managed by private
 expatriate or nongovernmental organizations.
 The movement toward a more open and representative political
 system in 1990 provided the potential for a greatly improved
 human rights climate. While this transition, thus far
 incomplete, has been carefully orchestrated from the top, it
 has set in motion potentially far-reaching changes, now
 incorporated as principles in the new 1990 Constitution, e.g.,
 in specifying an independent judicial system and strengthened
 worker rights, including the right to strike. If faithfully
 adhered to, the new Constitution will provide a wide array of
 internationally recognized human rights. The President
 granted amnesty to the 39 persons convicted in 1989 for
 involvement in the 1988 coup attempt.
 There is no American Embassy in Sao Tome and Principe.
 Information on the human rights situation is therefore limited.
 
 
 311
 SAO TOME AND PRINCIPE
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no reports of political or other extrajudicial
 killing by the Government in 1990.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 The new Constitution states explicitly that no one shall be
 subjected to torture or cruel and inhuman punishment. While
 there is little information available on this-subject, there
 were no reports of such abuses in 1990. Prison conditions are
 known to be severe.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 There is very little information available on the laws
 regulating arrest and detention or the manner in which the
 authorities carry out these provisions. In past
 political/security cases, suspects could be held legally for
 30 days for interrogation before being released or charged.
 In actual practice, the Government detained security suspects
 .for much longer periods, without charge and usually
 incommunicado, as in the case of the commandos arrested in
 1988.
 Miguel Trovoada, former Prime Minister, accepted President
 Pinto da Costa's invitation to return home in May 1990 to
 participate in the multiparty democratic process. Trovoada
 became the primary opponent to Pinto da Costa in the
 presidential election. Some lesser known government opponents
 still remain in self-exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The new Constitution states that all citizens, regardless of
 economic means, have the right of access to the courts for any
 action that violates rights recognized by the Constitution.
 In most cases, common criminals are given a hearing and are
 sentenced by a judge. There is no tradition of independent
 defense counsel or jury. Article 106 states that all trials
 are public, and there have been instances of public trials in
 recent years. Criminal trials occasionally are reported by
 the local media.
 Articles 103 and 104 of the new Constitution state that the
 courts are sovereign, independent organs. In the past the
 .courts have not been independent in political/security cases,
 and it remains to be seen if the 1990 political reforms will
 lead to an independent judiciary. The Government in February
 1989 did abolish the Special Court for Counter Revolutionary
 Acts, a positive step.
 The 1989 trial of 41 persons accused of involvement in the
 1988 coup attempt took place before the Higher Court of
 
 
 312
 SAO TOME AND PRINCIPE
 Appeal. The defendants had access to legal counsel, and the
 trial was open to the public and the government-controlled
 press. In September 1989, the Court acquitted 4 persons and
 sentenced the 37 others to prison terms from 2 to 22 years.
 The President subsequently granted unconditional amnesty in
 April 1990 to the 37. Amnesty International, in its 1990
 report, criticized the trial as falling short of international
 standards as they had no right of appeal. With the release of
 those convicted for participation in the 1988 coup attempt,
 there were, at the end of 1990, no known political detainees
 or~prisoners still being held.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The new Constitution states that personal identity and the
 right to privacy are inviolate and provides for privacy of the
 home, correspondence, and private communication. In the past
 the Government has monitored political activities and sought
 to identify potential dissidents through a loosely organized
 system of informers.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The new Constitution provides for freedom of expression and
 freedom of the press.   In practice, there was improvemint in
 these areas in 1990. The constitutional referendum in August
 received extensive publicity throughout the country, and the
 December 1989 national party conference was broadcast live by
 national radio and television. The latter showed wide-ranging
 debate and at times sharp criticism of the party and
 Government. The Sao Tome media, consisting of a television
 station, a radio station, and an intermittent newspaper, are
 government controlled and have generally reflected
 government/party policies. The press no longer automatically
 reflects the government and party line.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 These freedoms have been strictly limited in the past, but new
 constitutional provisions offered an improved climate in
 1990. The new Constitution states unequivocally that citizens
 have the right to meet peacefully anywhere, to demonstrate
 within the provisions of the law, and freely to form
 associations, noting that no citizen can be forced to belong
 to an association, or forced to remain in one. The August
 constitutional referendum and subsequent multiparty electoral
 process in late 1990 involved many meetings of different
 groups, including those opposed to the Government.
 Functions sponsored by cultural and social organizations, as
 well as cooperative and professional associations, still
 require government authorization.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Religious freedom is provided for in the new Constitution, and
 the three major religious communities--Roman Catholic,
 Protestant, and Seventh-Day Adventist--are allowed to practice
 freely.
 
 
 SAO TOME AND PRINCIPE
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Under the new Constitution citizens have the right to move
 freely to any part of the national territory and are free to
 emigrate and to return. However, the geographic isolation and
 poverty of the country severely limit foreign travel by its
 citizens. The Government has closely controlled exit visas
 for the few people who travel-almost exclusively those on
 government missions or medical evacuation trips. Citizens
 move freely around and between the island of Sao Tome and the
 smaller island of Principe, 90 miles away. Because
 interisland transport is only by slow ferry or twice weekly
 propeller airplane, such travel is difficult. Many Sao
 Tomeans live in Gabon and Angola, due mostly to the lack of
 employment opportunities on the islands.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Despite the promulgation of a new constitution and legislation
 providing for democratic pluralism, at the end of 1990
 citizens-still had not exercised the right to change their
 government through democratic means. However, multiparty
 legislative and presidential elections are scheduled for
 January and March 1991. Included in the new Constitution are
 provisions for free and fair elections by secret ballot,
 universal suffrage, a limit of two 5-year terms for the
 President, unlimited 4-year terms for Assembly members, an
 independent judiciary, the right to strike, and the freedom of
 expression, religion, and assembly. It remained to be seen,
 however, whether the Assembly would be able to exercise
 authority independent of the executive. In November President
 da Costa announced that he would not stand for reelection. By
 the end of the year three major political groups had been
 registered and had put forward- candidates to contest the
 elections.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Sao Tome and Principe is an isolated nation with limited
 outside contact. In 1988 the Government received an Amnesty
 International delegation concerned about due process for those
 arrested in conjunction with the failed invasion and coup
 plot. No groups in the country are known to monitor human
 rights developments.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Sao Tomean population (94,000 on Sao Tome, 20,000 on
 Principe) is relatively homogeneous in a common Luso-African
 culture. The new Constitution states that all citizens are
 equal before the law regardless of sex, race, social origin,
 political tendency, creed or philosophic conviction, and that
 women are equal to men in rights and duties, with the right to
 full participation in political, economic, social, and
 cultural life.
 The inhabitants of Principe often feel neglected by the
 central Government, an attitude accentuated by the current
 economic crisis.
 
 
 SAO TOME AND PRINCIPE
 Like men, women face drudgery and low wages on the large cocoa
 plantations. Only a small number of women have gkined access
 to political or professional positions. Violence against
 women in Sao Tome and Principe is believed to be infrequent
 and is not part of the traditional social context. However,
 there is no specific information available on the frequency of
 wife beating or other forms of domestic violence. The few
 incidents reported from time to time generally are presented
 within the context of domestic disputes. Police rarely
 intervene in such disputes, and as far as is known, apart from
 granting women equal rights in Article 14 of the new
 Constitution, the Government has not addressed publicly the
 issue of violence against women. There is an active women's
 organization, the Organizacio das Mulheres de STP (OMSTP).
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Notwithstanding provisions of the new Constitution, the sole
 trade union presently exists mainly on paper. The National
 Organization of Workers of Sao Tome and Principe was formed in
 September 1989, but little information is available on its
 activities apart from the fact that it is affiliated with the
 MLSTP. Most salaried workers in the country work on the large
 state-owned empresas (plantation-like agricultural
 enterprises) and do not often leave the estate, which
 generally provides all community facilities.
 The new Constitution provides for the right of workers to
 strike within the terms of the law, although no strikes took
 place in 1990. Sao Tome and Principe joined the International
 Labor Organization in 1982 but has not yet ratified either
 Convention 87 on Freedom of Association or Convention 98 on
 the Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively. The sole
 trade union organization is nominally a member of the
 Organization of African Trade Union Unity.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The new Constitution provides for the right of workers to
 organize, but it is not yet clear to what extent collective
 bargaining may now be legally permitted. There are no known
 laws preventing antiunion discrimination. The Government
 remains the determining force in setting wages and working
 conditions, and will likely retain this role for the immediate
 future. Because of mismanagement, neglect, and unproductivity
 of state-run empresas, workers are sometimes not paid salaries
 for up to 6 months. There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced or compulsory labor is prohibited by law and is not
 practiced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 A legal minimum employment age of 18 years in the modern wage
 economy is generally respected in practice. However, in the
 subsistence agricultural sector, children work on family plots
 from an early age.
 
 
 315
 SAO TOME AND-PRINCIPE
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The beginning basic salary for an empresa worker is about $34
 per month, with the median salary about $50 per month. These
 wages are not sufficient to provide a decent living for
 workers and their families. Empresa workers survive by
 running up debts at the company store, which are deducted from
 their "paper" wages. Workers are provided free (but poor)
 housing, rudimentary medical care, and access to the
 subsidized company store. The standard workweek is 40 hours.
 The implementation of a Structural Adjustment Program (backed
 by the World Bank) has led to measures such as a sharp
 devaluation of the currency and reductions in food subsidies
 which have caused short-term economic hardships for empresa
 workers and others. A number of state-owned farms are now
 under private management, and the conditions of workers on
 these estates is slowly improving as cocoa production
 increases and modern management techniques replace Socialist
 collective farming.
 Basic occupational health and safety standards are contained
 in the Social Security Law of 1979. It is not known to what
 extent they are enforced.
 
 
 316
