 SAO TOME AND PRINCIPE
 Sao Tome and Principe is one of the newest nations in
 Africa, having received its independence from Portugal
 in July 1975. It is a mini-state with only 372 square
 miles of island territory and approximately 75,000 people.
 Government officials are practically on a first-name
 basis with most citizens. The Portuguese kept the
 islands isolated from the rest of the world during five
 centuries of colonial rule, and there-was little violence
 or political oppression prior to independence. The new
 government has benefited from this relatively peaceful
 transition to nationhood and has instituted a tranquil
 single-party political system which protects most inter-
 nationally recognized human rights.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
 a. Torture
 There is no evidence that torture is used in Sao Tome
 and Principe.
 b. Cruel, inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 We have no evidence that such treatment or punishment
 occurs.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 There are no reports and no evidence of arbitrary arrest
 or imprisonment.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 There are no indications that a fair public trial is
 denied to citizens of Sao Tome and Principe.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 According to the best information available, invasion of
 the home is not practiced.
 
 
 98
 2. Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfill-
 ment of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health
 Care and Education
 The government of Sao Tome and Principe is consciously
 socialist and its Marxist economic policies, in the
 judgment of some observers, risk damaging its efforts
 to provide the basic needs for food, shelter, health
 care and education. The government is attempting to
 reorganize and reform the economy but has severely
 limited resources. The nationalization of the agri-
 cultural sector couldthereforeresult in economic
 decline. However, the government appears to be moti-
 vated by ideological concerns and is unlikely to be
 dissuaded from its "revolutionary" program by imple-
 mentation problems. Sao Tome and Principe has been
 promised a large amount of economic assistance from a
 number of countries, but it is still unclear how much
 of this aid will actually be forthcoming.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion and
 Assembly
 The constitution guarantees the basic freedoms of thought,
 religion and assembly, but political expression is
 limited by the country's single political party. The
 press is government-controlled. Assembly for political
 purposes must have the sanction of the ruling party.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 The standard exit visa requirement and the physical iso-
 lation of the islands are the only barriers to move-
 ment out of the country, including emigration. There
 are no known controls on internal travel.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 All political activity is controlled by the Movement for
 the Liberation of Sao Tome and Principe (MLSTP), the
 country's single party. Former members of the now dis-
 
 
 99
 banded opposition groups remain in the country and
 apparently suffer no prejudicial treatment at the
 hands of the government. Several political opponents
 of the government are thought to be in exile in Angola,
 but President Da Costa has announced publicly that the
 exiles are free to return whenever they wish.
 The President is elected by the Popular Assembly from a
 list of candidates named by the MLSTP. Under the
 constitution, the Assembly is the supreme organ of the
 state, and legislators are elected for a period of four
 years by universal suffrage.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-Governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 We are not aware that any outside groups have sought to
 investigate conditions.
 
 
