 SAO TOME AND PRINCIPE*
 In 1991 Sao Tome and Principe became a multiparty democracy, and citizens
 changed their government through free and fair elections. Independent candidate
 Miguel Trovoada became President, and the Party of Democratic Convergence (PCD)
 top pled the former single ruling party, the Movement for the Liberation of Sao Tome
 and Principe (MLSTP), in legislative elections to win control of the Government. In
 1993 the   D continued to dominate the Government and the National Assembly,
 but there were new political tensions between the two parties and between the
 President and the PCD Prime Minister and his Government over interpretation of
 the separation of powers provisions in the 1990 Constitution. In December 1992, the
 MLSTP came back to score a series of landslide victories in municipal elections, tak-
 ing firm control of six of eight regional governing bodies. The elections took place
 peacefully, and, after some initial disputes over transfer of government offices, the
 municipal committees began to work alongside the Government.
 External and internal securty is provided by a 300-person military force, com-
 posed mainly of part-time farmers or fishermen, and a 300-person paramilitary po-
 lice force. In 1993 the Government began a process of shifting the polie force fore
 the jurisdiction of the Minister of Defense to the Minister of Justice, Labor and
 Public Administration. There were no reports of abuses by military or police forces
 in 1993.
 In contrast to progress on the political front, there was little improvement in 1993
 in Sao Tome's export economy, which relies almost exclusively on a single cash crop,
 cocoa, and an archaic, state-rn system of plantations (called "empresas"). Almost
 all other production on the islands is for subsistence or local consumption. In 1993
 the Government continued to implement strict structural adjustment measures, em-
 phasizingprivatization, including of empresas, and currency reform to reduce the
 country's $200 million foreign debt. However, by the end of 1993 only a handful of
 plantations had managed even the first small steps away from state control, and
 the structural adjustment program tended to exacerbate economic hardship.
 The human rigts situation continued to be encouraging in 1993. The Government
 showed a continued respect for the rights of its citizens, and the young multiparty
 political system operated well in the ace of new challenges. Nevertheless, there re-
 mained serious problems in the judicial system, notaby long delays in bringing
 cases to trial, and societal discrimination against women. Also, worker rights re-
 mained limited in practice with the economy dominated by the plantation system.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killing by the Government.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 There were no reports of such abuses. The Constitution, promulgated in 1990, states
 explicitly that no one shall be subjected to torture or cruel and inhuman punish-
 ment. Prison conditions are harsh but did not result in any known deaths in 1993.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-There was no evidence of arbitrary arrest
 or detention, but there was very little information available on the laws regulating
 these practices or the manner in which the authorities carry them out. The Con-
 *There is no American Embassy in Sao Tome and Principe. Information on the human rights
 situation is therefore limited.
 
 
 stitution provides for the right to challenge the legality of detention through habeas
 corpus procedures.
 Exile is not used as a punishment in Sao Tome, and all those exiled under the
 former regime have been given the opportunity to return. Former president Manuel
 Pinto da Costa, who voluntarily left the country following current President
 Trovoada's election in 1991, returned in 1993. He was warmly received and was
 often seen in public.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-For civil cases, the Constitution states that all
 citizens shall have access to fair public trial and have the right of appeal. For crimi-
 nal cases, it provides for a public trial before a judge. The accused are entitled to
 legal representation; however, there is a shortage of trained judges, lawyers, and
 judicial infrastructure. The Government has been slow to institute reform, in part
 ecause of budgetary constraints. As a result, there are long delays in bringing
 cases before the courts, and there were instances in 1993 of the authorities simply
 dismissing criminal cases. In at least two confirmed cases, the Government did not
 bring to trial persons charged with assault because of insufficient personnel to con-
 duct proper investigations.
 There were no known political prisoners or detainees held during the year.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution states that personal identity and the right to privacy are inviolable; it
 provides for privacy of the home, correspondence, and private communication. In
 1991 the new democratically elected Government ended the intrusive monitoring
 practices of the past.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of expres-
 sion and freedom of the press. The 1992 municipal elections were conducted freely,
 with opposition parties publicly campaigning and openly criticizing the Government.
 The opposition had access to, but used sparingly, the limited facilities of the govern-
 ment-controlled national television and radio stations. Three newspapers appeared
 irregularly; one newspaper presents mainly the views of the Government and the
 others generally support opposition positions. There was one report in 1993 of a
 minister warning an independent publisher about the content of certain critical arti-
 cles. However, the Government took no action against the publisher and did not at-
 tempt to censor the newspaper.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Under the Constitution, citi-
 zens have the right to associate freely and to demonstrate publicly, provided they
 obtain legal authorization 48 hours in advance of planned events. This authorization
 is usually granted. Although bureaucratic delays often hold up such authorizations,
 there were no known instances of authorizations being withheld for purely political
 reasons in 1993. In December 1992, municipal elections took place nationwide; nu-
 merous rallies and demonstrations occurred, and even those that did not receive
 government sanction took place peacefully and without police restriction.
 Following its resounding victory in these elections, the MISTP took control of the
 newly created municipal committees in six of eight districts. The Government, under
 provisions in the Constitution, had called for formation of these municipal commit-
 tees in order to add a measure of decentralization to government administration,
 and the elections determined their first members. Tension arose in two districts-
 including Aguas Grandes, where Sao Tome City is located-when the police barri-
 caded buildings in which the committees were to meet. The committees, despite bit-
 ter complaints, were not afforded a place to meet for 2 months. In May, however,
 the PCD-controlled Government relented, and the committees began meeting regu-
 larly.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Religious freedom is provided for in the Constitution and
 in practice. The three major religious communities-Roman Catholic, Protestant,
 and Seventh-Day Adventist-are allowed to practice freely. There are no restrictions
 on the activities of foreign clergy.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Citizens move freely around the island of Sao Tome, as well as between
 it and the smaller island of Principe, 90 miles away. Interisland transport, however,
 is infrequent and slow. Under the Constitution, citizens have the specific right to
 move freely to any part of the national territory and are free to emigrate and to
 return. In July the Government repealed a law that required Sao Tomeans who
 wished to travel abroad to obtain exit visas.
 
 
 237
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have this right. Less than 2 years after ousting the MLSTP from power,
 Sao Tomean voters peacefully returned to the polls in December 1992 to give the
 former sin le ruling party an overwhelming victory in municipal elections. The
 MLSTP took the majority of seats in six of eight municipal districts, forming new
 committees that were designed to improve citizen participation in government ad-
 ministration at the village level.
 Throughout 1993 there were serious political differences between the opposition
 and the Government, initially when the PCD Government withheld budgets and re-
 fused to allow two of the MLSTP-dominated municipal committees to meet for 2
 months. In the National Assembly, the PCD Government of Prime Minister
 Norberto Costa Alegre defeated the MLSTPs efforts to institute a vote of no con-
 fidence. The disputes were conducted and resolved entirely within the existing con-
 stitutional framework.
 Other constitutional disputes arose in 1993, notably between the independent
 President and the PCD Prime Minister over authority for handling foreign and in-
 ternal economic policies. According to the findings of a panel of Portuguese jurists
 brought in to assist in interpreting the Constitution, foreign policy is solely the do-
 main of the Chief of State, while economic policy is the province of the Prime Min-
 ister and his Cabinet. Nevertheless, given the close interrelationship of the two re-
 sponsibilities, the controversy continued throughout much of the year and led to
 new discussions concerning amendment of the Constitution's separation of powers
 provisions. By year's end, however, there had been no action toward amending the
 Constitution.
 There are no restrictions in law or practice on the participation of women inpoli-
 tics. Women currently occupy important posts in the National Assembly, the Cabi-
 net, and the municipal committees.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Since the elections of 1991, a few small domestic groups have formed with various
 objectives including the protection of human and civi rights. Traditionally, Sao
 Tome and Principe has had limited contact with international human rights groups,
 mainly due to its small population and the absence of allegations of human rights
 abuses. In a report published in 1993, Amnesty International named Sao Tome and
 Principe as one of three countries worldwide in which there were no serious govern-
 ment-sponsored violations of human rights.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution states that all citizens, regardless of sex, race, social origin, po-
 litical tendency, creed, or philosophic conviction, are equal under the law. With more
 than 80 percent of the population (estimated at 94,000 on Sao Tome and 20,000 on
 Principe) able to understand Portuguese, the country also enjoys the advantages of
 being a relatively homogeneous society.
 Women.-The Constitution stipulates that women and men have equal rights to
 full political, economic, social, and cultural participation. Women have access to op-
 portunities in education, business, and government. However, in practice women en-
 counter substantial discrimination. In particular, traditional beliefs concerning the
 division of labor between men and women leave women with much of the hard labor
 in agriculture, most of the child-rearing responsibilities, and less access to education
 and the professions. In addition, the general lack of public services and health care
 serve to disadvantage women more than men in these traditional roles.
 Violence against women in Sao Tome and Principe is believed to be infrequent.
 However, there is no specific information available on domestic violence, including
 data on instances of wife-beating and rape, and the small media rarely cover caaes.
 Women have the right to legal recourse against men-including spouses-in cases
 of rape, domestic violence, and other abuses. In practice, however, police rarely in-
 tervene, and tradition and/or ignorance of the law may keep women from filing com-
 plaints or seeking outside intervention. The Government is actively trying to ad-
 dress women's issues through various programs.
 Children.-There are a number of government and donor-funded programs aimed
 at improving conditions for children, and great strides have been made in pre- and
 post-natal care, infant nutrition, and access to basic health services. Family plan-
 ning practices have not changed significantly, though, and Sao Tome may soon face
 more serious challenges to limited resources. According to recent estimates, nearly
 half the population is under the age of 15, and documented research in some rural
 
 
 238
 areas indicates the percentage may be as high as 75. According to health officials,
 the Government is beginning to make efforts to include family planning in its ma-
 ternal and child healt care programs, but traditional beliefs and cultural practices
 inhibit acceptance.
 National [Racial /Ethnic Minorities.-There are two minority groups which speak
 their own dialects: the Angolares, who are distant descendants of an Angolan ethnic
 group, and ethnic Cape Verdians, most of whom are second- or third-generation Cre-
 ole speakers. The Angolares principally inhabit the south of Sao Tome Island, mak-
 ing their living through subsistence fishing; the Cape Verdians still mainly work on
 the cocoa plantations, where they were brought by the Portuguese during colonial
 times. Both of these principally rural groups enjoy fewer opportunities in terms of
 health care, education, and social advancement than urban Sao Tomeans, although
 this is not due to any specific government action against them. Lack of government
 resources has also contributed to continuing complaints from inhabitants of Principe
 of governmental neglect. However, the newly named Minister for the Region of Prin-
 cipe-a cabinet-leve  st-has specifically addressed some of these issues.
 People with Disabi0ities.-There is no officially sanctioned discrimination against
 physically handicapped individuals. As far as known, there is no law specifically
 mandating accessibility to buildings for the disabled.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution provides for freedom of association
 and the right to strike, and a newly formed union federation, the Independent
 Union Federation (IUF), began to take advantage of these provisions. However, the
 formation of unions remained at an early stage, and in 1993 there was a significant
 increase in the activities of cooperatives, many of which began independent activi-
 ties on formerly state-owned land. These cooperatives tended to represent more tan-
 gible goals and results than unions, thus attracting greater participation on the part
 of plantation and other wage workers.
 Unrelated to the former sole union and unaffiliated with any political party, the
 IUF is still in its organizational stages and hobbled by the country's general pov-
 erty. Nevertheless, it seeks to represent workers in all sectors, including the large
 state-owned plantations (empresas) which employ a majority of the wor in   u-
 lation. It made only slight organizational progress in this respect in 1993. Workers
 do not often leave the estates, which generally provide all community facilities.
 Essential workers are allowed to strike in practice, and in November 1993, mid-
 level functionaries in the Ministries of Health and Justice briefly went on strike to
 demand higher wages.
 In 1992 the Government announced an ambitious p lan to privatize most of the
 state-owned industries, including the cocoa empresas. This move was seen as a posi-
 tive step not only for the economy as a whole, but also as part of the effort to im-
 prove the lot of workers, especially on the large plantations. At year's end, however,
 only one of these state-owned enterprises, the National Printing Press, had actually
 been p rivatized.
 In March workers at the largest state-run empresa, Monte Cafe, staged a strike
 to demand higher wages and more time off. Plantation managers requested govern-
 ment intervention, and there were reports of minor clashes between police and
 strikers. However, there were no reports of serious injuries or arrests, and, after 4
 days, work was resumed. Sporadic strikes by government employees were less com-
 mon in 1993 than in previous years.
 There are no restrictions barring trade unions from joining federations or becom-
 ing affiliated with international bodies.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectivelyt-Workers may organize and
 bargain collectively under the Constitution. However, in practice, since privatization
 steps have not yet reduced the relative role of the Government as em loyer, the
 Government remains the key interlocutor for labor on all matters, including wages.
 As far as is known, there are no laws prohibiting antiunion discrimination.
 Ther ae no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced or compulsory labor is pro-
 hibited by law and is not practiced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children-The legally mandated minimum
 employment age of 18 years in the modern wage economy is generally respected in
 practice. The Ministry of Justice, Labor, and Public Administration is responsible
 sor enforcing this law. However, in the subsistence agricultural sector, children work
 on family pots from an early age.
 e. Acceptable  Conditions of Work-Work      conditions  on  the state-owned
 em presas-the biggest wage employment sCctor-border on medieval. There is no le-
 gally mandated minimum wage, and the average salary for empresa workers does
 
 
 not permit a decent standard of living. Workers are, however, provided free (but
 poor) housing, rudimentary education and health care, and-in theory-the right to
 reduced prices and credit at the "company store." Clothes and foodstuffs are sub-
 sidized, but corruption at all levels is rampant, and the parallel market finds goods
 selling for far above the prices stipulated by the Government.
 Recently, in conjunction with the Government's privatization efforts, some
 empresas allotted workers small plots to raise noncash crops for their own consump-
 tion or sale. Nevertheless, most empresas still do not allow private farming on com-
 pany land. The current system of state control, and the corruption associated with
 it, is so entrenched that on most plantations, privatization is still a long way off.
 Implementation of an International Monetary Fund structural adjustment pro-
 gram continues to cause hardship for workers, both on and off the empresas.
 Basic occupational health and safety standards are contained in the Social Secu-
 rity Law of 1979 which is loosely enforced by inspectors from the Ministry of Jus-
 tice, Labor, and Public Administration.