 SAO TOME AND PRINCIPE
 The Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe is a multiparty democracy.
 The Government is composed of an executive branch and a unicameral legislature
 (the National Assembly). The President appoints the Prime Minister, who in turn
 appoints the ministers of the Government. Miguel Trovoada, leader of the Independ-
 ent Democratic Alliance (ADI), was reelected President in 1996 for a second 5-year
 term in an election deemed generally free and fair by international observers, de-
 spite allegations of an unconstitutional modification of the voter lists between the
 first and second rounds. In the November legislative elections, the Movement for the
 Liberation of Sao Tome and Principe (MLSTP) won an outright majority with 31 of
 55 seats, and holds all 10 seats in the Cabinet. The judiciary is independent.
 The Minister of National Defense, Security, and Internal Order supervises the
 military services and the police. Many members of the military are part-time farm-
 ers or fishermen. As the result of a military mutiny in 1995, the Government and
 international donors have dedicated resources to improving soldiers' living condi-
 tions.
 The economy is based on the export of a single product, cocoa, produced in an ar-
 chaic, state-run system of plantations called "empresas." The Government has
 privatized some of the state-held land but has had limited success in privatizing
 state-owned enterprises. The Government faltered in its efforts at structural adjust-
 ment, and the economy continues to face serious difficulties. The annual inflation
 rate is 60 percent, unemployment is 27 percent, total external debt is 6 times gross
 domestic product, and the country is highly dependent on foreign aid. Per capita in-
 come is less than $250 per year and the economy is, at best, stagnant.
 
 
 349
 The Government continued to respect the rights of its citizens. The principal
 human rights problems continued to be an inefficient judicial system, harsh prison
 conditions, discrimination and violence against women, and outdated plantation
 labor practices that limit worker rights.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits torture or cruel and inhuman punishment. There were
 no reports of violations during arrests or interrogations.
 Prison conditions are harsh but not life threatening. Human rights monitors are
 not known to have requested permission to make prison visits; it is believed the
 Government would permit such visits if requested.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution prohibits arbitrary ar-
 rest, detention, or exile, and the Government observes these prohibitions.
 Exile is not used as a punishment. All those exiled under the one-party regime
 of 1975-1990 are free to return and several prominent politicians have done so.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, and the judiciary has returned verdicts against both the President and the
 Government. The legal system is based on Portuguese and customary law with the
 Supreme Court at the apex. The Government has important powers relating to the
 judiciary, including setting salaries for judges and all ministerial employees in ac-
 cordance with standard government salary guidelines. Government salaries are ex-
 tremely low, and the authorities are concerned that judges may be tempted to ac-
 cept bribes. The authorities maintain that they continue to respect the independence
 of the judiciary.
 The Constitution provides for the right to fair public trial, the right of appeal, and
 the right to legal representation. In practice, however, the judicial infrastructure
 suffers from severe budgetary constraints, inadequate facilities, and a shortage of
 trained judges and lawyers, causing long delays in bringing cases to court and
 greatly hindering investigations in criminal cases.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, lome, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the integrity of the person and the right to privacy of
 home, correspondence, and private communication. The Government does not en-
 gage   in trusive practices, such as surveillance of persons or the monitoring of com-
 munications. The judicial police are responsible for criminal investigations and must
 obtain authorization from the Ministry of Justice to conduct searches.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of expres-
 sion and freedom of the press, and the Government generally respects these rights
 in practice. One government-run and three independent newspapers, and news-
 letters are published sporadically, usually on a monthly or bimonthly basis.
 Television and radio are state operated. While there are no independent local sta-
 tions, there are no laws forbidding them. The Voice of America, Radio International
 Portugal, and Radio France International rebroadcast locally. The law grants all op-
 position parties access to the state-run media, including a minimum of 3 minutes
 per month on television.
 All parties freely distribute newsletters and press releases giving their views and
 criticizing the Government, the President, and one another. There were no reports
 of government censorship or threats of censorship from any group, nor any reports
 of efforts by national security forces to suppress criticism.
 Academic freedom is respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 these rights, and the Government respects them in practice. The Government re-
 quires that requests for authorization for large-scale events be filed 48 hours in ad-
 vance and usually grants the appropriate permits.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-TheConstitution provides for religious freedom, and the
 Government respects this right in practice. Ther re no restrictions on the activi-
 ties of foreign ciergy.
 d. Freedom of Movement Wiithi e Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for these rights and the Government respects
 them in practice.
 
 
 350
 Authorities have traditionally welcomed those seeking refuge or asylum. No re-
 quests for first asylum were reported during the year but in theory the Government
 would be prepared to-grant such requests. There were no reports that persons were
 forced to return to a country where they feared persecution.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens exercised this right for the first time in 1991 in free and fair presidential
 and legislative elections, and subsequently in the 1994 and 1998 legislative elec-
 tions, and the 1996 presidential elections. These elections resulted in the peaceful
 transfer of power between political party coalitions. Voter participation has exceeded
 80 percent in recent elections. International observers noted that the November leg-
 islative elections were free and transparent. Each of the three principal political
 parties has significant representation in the unicameral National Assembly. Elec-
 tions are by secret ballot on the basis of universal suffrage for citizens 18 years of
 age or older. In the legislative elections, the MLSTP won an outright majority with
 31 out of 55 seats and will fill all of 10 Cabinet positions.
 The Constitution provides for the election of the President, who as Head of State
 names the Prime Minister. The Prime Minister appoints members of the Govern-
 ment.
 There are no restrictions in law or in practice on the participation of women in
 politics. However, women are underrepresented in the legislature. They currently
 hold 3 of 55 seats in the National Assembly. One woman was a presidential can-
 didate in the 1996 elections and received 16 percent of the first-round vote.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A small number of local human rights groups have formed since 1991 and operate
 without restriction or governmental interference. There were no known requests by
 international human rights groups to visit the country.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for the equality of all citizens regardless of sex, race,
 racial origin, political tendency, creed, or philosophic conviction. However, the Gov-
 ernment has not actively sought to enforce these provisions.
 Women.-While the extent of the problem is unknown, violence against women oc-
 curs, and medical professionals and officials report firsthand experience in dealing
 with violence, including rape. They also report that although women have the right
 to legal recourse-including against spouses-many are reluctant to bring legal ac-
 tion or are ignorant of their rights under the law. Traditional beliefs and practices
 also inhibit women from taking domestic disputes outside the family.
 While the Constitution stipulates that women and men have equal political, eco-
 nomic, and social rights, and while many women have access to opportunities in
 education, business, and government, in practice women still encounter significant
 societal discrimination. Traditional beliefs concerning the division of labor between
 men and women leave women with much of the hard work in agriculture, with most
 child-rearing responsibilities, and with less access to education and to the profes-
 sions. Female literacy is approximately 62 percent; male literacy is approximately
 85 percent.
 Children.-A number of government and donor-funded programs have been estab-
 lished to improve conditions for children. There has been improvement in maternity
 and infant care, in nutrition, and in access to basic health services, especially in
 urban areas. Mistreatment of children is not widespread. There are few social pro-
 tections for orphans and abandoned children.
 People With Disabilities.-The law does not mandate access to buildings, transpor-
 tation, or services for persons with disabilities. There are no reports of discrimina-
 tion against the disabled.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution provides for freedom of association
 and the right to strike. Few unions exist in the very small modern wage sector.
 Independent cooperatives, on the other hand, have taken advantage of the govern-
 ment land distribution program to attract workers and in many cases to improve
 production and incomes significantly. Public sector employees still make up the
 great majority of wage earners. Strikes are legal including those by government em-
 ployees and other essential workers. There are no laws or regulations prohibiting
 employers from retaliating against strikers.
 
 
 There are no restrictions barring trade unions from joining federations or
 affiliating with international bodies.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Constitution provides
 that workers may organize and bargain collectively. However, due to its role as the
 principal employer in the wage sector, the Government remains the key interlocutor
 tor labor on all matters, including wages. There are no laws prohibiting antiunion
 discrimination.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced and bond-
 ed labor, and it is not known to exist. The Government prohibits forced and bonded
 labor by children, and such practices are not known to occur. '
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age or Employment.-Employ-
 ers in the modem wage sector generally respect the legaly mandated minimum em-
 ployment age of 18 years. The Ministry of Justice and Labor is responsible for en-
 forcing this law. In subsistence agriculture, on plantations, and in informal com-
 merce, children do work, sometimes from an early age. The Government prohibits
 forced and bonded labor by children, and the prohibition is respected (see Section
 6.c.).
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Working conditions on many of the state-
 owned plantations-the largest wage employment sector-border on the medieval.
 There is no legally mandated minimum wage. The average salary for plantation
 workers does not provide a decent standard of living for a worker and family, and
 the real value of their pay is constantly eroded by high rates of inflation. In prin-
 ciple, workers and their families are provided free (but inadequate) housing, rudi-
 mentary education for their children, and health care, as well as the privilege of re-
 duced prices and credit at the "company store." These arrangements are intended
 to subsidize food and clothing. Corruption is widespread; however, and international
 lending institutions have criticized the Government for ineffective administration of
 these subsidies. Workers often are forced to pay higher prices on the parallel market
 to obtain the goods theoretically provided at a discount as part of their compensa-
 tion.
 The legal workweek is 40 hours with 48 consecutive hours mandated for a rest
 period, a norm respected in the modem wage sector. The Social Security Law of
 1979 prescribes basic occupational health and safety standards. Inspectors from the
 Ministry of Justice and Labor are responsible for enforcement of these standards,
 but their efforts are ineffective. Employees have the right under the law to leave
 unsafe working conditions.
