 SURINAME
 After over a decade of predominantly military rule, Suriname installed a freely
 elected Parliament and inaugurated a democratically chosen President in 1991
 Since then the Government has made fitful progress in consolidating democracy and
 slow but steady progress toward reestablishing civilian authority over the military.
 The Government of President Ronald Venetiaan is composed of ministers drawn
 from a four-party coalition which holds the majority of seats in the multiparty Na-
 tional Assembly. In 1992 the Government concluded a peace accord with members
 of insurgent groups which had fought a domestic armed conflict between 1986 and
 1991.
 In 1993 the Government replaced former military strongman Desire Bouterse as
 commander of the armed forces with a new commander of its own choosing, and also
 replaced four subordinate commanders. Since then, cooperation between the military
 and the civilian police improved as respective roles were clarified. Civilian police
 bear primary responsibility for the maintenance of law and order, and they contin-
 ued to be responsible for some human rights abuses.
 The market-oriented economy is largely agricultural, but with an important baux-
 ite and alumina export sector. There is a high degree of state involvement and regu-
 lation; the Government and parastatal companies employ over half the working pop-
 
 
 506
 
 ulation. For the last several years, depressed world prices for bauxite and alumina
 and the damaging effects of the country's domestic armed conflict resulted in high
 inflation and reduced economic growth.
 The principal human rights abuses included police mistreatment of detainees,
 abuse of prisoners, overcrowding of jails, government intimidation of the press, soci-
 etal violence against women, and marginalization of indigenous people. The Govern-
 ment continued to fail to call to account human rights abusers from previous re-
 gimes.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings. The authorities have taken no action against prison
 guards who allegedly beat a prisoner to death in 1993.
 The human rights group Moiwana '86 continued to pursue the court case it insti-
 tuted in 1992, challenging the validity of the law that conferred amnesty on mem-
 bers of the military and the insurgents for crimes (except crimes against humanity)
 committed between January 1985 and August 1992, but the court rendered no final
 judgment.
 The Government took no action to investigate past human rights violations, such
 as the 1982 killing by the military regime of 15 civic leaders or the 1986 massacre
 of civilians at the village of Moiwana. The Government failed to abide by a 1993
 judgment rendered by the Inter-American Court of Human Rights to pay compensa-
 tion to the survivors of seven Maroons (descendants of escaped slaves who fled into
 the interior to avoid recapture) killed near the village of Podgron in 1987, although
 in 1991 the Government admitted responsibility for the killings. The Government
 did provide funds to set up a foundation responsible for disbursing compensation to
 relatives of the victims.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no new allegations of disappearances, but the Gov-
 ernment took no action to investigate earlier allegations of disappearances which oc-
 curred under previous regimes.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits inhuman treatment or punishment, but human rights
 monitors continued to express concern about official mistreatment of detainees and
 prisoners. Prison guards reportedly beat inmates frequently. The authorities ar-
 rested a prison warden in September in connection with the beating of a prisoner
 of Dutch nationality, but had not brought him to trial by year's end. The Govern-
 ment has not released the results of an inquiry into charges that guards beat sev-
 eral recaptured prisoners in 1993.
 Severe jail overcrowding continued to be a serious problem. At police stations,
 cells intended for suspects awaiting trial contained as many as four times the num-
 ber of detainees they were designe for and were very unsanitary. Guards allow de-
 tainees no exercise and only rarely permit them to leave the cells. Detainees also
 suffer from inadequate nutrition. The Government began construction of two new
 facilities to relieve the overcrowding. In some jails, female prisoners are in the
 charge of male police officers, and these officers reportedly routinely abuse female
 prisoners sexually.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-According to the law, police may detain
 for investigation up to 14 days a person suspected of committing a crime for which
 the sentence is longer than 4 years. Within the 14-day period, the police must bring
 the accused before a prosecutor to be formally charged. If additional time is needed
 to investigate the charge, a prosecutor may authorize the police to detain the sus-
 pect for an additional 30 days. Upon the expiration of the initial 44 days, a 'judge
 of instruction" may authorize the police to hold the suspect for up to 120 additional
 days, in 30-day increments (for a total of 164 days), before the case is tried. The
 judge of instruction has the power to authorize release on bail, but that power is
 rarel   fever, used. There were no reports of detentions in contravention of these
 Pretrial detainees constitute nearly 70 percent of the total prison and jail popu-
 lation of 1,510. Of those held in police custody, 15 percent had already been con-
 victed.
 The military police observed the requirement to hand over to the civil police civil-
 ians arrested for committing a crime in their presence. The military police continued
 to perform the immigration function at the country's borders and airports but no
 longer investigated civilian crimes.
 While not specifically forbidden by law or the Constitution, exile is not practiced
 as a means of political control.
 
 
 507
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-Although the Constitution provides for an inde-
 pendent judiciary and the right to a fair public trial in which defendants have the
 right to counsel, the effectiveness of the civilian and military courts is limited. The
 courts assign lawyers in private practice to defend prisoners and pay them from
 public funds. The courts must, and in practice do free a detainee who is not tried
 within the 164-day period. Trials are before a single judge, with the right to appeal.
 There is little firm evidence of the extent to which corruption affects the court sys-
 tem, but the entire criminal justice system was subjected to severe strain in pre-
 vious years when the military controlled the Government and prominent meiners
 of the judiciary were involved with, or afforded protection to, drug traffickers.
 Military personnel are generally not subject to civilian criminal law. A soldier ac-
 cused of a crime immediately comes under military court jurisdiction, and military
 police are responsible for all such investigations. Military prosecutions are directed
 by an officer on the public prosecutor's staff, and take place in separate courts be-
 fore two military judges andone civilian judge. The military courts follow the same
 rules of procedure as the civil courts. There is no appeal from the military to the
 civil system.
 Since the change in military leadership in 1993, coordination between the military
 police and the civil police has improved, and there were no further instances of mili-
 tary interference in civilian police investigations. The pervasive climate of fear and
 intimidation that previously prevented cases involving military personnel or drug
 traffickers from being tried began to dissipate, and prospects for the impartial ay_
 ministration of justice began to improve. However, although the Government ar-
 rested the former military police commander in January on drug charges and tried
 him before a military tribunal, the court released him on August 8 due to "lack of
 evidence."
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the right to privacy. The law requires warrants for
 searches, which are issued not by judges but by quasi-judicial officers who supervise
 criminal investigations. The police obtain them in the great majority of investiga-
 tions. The new military command curbed invasions of privacy by the military such
 as the illegal monitoring of telephone calls, monitoring the movements of human
 rights advocates, and threatemng government officials, policemen, politicians,
 human rights workers, and journalists. Although some persons continued these ac-
 tivities on occasion, the military authorities reportedly did not authorize them to do
 so.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and expression of opinion through the printed press or other media, and the Govern-
 ment generally respects these rights. The parliamentary and extraparliamentary op-
 position criticize the Government freely. In at least one instance, however, the Gov-
 ernment acted arbitrarily in response to criticism. The authorities arrested a Dutch
 journalist of Surinamese descent in May, after he charged in a Dutch magazine that
 members of the Government were corrupt. They detained the journalist in a cell for
 over 6 weeks for disturbing the public order but filed no formal charges, and then
 deported him.
 The Government's incomplete control over the military allows the former military
 leadership to intimidate members of the media into practicing self-censorship and
 not publishing reports they think the military leaders will find objectionable.
 Suriname's two daily newspapers and most of its radio stations are privately
 owned. The two television stations and one of the radio stations are publicly owned.
 The Government did not attempt to interfere with publications or to abridge aca-
 demic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 the right to assemble peacefully and to form associations for nonviolent purposes,
 and the authorities respect these rights in practice. The law requires official reg-
 istration of associations and permits for most large public meetings, which the au-
 thorities routinely issued. Political and other meetings take place unhindered.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion and the
 authorities respect it in practice. Foreign clergy are allowed to minister to both local
 and expatriate congregations, and missionaries enter the country freely to prs-
 elytize. Adherence to a particular faith is neither a bar to, nor a requirement for,
 entry into political, economic, or social fields.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Citizens may change their residences and work places freely and travel
 abroad as they wish. Political dissidents who emigrated to the Netherlands and else-
 
 
 508
 where during the years of military rule are welcome to return. Few of them have
 chosen to do so. Citizenship is not revoked for political reasons. Suriname continued
 to provide refuge to a small number of Haitian migrants. It does not forcibly repatri-
 ate refugees.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides for this right, but in the past the military prevented
 its effective exercise. Although the Surinamese military has twice handed over
 power to elected civilian governments following coups, one elected government has
 not yet succeeded another in accordance with constitutional provisions. The current
 Government is still in the process of institutionalizing democratic, constitutional
 rule.
 The Constitution stipulates that power and authority rest with the people and
 provides for the right to change the government through the direct election by secret
 allot of a National Assembly of 51 members every 5 years. The National Assembly
 then elects the President by a two-thirds vote. If the legislature is unable to do so,
 as was the case after the 1991 election, the Constitution provides that a national
 People's Assembly comprising Members of Parliament and regional and local offi-
 cials shall elect the President.
 The Constitution provides for the existence of political parties, and many parties
 and political coalitions are represented in the National Assembly. Although the Con-
 stitution proscribes racial or religious discrimination several factors limit the par-
 ticipation of Maroons and Amerindians in the politicai process. Most of the country's
 political activity takes place in the capital and a narrow belt running east and west
 of it along the coast. The Maroons and Amerindians are concentrated in remote
 areas and therefore have limited access to, and influence in, the political process.
 There is a small Maroon political party which holds three seats in the National As-
 sembly and belongs to an opposition coalition. There are no Amerindian political
 parties. There are four Maroons, one Amerindian, and three women in the National
 Assembly. There are no Maroons, Amerindians, or women in the Cabinet.
 There are historical and cultural impediments to equal participation by women in
 leadership positions in government and political parties. In the past, most women
 expected to fulfill the role of housewifeand mother, thereby limiting opportunities
 to gain political experience or position. Participation by women in politics (and other
 fields) was generally onsidered inappropriate. While women have made limited
 gains in attaining political power in recent years, political circles remain under the
 influence of traditional groups and women are disadvantaged in seeking high public
 office.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Nongovernmental human rights organizations operated freely in Suriname. The
 National Institute of Human Rights, funded by the Government but authorized to
 act independently, is widely regarded as inactive and ineffective. Nonetheless its
 chairman stated that cabinet members often implement its recommendations. When
 the Institute's five members' 10-year terms expired, President Venetiaan did not ap-
 point new members and refused to accept letters of resignation, thus extending their
 tenure indefinitely.
 The Government reacted negatively to calls for investigations into past possible
 human rights violations and refused to initiate such studies. It failed to implement
 several recommendations by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights that
 it investigate killings during the tenure of the military regime. The Government has
 not had to deal with any outside requests for more recent human rights investiga-
 tions or charges that it had violated human rights.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution and laws do not differentiate among citizens on the basis of their
 ethnic origins, religious affiliations, or other cultural differences. In practice, how-
 ever, several groups within society suffer various forms of discrimination.
 Women.-Women have a legal right to equal access to education, employment, and
 property. Nevertheless social pressures and customs inhibit their full exercise of
 these rights, particularly in the areas of marriage and inheritance. The law does not
 differentiate between domestic violence and other forms of assault, and the Govern-
 ment has not specifically addressed the problem of violence against women. Accord-
 ing to a national women's group, victims reported a pproximately 425 cases of vio-
 lence against women. It remains a problem at all levels of society.
 
 
 509
 Children.-The Government makes only limited efforts to ensure the human
 rights and welfare of children. In the capital, where most of the country's population
 is concentrated, there are some orphanages, and a privately funded shelter or sexu-
 ally abused children opened in 1993. Elsewhere, distressed children must usually
 rely on the resources  their extended families. Both in the capital and in the coun-
 trys interior, some school-age children do not have access to education because of
 a lack of transportation, facilities, or teachers.
 Indigenous People.-Most Amerindians and Maroons suffer a number of disadvan-
 tages and have only limited ability to participate in decisions affecting their lands,
 cultures, traditions, and natural resources. The nation's political life, educational op-
 portunities, and jobs are concentrated in the capital and its environs, while the ma-
 jority of Amerindians and Maroons live in the interior. Government services in the
 interior became largely unavailable and much of the infrastructure was destroyed
 during the 1986-91 domestic insurgencies; progress in reestablishing services and
 rebuilding the infrastructure was very slow. Although the peace accords ending the
 insurgencies provided for the appointment of a Consultative Council for the develop-
 ment of the interior, including representatives of the Maroon and Amerindian com-
 munities, the Government has not yet appointed that Council. The Government did
 not consult with representatives of the Amerindian and Maroon communities about
 the granting of gold and timber concessions in areas they inhabit.
 People With Disabilities.-There are no laws concerning access for disabled people
 and no provisions for making private or public buildings accessible to them. There
 are also no laws mandating that they be given equal consideration when seeking
 jobs or housing. However, there are some training programs for the blind and others
 with disabilities.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution provides for the right of workers
 to associate and to choose their representatives democratically. At least 40 percent
 of the work force is organized into unions, most of which belong to one of the coun-
 try's six major labor federations. Unions are independent of the Government and
 play an active role in politics. A small Labor Party, which is independent of the
 labor movement but includes the chairmen of two of the most influential labor fed-
 erations in its leadership, is part of the ruling four-party coalition and provides
 three Cabinet members.
 There are no restrictions on unions! international activities. Several labor federa-
 tions were reaccepted as affiliates of international trade union organizations in the
 late 1980's after having been suspended for collaboration with the military regime
 earlier in tie decade.
 The Constitution also provides for the right of nongovernment employees to strike.
 Civil servants have no legal right to strike or mount other labor actions, but in prac-
 tice they are able to do so. Strikes in both the public and private sectors were com-
 mon as workers tried to secure wage gains to protect their earning power from rapid
 inflation.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Constitution explicitly
 recognizes these rights and the authorities respect them in practice. Collective bar-
 gaming agreements cover approximately 50 percent of the labor force. The law pro-
 hibits antiunion discrimination by employers, and there are effective mechanisms
 for resolving complaints of such discrimination. Employers must have prior permis-
 sion from the Ministry of Labor to fire workers, except when discharging an em-
 loyee for cause. The Labor Ministry individually reviews dismissals for cause; if it
 eds a discharge  Th           employer must reinstate the employee.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor, and there were no known instances of it.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-nThe law sets the minimum age for
 employment at 16 years. The Ministry of Labor and the police enforce this law only
 sporadically, however. Those under 16 years of age are often employed as street ven-
 dors, newspaper sellers, or shop assistants. School attendance is compulsory until
 the age of 12.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no minimum wage legislation. The
 Government's lowest wage for a civil servant is about $6 (SF3085) a month, which
 will not provide a decent living for a worker and family. The Government sets civil
 service wages and the National Assembly approves them.
 Work in excess of 9 hours per day or 45 hours per week on a regular basis re-
 quires special government permission, which is routinely granted. Such overtime
 work earns premium pay. The law requires one 24-hour rest period per week.
 
 
 510
 A 10- to 12-member inspectorate of the Occupational Health and Safety Division
 of the Ministry of Labor is responsible for enforcing legislated occupational safely
 and health regulations. There is, however, no law authorizing workers to refuse to
 work in circumstances they deem unsafe. They must appeal to the inspectorate to
 declare the workplace situation unsafe. Resource constraints and lack of trained per-
 sonnel preclude the division from making regular inspections of Surinamese indus-
 try. Accident rates in local industry do not appear to be high, and the key bauxite
 industry has an outstanding safety record.
