 SURINAME
 Suriname's difficult democratization process, which suffered a
 severe setback on December 24, 1990, when the country's
 military carried out its second coup d'etat in slightly more
 than a decade, resumed its uneven course in 1991 with the
 holding of general elections on May 25 and the inauguration of
 a new, democratically elected President on September 16.
 During most of the year, however, Suriname was governed by a
 Cabinet, reportedly handpicked by military commander Desi
 Bouterse, and a President and Vice President installed by the
 National Assembly on December 29, 1990, under pressure from the
 military. The interim regime successfully administered the May
 election, which was generally judged to be free and fair, but
 also used the powers of the State, including public expenditure
 and manipulation of government-owned media, in the electoral
 interests of the promilitary National Democratic Party (NDP).
 Nevertheless, in the May 25 election the NDP was soundly
 defeated by a coalition of prodemocracy parties known as the
 New Front for Democracy and Development, which took 30 of the
 Assembly's 51 seats. On September 6 a constitutionally
 mandated body called the United People's Assembly elected by an
 80-percent majority Ronald Venetiaan, the New Front's
 candidate, as Suriname's new President.-
 It is estimated that real gross domestic product declined in
 1990 and will do so again in 1991. The causes of this decline
 are a severe foreign exchange shortage with a consequent
 scarcity of essential imported inputs, a sagging world market
 for the products of the key bauxite sector, accelerating
 inflation, and a burgeoning black market in which over 80
 percent of all goods are sold. This economic crisis was
 greatly exacerbated in 1991 by vastly increased'levels of
 domestic and foreign public expenditure under the
 military-backed interim government.
 Human rights abuses declined in 1991. This was attributable in
 large part to the de facto end of the Maroon insurgency in the'
 country's interior which began in 1986; although no formal
 peace agreement was reached, the last hostilities occurred in
 September 1990. In addition, the military was anxious to
 counteract international condemnation of the December 1990 coup
 and to regain much-needed foreign assistance that was suspended
 following the coup. Finally, during the early part of 1991,
 the promilitary interim government prepared for the May 25
 election with international observers present, some of whom
 remained in Suriname until the September inauguration of
 President Venetiaan; their presence also helped to deter the
 sort of violence and other human rights abuses which punctuated
 1990.
 Principal human rights abuses in 1991 included the continuing
 impunity of military personnel in regard to human rights .
 abuses, widespread illegal arrests by the military police, the
 harassment of critics of the military, manipulation and
 intimidation of certain sectors of the media, and prison
 overcrowding. The promilitary interim regime made no apparent
 effort to investigate any of the serious human rights
 violations which occurred in 1990, including the assassination
 of Police Inspector Herman Gooding in August.
 
 
 738
 SURINAME
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no politically motivated killings reported in 1991.
 However, early in the year human rights activists reported that
 the fatal shooting during the night of December 25-26, 1990, of
 a village official, Jules Indiaan, at the Amerindian village of
 Bigi Poika was probably politically motivated. The body of the
 76-year-old Indiaan reportedly showed signs of torture.
 Shortly before his death, Indiaan had been involved in a
 dispute with members of the illegal armed group known as the
 Tucajana Amazone over what he considered the undermining of his
 position by the Tucajanas. Villagers informed human rights
 workers that Indiaan frequently had been threatened with death
 by the Tucajanas.
 There was no progress in investigations or prosecutions of
 suspects in past murders of opponents of the military during
 the era of military rule (1980-87) and the 3-year period of
 civilian government (1988-90) which followed. Neither the
 promilitary interim regime nor the civilian Government which
 succeeded it offered settlements to the victims of the families
 in two cases under investigation by the Inter-American
 Commission on Human Rights. These cases, the December 1987
 killings of seven Maroons near the village of Pokigron, and the
 November 1988 death while in civilian custody of a Surinamese
 citizen who had just returned from the Netherlands, were
 scheduled for hearing December 2 by the Inter-American Human
 Rights Court.
 b. Disappearance
 During 1991, further information came to light on a number of
 Amerindian men who disappeared during a failed uprising against
 the promilitary leadership of the Tucajana Amazone group in
 January-February 1990. In June an Amerindian activist claimed
 that two men, in addition to the 4 Amerindians reported
 murdered in 1990, had been killed by an army firing squad near
 the village of Matta during the night of February 6-7, 1990, on
 the orders of a senior army officer. Human rights activists
 have received unconfirmed reports that six other missing men
 were also murdered in the vicinity of Matta at around the same
 time. Amerindian women had protested the disappearances and
 human rights organizations took up the case, insisting that the
 interim government respond to the charges of the Amerindian
 activist and release information as to the fate of the missing
 men. As of year's end, despite assurances in January from
 interim president Johan Kraag that his government would pursue
 an investigation into the fate of the missing men, no such
 action had been taken. In September, three relatives of the
 missing men who had been involved in protesting the
 disappearances applied for political asylum in French Guiana,
 claiming that their lives had been threatened by the Tucajanas.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 There were no charges of physical torture or mistreatment in
 1991. The severe overcrowding of civilian police jail cells
 continued to be the only reported serious problem. Social
 workers reported that at some police stations, as many as 25
 
 
 739
 SURINAME
 detainees regularly inhabited rooms built for 10, and at others
 10 to 13 were housed in cells built to accommodate 4 persons.
 In August a check of the Nieuwe Haven station in Paramaribo
 revealed 270 inmates incarcerated in cells with a combined
 capacity of 90.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 According to law, a person suspected of committing a crime for
 which the sentence is longer than 4 years may be detained by
 the police for investigation for up to 10 days before being
 brought before a judge to be charged. The detention may be
 extended cnly if the judge decides there is sufficient evidence
 to support the charge. This law is respected in'practice.
 There is no provision for bail during this extended period.
 A law enacted in May 1990 terminating the arrest and pursuit
 powers of the military police in civilian cases and canceling
 the function of the military police commander and his deputy as
 "officers of justice" continued to be ignored in practice by
 the military police, who routinely arrested civilian suspects
 on a wide range of charges and turned them over, usually within
 a matter of days, to the civilian police. The courts have not
 chosen to enforce this 1990 law.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Although the Constitution provides for an independent judiciary
 and the right to a fair public trial in which defendants have
 the right to counsel, the effectiveness of both the civilian
 and military courts is limited. Civilian defendants before the
 military court do not receive public trials, and the military
 is, for all practical purposes, above the law. Military
 personnel are not subject to civilian criminal or civil law;
 under Surinamese military law, any soldier who commits a crime
 immediately comes under military jurisdiction. The military
 police are charged with carrying out all investigations
 involving military personnel. Although it is illegal for the
 army command to interfere with investigations, such
 interference often takes place. Judicial officials acknowledge
 that obstruction often takes place on the civilian side of the
 judicial system as well, at the investigative and prosecutorial
 levels, in politically sensitive criminal cases.
 Another factor that prevents criminal cases involving military
 personnel or drug traffickers from reaching the courts is what
 judicial officials have termed a pervasive climate of fear and
 intimidation. A number of criminal investigations are
 effectively blocked by military authorities who refuse to
 cooperate or by witnesses who are afraid to come forward.
 Cases of military abuses are unlikely to be solved unless the
 causes of the atmosphere of fear are addressed.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Constitution provides for the right to privacy. However,
 there were an increased number of credible reports following
 the December 24, 1990, coup concerning the illegal monitoring
 of telephone calls by security service personnel. There were
 also continuing credible reports of surveillance of the
 movements of human rights activists and critics of the
 military, and threats by letter and telephone to government
 officials, policemen, human rights'workers, and journalists,
 presumably made by the military and its allies. One member of
 
 
 740
 SURINAME
 the National Assembly fled the country after receiving a series
 of anonymous death threats which followed his participation in
 a December 29, 1990, protest against the Assembly's
 installation of the military's candidates for president and
 vice president.
 Gu:yanese citizens entering Suriname at its western border or
 residing in the country either legally or illegally frequently
 complained to the press and to human rights organizations of
 arbitrary searches and harassment by military and civilian
 police personnel. There were several complaints by Guyanese
 that Surinamese military policemen had extorted considerable
 amounts of money and goods from them as they entered the
 country or traveled to Paramaribo.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian
 Law in Internal Conflicts
 Reports in 1991 of violations of humanitarian law in the
 interior diminished significantly following the de facto end of
 the Maroon insurgency in 1990, the withdrawal of the army from
 interior and upper Suriname River areas, and an unofficial
 alliance between the army and the Jungle Commando. Supplies of
 medicine and foodstuffs moved freely to the interior for
 virtually the first time since the Maroon insurgency began in
 1986. However, much of the country's interior remained under
 the control of four so-called illegal armed groups: the Maroon
 Jungle Commando, the promilitary Tucajana Amazone, and two
 smaller promilitary groups, Mandela and Angula, which continued
 to practice banditry despite the winding down of the conflict.
 Shortly following the May 25 election, the leader of the
 Tucajana Amazone Amerindian group (in reality a military
 "front" group) announced that the Tucajanas' "occupation" of
 central and west Suriname would continue until the Government
 met various Tucajana demands.
 Violations of humanitarian law persisted in the ongoing
 conflict in the interior. Prior to the May 25 election, Maroon
 residents of the upper Suriname river area of the interior
 pleaded with both the army and the Jungle Commando to leave the
 area, declaring that they no longer saw any difference between
 the soldiers and the Jungle Commando and wished to vote in an
 atmosphere free of intimidation. However, months later,
 elements of both the army and the Jungle Commando remained in
 central, eastern, and southeastern Suriname. The Jungle
 Commando reportedly extorted gold from miners in southeastern
 Suriname, many of them Brazilian, and its members frequently
 demanded tribute from villages they passed through. On June
 21, armed members of the Mandela group kidnaped four Maroon
 gold miners in the vicinity of the village of Kwakugron in
 Brokopondo district and held them for ransom. Three days
 later, after protests from leading Maroon figures and human
 rights groups, the four men, one of whom had become seriously
 ill while in captivity, were freed, but only after their
 relatives paid the Mandela group ransom in gold.
 Despite an October 1990 promise by Army Commander Bouterse that
 soldiers responsible for the September 25, 1990, burning of
 over 20 dwellings in the Maroon village of Botopasi would be
 punished and the villagers compensated for their losses, no
 such action was taken during 1991.
 
 
 SURINAME
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and of the press are provided for by the
 Constitution, but these rights were limited for various reasons
 during 1991. During most of the year the military-backed
 Government exercised firm control over the content of news
 broadcasts on state-owned television and radio stations.
 Furthermore, during the tenure of the interim regime, news
 about government activities became more difficult for the media
 to obtain, as regime Vice President Jules Wijdenbosch took the
 decision to centralize the release of government information in
 his office, which effectively muzzled the various ministries as
 sources of news.
 In February the news director of one of the country's two
 television stations, both of which are government-owned,, was
 removed from her position and replaced by a relative and
 supporter of the interim vice president following the news
 director's airing of the arrival remarks of the new U.S.
 Ambassador, which included criticism of the December military
 coup. Manipulation by the interim Government of the
 state-owned media in the interests of the promilitary NDP was
 extensive during the political campaign that led up to the May
 25 election. During all but the last few days of the campaign,
 the television stations refused to run political advertisements
 other than those of the NDP, which were run repeatedly.
 The press and private radio stations, while occasionally
 critical of the promilitary interim Government, generally
 appeared to have practiced self-censorship. This was
 attributable, at least in part, to intimidation. Journalists
 disclosed that they were aware of many unfavorable developments
 involving either the military or the interim regime it
 supported, but believed they could not report them for fear of
 reprisals. For example, one of the private radio stations
 received a "friendly" telephone call from a military
 spokesperson, warning about possible trouble due to the
 station's broadcast of dispatches from a correspondent in the
 Netherlands. The station thereafter dropped the
 correspondent's reports. One human rights organization
 reported that the newspaper De West refused to run an
 advertisement submitted by a group protesting official
 involvement in drug trafficking, although De West did print
 other advertisements by the group which were critical of the
 Government.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The right to assemble peaceably and to form associations for
 nonviolent purposes is protected constitutionally, and these
 rights are respected in practice. Official registration is
 required in many instances and is generally granted. Most
 large public meetings require a permit, and these are routinely
 granted. Electoral campaign rallies by all parties were
 permitted and held without incident, with the exception of the
 cancellation by organizers of several public meetings scheduled
 to be held by parties other than the promilitary NDP in areas
 of the country under the control of the Tucajana Amazone
 Amerindian group, due to Tucajana intimidation and a lack of
 security.
 
 
 742
 SURiNAME
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is respected in Suriname. Foreign clergy
 are allowed to minister to both local and expatriate
 congregations, and missionaries enter the country freely to
 proselytize. Religious groups maintain international contacts,
 freely organize trips abroad, and publish periodicals.
 .Adherence to a particular faith is neither a bar to, nor
 advantage in, political, economic, or social activity.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Surin~mers may change their residence and workplace freely and
 travel abroad as they wish. Political dissidents who emigrated
 to the Netherlands and elsewhere during the years of military
 rule were publicly invited by a political adviser of the Army
 Commander to return to Suriname, and the names of a number of
 prominent opponents of the military were stricken from the list
 of those wanted by the authorities, but few exiles chose to
 return. Citizenship is not revoked for political reasons.
 There were no known instances in which refugees were forced to
 return to countries in which they feared persecution.
 Travel to the interior remains limited in practice due to the
 precarious security situation, although many areas which had
 been virtually inaccessible to travelers opened up as a result
 of the interim regime's agreement with four so-called illegal
 armed groups to allow access to anyone having election-related
 business in the interior. Even during the election campaign,
 however, access to areas controlled by the Tucajana Amazone
 Amerindian group, chiefly in central and western Suriname,
 remained extremely limited. Despite the Tucajanas' formal
 adherence to the agreement cited above, members of political
 parties other than the NDP and some election observers,
 including those from the Organization of American States, were
 denied access to these areas during the election campaign.
 Local government officials and civilian police were also barred
 from entering Tucajana-controlled territory; several of them,
 including the District Commissioner of Para, filed official
 reports detailing incidents of harassment and intimidation by
 the Tucajanas.
 Despite the cessation of fighting in the interior, the removal
 of several army checkpoints on major roads leading to interior
 areas, and a public relations campaign by the military centered
 around the theme of "national reconciliation," 8,000-10,000
 Surinamese refugees, predominately Maroon, remained in French
 Guiana along the Surinamese border throughout 1991; of these,
 6,400 resided in official camps administered by the French
 Government since 1986. Some refugees reportedly decided to
 remain in the camps for fear of losing the opportunity to apply
 for permanent resident status in French Guiana. Others remain
 fearful of what they believe to be the unstable security
 situation. in eastern Suriname and of possible retaliation by
 the military for suspected connections with the insurgency.
 An agreement between the United Nations High Commissioner for
 Refugees (UNHCR) and a Dutch Roman Catholic charitable
 organization to implement a pilot project of support for
 repatriates was signed in March. Destruction during the
 internal conflict of the small amount of infrastructure that
 once existed in eastern Suriname is a major disincentive to
 repatriation, and the UNHCR has recognized the reconstruction
 of basic facilities in the area as a priority need.
 
 
 743
 SURINAME
 In November, the French Government announced a refugee
 resettlement incentive of approximately $800 for adults and
 $400 for children choosing to return to their homeland.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The Constitution stipulates that power and authority rest with
 the people and provides for the right to change the government
 peacefully through the direct election by secret ballot of a
 National Assembly of 51 members every 5 years. This right was
 suspended by the military by its December 24, 1990, coup
 d'etat. Although the army agreed with civilian leaders to
 permit a new election in May, the fact remains that the
 Government democratically elected to a 5-year term of officeby
 a popular vote in November 1987 was arbitrarily terminated by
 the military.
 The May 25 general election was widely praised by international
 observers as generally free and fair. However, due to a
 lengthy and complex process of verifying the result and failure
 by the new National Assembly on two occasions to elect a
 President by the required two-thirds vote, the election of the
 President by the United People's Assembly did not-occur until
 September 6, with the inauguration of the President taking
 place 10 days later. This delay meant that the country was
 ruled by a nonelected, interim government for the first 8 1/2
 months of the year.
 The interim government used the powers of office to promote the
 electoral campaign of the ruling, promilitary NDP by dispensing
 government largess to influence voters and manipulating the
 state-owned media. Some observers believe this was, in fact,
 the strategy behind the coup: to use the time the interim
 government had in office to launch a populist program which
 would make the previous democratically elected government
 appear ineffectual, by comparison. The regime carried out major
 public works projects, granted a generous wage increase to
 civil servants, attempted to enforce price controls and
 restrain the black market, and increased imports of popular
 foodstuffs at'subsidized prices. This free-spending approach
 proved popular with many voters, particularly in poorer areas,
 .and resulted in NDP electoral gains, but left the new
 democratic Government with a large budget deficit and an
 exhausted foreign exchange reserve.
 The Constitution provides for the existence of political
 parties, and 16 parties of widely differing ideologies and
 programs competed for votes on the May 25 ballot. There are no
 special conditions or restrictions on nationality or
 citizenship that limit participation in the political system.
 In practice, however, the less educated Maroons and Amerindians
 of the interior are largely outside the legal political process.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Several local private human rights groups carried on their work
 in Suriname during 1990. Two groups were especially active and
 vocal in their criticism of the military coup and the policies
 of the promilitary regime--Moiwana '86 headed by Suriname's
 leading human rights activist, Stanley Rensch, and the
 Organization for Justice and Peace. The official National
 Institute for Human Rights was not very active during the
 
 
 744
 SURINAME
 year. Representatives of the International Committee of the
 Red Cross visited Paramaribo and areas of the interior in 1991,
 as did a team from Americas Watch and Caribbean Rights, which
 published a lengthy and highly critical report based on its
 findings.
 Although the authorities have repeatedly expressed a
 willingness to cooperate with international and domestic human
 rights groups, there has been little if any progress toward
 implementing these groups' recommendations to investigate past
 atrocities and disappearances, owing primarily to the
 unwillingness of the army to permit any serious inquiry. Human
 rights groups renewed these recommendations following the
 return to democratic government in September. Since the
 Government had reached no settlement with the Inter-American
 Commission on Human Rights to compensate victims of past
 abuses, the Inter-American Human Rights Court was expected to
 hear two cases dating from 1987 and 1988 on December 2 (see
 Section l.a.).
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Discrimination is prohibited by the Constitution and is rare in
 .Suriname's multiracial society. Ethnic consciousness remains
 strong among all groups, however. There is no evidence that
 Maroons and Amerindians confront overt de facto
 discrimination. However, because of inadequate basic
 educational, medical, and other infrastructural facilities in
 the interior of the country, residents such as Maroons and
 Amerindians are likely to be disadvantaged from an early age in
 terms of integrating into Suriname's urban society.
 As noted in Section l.f., Guyanese citizens frequently
 complained of discrimination, particularly by law enforcement
 officials but also in the areas of housing and employment.
 Guyanese asserted that they are often singled out for
 harassment by officials due to their language (English) and
 immigration and social status.
 Women have a legal right to equal access to education,
 employment, and property. However, social pressures and
 customs inhibit the full exercise of these rights, particularly
 in the areas of marriage and inheritance. Surinamese law does
 not differentiate between domestic violence and general assault
 cases, and the Government has not taken steps to address the
 problem of violence against women in Surinamese society. The
 privately funded Foundation Home for Women in Crisis Situations
 in Paramaribo has rooms for battered and abused women and their
 children, who are brought to the home by private and religious
 organizations. The home's rooms are continually filled with
 women from all the major ethnic groups, an indication that
 violence against women is prevalent. Plans to expand the
 facility are in abeyance due to lack of funds, and the
 Government has declined requests to support the Foundation.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Suriname's Constitution protects the right of workers to
 associate and to choose their representatives democratically.
 This right is exercised energetically, and about one half of
 the work force is organized. Unions are independent of the
 Government and play an active role in politics. Though not
 
 
 745
 SURINAME
 legally protected, strikes and other labor actions by civil
 servants are permitted in practice. The right of nongovernment
 employees to strike is protected by the Constitution, and
 during 1991 labor officials reported no instances of
 interference with the exercise of this right. Notable strikes
 during the year included those by employees of the stated-owned
 shipping company SMS (in May), the National Aviation Service
 (May), the Jarikaba Banana Company (June), and the state-owned
 lumber company Bruynzeel (July). Surinamese trade unions are
 permitted to maintain contacts with regional and international
 labor associations.
 The labor movement is a powerful political force. The umbrella
 labor organization Ravaksur (Council of Trade Union Federations
 of Suriname) issued a statement strongly condemning the
 December 24, 1990, military coup. The Suriname Labor Party, a
 relatively small political party which is independent of the
 union movement but includes the chairmen of two of the most
 influential labor federations (C-47 and the.Public Service
 Unions) in its leadership; contested the May general election
 as part of a coalition with the three traditional, ethnic-based
 parties known as the New Front for Democracy and Development.
 Following the New Front's electoral victory, three members of
 the Suriname Labor Party were named to the Cabinet.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The right to organize and bargain collectively is explicitly
 recognized by the Constitution and was respected in practice in
 1991. Collective bargaining agreements cover approximately 50
 percent of the labor force. Surinamese law prohibits antiunion
 discrimination by employers, and there are effective mechanisms
 for resolving complaints of such discrimination. There are no
 special economic zones in Suriname.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced or compulsory labor is prohibited by the Constitution,
 and there were no known instances of this practice in 1991.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The legal age for employment of children is 15 years. The
 Ministry of Labor and the police are responsible for enforcing
 this law. There were few complaints of violations in 1991.
 Persons under age 15 are occasionally employed as street
 vendors, newspaper sellers, and shop assistants. Most such
 employment generally occurs after school hours. Education is
 compulsory.until the age of 12.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Suriname has no legislated private sector minimum wage rate.
 However, the Government sets a minimum wage for janitorial
 personnel and other unskilled labor, which does not provide a
 decent living for a worker and family. Work in excess of 9
 hours per day or 45 hours per week on a regular basis requires,
 special government permission, which is routinely granted.
 Such overtime work is payable at a premium. Occupational
 safety and health regulations are set by law and sporadically
 enforced by a small inspectorate of the Occupational Health and
 Safety Division of the Ministry of Labor. Statistics on
 accident rates in local industry are not current, but the level
 is not considered to be high. Occupational safety in the key
 bauxite sector, for example, is considered outstanding.
 
 
 746
