 SURINAME
 Suriname returned to constitutional democracy in 1988
 following 8 years of'military rule. The governing three-party
 coalition, the National Front for-Democracy and Development,
 has a large majority in the popularly elected National
 Assembly. The Government's composition reflects Suriname's
 ethnic divisions by including political parties representing
 each of the country's three largest racial groups, the
 Hindustanis (Asian Indians), the Creoles (generally the
 descendants of emancipated slaves), and the Javanese. The
 Presidency is held by a member of the Hindustani party, while
 the Vice Presidency is filled by a leader of the principal
 Creole party. Both officers are chosen by the elected
 National Assembly.
 The Surinamese military, whose influence had diminished
 following the return to elected government, has reestablished
 itself as the dominant political force in the country. In
 contrast to the first year of Front Government, no military
 men hold civilian government positions, but reports of
 apparent harassment by members of the security services
 continue. The military remains the most important threat to
 the future health of Suriname's democracy. Throughout the
 year, Surinamese military leaders acted to forestall
 government actions with which they disagreed on issues
 affecting their perceived interests. For example, they
 carried out a well-publicized campaign against a peace
 agreement reached in July at Kourou, French Guiana, designed
 to end 3 years of debilitating maroon insurgency in the
 interior. (Maroons are the descendants of escaped slaves who
 fled to the interior several centuries ago.) Despite a
 government announcement of the end of a state of emergency in
 the interior, travel and the shipment of food and medicine
 outside the capital remain restricted by the military, and
 maroon refugees in French Guiana and displaced persons in the
 capital are still afraid to return to their traditional
 territories because of possible military retaliation. In June
 the Government passed an amnesty law which provides a general
 pardon for military and rebel actions taken since January 1,
 1985.
 The Surinamese economy enjoyed a limited resurgence in the
 first half of 1989, even though the civilian Government had
 made few significant economic policy changes. Real gross
 domestic product rose strongly, due primarily to a significant
 recovery in the key bauxite sector which traditionally
 accounts for 70 to 80 percent of foreign exchange earnings.
 In the aftermath of the military era, Suriname's human rights
 situation continued its spotty improvement. The press offered
 a forum for the robust expression of all shades of opinion
 and, to an increasing extent, journalists were more willing to
 criticize the military. The state-owned news agency became
 somewhat less blatant in propagating the military's
 viewpoint.. While competing for political influence with the
 military, the Government was slow in implementing the
 Constitution which was overwhelmingly approved by the
 population on September 30, 1987. Not until mid-1989 were
 representative assemblies formed at the province and
 subprovince level, and by year's end they had not yet become
 active. Only a few of the 120 new laws required to implement
 the Constitution had been passed by the Assembly, and the
 constitutional court which will interpret the Constitution and
 rule on human rights issues was not yet established. Although
 the "state of emergency" was abolished by National Assembly
 
 
 737
 SURINAME
 action in September 1989, the Government had taken no steps to
 deprive the military of such "emergency" powers as
 investigation and detention of civilians, issuance of visas,
 and supervision of customs and immigration at airports and
 harbors.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There was one credible report of a politically motivated
 killing in 1989. A man filmed by a television crew carrying
 an antimilitary placard in a demonstration in the town of
 Moengo was forcibly removed from his home on October 30,
 several weeks after the demonstration, and shot dead by masked
 men. The incident occurred during a raid by Amerindian
 insurgents on the town, which had been occupied by maroon
 insurgents. Independent observers believe the killers were
 Amerindian insurgents.
 In December unknown assailants made an attempt on the life of
 Suriname's most prominent human rights activist, Stanley
 Rensch, at his home. Rensch subsequently left the country.
 An amnesty law covering acts committed by the military and
 rebels during the period January 1, 1985, to a date to be
 fixed by the president (as yet undetermined), was passed by
 the National Assembly in June. There is an exemption for
 crimes against humanity, which are to be determined by the
 Attorney General in accordance with relevant international
 conventions. At year's end, the law still awaits steps by the
 executive branch for its implementation.
 Two suspects accused of murdering supposed regime opponents
 during the years of military rule won acquittal on narrow
 technical grounds. Both suspects are closely connected to the
 Army. Government prosecutors indicated an interest in
 bringing charges in one of the cases again, but by year's end
 no date had been announced.
 The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) is
 conduqting investigations into the December 1987 killings of 7
 maroons at the village of Pokigron and the November 1988 death
 while in military police custody of a Surinamese citizen who
 had just returned from the Netherlands. Government
 representatives announced their willingness to cooperate with
 the investigations. In September the IACHR held a hearing on
 the Pokigron case; further consideration by the IACHR was
 deferred until the next session of the commission in 1990.
 b. Disappearance
 Credible indications of disappearances were few in 1989.
 Human rights activists and the press noted that in several
 instances, maroons in outlying areas were detained by the
 military authorities under state of emergency regulations.
 One such incident reportedly took place in February and a
 second in June. In both cases, the detainee was eventually
 released.
 
 
 738
 SURINAME
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 There were no indications of a systematic pattern of
 mistreatment, but there was a sharp rise in the number of
 reported instances of police brutality. Several police
 officers were punished administratively in May for beating a
 suspect arrested earlier in the year. The press reported also
 that police officers severely beat a suspect detained in
 connection with a drug investigation in July. Another press
 report noted that a man detained in September after a traffic
 mishap was beaten. A human rights organization claimed that a
 police officer publicly pistol-whipped a man during a late
 July soccer match and -that a maroon arrested in mid-August
 receivdd harsh treatment before being released.
 Credible sources charged that in May and September persons
 entering and leaving the international airport were subjected
 to humiliating strip searches by military police, who still
 control that facility. The May incident involved a family
 returning from Holland in which several female members were
 detained several hours for reasons which were never
 explained. A human rights activist leaving the country in
 August was also strip searched by military police before being
 permitted to depart. The activist's organization had
 considered legal action against the Government but had not
 taken any steps by year's end.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 According to law, a person suspected of committing a crime for
 which the sentence i-s longer than 4 years may be detained for
 investigation for up to 10 days before being brought before a
 judge to be charged. The detention may be longer only if the
 judge decides there is sufficient evidence to support the
 charge. There is no provision for bail during this period.
 There were four apparent instances of arbitrary arrest in
 1989. In late April and early to mid-May, military police
 detained several persons for suspected involvement with the
 Jungle Commando, an insurgent group in the interior. Two of
 the detainees are recognized leaders of the human rights
 community, the third is a medical doctor involved with the
 provision of care in the interior, and the fourth is a civil
 servant. The detainees underwent 4 to 6 hours of rigorous
 questioning before gaining their release after expressions of
 concern by the public and diplomats. The authorities did not
 bring charges against any of those detained.
 Exile is not used as a method of political control. With
 regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Constitution provides for an independent judiciary and the
 right to fair public trial in which the defendants have the
 right to counsel. Indigents generally have access to free or
 low-cost legal representatives. Civilian defendants before
 the military court do not receive public trials, but news of
 military court proceedings regularly appear in the press.
 In late April, the military forcefully interfered with
 judicial procedure. A paramilitary soldier accused of
 involvement in a brutal 1986 massacre was removed from a
 civilian jail by an armed platoon on the grounds that the
 
 
 739
 SURINAME
 civil authorities had no power to arrest and try military
 personnel. A government commission set up after the incident
 to determine whether military or civilian authorities should
 prosecute the case had not reported its findings by year's end.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Although the Constitution protects the right to privacy, there
 were frequent allegations concerning the monitoring of
 overseas telephone calls by security service personnel. The
 charges persisted despite the reported withdrawal in March of
 security service personnel from an office in the facilities of
 the state-owned telephone system. Airport military security
 personnel confiscated papers belonging to a departing Dutch
 human rights activist in August after he was strip searched
 (see Section l.c.). Throughout the year, several labor and
 political officials reported harassment by anonymous figures.
 The officials believed the harassment to have been due to
 their peaceful opposition to the previous military regime.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian
 Law in Internal Conflicts
 There were numerous reports of violations of humanitarian law
 in 1989, and many appeared to be credible. Following a lull
 of many months, conflict in the interior flared in April and
 continued through the summer until the signing of the Kourou
 peace agreement. One of the more serious violations of
 humanitarian law was discovered in April when residents of the
 maroon village of Pokigron fled to the capital bearing reports
 of the village's destruction.  According to still confused
 accounts of what happened in Pokigron, it appears that
 elements of the maroon Jungle Commando insurgency torched the
 dwellings of villagers believed to be allied with the military
 and that in response other promilitary elements took similar
 action against Jungle Commando supporters. The persons
 displaced from Pokigron now live under difficult conditions in
 the capital.
 Following the June start of an Army offensive in the area
 around Suriname's central reservbir, there were frequent
 reports of firing on unarmed civilians by military personnel.
 A human rights group charged that a helicopter fired on
 civilians on June 3 and on unarmed boats during the first week
 of June. Beginning in July, there were many credible reports
 of arbitrary restrictions on the amount and type of material
 which residents of the interior could bring in to the region.
 Foodstuffs and medicine were restricted most severely. These
 restrictions reportedly contributed to or directly caused the
 closure of medical posts in the interior and the death of
 several patients, including women, children, and infants.
 In late August and September, armed Amerindians hijacked a
 small aircraft and held the pilot hostage for 1 month.
 Another group of Amerindians hijacked a ferry boat, killing a
 passenger in the process. Credible observers believe
 Amerindian actions are connected to or have been ordered by
 the military, and stem from military dissatisfaction with the
 Kourou peace process. The Army took no actions against the
 Amerindian insurgents, and military spokesmen publicly
 sympathized with their objectives and praised their tactics.
 The uprising of Amerindians contributed to a drastic
 deterioration in already inadequate-medical care arrangements
 for. the interior. One source noted publicly that the
 
 
 740
 SURINAM
 Amerindians had taken custody of the only ambulance available
 in the Western Suriname settlement of Apoera and that the
 transport of patients from the interior to the capital for
 acute care had declined from around 95 per month to 6.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and of the press is protected by the
 Constitution. As during the first year of civilian rule, the
 Surinamese robustly exercised their right to criticize
 government policies. Opposing political views faced little or
 no restriction in gaining a forum, particularly in the print
 media. 'In contrast to the first year of democratic
 government, critics of the military were less reluctant to
 speak out.
 The Surinamese print media are privately owned and include
 several church-owned newspapers. Most radio stations are also
 owned privately, but the State operates both a television and
 a radio station. The state-owned telephone company also
 operates a television station. Government restrictions
 generally prevent this station from broadcasting news and
 public affairs programming. Academic freedom is legally
 protected and appears to be protected in practice.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The right to assemble peaceably and to form associations for
 nonviolent purposes is protected constitutionally. These
 rights are respected in practice. Official registration is
 required in many instances and is generally granted. Most
 large public meetings require a permit, and these are granted
 routinely. Trade associations and professional bodies face no
 restriction on engaging in political activity or affiliating
 with international organizations.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of worship is respected in Suriname, a multicultural
 and multireligious society. Foreign clergy are allowed to
 administer to the needs of both local and expatriate
 congregations, and missionaries enter the country freely to
 proselytize. Organized religions are free to establish
 training facilities for their clergy. Religious groups
 maintained international contacts, freely organized trips
 abroad, and published periodicals.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Surinamese may change their residence and workplace freely,
 and may travel abroad as they wish. Although the authorities
 lifted the state of emergency which limited travel to certain
 interior districts on September 1, travel to the interior
 remains limited in practice, largely as a result of the
 precarious security situation. Troops at military checkpoints
 have repeatedly denied permission to travel into the interior,
 often on what appear to be arbitrary grounds.
 
 
 741
 SURINAME
 Surinamese may emigrate without interference and may return to
 take up residence at any time. Citizenship is not revoked for
 political reasons. There were no known instances in which
 refugees were forced to return to countries in which they fear
 persecution.
 Some 6,500 to 7,500 Surinamese refugees remain in camps in
 French Guiana along the Surinamese border. Following the July
 signing of the Kourou accord, representatives of the U.N. High
 Commissioner for Refugees began preparations for their orderly
 return and opened an office in Paramaribo toward that end.
 Although many refugees have expressed an interest in returning
 to their traditional homes in Eastern and Central Suriname,
 few if any have done so. The refugees cite fear of the
 unstable security situation in their home region or
 retaliation by the military for suspected connections with the
 insurgency. During 1989 hundreds of maroons moved from the
 interior to Paramaribo and its southern outskirts, mostly
 because of Amerindian actions in their home areas.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Power and authority rests with the Surinamese people under the
 Constitution approved by popular vote in 1987. Among other
 rights, the Constitution provides for the right to change
 government peacefully through the direct election by secret
 ballot of a National Assembly of 50 members every 5 years. It
 also protects the existence of political parties. Opposition
 parties regularly present opposing views in the National
 Assembly, the mass media, and in public gatherings.
 Dissenting votes were cast in the National Assembly on a
 number of bills and on procedural questions.
 There are no special conditions or restrictions on nationality
 or citizenship which limit participation in the political
 system. In practice, however, the less educated maroons and
 Amerindians from the interior are largely outside the
 political process.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Although the authorities have repeatedly expressed a
 willingness to cooperate with international and private human
 rights groups, there has been little progress in the
 implementation of these groups' recommendations concerning the
 investigation of past atrocities and disappearances. During
 1989, representatives of the International Committee of the
 Red Cross visited Suriname regularly and conducted a course
 for military personnel on the Geneva Convention and the laws
 of war.
 In addition to the official National Institute for Human
 Rights (NIM), there are several other local human rights
 groups. The NIM was not particularly active during the year
 and appeared unable to secure much official cooperation for
 inquiries into such atrocities committed during the years of
 military rule as the late 1987 massacre at the village of
 Pokigron (see Section l.a.). Private human rights groups were
 largely responsible for the collection of evidence on this and
 other incidents for use before the IAHRC, which began an
 inquiry into the tragedy in September. Private groups in
 general are able to interview victims and report their
 
 
 742
 SURINAME
 findings, generally through self-produced publications but
 also to international and nongovernmental human rights
 groups. Moiwana '86, Suriname's best known human rights
 group, has faced repeated harassment. Following a December
 attempt by unknown assailants on the life of the group's
 founder, Stanley Rensch, and Rensch's subsequent departure
 from the country, the future of Moiwana '86 was uncertain.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Legally sanctioned discrimination is prohibited and is rare in
 Suriname's multiracial society. Ethnic consciousness remains
 strong among all groups, however. Maroons and Amerindians
 report the existence of unofficial discrimination. Such
 ethnic differentiation is in many cases the result of limited
 access to technical and higher educati6n.
 Women have a legal right to equal access to education,
 employment, and property. However, social pressures and
 customs inhibit the full exercise of these rights. In certain
 spheres, notably marriage and inheritance, civil law holds
 only limited sway. Thus Hindustani women (and men) must be
 over age 30 to marry without the permission of the family
 head. Maroon women cannot keep the estates.of their dead
 spouses; all property and money pass to the tribe. There is
 no officially sanctioned violence against women. Surinamese
 law does not differentiate between domestic violence and
 general assault cases. Women's rights advocates do not
 consider violence to be one of the major problems they must
 address, but acknowledge that, due to the traditional practice
 among various ethnic groups of resolving instances of domestic
 violence within the community, violence against women could be
 underreported.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Suriname's Constitution protects the right of workers to
 associate and to choose their representatives democratically.
 This right is exercised energetically--about one-half of the
 total work force is organized. Unions are independent of the
 Government and play an active role in local politics. The
 right to strike is also protected by the Constitution.
 Although there were no major industrial strikes during 1989,
 labor officials have reported no instances of interference
 with the exercise of this right. A nationwide general strike
 on May 5, called to protest inaction by the Government
 concerning the economy and the maroon insurgency, provided a
 strong impetus to addressing these problems. The strike
 demonstrated the power of the labor movement, which has fully
 recovered from the havoc wreaked by the murder while in
 military custody of several prominent labor leaders in 1982.
 Though not legally protected, strikes and other labor actions
 by civil servants are permitted in practice. There is an
 active process of consultation between civil servants and
 their employer. A 2-day strike by police personnel in April
 was resolved after the installation of a government commission
 to investigate police claims that the army had overstepped its
 bounds in forcibly removing a soldier from civilian custody
 (see Section I.e.).
 
 
 743
 SURINME
 Surinamese trade unions are permitted to maintain contacts
 with regional and international labor associations. By 1989
 the principal labor unions were represented in the democratic
 international trade union movement. The Moederbond, following
 a hiatus in affiliation that resulted from the events of 1982,
 was fully reinstated to membership in the International
 Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU). Two other
 Surinamese unions, C-47 and the Public Service Unions (CLO),
 affiliated with the ICFTU at the same time. Another union,
 the OASF, was affiliated to the World Confederation of Labor.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The right to organize and bargain collectively is explicitly
 recognized by the Constitution and was respected in practice
 in 1989. Collective bargaining agreements cover approximately
 50 percent of the labor force. There are no special economic
 zones in Suriname, and labor laws are applied uniformly
 throughout the country. Surinamese law prohibits antiunion
 discrimination by employers, and there are effective
 mechanisms for resolving complaints of such discrimination.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced or compulsory labor is prohibited by the Constitution,
 and there were no known incidents of this practice in 1989.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The legal minimum age for employment of children is 15 years.
 The Ministry of Labor is responsible for enforcing this law.
 There were few complaints of violations in 1989, especially in
 the principal cities and towns. Persons under age 15
 occasionally are employed as newspaper sellers and street
 venders. Most such employment generally occurs after school
 hours.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 There is no legal minimum wage in Suriname, but wages remain
 high by regional standards and provide workers with a decent
 standard of living. Work in excess of 8 1/2 hours per day or
 48 hours per week on a regular basis requires special
 government permission, which is routinely granted. Overtime
 work is payable at a premium. Occupational safety and health
 regulations were fully in effect, and a number of workplaces
 were closed down during the year for noncompliance.
 
 
 744
