 SURINAME
 The military has governed Suriname since the 1980 coup that
 overthrew an elected government and suspended the Constitution.
 Since then, Lieutenant Colonel Desire D. Bouterse has exercised
 political power as "Leader of the Revolution" and Commander of
 the Armed Forces. In 1985 he officially assumed the title of
 Head of Government. On December 1, the Government reimposed
 in eastern Suriname the State of Emergency which had been in
 effect throughout the country from 1980 to February 1986.
 In January 1985, the military authority led by Commander
 Bouterse announced a timetable for "a planned return to
 democracy." Under the timetable, an appointed National
 Assembly, consisting of representatives of the military,
 business, and organized labor, would draft a new constitution
 to be presented for popular approval by the end of March 1987.
 Since July 1986, representatives of the principal political
 parties, business, and labor have sat alongside the military
 on the Council of Ministers, which oversees the day-to-day
 affairs of government, and on the Topberaad (Supreme Council),
 Suriname's highest decisionmaking body, which Bouterse chairs.
 Real power is still in the hands of the military, which has
 promised new government institutions by April 1988 after
 general elections are held.
 The Government continued to exercise control over Suriname's
 predominantly free market economy in 1986, primarily through
 the mechanism of centralized importing and distribution,
 foreign exchange controls, and import licenses for importers
 and manufacturers. Economic conditions deteriorated rapidly
 and have led to a shortage of foreign exchange. Imported
 goods are increasingly scarce and expensive. Companies engaged
 primarily in importing and commerce suffered a sharp decline
 in trade.
 Early in 1986, 500 bauxite industry employees were dismissed
 from their jobs; however, unemployment rose less rapidly than
 it might have, since companies in Suriname are forbidden by
 law from laying off workers without government approval.
 Nevertheless, during the last quarter of 1986, unemployment
 increased sharply as a result of an insurgency led by former
 army private Ronnie Brunswijk which has destroyed or damaged
 several major economic targets, idling hundreds of workers.
 The human rights situation in Suriname deteriorated seriously
 in mid-1986, particularly in the areas of suspected killings,
 disappearance, arbitrary arrest, and detention. This turn for
 the worse was largely due to the brutal practices employed by
 the Surinamese military in their effort to combat the Brunswijk
 insurgency which began in July.
 The victims of most human rights violations in recent months
 have been Bush Negroes, members of an ethnic group descended
 from African slaves. Bush Negro villages are concentrated in
 Eastern and Central Suriname, although many Bush Negroes now
 live in the capital, Paramaribo, and its suburbs. Brunswijk
 is a Bush Negro, as are almost all his followers. The army
 and militia appear to suspect all Bush Negroes to be Brunswijk
 supporters, and many Bush Negroes have been killed or arrested
 for no other reason than this.
 According to credible eyewitness reports, many innocent
 civilian Bush Negroes, including women and children, were
 
 
 632
 SURINAME
 killed by the army in Eastern Suriname during the last quarter
 of the year. Several Bush Negro villages also were
 destroyed. The international community condemned these
 actions and called on the Surinamese Government to take steps
 to end the abuse and bring those responsible to justice. The
 Government has responded that it will investigate these
 reports. In other areas, the military continued to engage in
 arbitrary arrest, incommunicado detention, and physical
 mistreatment of prisoners.
 Suriname's official National Institute for Human Rights (NIM),
 established in 1985, has proven to be a government-controlled
 body. Surinamese remain intimidated by the regime.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 According to credible eyewitness reports, noncombatant Bush
 Negroes, including women and children, were massacred by the
 military combating the insurgency in eastern Suriname. There
 have also been widespread reports of military death squads
 operating on government instruction against Bush Negroes.
 The army and militia are believed to have been involved in the
 killings, directed primarily against Bush Negroes in Paramaribo
 and Moengo. In one instance, five bodies of Bush Negroes were
 found on the outskirts of Paramaribo, riddled with bullet
 holes. Dutch news media published photos and videotapes of
 several bodies found near the village of Moengotapoe;
 interviews with survivors, as well as information from other
 reliable sources in Paramaribo, indicate that massacres like
 Moengotapoe took place in a number of other villages in the
 area. Conservative estimates of the number of civilians
 killed in the army's December sweep are at least 244.
 b. Disappearance
 There have been several credible reports of the kidnaping and
 disappearance of Bush Negroes, but the exact number of such
 cases is unknown.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 The 1985 Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR)
 report on Suriname expressed concern over widespread reports of
 torture by the Government. It also sharply contrasted prison
 conditions found in such military installations as Fort
 Zeelandia with those of Suriname's state penitentiaries, such
 as Santo Boma Prison. The report describes Fort Zeelandia's
 temporary brig as "badly overcrowded, filthy, with only the
 most primitive facilities." It found Santo Boma a "truly model
 facility," where regular school classes and trades are taught
 and where guards and administrative authorities are "well
 prepared educationally for their jobs." However, overcrowding
 is a serious problem in Paramaribo jails such as Nieuwe Haven
 and Geyersvlijt, where suspects are held as long as 6 months
 while awaiting trial.
 
 
 633
 SURINAME
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, -or Exile
 There were several widely publicized cases of arbitrary arrest.
 In February a journalist who had publicly criticized the
 Government was arrested at Paramaribo's international airport
 on his way to the United States for a vacation. The journalist
 and his family had their luggage searched and their passports
 confiscated by military police. According to the authorities,
 the Journalist possessed subversive and "destabilizing"
 literature. However, the journalist said that the
 incriminating material consisted of nothing more than United
 Nations reports on human rights in Suriname and some clippings
 from Dutch newspapers. The journalist was interrogated at
 Fort Zeelandia for several days before being released. He
 later left the country.
 In June two Dutch journalists who entered Suriname illegally
 in order to interview the insurgent Brunswijk were arrested by
 military police on charges of espionage. Imprisoned in Fort
 Zeelandia, they were held for 8 days before the courts
 determined that there was insufficient evidence to support the
 charges. The journalists were then turned over to immigration
 authorities, who held them for another 9 days before deporting
 them. While these incidents highlight the vulnerability of
 individuals to arbitrary arrest, it is noteworthy that the
 courts ordered the journalists' release in the face of strident
 public opposition from the Minister of Justice.
 As the strength of the insurgency grew, the military responded
 by arresting at least 20 Bush Negroes in sweeps through
 villages in eastern Suriname, beginning in late July. Members
 of the insurgent leader's family, including his younger brother
 Leo Brunswijk, and over 100 Bush Negro civilians from eastern
 Suriname where the insurgents operate, were detained at Fort
 Zeelandia, military police headquarters, the naval base, and
 possibly other military installations. On Christmas eve, the
 Government released 60 of these prisoners, mostly Bush
 Negroes, from Fort Zeelandia. The military admitted that 50
 prisoners are still being held there and have not been turned
 over to judicial authorities for legal proceedings. The
 Government has still not disclosed the charges against them,
 if any. A regional representative of the International
 Committee of the Red Cross was allowed to visit the prisoners
 in December. While the charges were said to have been dropped
 against those prisoners released, their names were not
 disclosed, and they are clearly reluctant to talk to the press.
 According to Surinamese law, a person suspected of having
 committed a crime for which the sentence is longer than
 4 years may be detained for investigation for up to 14 days
 before being brought before a court to be charged. He may be
 detained longer only if a judge decides there is sufficient
 evidence to support the charge. There is no provision for
 bail during this period.
 There were no reports of forced or compulsory labor in
 Suriname.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The judiciary continues to maintain its independence and to
 provide fair public trials when accused persons are turned
 over to it. The record of the National Police in this regard
 is good, but the Military Police, who are empowered to arrest
 civilians, frequently do not turn prisoners over to the courts
 
 
 634
 SURINAME
 promptly. Bush Negroes arrested in eastern Suriname and held
 incommunicado at Fort Zeelandia for many months are a case in
 point.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 In 1986 military police entered homes and businesses without
 warrants to conduct searches. The People's Militia and the
 February 25 Movement are organizations which monitor what
 people say, and act as informers to the authorities. There
 are no known cases of persons having been forced to join or
 actively support these organizations, though benefits do
 accrue to those who do. It is commonly believed that the
 Government engages in widespread wiretapping of private
 conversations. Some letters from overseas are believed to be
 opened by the Government for political reasons.
 In early 1986, the Government began jamming Radio Netherlands
 Caribbean Service, which often carries items from the Dutch
 press about Suriname. Dutch newspapers and journals have not
 been available to the public since 1982, and publications from
 the Netherlands do not reach subscribers in Suriname.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Surinamese have not forgotten the brutal events of December 8
 and 9, 1982, when 15 prominent opposition leaders were killed
 while in government custody; they remain circumspect about
 publicly criticizing the regime.
 The press in Suriname is not free. The arrests of the
 Surinamese and Dutch journalists are examples of official
 efforts to interfere with the press. In another case,
 Bouterse himself publicly criticized a Paramaribo weekly
 newspaper for failing to contribute "to the goals of the
 revolution." He warned that it risked the same fate as a
 Paramaribo daily whose offices were burned by the army in
 1982. Two months later, the editor of the weekly left the
 country to take up residence in Holland. While government
 censorship is not direct, local editors and journalists have
 been given a clear understanding of what is acceptable to the
 Government and what is not, particularly in reporting on
 military developments and fighting between the army and
 insurgents. Usually they are careful not to overstep the
 limits. On November 23, the media was forbidden to publish
 any news reports on events in eastern Suriname unless they
 were first cleared by the National Information Service (NIS).
 On December 23, video and sound tapes were confiscated from
 Dutch journalists working legally in Suriname, who had been
 interviewing inhabitants of Bush Negro villages in central
 Suriname. The media generally restricts coverage of sensitive
 issues to publication or broadcast of official news releases
 from NIS or the official Suriname News Agency.
 There are two public and three private radio stations and one
 government-owned television station. There are two private
 daily papers and one private weekly newspaper. In addition,
 the Catholic and Moravian Churches each publish a small weekly
 newspaper which often carry articles critical of the
 Government. The Lutheran and Reformed Churches publish a
 combined monthly journal.
 
 
 635
 SURINAME
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Restrictions on mass political meetings which had been in
 place since the coup in 1980 were relaxed somewhat in 1986.
 One political party sponsored a large public celebration of
 the 70th birthday of its founder, and another organized a
 church service to commemorate the 40th anniversary of its
 founding. However, political leaders are cautious about
 exercising this freedom and have been careful to avoid
 criticism of government policy. People may assemble freely
 for social purposes. Religious associations, clubs and
 fraternal societies operate without government interference.
 The State of Emergency, the lifting of which was regarded as a
 significant step toward the long-awaited return to the rule of
 law, was reinstated on December I in most of the eastern half
 of Suriname. The enabling legislation authorized the military
 authorities to enact any measures they regard as necessary for
 the restoration of order in the area. The first decrees
 announced by the military placed a 6 p.m. to 5 a.m. curfew in
 effect in two districts, prohibited gatherings of any kind in
 the entire State of Emergency area, required the surrender of
 all privately owned firearms in the country (later amended to
 apply only to the State of Emergency area), and placed
 restrictions on movement in eastern Suriname. At the same
 time, all foreigners were warned to stay out of the area
 covered by these decrees--which curiously included Zanderij
 International Airport.
 Half the labor f6rce is unionized. Labor organizing, union
 elections, wage negotiations, and labor actions, including
 strikes, normally take place freely. However, most labor
 leaders continue to be cautious in their dealings with the
 Government. Unions and business organizations are free to
 affiliate with international bodies. In November 1986, the
 International Confederation of Free Trade Unions suspended one
 labor federation, the Moederbond, for supporting the Bouterse
 Government. Three of Suriname's four labor federations and
 two business associations are participating in the Government
 and in the drafting of a new constitution.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 There is freedom of worship. No one religion is favored above
 any other, nor is there discrimination against members of any
 religious group. Articles and programs sponsored by religious
 groups appear in the newspapers and on radio and television.
 Religious groups publish without advance censorship, maintain
 international contacts, and freely organize trips abroad.
 Foreign clergy are allowed to minister to the needs of both
 local and expatriate congregations; however, in August 1985,
 Father Maarten Noordermeer was expelled from the country for
 making statements from his pulpit directly criticizing
 Bouterse. The National Institute for Human Rights [NIM],
 which has been largely inactive in 1986, held a public hearing
 on the complaint filed by the Catholic bishop; it ruled on
 December 31 that neither the rights of Father Noordermeer nor
 those of the Catholic diocese had been violated by the
 expulsion. However, NIM noted that Surinamese immigration
 law, which was enacted in 1938 and doesn't allow aliens to
 appeal expulsion orders, no longer met "international norms."
 NIM's decision only confirmed the popular perception that it
 is a government-controlled organ with no independent voice.
 Missionaries are allowed to enter the country and to
 proselytize.
 
 
 636
 SURINAME
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Surinamese may move residences and change workplaces freely.
 They generally may travel abroad as they wish; however, travel
 within Suriname is now restricted because of fighting in
 eastern Suriname, and travel between government-held and
 guerrilla-dominated areas is practically impossible. The
 Government also has suspended flights by the Mission Aviation
 Fellowship, which provided supply and transportation services
 for religious missions in the interior. There was one case in
 1986 in which passports were seized by the authorities to
 prevent persons identified as political opponents from
 traveling abroad. However, when threatened with legal action,
 the authorities returned the passports within a few days.
 Surinamese may emigrate without interference and may return to
 take up residence at any time. In general, Surinamese
 identified with the previous government are not harassed if
 they return to the country. However, those regarded as
 enemies by the current regime are afraid to return. In its
 1985 Report on Suriname, the IACHR expressed concern over
 reports of harassment, intimidation, and in some cases, the
 attempted assassination of political opponents of the
 Government who were living abroad.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Until the 1980 coup, Suriname was a functioning democracy.
 Upon taking over, Bouterse suspended the Constitution and
 placed effective power in the hands of a five-member Military
 Authority, presently reduced to two members. There have been
 no elections since the coup, but with the inclusion of
 civilians in the Government in 1984, an official policy of
 returning to an undefined "democratic system" was begun. In
 August 1985, Bouterse, as Chairman of the Military Authority,
 was made Head of Government. In January 1985, the 31-member
 National Assembly was appointed, 14 members nominated by the
 military, and the other 17 by the labor unions and a business
 association. The Assembly was charged with drafting a new
 constitution. On December 12, Bouterse announced that the
 draft constitution would be ready by March 1987 and that it
 would be submitted to a popular referendum for approval within
 6 months. He also said that general elections will be held no
 later than March 1988.
 In July 1986, a new Cabinet, composed of representatives of
 military, labor, and business groups, as well as of Suriname's
 three traditional parties, was appointed to implement a
 program of political and economic reforms. The nature of this
 program and of the future democratic system has not been
 further defined.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 In 1985 the Government appointed five persons to the NIM human
 rights commission. NIM exhibited little interest in pursuing
 individual complaints of human rights violations until October
 1986, when it announced hearings on the case of the Catholic
 priest expelled from Suriname 18 months before. No reason was
 given for investigating this particular case;
 
 
 637
 SURINAME
 two other individual complaints brought to the attention of
 the commission earlier were not mentioned.
 There are no nongovernmental human rights organizations within
 the country. Representatives of the various churches speak
 out against violations of human rights, but they do so
 carefully to avoid retaliation by the military authorities.
 In a rare official reference to human rights, Bouterse, during
 his appearance at the U.N. General Assembly in October 1986,
 asserted that the Surinamese Government fully supported the
 protection of fundamental human rights. The Government is not
 active in international or regional human rights bodies.
 The Surinamese Government did not respond to the IAHCR effort
 to raise the question of summary executions.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Women have equal. access to education and employment, although
 social pressures and customs still inhibit women from fully
 exercising these rights. Racial discrimination is prohibited
 and is uncommon in Suriname's multiracial society. However,
 ethnic consciousness remains strong among all groups and has
 been exacerbated by the current fighting between the
 predominantly creole army and insurgents, who are mostly Bush
 Negroes.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 There is no legal minimum wage in Suriname, but wages are
 generally high by the standards in the region and provide
 workers an adequate standard of living. The workweek in most
 companies is between 39 and 45 hours. The legal minimum age
 for employment of children is 14, except in the fisheries
 industry where it is 15.
 
 
 68
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COJNTRY: SURINAME
 1984     1985     1986
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL.,          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............      . 0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.AIO ....................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.3      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOO0 FOR PEACE .......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ................. 0.0         0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS.....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE lI-TOTAL .........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF. EC.DEV & WFP.        0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST..         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS ......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ..............     0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ............. .   .0.0        0.0      0.0
 A.MAP  GRANTS ...........      0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 :.INTL IL.EO.TRN$ ....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 3.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...*        0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER  US  LOANS ..........      0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IN BANK LOANS .......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL  OTHER ..............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 19B4     1985     1986     1946-86
 TOTAL ........     0.0      0.3      0.0    .59.6
 I8RD               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IFC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADS                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFOB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNOP               0.0      0.3      0.0     11.1
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0      0.0      0.7
 EEC                3.0      0.0      0.0     47.8
 
 
 639
