 SURINAME
 During 1992 Suriname continued its efforts to consolidate democratic constitu-
 tional government which had been reestablished by the installation of a freely elect-
 ed Parliament and the inauguration of a democratically elected President in 1991.
 The new Government of President Ronald Venetiaan was successful in bringing the
 
 
 insurgencies in the countryside to a formal end and arranging for the rebels to turn
 in their weapons under the auspices of the Organization of American States. A
 central element of the settlement was an amnesty relating to offenses committed by
 both sides of the conflict since 1985.
 The Surinamese armed forces, which overthrew a civilian government twice in 10
 years (most recently in December 1990), are still not fully under civilian government
 control. According to the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, total military
 expenditures for 1989 were $39 million. There has been nominal growth in the de-
 fense budget and, with military reform now a focus, it is possible the Government
 will reduce the size of its armed forces, permitting a reduction in military spending
 in the near future. The military police no longer investigate civilian criminal cases,
 reducing greatly the number of illegal arrests. They continue to perform immigra-
 tion functions at the international airport and the country's borders.
 Suriname's economy is largely agricultural but also depends heavily upon export
 revenues from the key bauxite sector. There was no growth in the real gross domes-
 tic product in 1992, and the economy was beset by foreign exchange shortages, infla-
 tion, and a flourishing black market. The National Assembly approved a structural
 adjustment program developed by the Government, and flows of economic assistance
 from the Netherlands and other donors were expected to resume. It was too early,
 however, to know whether these measures would bring about the desired economic
 recovery.
 The number of new allegations of human rights abuses declined sharply in 1992.
 The principal problems included police mistreatment of detainees, prison overcrowd-
 ing, and intimidation of the press. The Government failed to call to account human
 rights abusers from previous regimes.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Exirajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political
 killings in 1992, but there were instances of suspects dying in police custody. There
 were credible charges that two persons in police custod died, one from beating at
 the hands of the police and the other from police refusalto secure treatment for an
 ill prisoner. There was no progress in investigations or prosecutions of suspects in
 past murders of opponents of the military, or in killings or disappearances during
 the insurgency in the interior.
 The President signed an amnesty law granting immunity from prosecution for cer-
 tain crimes committed since 1985 by those participating in armed insurgency or by
 the military in suppressing it; the law specifically exempts crimes against humanity.
 A nongovernmental human rights group, Moiwana 86, is challenging the law's valid-
 ity on grounds it is inconsistent with Suriname's legal obligations under inter-
 national human rights agreements. The impact of the law on investigation and pros-
 ecution of past abuses is not yet clear. The President publicly discussed the possibil-
 ity of extending the amnesty to cover the 1982 killing of opponents of the military
 regime who were in military custody, but did not indicate whether he would favor
 such an extension.
 In the case involving the December 1987 killings of seven Maroons near the vil-
 lage of Pokigron, for which the Government admitted responsibility before the Inter-
 American Court of Human Rights in December 1991, the amount of compensation
 to be paid to the families of the victims has not yet been determined. The court
 heard oral arguments in June in this case and another case arising from the killing
 of a Suriname citizen who had recently returned from the Netherlands. Decisions
 are expected in February 1993.
 b. Disappearance.-During 1992, there were no allegations of the disappearance
 of Surinamese citizens due to the actions of the Government or the military. How-
 ever, the Government took no action to investigate earlier allegations of killings and
 disappearances occurring in 1990.
 c.Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Surinamese Constitution prohibits inhuman treatment or punishment, but
 human rights observers expressed increasing concern during the year over police
 mistreatment of prisoners. Physical intimidation of prisoners was reputed to be a
 routine practice. There were several cases of hospitalization or death of suspects
 while in police custody. A prominent human rights organization received five com-
 plaints of police mistreatment of prisoners in 1992. Two cases allegedly resulted in
 death as described above, and the other three cases involved claims of police brutal.
 ity.
 Jail overcrowding is severe and continues to be a serious problem. Members of the
 Dutch Parliament and Dutch human rights workers expressed shock at the condi-
 
 
 492
 tions of Surinamese jails. The worst problem is found at police stations where sus-
 pects are held pending trial. Cells may hold as many as four times the number of
 prisoners they were designed for, and toilet and bathing facilities are inadequate.
 Police officials admit the problem and express a desire to correct it but say they do
 not have the resources to do so.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Surinamese law allows a person sus-
 pectedof committing a crime for which the sentence is longer than 4 y'ears to be
 detained by the police for up to 14 days before being brought before a Judqe to be
 charged. The prosecutor's office then has 30 days to complete its investigation and
 prepare the prosecution. The prosecutor may request an extension of an additional
 30 days from the "judge of instruction." This law is observed in practice; there is
 no bai available during this period.
 In 1992 the military police no longer arrested civilians they suspected of criminal
 activity. (Although a 1990 law had terminated their authority to arrest civilians, the
 military elice had previously continued to make such arrests, particularly from
 January o September 1991, when a militarily installed Government was in power.)
 They observed the requirement to hand over to the police civilians they arrested for
 committing a crime in their presence. They continued to perform the immigration
 function at the country's international airports and borders, despite the contention
 of the police that the 1990 law also ended the military police's authorization to per-
 form this function.
 There were no allegations that exile was used as a means of political control in
 Suriname, although during the military regime (1980-1987) and the military-sup-
 ported interim Government (1990-1991), some citizens fled the country for fear that
 they might be arrested or killed for their political activity. Although few of these
 individuals have returned to Suriname to reside, several visited the country without
 incident for a December memorial service.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Tria.-Although the Surinamese Constitution provides
 for an independent judiciary and the right to a fair public trial in which defendants
 have the right to counsel, the effectiveness of both the civilian and military courts
 is limited. Military personnel are generally not subject to civilian criminal or civil
 law; under Surinamese military law, any soldier who commits a crime immediately
 comes under military jurisdiction. (A member of the armed forces may be tried in
 a civilian court only if charged with participating in a criminal act with civilians.)
 The military police are responsible for carrying out all investigations involving mili-
 tary personnel. Although it is illegal for the Army Command to interfere with inves-
 tigations, such interference often takes place. Obstruction often occurs on the civil-
 ian side of the judicial system as well, at the investigative and prosecutorial levels,
 in politically sensitive and narcotics-related criminal cases.
 Another factor that prevents criminal cases involving military personnel or drug
 traffickers from reaching the courts is what judicial officials termed a pervasive cli-
 mate of fear and intimidation. A number of criminal investigations were effectively
 blocked by military authorities who refused to cooperate or because witnesses were
 afraid to come forward. Such cases are unlikely to be solved until the military is
 brought fully under civilian control.
 There were no known political prisoners held during the year.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family,  ome, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the right to privacy. There were continuing credible r-
 ports that the armed forces illegally monitored telephone calls, tracked the move-
 ments of human rights activists and of its critics, and threatened government offi-
 cials policemen, politicans, human rights workers, and journalists. Warrants, issued
 not by judges but by quasi-judicial officers who supervise criminal investigations,
 are required for searches. Such warrants are obtained in the great majority of police
 investigations.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution guarantees the right of free-
 dom of speech and expressiop of opinion through the printed press or other commu-
 nications media. Suriname's two daily newspapers and most of its radio stations are
 privately owned. Its two television stations and one of the country's radio stations
 are owned and operated by the Government. In 1992, under the elected Govern-
 ment, restrictions on freedom of speech and the press were greatly reduced com-
 pared to the situation under the military regime and under the military-sponsored
 interim government. Nonetheless, because the Surinamese armed forces were still
 not fully under the control of the civilian Government, journalists and others ini-
 tially remained wary of expressing views which might incur military displeasure.
 Having previously learned to exercise a degree of self-censorship, the press was also
 somewhat hesitant in exercising its greater freedom. In September, however, the
 
 
 493
 Journalists' Association publicly called for an investigation into the killing of 15
 civic leaders in 1982, an act tantamount to calling for investigation of the armed
 forces.
 Early in the year, the President prohibited the two television channels from trans-
 mitting live broadcasts of a seminar on economic adjustment and reform held by the
 Journalists' Association. In June police confiscated copies and prohibited the sale of
 a book by a Guyanes author published in Suriname on the ground that it blas-
 phemed the Hindu religion. Under Surinamese law, blasphemy is a criminal offense.
 Writers and human rights monitors protested the police action. The governmental
 National Institute  of Human     Rights, however, publicly    stated  that the
 antiblasphemy law was necessary in Suriname's multicultural society and that the
 police were right in acting on it.
 In September press reports indicated that the Government was reviewing the
 broadcasting license of a radio station which carried a program that was regularly
 critical of the Government and members of the ruling political coalition. The Gov-
 ernment later informed station managers without publicity that the inquiry was
 ended and that there was no question of revoking the station's license.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The right to assemble peace-
 ably and to form associations for nonviolent purposes is protected constitutionally,
 and these rights are respected in practice. Official registration of associations is re-
 quired in many instances and is generally granted. Most large public meetings re-
 quire permits, which are routinely issued.
 c. Freedom of Re/igion.-Freedom of religion is respected in Suriname. There is
 no state religion. Foreign clergy are allowed to minister to both local and expatriate
 congregations, and missionaries enter the country freely to proselytize. Religious
 groups maintain international contacts, freely organize trips abroad, and publish
 periodicals. Adherence to a particular faith is neither a bar to, nor a requirement
 for, entry into political, economic, or social fields.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 pabriation.--Surinamers may change their residences and workplacos freely and
 travel abroad as they wish. Political dissidents who emigrated to the Netherlands
 and elsewhere during the years of military rule are welcome to return. Few of them,
 however have chosen to do so. Citizenship is not revoked for political reasons.
 Travef to the interior became once again possible in theory in the wake of the
 peace agreement between insurgent groups and the Government. In practice, how-
 ever, the Government made only slow progress in reestablishing the presence of po-
 lice and other government services in the interior, and many prospective travelers
 declined to precede the government presence.
 There were no known instances in which refugees were forced to return to coun-
 tries in which they feared persecution. By the end of 1992, approximately 4,500 of
 the 6,000 refugees who fled to French Guiana during the insurgency had returned
 to Suriname under the auspices of the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees.
 Spokespersons for the remaining refugees said they were unwilling to return to the
 country while those who created the conditions from which they had fled (i.e., the
 military leadership) remained in positions of power and influence.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution stipulates that power and authority rest with the people and
 provides for the right to change the Government peacefully through the direct elec-
 tion by secret ballot of a National Assembly of 51 members every 5 years. The Na-
 tional Assembly then elects a President by a two-thirds vote. If the legislature is
 unable to do so, as was the case, fllowing the last election in 1991, the Constitution
 provides that a National People's Assembly omprisingMembers of Parliament and
 regional and local officials shall elect the President. Constitutional provisions were
 followed and resulted in the election of the current Government. Nevertheless, the
 Surinamese armed forces have overthrown elected Governments twice since 1980
 and are not yet fully under civilian control. While the citizens of Suriname have
 twice elected Governments to replace military regimes, it has not yet been dem-
 onstrated that one elected Government can be replaced by another through use of
 the ballot box.
 The Constitution provides for the existence of political parties, and six parties are
 represented in the National Assembly. There are no special conditions or restric-
 tions on nationality or citizenship that limit participation in the political system. In
 practice, however, most of the country's political activit takes place in the capital,
 and those who live elsewhere, particularly less educated Maroons and Amerindians
 in remote areas, have little influence in the political process.
 
 
 494
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Suriname's two major human rights organizations, Moiwana '86 and the Organi-
 zation for Peace and Justice, were not subject to governmental restriction of their
 activities. However, Military Commander Desi Bouterse publicly opposed the Gov-
 ernment's grant of permission for the Organization for Peace and Justice and affili-
 ated groups to commemorate the anniversary of the December 1982 killing by the
 military regime he led of 15 civic leaders suspected of antigovernment plotting. He
 urged his supporters to meet those demonstrating against the killings in the streets.
 The commander resigned in the furor over the commemoration and did not carry
 through on his threat. The demonstration took place peacefully under well organized
 police protection.
 The National Institute of Human Rights is funded by the Government but author-
 ized to act independently. In practice, however, the Institute is widely regarded as
 ineffective. The Surinamese Gvernment is prepared to cooperate with investiga-
 tions of the human rights sitiation in the country. A January mission from the
 Dutch Institute for Human Rights was received by the President.
 Suriname failed to implement several recomendations of the Inter-American Com-
 mission on Human Rights that it investigate killings during the tenure of the mili-
 tary regime and interim Government. The current Government has expressed a will-
 ingness to abide by a ruling of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights in a case
 arising from violations during the military regime for which it has recognized state
 responsibility. The court, however, is not scheduled to rule until February 1993 on
 the amount of damages which should be paid.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Language, or Social Status
 Suriname's Constitution and laws do not differentiate among its citizens on the
 basis of their ethnic origins, religious affiliations, or other cultural differences. In
 Suriname's pluralistic society any deprture from equality before the law would be
 extremely divisive. Amerindians and Maroons are therefore formally able to partici-
 pate in Suriname's political process on an equal footing with the country's other in-
 abitants.
 In actuality, however, the majority of members of these two groups are at a dis-
 tinct disadvantage in affecting the political process. First, Suriname's political life
 is concentrated in the capital city of Paramaribo while the majority of Amerindians
 and Maroons live in the interior. Second, most Amerindians and Maroons are dis-
 advantaged by the limited availability of educational and other social services in the
 interior. Beginning in the mid-1980's, their isolation   was compounded by
 insurgencies that effectively cut most of the interior off from the capital. Implemen-
 tation of the mid-August peace accord should increase the ability of members of
 these groups to participate in Suriname's political life, but little progress had been
 made in putting those provisions of the agreement into force by the end of the year.
 Women have a legal right to equal access to education, employment, and property.
 Nevertheless, socia pressures and customs inhibit the full exercise of these rights,
 particularly in the areas of marriage and inheritance. Surinamese law does not dif-
 ferentiate between domestic violence and other forms of assault, and the Govern-
 ment has not specifically addressed the problem of violence against women. The
 rooms of the private Foundation Home for Women in Crisis Situations in Paramar-
 ibo are constantly filled with women and their children from all the country's ethnic
 grups, an indication that violence against women is prevalent. The Foundation
 finds it difficult to raise funds from private sources, and the Government has de-
 clined to provide it assistance.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution protects the right of workers to as-
 sociate and to choose their representatives democratically. At least 40 percent of the
 work force is organized into unions which belong to one of the country's six major
 labor federations. Unions ae independent of the Government and play an active
 role in politics. A small Labor Party, which is independent of the labor movement
 but includes the chairmen of two of the most influential labor federations in its lead-
 ership, is part of the ruling four-party coalition and provides three cabinet members.
 There are no restrictions on unions' international activities. Several Surinamese
 labor federations were reaccepted as affiliates of international trade union organiza-
 tions in the late 1980's after having been suspended for collaboration with the mili-
 tary regime earlier in the decade.
 Civil servants have no legally protected right to strike and mount other labor ac-
 tions but in practice are able to engage in these activities. The Constitution does
 protect the right of nongovernment employees to strike. Workers in both the govern-
 
 
 ment and private sections staged a number of short strikes in 1992. Among others,
 rice workers, customs officers, and health workers struck during the year.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The right to organize and
 bargain collectively is explicitly recognized by the Constitution and is respected in
 practice. Collective bargaining agreements cover approximately 50 percent of the
 abor force. The law prohibits antinion discrimination by employers, and there are
 effective mechanisms for resolving complaints of such discrimination. There are no
 special economic zones in Suriname.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Lcbor.-aThe Constitution prohibits forced
 or cornpulsory labor. There were no known instances of it in 1992.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Chi/dren.--Surinamese law sets the minimum
 age for employment at 15 years. Enforcement of this law by the Ministry of Labor
 and the police is sporadic and only partially effective, however. Those under 15
 years of age are sometimes employed as street vendors, newspaper sellers, and shop
 assistants. School attendance is compulsory until the age of 12. However, schooling
 has been largely unavailable in the interior due to the armed insurgncies which
 were in progress there. In addition, a significant number of the children who fled
 to the capital to escape fighting in the countryside did not find places in the schools.
 The August 1992 peace accord between the Government and insurgent groups pro-
 vides for the reestablishment of schooling as well as other government services. The
 Government was beginning to plan for their restoration as the year ended.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work--Suriname has no minimum wage legislation.
 The Government's lowest wage for unskilled laborers will not provide a decent living
 for a worker and family. Work in excess of 9 hours per day or 45 hours per week
 on a regular basis requires special government permission, which is routinely grant-
 ed. Such overtime work earns premium ay.
 A 10- to 12-member inspectorate of the Occupational Health and Safety Division
 of the Ministry of Labor is charged with enforcing legislated occupational safety and
 health regulations. Resource constraints and lack oftrained personnel preclude the
 Division from making regular inspections of Surinamese industry. There are no cur-
 rent statistics on accident rates in local industry. However, the rates do not appear
 to be unreasonably high. The key bauxite industry, for example, has an outstanding
 safety record.
