 SURINAME
 Suriname has been governed by the military since the 1980 coup
 which overthrew its elected Government and suspended the
 Constitution. Since the coup, political power has been
 exercised or delegated by Leader of the Revolution and
 Commander of the Armed Forces, Lieutenant Colonel Desire D.
 Bouterse and by other members of the military authority. In
 1985, Suriname continued to operate under an official state of
 emergency.
 In January 1985, a new Cabinet consisting of nominees of the
 military, labor and business was installed under Prime
 Minister Wim Udenhout and given a mandate by the military to
 govern until March 31, 1987, the end of the announced
 transitional period to "democracy." The military, organized
 labor and organized business also nominated members to a new
 National Assembly whose main tasks include the writing of a
 constitution, approving a budget, and legislating. In August,
 the Assembly approved a decree formalizing the de facto role
 of the military in the government by naming Commander Bouterse
 as "Head of Government" and by identifying the five-member
 "Military Authority" as a component of the Government.
 However, the military has said that, when the Constitution is
 completed and has received popular approval, it will hand over
 governing power to new constitutional authorities.
 Suriname's predominantly free market economy came increasingly
 under government regulation in 1985--primarily through
 allocations of scarce foreign exchange and import licenses to
 importers and manufacturers. Economic conditions worsened
 rapidly because of a shortage of foreign exchange, and
 companies engaged in importing and commerce suffered a sharp
 decline in trade. Unemployment has risen less rapidly than it
 might have, because layoffs are forbidden without government
 approval.
 The human rights situation in Suriname showed some signs of
 modest progress in 1985 as violations attributable to
 government actions declined further. There were serious
 abuses in the expulsion of 5,000 illegal Guyanese residents.
 The powers of the military police were expanded. Showing
 sensitivity to expressions of international concern, the
 Government in August brought the long-awaited "Civil Rights
 and Duties Commission" into existence. Political rights,
 however, are still denied, and Surinamers remain intimidated
 by the regime,
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no known cases of killing with political motivation
 or at Government instigation in 1985. In its 1985 Human
 Rights report on Suriname, however, the Inter-American
 Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) reported allegations
 concerning several assassination attempts on the lives of
 political opponents of the Government living abroad.
 
 
 SURINAME
 b. Disappearance
 There is no evidence that the Government sponsored abductions
 or kidnappings by governmental or non-governmental forces, nor
 were there any reports of such disappearances during 1985.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Approximately five thousand Guyanese who were allegedly in
 Suriname illegally were rounded up and deported in January and
 February 1985. Many were detained and moved to the border
 without being allowed to collect their children or property.
 During their overnight detention in an abandoned banana
 warehouse at the border town of Nieuw Nickerie, hundreds of
 Guyanese were denied access to adequate sanitary facilities,
 food and water, and at least one child is said to have died
 under these circumstances. Following a public outcry by the
 churches, the military police stopped the operation in
 February.
 The 1985 IACHR report on Suriname sharply contrasts prison
 conditions found in such military installations as Fort
 Zeelandia with those of regular state penitentiaries such as
 Santo Boma Prison. The report describes Fort Zeelandia's
 temporary brig as "badly over-crowded, filthy, with only the
 most primitive facilities." It describes Santo Boma as a
 "truly model facility" where regular school classes and trades
 are taught and where guards and administrative authorities are
 "well prepared educationally for their jobs."
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention or Exile
 During 1985 the only known case of arbitrary arrest involved a
 young man who was taken into custody in July for having
 written a book which the authorities described as subversive.
 He was arrested by the military police and held incommunicado
 for over five days. The Court decided that there was
 insufficient evidence to detain the man and he was released
 after having been detained for a total of approximately nine
 days.
 According to Surinamese law, a person suspected of having
 committed a crime the sentence for which is longer than four
 years, may be detained by the police for investigation for up
 to fourteen days before being brought before a court to be
 charged. He may be detained longer only if a judge decides
 that there is sufficient evidence to justify the charge.
 There is no provision for bail during this period.
 There is no forced or compulsory labor in Suriname.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The civil court system provides fair public trials when the
 accused are turned over to the civil authorities, and there
 were no known cases in 1985 of military police not adhering to
 this practice. The judiciary continues to maintain its
 independence and to act properly in cases referred to it.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Military police in 1985 entered homes and businesses without
 warrants to conduct searches. The People's Militia and the
 
 
 684
 SURINAME
 February 25 Movement are organizations which have the power to
 monitor what people say and to act as informers to the
 authorities. Information on how this power is used is
 lacking. There are no known cases of persons having been
 forced to join or actively support these organizations, though
 benefits do accrue to those who do. It is widely believed
 that there is widespread wiretapping by the Government of
 private conversations. Some letters from overseas are
 suspected of being opened by the Government while in the post
 office.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 People have not forgotten the events of December 8 and 9,
 1982, when fifteen prominent opposition leaders were killed
 while in government custody; they remain circumspect about
 publicly critizing the regime.
 The press is not free; the Government continues to censure
 editors who publish what it does not like. In January 1985
 the editor of one newspaper was called in and told to correct
 his "unpatriotic" reporting. He had printed a story on an
 internal Colombian matter on page one and had relegated a
 dispatch on Commander Bouterse's visit to Colombia to an
 inside page. In February, the editor of a church newspaper
 was called in by the authorities and warned that he was liable
 to be prosecuted for his criticism of the Government for its
 round-up and treatment of Guyanese alleged to have been in
 Suriname illegally. In July, the editor of a weekly was told
 to correct an article because it had insulted a high
 government official. The editor asked by letter which part of
 the article should be corrected and how. He did not receive a
 reply and no corrections were made. Similar pressures were
 experienced by the privately owned radio stations.
 In April 1985, a new, privately owned radio station was
 opened; there are now three privately owned radio stations and
 one public radio station. There is one government-owned
 television station. There are two private daily newspapers
 and one private weekly newspaper. In addition, the Catholic
 and Moravian churches each publish a small weekly newspaper
 which often carry articles critical of the Government. The
 Lutheran and Reformed churches publish a combined monthly
 journal.
 Surinamers listen freely to independent shortwave broadcasts
 from abroad, most especially to the Radio Netherlands World
 Service. There is no attempt by the Government to restrict
 this practice. Indeed, the Government complains often and
 loudly about Radio Netherlands' reports on Suriname, thus
 showing that it also carefully monitors these daily reports.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Political rallies which do not support the military and the
 Government are not permitted. Although pre-coup political
 parties had been banned for the past five years, some of their
 leaders met throughout the year with representatives of the
 Government to discuss democratization plans. Beginning on
 September 30, 1985, leaders of the three largest parties were
 authorized to meet with their members once again.
 People may assemble freely for social purposes. Initially,
 
 
 685
 SURINAME
 the Government strictly limited the number of persons allowed
 to meet party leaders, in one instance stationing an armored
 car at the meeting place to assure compliance with the
 headcount restriction. From December onward the numberical
 restrictions were relaxed. People may assemble freely for
 social purposes. Religious associations, clubs and fraternal
 societies operate without government interference.
 Labor organizing, union elections, wage negotiations, and
 labor actions, including strikes, normally take place freely.
 However, labor leaders continue to be cautious in their
 dealings with the Government. Such caution is an indication
 of lingering intimidation prompted by the December 1982
 killings of 15 prominent critics of the regime while they were
 being held in government custody. About half the labor force
 is unionized. Union and business associations affiliate with
 international bodies as they see fit. Three of Suriname's
 four labor federations and two business associations
 participate in the Government. This year business and labor
 nominated several cabinet ministers and named their respective
 representatives to the new National Assembly.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 There is freedom of worship. No one religion is favored above
 any other, nor is there discrimination against members of any
 religious group. Articles and programs sponsored by religious
 groups appear in the newspapers and on radio and television.
 Religious groups publish what they like without advance
 censorship, maintain international contacts as they wish and
 freely organize trips abroad. Despite the serious shortage of
 foreign exchange, the Government took steps to assure that an
 important pilgrimage to Mecca could take place. The
 Government allocated scarce foreign exchange to allow for the
 printing abroad of a commemoration book for another religious
 group. Foreign clergy are allowed to minister to the needs of
 both local and expatriate congregations. However, in August
 1985, one foreign priest was expelled from the country for
 making statements from his pulpit critical of the Government's
 human rights abuses. Missionaries are allowed to enter the
 country and to proselytize.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 Surinamers generally may travel as they wish, both within the
 country and abroad. There were two known cases of the
 authorities seizing or denying passports to persons to prevent
 them from traveling freely abroad. Both individuals were
 associated with opposition political views. Surinamers may
 move residences and change workplaces freely. They may take
 abroad only the equivalent of $297 in currency per year,
 unless a special license is obtained, which is difficult to
 do. In order to buy a ticket to a destination other than
 Suriname Airways' terminal points, Surinamers must apply for a
 special license for the foreign exchange. These restrictions
 are the result of the extreme shortage of foreign exchange and
 were not instituted for political reasons.  Surinamers may
 emigrate without interference. They may return to take up
 residence in Suriname at anytime, even after long periods
 abroad. In general, Surinamers who are identified with the
 pre-coup Government are not harassed. However, those regarded
 as enemies by the current regime would likely fear for their
 safety if they returned to the country. In its 1985 Human
 
 
 686
 SURINAME
 Rights report on Suriname, the Inter-American Commission on
 Human Rights expressed concern over reports of harassment,
 intimidation, and in some cases, the attempted assassination
 of political opponents of the Government living abroad.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Surinamers have been denied the right to change their
 government by democratic means since 1980. Effective power
 rests in the hands of the five member Military Authority which
 retains or delegates power as it sees fit. There have been no
 political elections since the military coup of February 1980.
 By decree the chairman of the Military Authority, Commander
 Desi Bouterse, was made Head of Government in August 1985 and
 the Government was composed of military, labor and business
 groups. A 31-member National Assembly was appointed in
 January 1985. Fourteen members were nominated by the
 military. Labor unions and a business association nominated
 the other 17 members. The principal task of the Assembly is
 the drafting of a new Constitution. The Assembly also has
 certain legislative powers. During 1985, leaders of
 Suriname's traditional political parties began a series of
 discussions with the Military Authority regarding future
 democratic political structures, which led to a signed
 agreement on November 23 between the military and the
 political leaders to continue the discussions, the goal of
 which is restoration of democracy. As a result of this
 agreement, each of the three parties nominated two members to
 participate in discussions on questions of a political or
 administrative nature in the Supreme Council, the top
 policy-making body of the Government.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 In January 1985, the Government accepted a visit of a
 delegation of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights.
 The delegates met with government, labor, business and church
 leaders and visited social projects.
 In March 1985, the report of the United Nations High
 Commissioner for Refugees's special rapporteur on summary or
 arbitrary executions, Mr. S. Amos Wako, was released.
 According to the report, "summary or arbitrary executions took
 place on the night of 8-9 December (1982) in Fort
 Zeelandia.... It was universally acknowledged to the special
 rapporteur that, in looking to the future, summary or
 arbitrary executions can be prevented if democracy is
 restored."
 In August 1985, the Government appointed five persons to the
 "National Institute of Basic Rights and Duties of the
 Surinamese People," the long-awaited human rights commission.
 The Institute has as its main tasks the furthering of respect
 for the fundamental rights and duties of man, the study of
 national and international legislation to ensure that
 Suriname's laws are brought into compliance with international
 standards, the promotion of cooperation with the UN, the OAS
 and other organizations in the field of human rights, and the
 provision of information and support to organizations which
 wish to be informed about these fundamental rights and duties.
 
 
 687
 SURINAME
 Critics charge that the Institute does not have as part of its
 specific functions the investigation of individual complaints
 about human rights abuses. They fear that the Institute may
 not have the authority nor the ability to conduct independent
 investigations, and note it does not have an autonomous
 budget. However, by September 1985, two individual complaints
 were before the commission. So far, the commission has not
 acted on the complaints.
 There are no nongovernmental human rights organizations within
 the country. The churches have on occasion spoken out against
 what they allege to be violations of human rights, most
 specifically during the campaign to round up aliens illegally
 in the country in January and February 1985; the Government
 responded by warning one church newspaper editor that he could
 be liable for prosecution for what he had written on the issue.
 The Government is not actively involved in international or
 regional human rights bodies dealing with violations in other
 countries.
 Amnesty International Report 1985 mentions judicial
 developments in the cases of the 14 persons held in military
 custody, the subject of the 1983 and 1984 reports. Freedom
 House rates Suriname "not free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 According to the latest government figures, Suriname has a
 population of 390,000, and its population growth rate,
 according to World Bank data for 1985, was two percent per
 annum. However, the Inter-American Development Bank's
 planning bureau estimated the population growth rate in 1982
 at 3.1 percent per annum, while at least one local government
 agency puts it at 2.2 percent. Per capita gross national
 product, according to World Bank data, was $3,420 in 1983.
 Suriname's import oriented economy continued to suffer in
 1985. Depressed international market prices for bauxite and
 its derivatives have weakened the country's ability to earn
 foreign exchange. As a result, many imported consumer goods
 and raw materials for industry are scarce. The private
 business sector has been hurt and the standard of living is
 dropping. Overall unemployment is estimated to be as high as
 thirty percent even though the government employs forty-two
 percent of the labor force. During the last decade, the
 country has.lived above its indigenous means. This was
 possible because of generous amounts of Dutch development aid
 and, later, a drawing down of reserves. The aid has been
 suspended, the reserves are now gone, and the standard of
 living is dropping.
 Latest figures available for life expectancy at birth is 66
 years; infant mortality is 21 per 1,000 live births; adult
 literacy is 65 percent. The adjusted primary school
 enrollment ratio in 1978 was 103. In 1979 the caloric supply
 as a percentage of requirements was 119.
 There is little effective government supervision of labor
 conditions. The Government has few inspectors and many
 conditions are not covered by regulation or law. For
 instance, there is no legal minimum wage in Suriname. On the
 other hand, the country enjoys a highly-developed labor
 movement with a tradition of effective bargaining over wages,
 
 
 688
 SURINAME
 benefits and working conditions. Approximately half of the
 workforce is organized. The unions are usually able to
 monitor working conditions and to enforce conditions of labor
 acceptable to national standards. Wages generally provide for
 an adequate standard of living for workers. The work-week in
 most companies is between thirty-nine and forty-five hours
 long.
 The legal minimum age for employment of children is 14 except
 in the fisheries industry where it is 15. The Government is
 concerned that worsening economic conditions are encouraging
 the spread of child labor, and established a commission to
 study the problem. The commission did not examine the extent,
 form or causes of child labor, but concluded that economic
 decline contributed to an increase in child labor. The
 commission noted that economic growth would cause child labor
 to decline. The commission recommended that the legal minimum
 age for employment be raised from twelve to fifteen, that the
 government begin a study of the extent, form and causes of
 child labor and improve surveillance and enforcement of
 existing laws. In areas in which unions are organized, such
 as in industry and retail establishments, child labor does not
 exist.
 Women have equal access to education and employment, although
 social pressures and customs still inhibit women from fully
 exercising these rights. Racial discrimination is prohibited
 and it is very uncommon in this multi-racial society.
 However, ethnic consciousness remains strong among all groups.
 
 
 .689
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: SURINAME
 1983     1984     1985
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...          0.1      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ................ 0.0          0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............      0.1       0.0      0.0
 A.AID ....................       0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.0       0.0      0.0
 (SEC.SUPPASSIST) ...        0.0       0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............     0.0       0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........0.0               0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN I-LOANS .....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0       0.0      0.0
 TITLE II-TOTAL .........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP,         0.0       0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        0.0       0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...          0.1      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.1       0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS ......        0.0      0.0       0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0       0.0      0.0
 OTHER ..............      0.1       0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL,,           0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ................       0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG ....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & IL,,.          0.1      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............   0.1       0.0      0.0
 OTHER US LOANS ..........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......        0.0       0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER ..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1983     1984     1985     1946-85
 TOTAL ........     0.7      0.0       0.0     59.3
 IBRO               0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 IFC                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDA                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 1O8                0.0      0.,0      0.0      0.0
 ADB                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFOB               0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 UNOP               0.7       0.0      0.0     10.8
 OTHER-UN           0.0       0.0      0.0      0.7
 EEC                0.0      0.0       0.0     47.8
 
 
 690
