 SURINAME
 After over a decade of predominantly military rule, Suriname installed a freely
 elected Parliament and inaugurated a democratically chosen president in 1991. A
 second free and fair election was held in May 1996, but no candidate was able to
 secure the two-thirds majority of the 51-member National Assembly necessary to
 elect a president. In accordance with the Constitution, an 837-member United Peo-
 ple's Assembly, a broadly representative, democratically chosen body, then voted in
 Jules Wijdenbosch of the National Democratic Party (NDP) as President in Septem-
 ber 1996. Wijdenbosch formed a cabinet from members of the NDP, the ethnic-Hin-
 dustani Grassroots Party for Renewal and Democracy, the ethnic-Javanese KTPI
 party, and several smaller political parties. Although the Constitution provides for
 an independent judiciary, the effectiveness of the courts is limited in practice.
 The armed forces are responsible for national security, border, and immigration
 control and are nominally under control of the civilian Minister of Defense. Civilian
 police bear primary responsibility for the maintenance of law and order and report
 to the Ministry of Justice and Police. The previous government had taken steps to
 reform the military in 1995-96 by purging military officers and supporters of former
 dictator Desi Bouterse, who ruled the country in the 1980's. Although this action
 somewhat extended democratic civilian control over the military, since the establish-
 ment of the Wijdenbosch Government, Bouterse loyalists have returned to positions
 of responsibility. Moreover, in April 1997 President Wijdenbosch named Bouterse as
 First State Adviser, formalizing his influence over the Government. Prison officials
 continue to be responsible for some human rights abuses.
 The economy depends heavily on the export of bauxite derivatives. Unregulated
 gold mining is an increasingly important economic activity that highlights a lack of
 land rights for indigenous and tribal people and has a serious environmental im-
 pact. The Government and state-owned companies employ over half the working
 population. Following 4 years of double- and triple-digit inflation, the rate dipped
 to I percent -in 1996 and remained under 5 percent for most of 1997. However, infla-
 tion-reached almost 22 percent in 1998. The estimated real economic growth rate
 was about 4 percent, and per capita annual income is about $1,372.
 The Government generally respected the human rights of its citizens; however,
 endemic problems still remain in some areas. Police mistreat detainees, guards
 abuse unruly prisoners, and local detention facilities remain overcrowded. The judi-
 ciary suffers from a huge case backlog. Societal discrimination against women and
 indigenous and tribal people persist, and violence against women is a problem. In
 view of the human rights record of the Bouterse regime, many of whose members
 participate in the current Government, human rights organizations remain con-
 cerned about the potential for a deterioration of civil liberties. The Wijdenbosch ad-
 ministration has not addressed calls to investigate human rights abuses by previous
 regimes, other than by appointing a committee in December 1997 to establish a
 framework for an investigative commission. However, the Government did partici-
 pate in an independently sponsored 'Truth and Reconciliation" Conference in Au-
 -gust. That meeting sought to solicit suggestions for the framework of a human
 rights commission and included frank discussion of human rights violations commit-
 ted during the 1980's.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political
 killings.
 
 
 However, the Government has not addressed past abuses, and they continue to
 be a focus of concern. The authorities have not taken action against prison guards
 who allegedly beat a prisoner to death in 1993. The Government undertook no in-
 vestigation into the 1982 executions by the Bouterse regime of 15 opposition leaders
 and the 1986 massacre of civilians at the village of Moiwana.
 On December 5, 1997, the Wijdenbosch administration appointed a "committee to
 establish the framework for a commission to investigate past human rights abuses."
 Human rights groups, which had been pressing since 1995 for an independent
 human rights commission to investigate violations committed during the 1980's,
 were neither informed nor consulted prior to the establishment of the committee.
 Moreover, the chairman of the committee is reportedly a member of Bouterse's team
 of legal advisers; his appointment raised questions regarding the objectivity of the
 group's work.
 The Organization for Justice and Peace, a nongovernmental organization (NGO),
 sponsored a "Truth and Reconciliation" conference in August aimed at creating an
 independent truth commission for the country. Representatives from both local and
 international human rights organizations, as well as high-level government officials
 including the Vice President, attended the conference. Although it was only a pre-
 liminary meeting, there was at times frank discussion of the human rights viola-
 tions committed during the 1980's.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 However, the Government took no action to investigate allegations of disappear-
 ances that occurred under previous regimes.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits inhuman treatment or punishment, but human rights
 groups continue to express concern about official mistreatment. Police mistreat de-
 tainees, particularly during arrests. Guards abuse prisoners, and local detention fa-
 cilities remain overcrowded.
 Prison conditions are uneven. There are two state prisons and several detention
 facilities, where arrestees are detained until they appear before a judge for trial.
 Human rights activists are concerned about conditions in the prisons and especially
 about conditions in local detention facilities. They have complained that the jails are
 overcrowded, that guards systematically mistreat prisoners, and that medical care
 and living conditions are inadequate. Police officers, who are not trained in prison
 work, serve as the jailers at local detention facilities, a situation that human rights
 groups assert contributes to the abuses.
 The completion of a new prison and renovation of existing jails have somewhat
 reduced the problems and improved overall health and safety conditions. However,
 the older jails remain seriously overcrowded, with as many as four times the num-
 ber of detainees for which they were designed. In addition, these older prisons are
 unsanitary. At police stations, guards allow detainees no exercise and only rarely
 permit them to leave the cells. Detainees and human rights groups also complain
 about inadequate prison meals, although families are permitted and encouraged to
 provide food to incarcerated relatives.
 In January 1996, the human rights group Moiwana '86 implemented a program
 to 'monitor the condition of prisoners. Representatives of the group report that in
 general they have access to prisoners and receive cooperation from prison officials
 on routine matters. Moiwana '86 and the police cooperated to, develop a detention
 officer training program for police guards working at the local detention facilities.
 The program consists of lectures given at the state prison to both guards and to
 prisoners.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law provides that the police may de-
 tain for investigation up to 14 days a person suspected of committing a crime for
 which the sentence is longer than 4 years. The law also permits incommunicado de-
 tention during this period, which must be authorized by an assistant district attor-
 ney or a police inspector. Within the 14-day period, the police must bring the ac-
 cused before a prosecutor to be formally charged. If additional'time is needed to in-
 vestigate the charge, a prosecutor may authorize the police to detain the'suspect for
 an additional 30 days. Upon the expiration of the initial 44 days, a "judge of instruc-
 tion" may authorize the police to hold the suspect for up to 120 additional days, in
 30-day increments (for a total of 164 days), before the case is tried. The judge of
 instruction has the power to authorize release on bail, but that power is rarely, if
 ever, used.
 Pretrial detainees, who constitute a large percentage of inmates, are routinely
 held without being brought before a judge. They are often held in overcrowded de-
 tention cells at local police stations. Of those held in police custody or detention
 cells, 15 percent had already been convicted, but were not placed in prisons.
 
 
 775
 In October 1997, the authorities arrested 25 men for allegedly attempting to over-
 throw the Government. One of the ringleaders was hospitalized for injuries sus-
 tained during his arrest. The detainees were accorded due process under the law
 and were given access to attorneys and family members. In August the coup plotters
 were formally sentenced. The presiding judge issued mostly moderate sentences of
 approximately 2years'imprisonment for each person, with the exception of the lead-
 ers, who received approximately 4 years' imprisonment.
 The military police continued to observe the requirement to hand over civilians
 arrested for committing a crime in their presence to the civil police. The military
 police continued to control the country's borders and airports but no longer inves-
 tigated civilian crimes.
 While not specifically forbidden by law or the Constitution, exile is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial-Although the Constitution provides for an inde-
 pendent judiciary, the effectiveness of the civilian and military courts is limited.
 Th--e judicil system consists of three lower courts and an appeals court; there is
 no Supreme Court. In August, President Wijdenbosch named a new President of the
 Court of Justice and Prosecutor General without consulting with, and over the objec-
 tions of, the sitting justices. Most legal authorities interpret the Constitution to re-
 qUire that consultation. Small, peaceful demonstrations took place for 2 days after
 e naming, and the members of the court refused to recognize the named President
 or Prosecutor General. In spite of continued objections, President Wijdenbosch
 named additional justices without consultation in December, but they cannot be
 sworn in by the President of the Court of Justice, who has not himself been sworn
 in. The juiciary continues to operate with the original justices; the newly named
 officials did not participate in the daily operations of the judiciary. The 1987 Con-
 stitution calls for the establishment of an independent constitutional court. How-
 ever, the Government has not taken any steps to set up such a court, and the timing
 of its establishment remains unclear.
 The Constitution provides for the right to a fair public trial in which defendants
 have the right to counsel if needed. The courts assign lawyers in private practice
 to defend prisoners and pay them from public funds. However, the court-assigned
 lawyers usually only show up at the trial, if they show up at all. The courts must,
 and in practice do, free a detainee who is not tried within the 164-day period. In
 one instance, a court levied a fine against the Government for failing to release de-
 tainees as directed by the court. Trials are before a single judge, with the right of
 appeal. There are only nine judges to preside over all court cases; consequently,
 there is a huge backlog in the judicial system.
 Military personnel are generally not subject to civilian criminal law. A soldier ac-
 cused of a crime immediately comes under military jurisdiction, and military police
 are responsible for all such investigations. Military prosecutions are directed by an
 officer on the public prosecutor's staff and take place in separate courts before two
 military judges and one civilian judge. The military courts follow the same rules of
 procedure as the civil courts. There is no appeal from the military to the civil sys-
 tem.
 Foreign military instructors conducted human rights and military justice semi-
 nars in 1998. These seminars provided unprecedented opportunities for civilian gov-
 ernment officials, private sector representatives, and military personnel to discuss
 human rights and the role of the military in a democracy.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the right to privacy. The law requires warrants for
 searches, which are issued by quasi-judicial officers who supervise criminal inves-
 tigations. The police obtain them in     a majority of investigations. There have
 been complaints of surveillance of human rights workers by members of the military
 police and the division of central intelligence.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and of the press, and the Government generally respects these rights. However,
 there were reports of intimidation and harassment.
 The parliamentary and extraparliamentary opposition criticize the government
 freely. Some media members continue to practice some self-censorship because of
 the recent history of intimidation and reprisals by certain elements of the former
 military leadership. There was no progress in the investigation of the December
 1997 kidnaping and beating of a journalist. The incident occurred on the anniver-
 sary of the 1982 murders of 15 political opponents of the Bouterse regime and ap-
 peared aimed at stifling criticism in the local press. The victim later withdrew his
 statement In June a Duteh journalist, who was principally responsible for covering
 
 
 political and economic issues, was kidnaped, beaten, and threatened. The incident
 was still under investigation at year's end, but police suspected the case arose from
 personal motives.
 The two daily newspapers, three television stations, and most of the radio stations
 are privately owned. Two television stations and two radio stations are publicly
 owned. Three companies provide cable television, which includes international chan-
 nels.
 The Government did not attempt to abridge academic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 these rights, and the Government respects them in practice.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Citizens may change their residence and workplaces freely and travel
 abroad as they wish. Political dissidents who emigrated to the Netherlands and else-
 where during the years of nifitary rule are welcome to return. Few of them have
 chosen to do so, generally for economic reasons. Citizenship is not revoked for politi-
 cal reasons.
 The Government cooperates with the office of the U.N. High Commissioner for
 Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees. The issue of
 the provision of first asylum did not arise in 1998. There were no reports of forced
 return of persons to a country where they feared persecution.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides for this right, but in the past the military prevented
 its effective exercise. Although the military has twice handed over power to elected
 civilian governments following coups, 1996 marked the first time since independence
 from the Netherlands in 1975 that one elected government succeeded another in ac-
 cordance with constitutional provisions. The Government is still in the process of
 institutionalizing democratic, constitutional rule.
 The Constitution stipulates that power and authority rest with the people and
 provides for the right to change the government through the direct election by secret
 ballot of a National Assembly of 51 members every 5 years. The National Assembly
 then elects the President by a two-thirds vote. If the legislature is unable to do so,
 as was the case both in the 1991 and 1996 national elections, the Constitution pro-
 vides that a national people's assembly, comprising members of parliament andre-
 gional and local officials, shall elect the President.
 The Constitution provides for the organization and functioning of political parties.
 Many parties and political coalitions are represented in the National Assembly.
 There are historical and cultural impediments to equal participation by women in
 leadership positions in government and political parties. In the past, most women
 expected to fulfill the role of housewife and mother, thereby limiting opportunities
 to gain political experience or position. Participation by women in politics (and other
 fields) was generally considered inappropriate. While women have made limited
 gains in attaining political power in recent years, political circles remain under the
 influence of traditional male-dominated groups, and women are disadvantaged in
 seeking high pubic office. In 1996 voters eleted six women to the National Assem-
 bly, comparedIwith three who held seats in the previous assembly, and the Assem-
 bly appointed a woman as chairperson. The Cabinet includes one woman as Min-
 ister of Regional Development and another as Deputy Minister of Social Affairs.
 Although the Constitution proscribes racial or religious discrimination, several
 factors limit the participation of Maroons and Amerindians in the political process.
 Most of the country's political activity takes place in the capital and a narrow belt
 running east and west of it along the coast. The Maroons and Amerindians are con-
 centrated in remote areas in the interior and therefore have limited access to, and
 influence in, the political process. There is a small Maroon political party, which
 holds one seat in the National Assembly and belongs to an opposition coalition. Al-
 though there is no Amerindian political party, voters elected the first Amerindians
 to the National Assembly in 1996. There are eight Maroons and two Amerindians
 in the National Assembly. There are no Maroons or Amerindians in the cabinet.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Human rights groups operate without government restriction, investigating and
 publishing their findings on human rights cases. Government officials are, however,
 generally not cooperative or responsive to their views.
 
 
 777
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution and laws do not differentiate among citizens on the basis of their
 ethnic origins, religious affiliations, or other cultural differences. In practice, how-
 ever, several groups within society suffer various forms of discrimination.
 Women.-The law does not differentiate between domestic violence and other
 forms of assault. The Government has not specifically addressed the problem of vio-
 lence against women. According to a national women's group, victims reported ap-
 proximately 500 cases of violence against women, and complained of an inadequate
 response from the Government and society to what appears to be a trend of increas-
 ing family violence. Police are reluctant to intervene in instances of domestic vio-
 lence, which remains a problem at all levels of society.
 There are no specific laws to protect women against trafficking and sexual exploi-
 tation. There are credible reports of trafficking in women and girls for prostitution.
 Women have the right to equal access to education, employment, and-property.
 Nevertheless, social pressures and customs inhibit their full exercise of these rights,
 particularly in the areas of marriage and inheritance. Women experience economic
 discrimination in access to employment and in rates of pay for the same or substan-
 tially similar work. The Government has not made specific efforts to combat eco-
 nomic discrimination.
 The National Women's Center is a government agency devoted to women's issues;
 there is also a women's policy coordinator. Their effectiveness is severely limited by
 financial and staffing constraints. The principal concerns of women's groups are po-
 litical representation, economic vulnerability, violence, and discrimination.
 Children.-School attendance is free and compulsory until 12 years of age, but
 some school-age children do not have access to education because of a lack of trans-
 portation, facilities, or teachers. There is no difference in the treatment of girls and
 boys in education or health care services. Children face increasing economic pres-
 sure to discontinue their education in order to work.
 The Government makes only limited efforts to ensure safeguards for the human
 rights and welfare of children. There are continuing reports of malnutrition among
 poor children, but it is difficult to quantify the extent of the problem. In the capital,
 where most of the country's population is concentrated, there are several orphan-
 ages, and a privately funded shelter for sexually abused children opened in 1993.
 Elsewhere, distressed children must usually rely on the resources of their extended
 families.
 There is no societal pattern of abuse directed against children; however, the legal
 age of consent is 12 and some children are exploited for prostitution.
 People With Disabilities.-There are no laws concerning disabled people and no
 provisions for making private or public buildings accessible to them. There are also
 no laws mandating that they be given equal consideration when seeking jobs or
 housing. However, there are some training programs for the blind and others with
 disabilities.
 Indigenous People.-Most Amerindians and Maroons suffer a number of disadvan-
 tages and have only limited ability to participate in decisions affecting their lands,
 cultures, traditions, and natural resources. The nation's political life, educational op-
 portunities, and jobs are concentrated in the capital andits environs, while the ma-
 jority of Amerindians and Maroons live in the interior. Government services in the
 interior became largely unavailable and much of the infrastructure was destroyed
 during the 1986-91 domestic insurgencies; progress in reestablishing services and
 rebuilding the infrastructure has been very slow.
 The Government appointed the Consultative Council for the Development of the
 Interior in September 1995. This Council, provided for in the 1992 peace accords
 that ended the insurgencies, includes representatives of the Maroon and Amer-
 indian communities. The Government did not, however, consult with representatives
 of these communities about the granting of gold and timber concessions on indige-
 nous and tribal lands.
 Organizations representing Maroon and Amerindian communities complain that
 sma-scale mining operations, mainly illegal Brazilian gold miners, dig trenches
 that cut residents off from their agricultural land and threaten to drive them away
 from their traditional settlements. Mercury runoff from these operations also con-
 taminates and threatens traditional food source areas.
 Maroon and Amerindian groups continue to cooperate with each other in order to
 exercise their rights more effectively. Two summits, or "gran krutus," bringing to-
 gether Maroon and Amerindian tribal leaders, have been held, the most recent in
 September 1996. During these summits, indigenous leaders reiterated their de-
 mands for the right to participate in decisions concerning the use of natural re-
 
 
 sources on land they claim as their own and for greater autonomy from the Govern-
 ment.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution protects the right of workers to as-
 sociate and to choose their representatives democratically. Nearly 60 percent of the
 work force is organized into unions, and most unions belong to one of the country's
 six major labor federations. Unions are independent of the Government but play an
 active role in politics. The small Labor Party has historically been a very influential
 force in government.
 The Constitution provides for the right of nongovernment employees to strike.
 Civil servants have no legal right to strike or mount other labor actions, but in prac-
 tice do so. Strikes in both the public and private sectors are common as workers
 try to secure wage gains to protect their earning power from inflation.
 There are no restrictions on unions' international activities. Several labor federa-
 tions were accepted once again as affiliates of international trade union organiza-
 tions, after having been suspended for collaboration with the military regime in the
 late 1980's.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Constitution explicitly
 recognizes these rights, and the authorities respect them in practice. Collective bar-
 aining agreements cover approximately 50 percent of the labor force. The law pro-
 ibits antinion discrimination by employers, and there are effective mechanisms
 for resolving complaints of such discrimination. Employers must have prior permis-
 sion from the Ministry of Labor to fire workers, except when discharging an em-
 ployee for cause. The Labor Ministry individually reviews dismissals for cause; if it
 finds a discharge unjustified, the employee must be reinstated.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor, and there were no reports that it occurred. However, there
 were credible reports of trafficking in women and girls for prostitution (see Section
 5). The law prohibits forced and bonded labor by children, and such practices are
 not known to occur.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The law
 sets the minimum age for employment at 14 years. However, the Ministry of Labor
 and the police enforce this law only sporadically. Children under 14 years of age
 work as street vendors, newspaper sellers, or shop assistants. Working hours for
 youths are not limited in comparison with the regular work force. School attendance
 is compulsory until 12 years of age. The law prohibits forced and bonded labor by
 children, and there were no reports of such practices, although trafficking of girls
 for prostitution does occur (see Section 6.c.).
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no minimum wage legislation. Follow-
 ing an 80 percent pay raise in January, the lowest wage for civil servants is about
 $100 (SF 40,000) per month. This salary level makes it very difficult to provide a
 decent living for a worker and family. Government employees, who comprise close
 to 50 percent of the work force of 100,000, frequently supplement their salaries with
 second or third jobs, often in the informal sector. The President and Council of Min-
 isters set and approve civil service wage increases.
 Work in excess of 9 hours per day or 45 hours per week on a regular basis re-
 quires special government permission, which is routinely granted. Such overtime
 work earns premium pay. The law requires one 24-hour rest period per week.
 A 10- to 12-member inspectorate of the Occupational Health and Safety Division
 of the Ministry of Labor is responsible for enforcing legislated occupational safety
 and health regulations. Resource constraints and lack of trained personnel preclude
 the division from making regular ins ections of industry. Accident rates in local in-
 dustry do not appear to be high, an the key bauxite industry has an outstanding
 safety record. There is, however, no law authorizing workers to refuse to work in
 circumstances they deem unsafe. They must appeal to the inspectorate to declare
 the workplace situation unsafe.
