 SURINAME
 Following independence from the Netherlands in 1975, Suriname
 functioned as a parliamentary democracy until February 25,
 1980, when the elected government was overthrown by a military
 coup.
 On August 13, 1980, Suriname's Parliament was dismissed and its
 Constitution suspended. Since the coup, absolute political
 power has been exercised or delegated by Leader of the
 Revolution and Commander of the Armed Forces, Lieutenant
 Colonel Desire D. Bouterse.
 In December 1984, Prime Minister Wim Udenhout announced plans
 for new governmental structures which call for establishment of
 an interim National Assembly composed of representatives
 selected from various social and economic sectors. The
 National Assembly is to have legislative powers and is charged
 with drafting a constitution, defining the future role of
 political parties, and providing the mechanism for installation
 of a democratic government. The interim government is also to
 include an *executive* cabinet and is expected to complete its
 tasks within twenty seven months. The military will probably
 fill a large number of seats in this temporary cabinet and
 national assembly with members of the Government's February 25
 Movement.
 The highest judicial body in Suriname is the Court of Justice,
 members of which are appointed by the President (a largely
 ceremonial position) on the advice of the Government. The
 Court's effectiveness as a mechanism to protect human rights
 has been undermined by the military authority in the sense that
 individuals have been detained for questioning without warrants
 by the military police; they were held incommunicado; and, in
 some cases, they are subsequently released without being
 formally charged with having committed a crime.
 In February 1984, the Government decreed a revision in
 Suriname's criminal code. Some of the more significant changes
 involved increased penalties for crimes against the State. The
 following examples from the revised code were reported in the
 press: 'Attacks against the Highest Military Authority or Head
 of State are punishable by imprisonment for 10-20 years or
 life; threats or use of violence to break up government
 sponsored meetings can result in a prison sentence of 10-20
 years; and the rendering of assistance to foreigners who engage
 in anti-state activities will be punishable by a 10-20 year
 jail sentence, with such assistance defined to include
 assisting in the import of items to be used against the
 State.' Formerly such crimes stipulated a maximum penalty of
 five years imprisonment or a monetary fine.
 Security forces consist of the armed forces, the civil police,
 the People's Militia, and the Youth Militia. Of the armed
 forces, the military police are most actively involved in
 investigating perceived internal security threats.
 'Anti-intervention Committees' were formed in early 1983, in an
 attempt to organize the population against possible external
 intervention. More specifically these committees and other
 'revolutionary mass organizations" were to mobilize the people
 to "defend the revolution' against its internal as well as
 external 'imperialist and neo-colonialist" enemies and to
 induce citizens to support social and economic goals as defined
 by Lt. Col. Bouterse.
 
 
 674
 SURINAME
 In November 1983, the military Government announced formation
 of the February 25 Movement, which is to perform many of the
 functions of the other 'revolutionary mass organizations.' The
 regime intends for the Movement to become its popular political
 base, despite the fact that political parties are banned. In
 1984, cells of the Movement were being established in
 government ministries.
 Suriname continues to have a predominantly free market economy,
 but growing state control or influence has been exerted through
 regulation. Government control of increasingly scarce foreign
 exchange contributes significantly to the regime's leverage
 over the private business sector.
 Surinamers still do not possess all of the human rights which
 they enjoyed before the imposition of military rule. Freedoms
 of assembly, of speech, and of the press have been curtailed.
 There are no political mechanisms to allow citizens a direct
 voice in how the Government is conducted or constituted. Laws
 have beem promulgated by decree. There has been periodic,
 arbitrary invasion of the home.
 For the most part, Surinamers have been intimidated by the
 regime. The people have not forgotten the events of December
 9, 1982, when 15 prominent opposition leaders (all but one of
 whom were civilians) were killed while in government custody.
 Activities by the military police, whose growing power was
 demonstrated by a continuous intrusion into areas formerly
 reserved to the civilian police during 1984, further intimidate
 the general population.
 Nonetheless, certain rights are respected by the military
 Government. Trade union and business organizations, service
 clubs and fraternal orders carry out their normal functions.
 There is complete freedom of religion with no attempt to
 restrict religious practices. Racial, ethnic, and sexual
 discrimination against individuals is not condoned. Surinamers
 are free to travel within and outside of their country,
 although foreign currency regulations hamper travel outside of
 Suriname.
 On balance, 1984 was a year of modestly progressive trends in
 the Government's respect for human rights. The military
 demonstrated growing responsiveness to international criticism
 of its human rights shortcomings. As a result of a relaxation
 of restrictions on the media in May, there was a somewhat freer
 and enlarged private radio and press. In August, the nightly
 curfew which had been in effect since December 1982 was
 lifted. That same month, the military authority announced its
 intention to establish a national human rights commission which
 could investigate allegations of abuse and designated Acting
 President Ramdat-Misier to head the commission. As a result,
 there was growing willingness of private citizens to appeal
 successfully to the Acting President for release of private
 citizens detained without judicial review. Finally, in
 December, the Government decreed creation of the National
 Institute of Human Rights to be formed in January 1985. The
 Institute was to be established in accordance with United
 Nations General Assembly Resolution 38/123 of December 16, 1983.
 
 
 675
 SURINAME
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a.   Political Killing
 The only known death with political overtones was that of a
 military policeman who had detained a well-connected
 businessman for attempting to take 104,000 dollars out of the
 country at the international airport at Zanderij. The
 businessman is said to have told the military policeman that he
 was acting for friends highly placed in the military, and to
 have given some names. The businessman was released almost
 immediately. The military policeman was transferred to another
 post where a few days later, he was beaten severely by other
 military police and left in the sun where he died.
 b.   Disappearance
 There is no firm evidence that the Government has sponsored
 abductions or kidnappings by governmental or nongovernmental
 forces, aside from arrests by the military police as discussed
 in section d below.
 c.   Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Beatings and cruel treatment occured in 1984 at the prison at
 Fort Zeelandia according to reports on which the Government has
 made no comment. One reliable report concerned a storeowner
 who was arrested at his home without a warrant by military
 police and was detained for four days at Fort Zeelandia. He
 was- beaten about the body and suffered damage to an ear. While
 in detention he was denied sleep and water.
 Another person, who was detained in solitary confinement for
 twenty-eight days, had to sleep on a stone floor, had only a
 bucket for personal hygiene, and was given little to eat or
 drink. Further unsubstantiated reports indicate that these
 conditions of incarceration at Fort Zeelandia are not unusual.
 d.   Arbitrary Arrest, Detention or Exile
 During 1984 several persons were arrested arbitrarily by the
 military police and taken to Fort Zeelandia; in one of the
 cases mentioned under section c, the detained individual was
 questioned about things he had said, which had been reported to
 the military by an informer. When he protested that he had not
 violated any law, his interrogator reportedly replied that the
 military could arrest whom it wished.
 Another person was detained for some weeks in solitary
 confinement in a small cell at Fort Zeelandia. For the first
 two days he was interrogated without stop. He was never
 accused, formally or informally, or told why he had been
 incarcerated, or, ultimately, released.
 Two foreign citizens were arrested and held for six months in
 Fort Zeelandia. After pressure for an explanation or charge,
 the two were accused of having engaged in activities against
 the State. The charge was forwarded to the public prosecutor,
 who requested that authorities provide more detailed
 
 
 676
 SURINAME
 information. When none was forthcoming, the public prosecutor
 advised that they should be released, and they were.
 Information involving the arbitrary arrest and detention of
 foreigners is more readily available since such cases become
 known through the international community, and those arrested
 are less reluctant to speak of their experiences, knowing they
 are leaving the country.
 The most usually cited figure of persons detained at any one
 time by the military police is under ten. The civil police do
 not make politically-motivated arrests so far as is known.
 Those arrested by the military police were generally arrested
 surreptitiously, and always without warrants. They were rarely
 formally charged with any crime. The military authority
 usually did not admit that they were in detention, and they did
 not have access to an attorney or to a court or other
 tribunal. There are no legal protections for those arrested by
 the military police. The army alone decides whether, when and
 whom to release to civil authorities.
 e.   Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The civil court system is able to provide fair public trials
 when the accused are turned over to civil authorities.
 However, it is much more common for people to be detained by
 the military police and then released without being formally
 charged.
 In November 1983, eleven Surinamers were reportedly arrested by
 the military police in connection with arson and an alleged
 plot. Three of them were later interrogated on television by a
 military police officer and accused of having engaged in
 destabilizing activities and sending mercenaries into
 Suriname. Subsequently, some of the detainees were released
 and others were turned over to the civil authorities. Four
 were tried in June 1984. Three were found guilty of arson and
 sentenced to from one year to four and a half years
 imprisonment. A fourth person was found not guilty and
 released.
 In August 1984, two military officers were sworn in as members
 of the civilian Court of Justice to assist strictly in cases of
 appeals from the military judge. To date, they have handled no
 cases at the Court of Justice, and it is not yet possible to
 determine what effect, if any, military officers will have on
 the Court.
 f.   Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home or
 Correspondence
 Military police have been known to enter homes without a
 warrant to conduct searches. The People's Militia, the
 'Anti-intervention Committies" and the February 25 Movement are
 organizations which have the potential to monitor what people
 say and to act as informers to the authorities. However, the
 People's Militia and the Youth Militia, once so visible on
 guard at various government buildings and other sites,
 virtually disappeared from sight by year's end. There are no
 known cases of persons having been forced to join or to
 actively support any of these organizations, though benefits do
 accrue to those who do.
 
 
 677
 SURINAME
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a.   Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedoms of speech and press, dramatically abridged after
 December 1982, have been somewhat less tightly controlled by
 the military during 1984. The climate of fear which resulted
 from the deaths of December 1982 continues, albeit reduced in
 intensity. The rumors of arrest and detention in Fort
 Zeelandia maintain a repressive atmosphere, which generally
 tends to inhibit free expression of opinions.
 Suriname does not have a completely free press. In May 1984,
 suppression of the news media was eased somewhat. One
 newspaper was allowed to resume publication, in addition to the
 one which had not been closed. Two radio stations were allowed
 to broadcast, in addition to the state-run public station.
 Easing of censorship required acceptance by the news media of
 Government guidelines which generally restricted the nature and
 manner of treatment of media coverage. At times, the media were
 given specific instructions. In August, for example, they were
 told not to continue reporting details of the struggle for
 leftist control of the university. The Government owned and
 controlled television station also follows these guidelines,
 which cover internal and external political events, economic
 and financial questions, and, indeed, any field which may
 conceivably affect the "security' of the regime. During most
 of the year, media criticism of the Government was pointedly
 discouraged. However, toward the end of 1984, the Prime
 Minister encouraged 'constructive' media criticism of his
 Government's policies. Several critical newspaper articles
 were published and there were no reprisals by the Government
 other than non-publicized expressions of displeasure to
 responsible parties.
 In order to hear completely uncensored news about Suriname and
 the rest of the world, many Surinamers listen to shortwave
 broadcasts of the Radio Netherlands World Service, the BBC or
 the Voice of America. Because of the lack of foreign exchange,
 foreign newspapers and news magazines are not widely available
 within the country, though some sports, news and home magazines
 are still imported in limited quantities.
 b.   Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 People may assemble freely for social purposes. Religious
 associations, clubs, and fraternal societies operate without
 restrictions. Political assemblies which do not support the
 military and the Government are not allowed and have not taken
 place. Pre-coup political parties are officially banned.
 Within the strictly labor-management sphere of trade union
 activity, labor organizations are usually free to operate
 without Government interference. Organizing, union elections,
 negotiations and strikes normally take place freely. However,
 the Government interjected itself in strikes at both
 multinational bauxite companies and several other firms in
 1984. Serving as members of a tripatite 'social partnership'
 with the military, union and business associations have
 participated in government in an advisory capacity to the
 military authority. Unions may affiliate with international
 bodies as they see fit. Several union federations maintain
 these affiliations.
 
 
 678
 SURINAME
 C.   Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is not infringed in any way. No one
 religion is favored above any other. Articles and programs
 sponsored by religious groups appear in the newspapers and on
 radio and television. In addition, weekly publications by
 religious groups are not censored despite the fact that they
 include articles concerning human rights issues. In late 1984
 a church leader was cautioned against increasingly explicit
 criticism of the Government in church weeklies, but the
 Government took no punitive actions, and low-key church
 criticism of the Government did not stop.
 d.   Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 Surinamers are not restricted from traveling within the
 country, changing jobs, or moving residences. In August 1984,
 the Government lifted the nightly curfew it had imposed in
 December 1982. Travel outside the country is restricted by the
 decree that residents may take only 625 guilders ($353) in
 currency with them per year. If Surinamers are bound for
 destinations other than Suriname Airways' terminal points, they
 must apply for foreign exchange with which to purchase onward
 tickets on arrival abroad. These restrictions result from a
 shortage of foreign exchange and not for political reasons.
 Surinamers continue to emigrate without interference. The
 Government does not prevent persons from returning to Suriname
 after long residence abroad. However, those Surinamers abroad
 whom the Government has characterized as 'mercenaries,*
 "traitors,* and "threats to national security" (these include
 former President Chin a Sen and others supporting the
 opposition leaders who were executed in December 1982) fear for
 their safety and might well be arrested and sentenced to prison
 terms if they were to return without advance Government
 assurances.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Surinamers are currently denied the right to change their
 Government by democratic means. Power rests in the hands of
 the military, specifically Army Commander Lt. Col. Bouterse and
 his closest advisers. There have been no political elections
 since the military coup of February 1980. Political
 organization is limited to supporters of the military authority
 through officially sanctioned organizations, such as the
 February 25 Movement and the Anti-intervention Committees.'
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 In 1984, no independent domestic organizations focused on human
 rights. In their journals and from the pulpits, the churches
 indicated increasing but restrained concern over human rights
 violations. In August, Army Chief of Staff Ivan Graanoogst
 announced that the Government would establish a Human Rights
 Commission, to be chaired by the Acting President and former
 Chief Judge, Fred Ramdat-Misier. In December, the Government
 announced its intention to establish a National Institute of
 Human Rights in January 1985. Among other things, the
 Institute is to regulate and maintain respect for fundamental
 
 
 679
 SURINAME
 rights, to investigate complaints brought to its attention, to
 ensure that Suriname law is brought into compliance with
 international human rights obligations, and to provide
 information and support to commissions and groups of people who
 wish to be informed about fundamental rights and duties of man.
 The Government has allowed international and non-governmental
 investigations of human rights in Suriname. However, to a
 lesser extent than in 1983, the Government attempted to control
 the activities of visiting investigative teams, to limit public
 knowledge of critical reports, and to exploit one-sidedly any
 investigation or report which contains positive comments.
 A visit by Special Rapporteur Amos Wako of the U.N. Human
 Rights Commission took place in July 1984. Mr. Wako had come
 to investigate the December 1982 deaths. His visit was widely
 covered in the local media, and he was allowed access to those
 people with whom he wished to speak. The interviewees were
 circumspect in what they said. A business leader, for example,
 advised associates *to say only positive things about the
 country.' The Government's attitude towards Mg. Wako cooled
 noticeably following his announcement that he would travel to
 the Netherlands to interview relatives of the people who died
 in December 1982. Mr. Wako's report has not yet been released.
 A 1984 report by Amnesty International entitled, *Torture in
 the Eighties' noted in regard to Suriname that there had been
 frequent reports of torture or ill-treatment of persons
 detained by the military. The report stated that the alleged
 torture included severe beatings, threats, deprivation of
 sleep, food and drink, and even in some cases mutilation. In
 its regular annual Amnesty International Report 1984, that
 organization continued to call for an impartial inquiry into
 the extrajudicial executions of civilian and military
 opposition leaders which occured in December 1982, and concern
 was also expressed about the continuing incommunicado
 detentions of alleged opponents of the Government without
 charge or trial and ill-treatment of detainees.
 The Freedom House report, 'Freedom in the World 1983-1984"
 noted that Suriname is ruled by a military council without
 legitimization by elections or other means. The report
 commented that the press is under strong pressure, that
 political organization and assembly are forbidden, that
 prisoners of conscience are detained and treated brutally and
 that houses are searched at will. The report commented that
 courts and unions retain some independence and that business
 groups continue to publicly express opposition to economic
 policy in face of state attempts to increase its control over
 industry.
 The 'Report of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights on
 the Situation of Human Rights in Suriname' of October 12, 1983,
 concluded that serious violations of important human rights as
 specified in the Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Man
 have occurred. Concern was also expressed about conditions at
 the University, where the Commission found that the authorities
 have intervened in such a way as to result in an increasing
 politicization.
 In response to a complaint filed by the International
 Confederation of Free Trade Unions and the World Confederation
 of Labor, the ILO Committee on Freedom of Association examined
 events leading up to and occurring in December 1982. In its
 
 40-387 0 - 85 - 44
 
 
 680
 SURINAME
 November 1983 report, the Committee noted that, in February
 1983, a climate of violence was a serious impediment to the
 exercise of trade union rights.
 In its conclusions, the Committee deplored the arrests and
 condemned in the strongest terms the deaths of December 1982.
 The Committee noted that no independent judicial investigation
 has been held on the deaths and wrote that only in a climate
 where the rule of law is respected can human rights, including
 trade union rights, be exercised normally.
 These conclusions were similar to those of the International
 Committee of Jurists in its 1983 report, which noted that the
 common element uniting the human rights problems in Suriname
 was the fact that the authorities, and particularly the
 military authorities, were not subject in their acts to the
 rule of law.
 The Suriname Government is not itself actively involved in
 international or regional human rights bodies dealing with
 violations in other countries. It is passive, except when the
 Government itself stands accused, at which time it may deny the
 charges and point to an alleged threat from 'foreign
 mercenaries' which make necessary extraordinary measures.
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Suriname's import-oriented economy continued to suffer in
 1984. Depressed international market prices for bauxite and
 its derivatives adversely impacted on the country's ability to
 earn foreign exchange. The resulting shortage of foreign
 exchange further reduced the standard of living and damaged the
 viability of the private business sector. Faced with higher
 overhead costs and a slack domestic economy, several firms went
 out of business and others are likely to follow if trade unions
 continue to press for increased wages and benefits. Overall
 unemployment is estimated to be 20 percent despite the
 Government's employment of 42 percent of the labor force.
 During the year, the Government failed to address the causes of
 its financial problems.
 Suriname has an estimated population of 370,000, and its
 population growth rate, according to World Bank data for 1984
 is 1.8 percent per annum. However, the Inter-American
 Development Bank's planning bureau estimated the growth rate in
 1982 at 3.1 percent per annum. Per capita Gross National
 Product (GNP), according to WOrld Bank data, was $3,189.00 in
 1982. It was lower in 1984. Life expectancy at birth is 66.74
 years, the infant mortality rate is 21.20 per 1,000 live
 births, and adult literacy is 65 percent. The adjusted primary
 school enrollment ratio in 1978 was 119.65. In 1977 the
 caloric supply as a percentage of requirements was 123.35.
 Women have equal access to education and employment, although
 social pressures and customs still inhibit women from fully
 exercising these rights. Racial and sexual discrimination are
 prohibited; however the consciousness of ethnicity remains
 strong among all groups. Women hold positions in various
 government ministries.
 
 
 681
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: SURINAME
 1982     1983    1984
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        0.5      0.1      0.0
 LOANS ..............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............       0.5      0.1      0.0
 A.AIO  .................       0.9      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............      0.5      0.0      0.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSST.)...        0.5      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......       0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ......... ......     0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL .......          0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS.:::,        0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR ....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE 11-TOTAL ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & VFP.        0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...        0.0      0.1      0.0
 LOANS ..............      0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............       0.0      0.1      0.0
 PEACE CORPS ......       0.0      0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ............      0.0      0.1      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .............. 0.0           0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............      0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.EO.TRNG ....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 O.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...       0.5      0.1      0.0
 LOANS ..............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............       0.5      0.1      0.0
 OTHER US LOANS ..........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-1M BANK LOANS .......       0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER ..............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1982     1983     1984    1946-84
 TOTAL ........    0.4      0.7     0.0     59.2
 IBRO               0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0
 IFC                0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDA                0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0
 108                0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADS                0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 AFOB               0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 UNOP               0.4      0.7     0.0     10.7
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0     0.0      0.7
 EEC                0.0      0.0     0.0     47.8
 
 
 682
