 SURINAME
 After over a decade of predominantly military rule, Suriname installed a freely
 elected Parliament and inaugurated a democratically chosen president in 1991. That
 president, Ronald Venetiaan, sought reelection in May 1996, but no candidate was
 able to secure the two-thirds majority of the 51-member National Assembly nec-
 essay to elect a president. In accordance with the Constitution, an 837-member
 United People's Assembly, a broadly representative, democratically chosen body,
 then voted in Jules Wijdenbosch of the National Democratic Party (NDP) as Presi-
 dent in September 1996. Wijdenbosch formed a cabinet from members of the NDP,
 the ethnic-Hindustani Grassroots Party for Renewal and Democracy, the ethnic-Jav-
 anese party KTPI, and several smaller political parties. Although the Constitution
 provides for an independent judiciary, the effectiveness of the courts is limited in
 practice.
 The armed forces are responsible for national security, border, and immigration
 control and are nominally under control of the civilian Minister of Defense. Civilian
 police bear primary responsibility for the maintenance of law and order, and report
 to the Ministry of Justice and Police. The Venetiaan government had taken steps
 to reform the military in 1995-96 by purging military officers and supporters of
 former dictator Desi Bouterse, who ruled the country in the 1980's. Although this
 action somewhat extended democratic civilian control over the military, since the es-
 tablishment of the Wijdenbosch Government, Bouterse loyalists have returned to po-
 sitions of responsibility. Moreover, in April President Wijdenbosch named Bouterse
 as First State Adviser, formalizing his influence over the government. Prison offi-
 cials and the military continue to be responsible for some human rights abuses.
 The economy depends heavily on the export of bauxite derivatives. Unregulated
 gold mining is an increasingly important economic activity that highlights a lack of
 land rights for indigenous and tribal people and has a serious environmental im-
 pact. The Government and state-owned companies employ over half the working
 population. Following 4 years of double-digit inflation, the rate dipped to 1 percent
 mn 1996 and remained under 5 percent for most of 1997. The estimated real eco-
 nomic growth rate was about 4 percent, and per capita annual income is about
 $1,372.
 The Government generally respected the human rights of its citizens; however,
 endemic problems still remain in some areas. Police mistreat detainees, guards
 abuse prisoners, and jails are overcrowded. The judiciary suffers from a huge case
 backlog. Societal discrimination against women and indigenous and tribal people
 persist, and violence against women is a problem. In view of the human rights
 
 
 652
 record of the Bouterse regime, many of whose members participate in the current
 Government, human rights organizations remain concerned about the potential for
 a deterioration of civil liberties. The Wijdenbosch administration has not addressed
 calls to investigate human rights abuses by previous regimes, other than by appoint-
 in. g a committee in December to establish a framework for an investigative commis-
 sion.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political
 killings. However, the human rights group Moiwana '86 began an investigation into
 the death of a prisoner following complaints from the prisoner's family that he was
 beaten to death by prison guards. Moiwana "86 also investigated the death of a pris-
 oner by hanging under what it characterized as suspicious circumstances, and criti-
 cized prison authorities for not responding to requests for information. Both inves-
 tigations were still pending at year's end.
 The Government has not addressed past abuses, and they continue to fester. The
 authorities have not taken action against prison guards who allegedly beat a pris-
 oner to death in 1993. The Government undertook no investigation into the 1982
 executions by the Bouterse regime of 15 opposition leaders and the 1986 massacre
 of civilians at the village of Moiwana.
 However, on December 5, the Wijdenbosch administration appointed a "committee
 to establish the framework for a commission to investigate past human rights
 abuses." Human rights groups, which had been pressing since 1995 for an independ-
 ent human rights commission to investigation v   ions committed during the
 1980's, were neither informed nor consulted prior to the establishment of the com-
 mittee. Moreover, the chairman  of the committee is reportedly a member of
 Boutrse's team of legal advisers; his appointment raised questions regarding the
 objectivity of the group's work. The Organization for Justice and Peace, a non-
 governmental organization (NGO), has initiated a process aimed at creating an
 independent truth commission for the country, which would include national and
 international experts.
 Moiwana '86 unsuccessfully challenged in the lower court of Paramaribo the valid-
 ity of the Amnesty Law passed in 1992, which pardoned members of the militay
 and the insurgents for crimes (except genocide) committed between January 1985
 and August 1992.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 However, the Government took no action to investigate allegations of disappear-
 ances that occurred under previous regimes.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits inhuman treatment or punishment, but human rights
 groups continue to express concern about official nmstreatment. Police mistreat de-
 tainees and guards abuse prisoners.
 Prison conditions are uneven. Human rights activists have complained that the
 jails are overcrowded, that guards systematically mistreat prisoners, and that medi-
 cal care and living conditions are inadequate. There are two state prisons and sev-
 eral detention facilities, where arrestees are detained until they appear before a
 judge. The completion of a new prison and renovation of existing jails have some-
 what reduced overcrowding and improved overall health and safety conditions. The
 older jails however, remain seriously overcrowded, with as many as four times the
 number of detainees for which they were designed. In addition, these older prisons
 are unsanitary. At police stations, ards allow detainees no exercise and only rare-
 ly permit them to leave the cells. netainees also suffer from inadequate nutrition,
 although families are permitted and encouraged to provide food to incarcerated rel-
 atives.
 In January 1996, the human rights group Moiwana '86 implemented a program
 to monitor the condition of prisoners. Representatives of the group report that in
 general they have access to prisoners and receive cooperation from prison officials
 on routine matters.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law provides that the police may de-
 tain for investigation up to 14 days a person suspected of committing a crime for
 which the sentence is longer than 4 years. The law also permits incommunicado de-
 tention during this period, which must be authorized by an assistant district attor-
 ney or a police inspector. Within the 14-day period, the police must bring the ac-
 cused before a prosecutor to be formally charged. If additional time is needed to in-
 vetigate the charge, aprosecutor may authorize the police to detain the suspect for
 an additional 30 days. Upon the expiration of the initgal 44 days, a tjudge of instruc-
 
 
 653
 tion" may authorize the police to hold the suspect for up to 120 additional days, in
 30-day increments (for a total of 164 days), before the case is tried. The judge of
 instruction has the power to authorize release on bail, but that power is rarely, if
 ever, used.
 Pretrial detainees, who constitute a large percentage of inmates, are routinely
 held without being brought before a judge. They are often held in overcrowded de-
 tention cells at local police stations. Of those held in police custody or detention
 cells, 15 percent had already been convicted, but were not placed in pisons.
 In October the authorities arrested about 25 men for allegedly attempting to over-
 throw the Government. The detainees were accorded due process under the law and
 were given access to attorneys and family members. There were no reports of police
 beatings or mistreatment. According to the Attorney General, the accused are ex-
 pected to face trial in early 1998.
 The military police observed the requirement to hand over civilians arrested for
 committing a crime in their presence to the civil police. The military police contin-
 ued to control the country's borders and airports but no longer investigated civilian
 crimes.
 While not specifically forbidden by law or the Constitution, exile is not practiced
 as a means of political control.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-Although the Constitution provides for an inde-
 pendent judiciary, the effectiveness of the civilian and military courts is limited.
 The judicial system consists of three lower courts and an appeals court; there is
 no Supreme Court. The 1987 Constitution calls for the establishment of an inde-
 pendent constitutional court. However, the Government has not taken any steps to
 set up such a court, and the timing of its establishment remains unclear.
 The Constitution provides for the right to a fair public trial in which defendants
 have the right to counsel. The courts assign lawyers in private practice to defend
 prisoners and pay them from public funds. However, the court-assigned lawyers
 usually only show up at the trial, if they show up at all. The courts must, and in
 practice do, free a detainee who is not tried within the 164-day period. Trials are
 before a single judge, with the right of appeal. There are only nine judges to preside
 over all court cases; consequently, there is a huge backlog in the judicial system.
 Military personnel are generally not subject to civilian criminal law. A soldier ac-
 cused of a crime immediately comes under military jurisdiction, and military police
 are responsible for all such investigations. Military prosecutions are directed by an
 officer on the public prosecutor's staff and take place in separate courts before two
 military judges and one civilian judge. The military courts follow the same rules of
 procedure as the civil courts. There is no appeal from the military to the civil sys-
 tem.
 Foreign military instructors conducted human rights and military justice semi-
 nars in 1997. These seminars provided unprecedented opportunities for civilian gov-
 ernment officials, private sector representatives, and military personnel to discuss
 human rights and the role of the military in a democracy.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the right to privacy. The law requires warrants for
 searches, which are issued by quasi-judicial officers who supervise criminal inves-
 tigations. The police obtain them in the great majority of investigations. There have
 been complaints of surveillance of human rights workers by members of the military
 police and the division of central intelligence.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and of the press, and the Government generally respects these rights. However,
 there were reports of intimidation and harassment. Political leaders of the ruling
 coalition have expressed their frustration, accusing the media of espousing
 antigovernment rhetoric.
 The parliamentary and extraparliamentary opposition criticize the government
 freely.     a members continue to practice some self-censorship because of the re-
 cent history of intimidation and reprisals by certain elements of the former military
 leadership. On December 8, three men kidnaped, beat, and threatened a journalist
 in broad daylight. The incident occurred on the anniversary of the 1982 murders
 of 15 political opponents of the Bouterse regime and appeared aimed at stifling criti-
 cism in the local press. At year's end, the attack was still under investigation.
 The two daily newspapers, three television stations, and most of the radio stations
 are privately owned. Two television stations and two radio stations are publicly
 owned. Three companies provide cable television, which includes international chan-
 nels.
 
 
 654
 The Government did not attempt to abridge academic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 these rights, and the Government respects them in practice.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Citizens may change their residence and workplaces freely and travel
 abroad as they wish. Political dissidents who emigrated to the Netherlands and else-
 where during the years of military rule are welcome to return. Few of them have
 chosen to do so, generally for economic reasons. Citizenship is not revoked for politi-
 cal reasons.
 The Government cooperates with the office of the U.N. High Commissioner for
 Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees. The issue of
 the provision of first asylum did not arise in 1997. There were no reports of forced
 return of persons to a country where they feared persecution.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment ,
 The Constitution provides for this right, but in the past the military prevented
 its effective exercise. Although the military has twice handed over power to elected
 civilian governments following coups, 1996 marked the first time since independence
 from the Netherlands in 1975 that one elected government succeeded another in ac-
 cordance with constitutional provisions. The Government is still in the process of
 institutionalizing democratic, constitutional rule.
 The Constitution stipulates that power and authority rest with the people and
 provides for the right to change the government through the direct election by secret
 ballot of a National Assembly of 51 members every 5 years. The National Assembly
 then elects the President by a two-thirds vote. If the legislature is unable to do so,
 as was the case both in the 1991 and 1996 national elections, the Constitution pro-
 vides that a national people's assembly, comprising members of parliament andre-
 gional and local officials, shall elect the President.
 The Constitution provides for the organization and functioning of political parties.
 Many parties and political coalitions are represented in the National Assembly.
 There are historical and cultural impediments to equal participation by women in
 leadership positions in government and political parties. In the past, most women
 expected to fulfill the role of housewife and mother, thereby limiting opportunities
 to gain political experience or position. Participation by women in politics (and other
 fiefds) was generally considered inappropriate. While women have made limited
 gains in attanng political power in recent years, political circles remain under the
 influence of traditional male-dominated groups, and women are disadvantaged in
 seeking highpublic office. In 1996 voters elected six women to the National Assem-
 bly, compared with three who held seats in the previous assembly, and the assembly
 appointed a woman as chairperson. The Cabinet includes one woman as Minister
 of Regional Development and another as Deputy Minister of Social Affairs.
 Although the Constitution prscribes racial or religious discrimination, several
 factrs limit the participation of Maroons and Amerinians in the political process.
 Most of the country's political activity takes p lace in the capital and a narrow belt
 running east and west of it along the coast. The Maroons and Amerindians are con-
 centrated in remote areas in the interior and therefore have limited access to, and
 influence in, the poitica process. There is a small Maroon political party, which
 holds three seats in the National Assembly' and belongs to an opposition coalition.
 Although  there is no Amerindian      political p    darty, voters eleted  the  first
 Amerindians to the National Assembly in 1996. There are eight Maroons and two
 Amerindians in the National Assembly. There are no Maroons or Amerindians in
 the cabinet.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Hurnan Rights
 Human rights groups operate without government restriction, investigating and
 publishing their findings on human rights cases. Government officials are, however,
 generally not cooperative or responsive to their views.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution and laws do not differentiate among citizens on the basis of their
 ethnic origins, religious affiliations, or other ultral differences. In practice, how-
 ever, several iups within society suffer various forms of discrimination.
 Women.-The law dos not differentiate between domestic violence and other
 forms of assault. The Government has not specifically addressed the problem of vio-
 
 
 655
 lence against women. According to a national women's group, victims reported ap-
 proximately 500 cases of violence against women, and complained of an inadequate
 response from the Government and society to what appears to be a trend of increas-
 ing family violence. Police are reluctant to intervene in instances of domestic vio-
 lence, which remains a problem at all levels of society.
 There are no specific laws to protect women against trafficking and sexual exploi-
 tation. There are credible reports of trafficking in women and girls for prostitution.
 Women have the right to equal access to education, employment, and property.
 Nevertheless, social pressures and customs inhibit their full exercise of these rights,
 particularly in the areas of marriage and inheritance. Women experience economic
 discrimination in access to employment and in rates of pay for the same or substan-
 tially similar work. The Government has not made specific efforts to combat eco-
 nomic discrimination.
 The National Women's Center is a government agency devoted to women's issues;
 there is also a women's policy coordinator. Their effectiveness is severely limited by
 financial and staffing constraints. The principal concerns of women's groups are po-
 litical representation, economic vulnerability, violence, and discrimination.
 Chiidren.--School attendance is free and compulsory until 12 years of age, but
 some school-age children do not have access to education because of a lack of trans-
 portation, facilities, or teachers. There is no difference in the treatment of girls and
 boys in education or health care services. Children face increasing economic pres-
 sure to discontinue their education in order to work.
 The Government makes only limited efforts to ensure safeguards for the human
 rights and welfare of children. There are continuing reports of malnutrition among
 poor children, hut it is difficult to quantify the extent of the problem. In the capital
 where most of the country's ppulation is concentrated, there are several orphan-
 ages, and a privately funded shelter for sexually abused children opened in 1993.
 Elsewhere, distressed children must usually rely on the resources of their extended
 families.
 There is no societal pattern of abuse directed against children; however, the legal
 age of consent is 12 and some children are exploited for prostitution.
 People With Disabilities.-There are no laws concerning disabled people and no
 provisions for making private or public buildings accessible to them. There are also
 no laws mandating that they be given equal consideration when seeking jobs or
 housing. However, there are some training programs for the blind and others with
 disabilities.
 Indigenous People.-Most Amerindians and Maroons suffer a number of disadvan-
 tages and have only limited ability to participate in decisions affecting their lands,
 cultures, traditions, and natural resources. The nation's political life, educational op-
 portunities, and jobs are concentrated in the capital and its environs, while the ma-
 jority of Amerindians and Maroons live in the interior. Government services in the
 interior became largely unavailable and much of the infrastructure was destroyed
 during the 1986-91 domestic insurgencies; progress in reestablishing services and
 rebuilding the infrastructure has been very sfow.
 The Government appointed the Consultative Council for the Development of the
 Interior in September 1995. This Council, provided for in the 1992 peace accords
 that ended the insurgencies, includes representatives of the Maroon and Amer-
 indian communities. The Government did not, however, consult with representatives
 of these communities about the granting of gold and timber concessions on indige-
 nous and tribal lands.
 The World Council of Churches has condemned large scale commercial mining in
 the country, claiming that it violates the human rights of the indigenous people who
 live in the mining concession areas. Organizations representing Maroon and Amer-
 indian communities also complain that the companies dig trenches that cut resi-
 dents off from their agricultural land and threaten to drive them away from their
 traditional settlements. Three meetings held in 1996-97 with the leaders of Nieuw
 Koffiekamp, one of the principal villages involved in the indigenous community con-
 flicts with mining concessionaires, have not resulted in a mutually approved agree-
 ment. Several members of the villages are involved in small-scale mining and do not
 want to lose access to areas where they have traditionally mined. In March an in-
 digenous land rights organization accused a foreign mining company of hiring secu-
 rity guards associated with the previous military regime, who have threatened and
 intimidated villagers in Nieuw Koffiekamp.
 Maroon and Amerindian groups continue to cooperate with each other in order to
 exercise their rights more effectively. Two summits, or "gran krutus," bringing to-
 gether Maroon and Amerindian tribal leaders, have been held, the most recent in
 September 1996. During these summits, indigenous leaders reiterated their de-
 mands for the right to participate in decisions concerning the use of natural re-
 
 
 sources on land they claim as their own and for greater autonomy from the Govern-
 ment.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution protects the right of workers to as.
 sociate and to choose their representatives democratically. Nearly 60 percent of the
 work force is organized into unions, and most unions belong to one of the country's
 six major labor federations. Unions are independent of the Government but play an
 active role in politics. The small Labor Party has historically been a very influential
 force in government.
 The Constitution provides for the right of nongovernment employees to strike.
 Civil servants have no legal right to strike or mount other labor actions, but in prac-
 tice do so. Strikes in both the public and private sectors are common as workers
 try to secure wage gains to protect their earning power from inflation.
 There are no restrictions on unions' international activities. Several labor federa-
 tions were accepted once again as affiliates of international trade union organiza-
 tions, after having been suspended for collaboration with the military regime in the
 late 1980's.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Constitution explicitly
 recognizes these rights, and the authorities respect them in practice. Collective bar-
 gaining agreements cover approximately 50 percent of the labor force. The law pro-
 hibits antiunion discrimination by employers, and there are effective mechanisms
 for resolving omplaints of such discrimination. Employers must have prior permis-
 sion from the Ministry of Labor to fire workers, exept when discharging an em-
 ployee for cause. The Labor Ministry individually reviews dismissals for cause; if it
 insadischarge unjustified, the employee must be reinstated.
 There are no expert processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor, and there were no reports that it occurred. However, there
 were credible reports of trafficking in women and girls for prostitution (see Section
 5). The law prohibits forced and bonded labor by children, and such practices are
 not known to occur.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The law
 sets the minimum age for employment at 14 years. However, the Ministry of Labor
 and the police enforce this law only sporadically. Children under 14 years of age
 work as street vendors, newspaper sellers, or shop assistants. Working hours for
 youths are not limited in comparison with the regular work force. School attendance
 is compulsory until 12 years of age. The law prohibits forced and bonded labor by
 children, and there were no reports of such practices, although trafficking of girls
 for prostitution does occur (see Section 6.c.).
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no minimum wage legislation. Follow-
 ing a 50 percent pay raise, the lowest wage for civil servants is about $59.29 (SF
 25,200) per month. This salary level makes it very difficult to provide a decent liv-
 ing for a worker and family. Government employees, who comprise close to 50 per-
 cent of the work force of 100,000, frequently supplement their salaries with second
 or third jobs, often in the informal sector. The President and Council of Ministers
 set and approve civil service wage increases.
 Work in excess of 9 hours per day or 45 hours per week on a regular basis re-
 quires special government permission, which is routinely granted. Such overtime
 work earns premium pay. The law requires one 24-hour rest period per week.
 A 10- to 2-member inspectorate of the Occupational eath and Safety Division
 of the Ministry of Labor is responsible for enforcing legislated occupational safety
 and health regulations. Resource constraints and lack of trained personnel preclude
 the division from making regular inspections of industry. Accident rates in local in-
 dustry do not appear to be high, and the key bauxite industry has an outstanding
 safety record. There is, however, no law authorizing workers to refuse to work in
 circumstances they deem unsafe. They must appeal to the inspectorate to declare
 the workplace situation unsafe.
