 SURINAME
 After over a decade of predominantly military rule, Suriname installed a freely
 elected Parliament and inaugurated a democratically chosen President in 1991.
 Since then the Government has made fitful progress in consolidating democracy and
 slow but steady progress toward professionalizing and depoliticizing the military
 and reestablishing civilian authority over it. In 1992 the Government concluded a
 peace accord with members of insurgent groups that fought a domestic armed con-
 flict between 1986 and 1991. Elections were completed on May 23 without incident
 and were deemed free and fair by observers from the Organization of American
 States. A People's Assembly elected Jules Wijdenbosch President in September and
 he formed his Cabinet from members of the National Democratic Party (NDP) and
 several other political parties. Former military strngman Desi Bouterse, president
 of the NDP, does not hold a position in the new Government, but exerts consider-
 able influence through his party role.
 The Government of former President Ronald Venetiaan took positive steps toward
 reforming the military during 1995 and early 1996. The purging of Bouterse sup-
 porters, including the armed forces commander in 1995 and the army commander
 So                          ere           losded somewhat
 atic c   n ont       r the mliry. This posi     tren     ybe afiectd,
 however, with the return of the Bouterse-led NDP to government. Cooperation be-
 tween the military and the civilian police improved as respective roles have been
 clarified. Some aspects of the relationship between the Government and the military
 remain to be defined. Civilian police bear primary responsibility for the mainte-
 nance of law and order, but they continue to be responsible for some human rights
 abuses.
 The market-oriented economy is largely agricultural, but with an important baux-
 ite and alumina export sector. There is a high degree of state involvement and regu-
 lation; the Government and state-owned companies employ over half the working
 population. For the last several years, depressed world prices for bauxite and alu-
 mina, the damaging effects of the country's domestic armed conflict, and rapid
 growth of the money supply resulted in high inflation and reduced economic growth.
 Previously high inflation, which reached 586 percent in 1994 and 37 percent in 1995
 acording to the Surinamese Statistics Bureau, dropped to less than 1 percent in
 the first half of 1996. The estimated real eonomic growth rate was about 4 percent,
 and per capita annual income is about $1,400. The recent stabilization of the cur-
 rency following the July 1995 unification of the exchange rate is cited by some as
 an indication that the economy is beginning to respond to government efforts at
 structural reform. There are in*ications that the new Government, despite its popu-
 list base, is continuing efforts to limit expenditures and to support te local cur-
 rency.
 Both the Wijdenbosch and the Venetiaan governments generally respected the
 human rights of their citizens; however, problems remained in some areas. These
 are police mistreatment of detainees, abuse of prisoners, overcrowding of jails, soci-
 etal discrimination and violence against women, and marginalization of indigenous
 people. Both governments failed to call to account those responsible for human
 rights abuses in previous regimes.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Kilhing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings. There was, however, one report of a Molotov cocktail at-
 tack on the home of a human rights activist. The victim was pressing for an inves-
 tigation of the 1982 murders of 15 opposition leaders.
 The authorities took no action against prison guards who allegedly beat a prisoner
 to death in 1993. The Government also took no action to investigate past human
 rights violations, such as the 1982 executions by the military regime of 15 opposi-
 tion leaders or the 1986 massacre of civilians at the village of Moiwana. The human
 rights group Moiwana '86 unsuccessfully challenged in the lower court of Paramar-
 ibo the validity of the amnesty law passed in 1992, which pardoned members of the
 military and the insurgents for crimes (except crimes against humanity) committed
 between January 1985 and August 1992.
 The Inter-American Court of Human Rights rendered a judgment in 1993 that re-
 quired the Government to pay compensation to the survivors of seven Maroons (de-
 scendants of escaped slaves who fled into the interior to avoid recapture) killed near
 the village of Pokigron in 1987. The Government responded by establishing a fully
 funded foundation to pay compensation to relatives of the victims. The foundation
 
 
 563
 is actively disbursing compensation and has also funded a school and clinic in the
 village.
 b.Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 The Government, however, took no action to investigate earlier allegations of dis-
 appearances that occurred under previous regimes.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits inhuman treatment or punishment, but human rights
 monitors continued to express concern about official mistreatment of detainees and
 prisoners. The authorities fired two prison guards and suspended a third for report-
 edly beating prisoners and using unnecessary force in attempting to quell a riot at
 the Latour jail in February. The Government has not released the results of an in-
 quiry into charges that guards beat several recaptured prisoners in 1993.
 The completion of a new prison and renovation of existing jails have somewhat
 reduced overcrowding and improved overall health and safety conditions. However,
 the new prison, at Duuisberglaan, is operating at only half its capacity in large part
 due to difficulty in recruiting and training additional prison guards. Older jails re-
 main seriously overcrowded with as many as four times the number of detainees
 they were designed for, they are also unsanitary. At police stations, guards allow
 detainees no exercise and only rarely permitted them to leave the cells. Detainees
 also suffer from inadequate nutrition, although families are permitted and encour-
 aged to provide food to incarcerated relatives. Female prisoners were housed exclu-
 sively in an older jail and were not eligible for transfer to the new facility. According
 to local women's groups, there were no reports of sexual abuse of female prisoners
 by police officers.
 The Government permits independent monitoring of prison conditions.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law provides that the police may de-
 tain for investigation up to 14 days a person suspected of committing a crime for
 which the sentence is longer than 4 years. Within the 14-day period, the police must
 bring the accused before a prosecutor to be formally charged. If additional time is
 needed to investigate the charge, a prosecutor may authorize the police to detain
 the suspect for an additional 30 days. Upon  th     ran      the initial 44 days,
 a' judge of instruction" may authorize the police to hold the suspct for up to 120
 additional days, in 30-day increments (for a total of 164 days), before the case is
 tried. The judge of instruction has the power to authorize release on bail, but that
 pwer is rarely, if ever, used. There were no reports of detentions in contravention
 of these standards.
 Pretrial detainees constitute a large percentage of inmates and are often held in
 overcrowded detention cells at local police stations. Of those held in police custody,
 15 percent had already been convicted.
 The military police observed the requirement to hand over to the civil police civil-
 ians arrested for committing a crime in their presence. The military police continued
 to perform the immigration control function at the country's borders and airports
 but no longer investigated civilian crimes.
 While not spe   ay forbidden by law or the Constitution, exile is not practiced
 as a means of political control.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Tria!.-Although the Constitution provides for an inde-
 pendnt judiciary and the right to a fair public trial in which defendants have the
 right to counsel, the effectiveness of the civilian and military courts is limited. The
 courts assign lawyers in private practice to defend prisoners and pay them from
 public funds. The courts must, and in practice do, free a detainee who is not tried
 within the 164-day period. Trials are before a single judge, with right of appeal.
 There is little firm evidence of the extent to which corruption affects the court sys-
 tem, but the entire criminal justice system was subjected to severe strain during
 the period when the military controlled the Government and ominent members
 of the judiciary were involved with, or afforded protection to, rug traffickers. Re-
 cent escapes     -were linked to orruption of prison guards.
 The 1987 Constitution calls for the establishment of an independent constitutional
 court. However, as no steps have been taken to setgup such a court, it remains un-
 clear when the Government will create this institution.
 Military personnel are generally not subject to civilian criminal law. A soldier ac-
 cused of a crime immediately comes under military jurisdiction and military police
 are responsible for all such investigations. Military prosecutions are directed by an
 officer on the public prosecutor's staff, and take place in separate courts before two
 military judges and one civilian judge. The military courts follow the same rules of
 procedure as the civil courts. There is no appeal from the military to the civil sys-
 tem.
 Sincthe tchange in military leadership in 1993, coordination between the military
 police and the civil police has improved, and there were no further instances of mili-
 
 
 564
 tary interference in civilian police investigations. The pervasive climate of fear and
 intimidation that previously prevented cases involving military personnel or drug
 traffickers from being tried began to dissipate, and prospects for the impartial ad-
 ministration of justice have improved. Fear of possible reprisals by the ex-military
 strongman Desire Bouterse, however, appears to affect judicial decisionmaking in
 cases involving persons close to Bouterse.
 Foreign military instructors conducted human rights and military justice semi-
 nars in July 1995 and in March 1996. These seminars provided unprecedented op-
 portunities for civilian government and private sector representatives and military
 personnel to discuss human rights and the role of the military in a democracy.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the right to privacy. The law requires warrants for
 searches, which are issued not by judges but by quasi-judicial officers who supervise
 criminal investigations. The police obtain them in the great majority of investiga-
 tions. The military command curbed invasions of privacy by the military such as tie
 illegal monitoring of telephone calls, monitoring of the movements of human rights
 advocates, and threatening government officials, policemen, politicians, human
 rights workers, and journalists.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and of the press, and the Government generally respects these rights.
 The parliamentary and extraparliamentary opposition criticize the Government
 freely. Media members continue to practice some self-censorship, because of the re-
 cent history of intimidation and reprisals by certain elements of the former military
 leadership.
 The two daily newspapers and most of the radio stations are privately owned. The
 two television stations and one of the radio stations are publicly owned. The Govern-
 ment did not attempt to interfere with publications or to abridge academic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 these rights, and the Government respects them in practice.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Citizens may change their residence and work places freely and travel
 abroad as they wish. Political dissidents who emigrated to the Netherlands and else-
 where during the years of military rule are welcome to return. Few of them have
 chosen to do so. Citizenship is not revoked for political reasons.
 The Government cooperates with the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees and
 other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees. The issue of the provision
 of first asylum did not arise. There were no reports of forced return of persons to
 a country where they feared persecution.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides for this right, but in the past the military prevented
 its effective exercise. Although the military has twice handed over power to elected
 civilian governments following coups, 1996 marked the first time since independence
 from the Netherlands in 1975 that one elected government succeeded another in ac-
 cordance with constitutional provisions. However, the Government is still in the
 process of institutionalizing democratic, constitutional rule.
 The Constitution stipulates that power and authority rest with the people and
 provides for the right to change the government through the direct election by secret
 ballot of a National Assembly of 51 members every 5 years. The National Assembly
 then elects the President by a two-thirds vote. If the legislature is unable to do so,
 as has been the case beth in the 1991 and 1996 national elections, the Constitution
 provides that a national People's Assembly, comprising Members of Parliament and
 regional and local officials, shall elect the President.
 The Constitution provides for the organization and functioning of political parties,
 and many parties and political coalitions are represented in the National Assembly.
 There are historical and cultural impediments to equal participation by women in
 leadership positions in government and political parties. In the past, most women
 expected to fulfill the role of housewife and mother, thereby limiting opportunities
 to gain political experience or position. Participation by women in politics (and other
 fields) was generally considered inappropriate. While women have made limited
 gains in attaining political power in recent years, political circles remain under the
 ifluence of traditional male-dominated groups, and women are disadvantaged in
 
 
 seeking highpublic office. In May voters elected six women to the National Assem-
 bly, compared with three who held seats in the previous assembly, and the Assem-
 bly appointed one of them as chairperson. The Wijdenbosch Cabinet includes a
 woman as Minister of Regional Development.
 Although the Constitution proscribes racial or religious discrimination, several
 factors limit the participation of Maroons and Amerindians in the political process.
 Most of the country's political activity takes place in the capital and a narrow belt
 running east and west of it along the coast. The Maroons and Amerindians are con-
 centrated in remote areas in the interior and therefore have limited access to, and
 influence in, the political process. There is a small Maroon political party, which
 holds three seats in the National Assembly and belongs to an opposition coalition.
 Although there is no Amerindian political party, voters elected the first Amerindian
 to the National Assembly in May. There are seven Maroons in the National Assem-
 bly. There are no Maroons or Amerindians in the Cabinet.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Human rights groups operate without government restriction, investigating and
 publishing their findings on human rights cases. Government officials are, however,
 generally not cooperative or responsive to their views. In April the Government re-
 fused a reest by Amnesty International to allow a video crew to make a film
 about the December 1982 murders (see Section l.a.) on the grounds that the timing
 would upset the elections. In May a Surinamese organization, the Organization for
 Justice and Peace, approached the Government with the idea of establishing a
 "truth ommission" to investigate past human rights abuses. However, the Govern-
 ment turned down the idea again citing the fear that any findings would have an
 adverse impact on the election process. The National Institute of Human Rights,
 which had been initiated by the Government but authorized to act independently,
 was dissolved in 1994, after the expiration of the first members' 10-year term.
 The Venetiaan Government reacted negatively to calls for investigations into past
 human rights violations and refused to initiate such studies. By year's end, the new
 Wijdenbosch Government had taken no concrete steps to initiate any investigations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution and laws do not differentiate among citizens on the basis of their
 ethnic origins, religious affiliations, or other cultural differences. In practice, how-
 ever, several groups within society suffer various forms of discrimination.
 Women.-The law does not differentiate between domestic violence and other
 forms of assault, and the Government has not specifically addressed the problem of
 violence against women. According to a national women's group, victims reported
 approximately 500 cases of violence against women, and complained of an inad-
 equate response from the Government and society to what appears to be a trend
 of increasing family violence. Police are reluctant to intervene in instances of domes-
 tic violence. It remains a problem at all levels of society.
 There are no specific laws to protect women against trafficking and sexual exploi-
 tation. A local women's group is investigating several cases of arranged marriages
 to foreigners where the women were subsequently forced into prostitution. There are
 also credible reports of trafficking in Brazilian women for prostitution. Neither med-
 ical nor legal assistance is available to victims. Victims are not discouraged from
 filing complaints and do not face legal or other penalties.
 Women have a legal right to equal access to education, employment, and property.
 Nevertheless, social pressures and customs inhibit their full exercise of these rights,
 particularly in the areas of marriage and inheritance. Women, notably those who
 were heads of families, were adversely affected by deteriorating economic conditions.
 Women experience economic discrimination in access to employment and in rates of
 pay for the same or substantially similar work. The Government has not made spe-
 cific efforts to combat economic discrimination.
 The National Women's Center is a government agency devoted to women's issues;
 there is also a women's policy coordinator. Their effectiveness is severely limited by
 financial and staffing constraints. There are several active women's rights groups.
 Their principal concerns are political representation, economic vulnerability, vio-
 lence, and discrimination. These groups are somewhat effective.
 Children.-The Government makes only limited efforts to ensure safeguards for
 the human rights and welfare of children. The steady increase in the number of
 cases of malnutrition, by some estimates reaching upwards of 20 percent of school-
 children in the Paramaribo area, has been cause for concern. In the capital, where
 most of the country's population is concentrated, there are some orphanages, and
 
 
 566
 a privately funded shelter for sexually abused children opened in 1993. Elsewhere,
 distressed children must usually rely on the resources of their extended families.
 There is no societal pattern of abuse directed against children. Both in the capital
 and in the country's interior, some school-age children do not have access to edu-
 cation because of a lack of transportation, facilities, or teachers. There is no dif-
 ference in the treatment of girls and boys in education or health care services. Chil-
 dren face increasing economic pressure to discontinue their education in order to
 work.
 People With Disabilities.-There are no laws concerning disabled people and no
 provisions for making private or public buildings accessible to them. There are also
 no laws mandating that they be given equal consideration when seeking jobs or
 housing. However, there are some training programs for the blind and others with
 disabilities.
 Indigenous People.-Most Amerindians and Maroons suffer a number of disadvan-
 tages and have only limited ability to participate in decisions affecting their lands,
 cultures, traditions, and natural resources. The nation's political life, educational op-
 portunities, and jobs are concentrated in the capital and its environs, while the ma-
 jority of Amerindians and Maroons live in the interior. Government services in the
 interior became largely unavailable and much of the infrastructure was destroyed
 during the 1986-91 domestic insurgencies; progress in reestablishing services and
 rebuilding the infrastructure has been very slow.
 The Government appointed the Consultative Council for the Development of the
 Interior in September 1995. This Council, provided for in the 1992 peace accords
 ending the insurgencies, includes representatives of the Maroon and Amerindian
 communities. The Government did not, however, consult with representatives of
 these communities about the granting of gold and timber concessions.
 In May the World Council of Churches condemned the mining activity of two Ca-
 nadian mining companies, claiming that they violate the human rights of the indige-
 nous people who live within the mining concession areas. Organizations represent-
 ing Maroon and Amerindian communities complained that the companies dig
 trenches that cut residents off from their agricultural land and threaten to drive
 them away from their traditional settlements. In December the Minister of Natural
 Resources met with the leaders of Nieuw Koffiekamp, one of the principal villages
 involved in the indigenous community conflicts with mining concessionaires, to dis-
 cuss the village's concerns and options to resolve this particular dispute.
 Although a special mission from the Organization of American States has em-
 barked on a number of initiatives related to the determination of indigenous rights
 and the division of interior districts, implementation has been delayed by the cum-
 bersome government bureaucracy and its reluctance to tackle sensitive political is-
 sues.
 Maroon and Amerindian groups are beginning to cooperate in order to exercise
 their rights more effectively. The second summit, or "gran krutu," in as many years
 between Maroon and Amerindian tribal leaders took place in September. The lead-
 ers reiterated their demands for the right to participate in decisions concerning the
 use of natural resources and for greater autonomy from the Government.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution protects the right of workers to as-
 sociate and to choose their representatives democratically. Nearly 60 percent of the
 work force is organized into unions, most of which belong to one of the country's
 six major labor federations. Unions are independent of the Government and play an
 active role in politics. The small Labor Party, which is independent of the labor
 movement, has historically been a very influential force in government.
 The Constitution provides for the right of nongovernment employees to strike.
 Civil servants have no legal right to strike or mount other labor actions, but in prac-
 tice do so. Strikes in both the public and private sectors were common as workers
 tried to secure wage gains to protect their earning power from rapid inflation.
 Suriname was elected to the governing body of the International Labor Organiza-
 tion in March. There are no restrictions on unions' international activities. Several
 labor federations were reaccepted as affiliates of international trade union organiza-
 tions in the late 1980's, afterhaving been suspended for collaboration with the mili-
 tary regime.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Constitution explicitly
 recognizes these rights, and the authorities respect them in practice. Collective bar-
 gaIning agreements cover approximately 50 percent of the labor force. The law pro-
 hibits antiunion discrimination by employers, and there are effective mechanisms
 for resolving complaints of such discrimination. Employers must have prior permis-
 sion from the Ministry of Labor to fire workers, except when discharging an emn-
 
 
 567
 floyee for cause. The Labor Ministry individually reviews dismissals for cause; if it
 a discharge unjustified, the employee must be reinstated.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor, and there were no known instances of it.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The law sets the minimum age for
 employment at 16 years. However, the Ministry of Labor and the police enforce this
 law only sporadically. Those under 16 years of age often work as street vendors,
 newspaper sellers, or shop assistants. Working hours for youths are not limited in
 comparison with the regular work force. School attendance is compulsory until 12
 years of age.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no minimum wage legislation. Follow-
 ing a 40 percent pay hike instituted during election time, the lowest wage for civil
 servants was about $41.79 (SF 16,800) per month. This salary level makes it very
 difficult to provide a decent living for a worker and family. Government employees,
 who comprise close to 50 percent of the work force of 100,000, frequently supple-
 ment their salaries with second or third jobs, often in the informal sector. The Gov-
 ernment sets civil service wages and the National Assembly approves them.
 Work in excess of 9 hours per day or 45 hours per week on a regular basis re-
 quires special government permission, which is routinely granted. Such overtime
 work earns premium pay. The law requires one 24-hour rest period pr week.
 A 10- to 12-member inspectorate of the Occupational Health andSafety Division
 of the Ministry of Labor is responsible for enforcing legislated occupational safety
 and health regulations. Resource constraints and lack of trained personnel preclude
 the division from making regular inspections of industry. Accident rates in local in-
 dustry do not appear tobe high, and the key bauxite industry has an outstanding
 safety record. There is, however, no law authorizing workers to refuse to work in
 circumstances they deem unsafe. They must appeal to the inspectorate to declare
 the workplace situation unsafe.
