 SURINAME
 After 8 years of military rule, Suriname returned to civilian
 government in late January 1988. The National Assembly, which
 was elected under terms of a new Constitution approved by
 referendum in December 1987, selected Hindustani agricultural
 engineer Ramsewak Shankar as President, and veteran Creole
 leader Henk Arron as Vice President. Arron serves as Chairman
 of the Council of Ministers (i.e., de facto Prime Minister) as
 well. Jaggernath Lachmon, chairman of the leading Hindustani
 party and a key figure in Surinamese politics for decades,
 became Speaker of the new National Assembly which, under the
 Constitution, is the supreme organ of government. Javanese
 leader Willie Soemita holds the post of Vice Chairman of the
 Council of Ministers and a seat in the Cabinet. The remainder
 of the Cabinet also reflects Suriname's diverse ethnic makeup
 and the important social role of both the business community
 and the trade union movement.
 The military is again nominally under civilian control.
 Nonetheless, Desi Bouterse, the former military ruler, retains
 his post as Armed Forces Commander. Other senior military
 officers also continue to hold important positions in business
 and government. One officer, for example, heads the
 state-owned rice exporting company, a major earner of foreign
 exchange, while another directs the state-controlled Suriname
 News Agency.
 The new civilian authorities do not as yet exercise full
 control of the military or enjoy uncontested power. Friction
 between civilian officials and the military strongly affects
 the human rights situation. While the new Constitution
 protects such fundamental rights as free speech and the
 sanctity of the person, the civilian Government has not
 pressed charges against military-controlled internal security
 institutions for human rights violations committed during the
 years of military rule. Elements of the civilian-controlled
 police force went on strike in May in an unsuccessful attempt
 to force the new Government's hand over this and related
 issues. Although civilians now have a greater role in law
 enforcement, and hence in the protection of human rights,
 military dominance in internal security matters continues.
 Most notably, the military retains the right to arrest
 civilians for civil offenses and also controls immigration at
 the harbors and airports. This led to controversy in early
 November when a returnee from the Netherlands died while in
 military police detention at Zanderij International Airport.
 The military's continuing dominant role in internal security
 is strongly reinforced by the ongoing armed conflict in
 Eastern and Upper Suriname. The insurgent movement is led by
 Ronny Brunswijk, a former bodyguard of Desi Bouterse and a
 Bush Negro, like most of his followers. Bush Negroes make up
 about 10 percent of Suriname's population of 400,000. The
 descendants of escaped slaves, they continue to live in
 isolated rural areas. Surinamese authorities claim that the
 Bush Negro insurgency, which began in 1986, receives
 considerable aid from outside the country, especially in the
 form of weapons and mercenaries. Although a former soldier in
 the French Army died during combat operations in August
 (Suriname's eastern border is with French Guiana), the
 Suriname Government has not to date produced any valid
 evidence of French involvement in the conflict.
 
 
 705
 SURINAME
 Efforts to end the insurgency through military means have, in
 the past, produced frequent and credible reports of gross
 violations of human rights. The frequency of such reports
 diminished markedly in 1988. This was one of the results of
 the de facto cease-fire which began when the new civilian
 authorities took power and did not end until church-mediated
 peace negotiations collapsed in July. Despite the
 negotiations, the state of emergency limiting movement and the
 size of gatherings in East Suriname, imposed in 1986, remains
 in effect. It is administered by the armed forces.
 Economic conditions in Suriname remained seriously depressed
 in 1988. Uncertainty about Suriname's political future proved
 to be a serious disincentive to foreign investment. The
 scarcit, of foreign exchange also depressed the economy, as
 did pervasive corruption and the disproportionate size of the
 government work force. In mid-1988, approximately 50,000
 people worked directly or indirectly for the Government,
 accounting for over half of Surinamese employment. The
 Government's inability to reach an agreement needed to assure
 the continued operation of the foreign-owned bauxite companies
 (which have traditionally accounted for 70 to 80 percent of
 the country's foreign exchange earnings) continued to cast a
 shadow over Suriname's economic future.
 Inauguration of a civilian government and the military's
 return to its barracks in January marked the beginning of a
 noticeable improvement in the human rights situation.
 However, the print and electronic media continued to be
 constrained and timid in their comments about the military.
 The newspapers were far more willing, however, to criticize
 the new civilian regime. With the notable exception of the
 government-controlled news agency, the state-owned electronic
 media ceased to be a blatant propaganda vehicle for the
 military and its supporters. There were far fewer credible
 reports of human rights violations by the military or security
 services in 1988. Although the state of emergency remained in
 effect in Eastern and Upper Suriname, brigandage increased
 sharply in the interior areas which remained outside
 government control.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 In sharp contrast to the recent past, only one confirmed report
 of politically motivated killing came to light in 1988. The
 press and a local human rights organization reported that two
 officers\,f the military-controlled Internal Security Service
 on or about January 8 arrested a Bush Negro suspected of having
 links to the insurgents. The suspect's location remained
 unknown until January 18, when he was discovered dead in a
 shallow grave some miles from the capital. In addition, a
 Bush Negro civilian wounded on December 31, 1987, when the
 armed forces indiscriminately began firing at the village of
 Pokigron, died in a local hospital on March 4. An army first
 lieutenant, a sergeant, and two other soldiers were brought to
 trial by the military tribunal for the murder of the man found
 in the shallow grave and also for involvement in the Pokigron
 incident. The sergeant escaped from custody in October, the
 two lower-ranking soldiers received a 2-year sentence, and in
 December the authorities declared a mistrial on technical
 
 
 106
 SURINAME
 grounds in the case of the lieutenant, who disappeared
 following his temporary release.
 Violent incidents, in some cases fatal, involving Bush
 Negroes, the security service, and the police force, took
 place throughout the year. Eyewitness and press reports of
 these incidents often alleged a political motivation. It was
 impossible, however, to confirm most such reports. Many of
 the victims of these armed confrontations may well have been
 involved in criminal activities or in personal disputes. A
 military officer was investigated for involvement in the March
 firebombing of the KLM office in Paramaribo and a violent
 attempt to interfere with the arrival of the Dutch foreign
 minister. Although the officer's whereabouts remain unknown,
 he was placed on trial in absentia for a lesser, unrelated
 offense.
 Controversy arose in early November over the death of a
 returnee from the Netherlands while in military police
 detention at the International Airport. Assertions by the
 authorities that the victim took his own life have been given
 so little credence that the Government launched an
 investigation, the results of which were not known at year's
 end.
 b. Disappearance
 There were few credible reports of kidnaping or disappearance
 in 1988. Most of those persons alleged to have disappeared
 later proved to have been detained by the military police.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 No confirmed reports of systematic torture came to light in
 1988. There were, however, unconfirmed reports that a former
 French soldier, who was killed during combat between the
 Surinamese army and the Jungle Commando insurgents, was beaten
 and kicked before his death. The soldier's remains were later
 cremated.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 There were a few confirmed reports of persons detained in
 violation of procedural safeguards. On August 11, a Dutch
 citizen was arrested and held by the military police for
 several days under suspicion of violating currency export
 regulations. When he returned from the United States on
 December 10, noted human rights activist Stanley Rensch was
 arrested by military police on charges of illegal contact with
 enemies of the State. Rensch, who admitted he had held talks
 with the insurgents earlier in the year but contended they
 were aimed at reconciliation and were approved by the civilian
 authorities, was released on December 21 after considerable
 international attention focused on his case. The public
 prosecutor stated that there was insufficient evidence to
 prosecute him.
 According to Surinamese law, a person suspected of committing
 a crime for which the sentence is longer than 4 years may be
 detained for investigation for up to 10 days before being
 brought before a judge to be charged. He or she may be
 detained longer only if a judge decides there is sufficient
 evidence to support the charge. There is no provision for
 bail during this period. As far as is known, there were
 
 
 707
 SURINAME
 approximately 10 arbitrary arrests during the year, and all
 persons arrested were released after a short period.
 Exile is not used as a means of political control. Persons
 who fled the country voluntarily during the years of military
 rule are free to return and resume a normal life. No special
 arrangements have been made, however, to facilitate the return
 of such persons.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Suriname's new Constitution provides for an independent
 judiciary and fair public trials. (Defendants before the
 military court, or Krijgsraad, are an exception to the latter
 rule.) Actual practice appears to be following the
 constitutional mandate. Although military court defendants
 are not tried publicly, news of such court proceedings is
 regularly published. The greatest potential threat to the
 right to a fair trial appears to be a dispute between the
 court-appointed defense attorneys for indigents and the
 Government. The Government is behind in its payments to them,
 and they accbrdingly have threatened to stop participating in
 the program.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Although the Constitution protects the right to privacy,
 frequent and credible allegations have been made concerning
 the monitoring of overseas telephone calls by the military
 police. In addition, there have also been credible indications
 of military police harassment of political figures opposed to
 the army's role in national life. However, the frequency of
 such complaints has diminished considerably, compared to
 previous years.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Suriname's new Constitution provides for freedom of the press
 and free speech. Although Surinamese freely criticized the
 new civilian Government during 1988, criticism of the military
 and of actions undertaken during the years of military rule
 remained muted both in formal and informal settings. A similar
 situation existed in the press. While two daily newspapers
 regularly attacked the current regime, criticism of the
 military was rare and usually indirect. Several small
 newspapers and journals published by religious organizations
 and human rights groups were less circumspect. The electronic
 media, once strongly under the influence of the military
 Government, has demonstrated its independence regularly since
 the civilian Government took power.
 Academic freedom was legally protected but was not entirely
 secure. In August a university professor and activist in one
 of the three ruling coalition parties was attacked on the
 National University campus by two individuals associated in
 the past with the internal security forces. The professor
 indicated to the press that his assailants threatened him for
 his political activities.
 
 
 708
 SURINAME
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The new Constitution provides for freedom of assembly and
 association. Political, civic, religious, artistic, social,
 and other special interest groups are permitted free public
 assembly, subject to regulations concerning public order.
 Groups protesting policies of the civilian Government are not
 harassed or persecuted by the civil authorities, but reports
 of harassment by the military's internal security services
 persisted in 1988. Permits are required and routinely granted
 for open-air assemblies.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of worship is respected in Suriname, a multicultural
 and multireligious society. Foreign clergy were allowed to
 administer to the needs of both local and expatriate
 congregations, and missionaries entered the country freely to
 proselytize. Religious groups maintained international
 contacts, freely organized trips abroad, and published
 periodicals, some of which contained criticism of the
 military.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Surinamese may change their residence and workplace freely,
 and may travel abroad as they wish. However, travel within
 Suriname was restricted in 1988 due to the state of emergency
 in effect in Eastern Suriname. Travelers in that area were
 required to obtain permission from the military authorities.
 Such permission was often withheld arbitrarily. Vehicles and
 persons journeying to and from the interior were subject to
 search at army checkpoints.
 Surinamese may emigrate without interference and may return to
 take up residence at any time. Although Surinamese who fled
 the country during the years of military dominance were free
 to return, the authorities indicated, ostensibly for economic
 reasons, that no special arrangements would be made to ease
 their way back into society. Approximately 10,000 Surinamese,
 primarily Bush Negro refugees, fled Suriname to French Guiana
 following the outbreak of fighting in the eastern half of the
 country. The Surinamese Government in September signed an
 agreement with the Government of France and the United Nations
 High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to facilitate their
 return. Discussions have been held on implementing the
 agreement, but the refugees remain unwilling to return because
 their safety from attacks by the National Army could not be
 guaranteed.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Under the new Constitution, power and authority rest with the
 Surinamese people. Provided the military adheres to its
 terms, Surinamese citizens will have the right to change their
 government. The Constitution provides for direct election of
 a National Assembly of 50 members for 5-year terms. It also
 protects the existence of political parties. In 1988 41 of
 the 50 seats were held by the National Front for Development
 and Democracy, a coalition of the three (Creole, Hindustani,
 and Javanese) major traditional Surinamese political parties.
 Seats within the National Assembly reflected the balance of
 power within the Front; that is, the large Creole and
 
 
 709
 SURINAME
 Hindustani parties together held a majority of seats but the
 Javanese party held the swing vote.
 Opposition parties regularly present opposing views in the
 National Assembly and, less regularly, through the mass media.
 Dissenting votes were cast in the National Assembly on a
 number of bills and on procedural questions. Elections are
 based on universal suffrage for adults over 18 years of age.
 Women play an active role in political life, but only a few
 women held high office in 1988.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The civilian Government made a significant effort to be
 responsive to international inquiries on human rights issues.
 In March, for example, the Government promised to implement
 recommendations of a U.N. Special Rapporteur for vigorous
 investigations of past atrocities and disappearances in the
 interior of the country. Domestic human rights organizations,
 including the officially sanctioned National Institute for
 Human Rights, were active and generally unhindered in their
 work, although the Institute was careful to avoid
 confrontation with the military.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Discrimination is prohibited and is rare in Suriname's
 multiracial society, although ethnic consciousness remains
 strong among all groups. Women have a legal right to equal
 access to education, employment, and property. However,
 social pressures and customs still inhibit women from fully
 exercising these rights. Most female workers are to be found
 in less well-paid jobs.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Suriname's Constitution protects the right of workers to
 associate and to choose their representatives democratically.
 The atmosphere of tension which prevailed in the labor
 movement following the killings in December 1982 of several
 promineht labor leaders has largely dissipated. The labor
 movement appears to have made a full recovery. Grouped in
 four major confederations, Surinamese unions enjoy complete
 independence from the Government. One of the principal
 confederations, the Moederbond, is an affiliate of a member
 party in the ruling coalition. The union makes a considerable
 effort, however, to limit political influence in its union
 activities. This is borne out by the fact that Moederbond
 affiliates have struck more than have any other Surinamese
 unions since the new Government took power. No instances came
 to light of interference with union property or members as a
 result of union membership. Surinamese trade unions are
 permitted to maintain contacts with regional and international
 labor associations. Workers have the right to strike and
 exercised it frequently in 1988. The right of civil service
 employees to strike is recognized in practice.
 
 
 710
 SURINAME
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The rights of union organizing and of collective bargaining
 are provided for in the Constitution, and were respected in
 practice in 1988. Collective bargaining procedures covered
 approximately 50 percent of the work force. Negotiations over
 wages, working conditions, and pensions were held frequently
 and without hindrance from the authorities. Labor laws are
 applied uniformly throughout the country.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 There were no known incidents of forced or compulsory labor in
 Suriname. It is prohibited by the Constitution.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The legal minimum age for employment of children is 15 years.
 The Ministry of Labor is responsible for enforcing the law.
 There were few complaints of violations in 1988.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 There is no legal minimum wage in Suriname, but wages are high
 by regional standards and provide workers a decent standard of
 living. Work in excess of 8 1/2 hours per day or 48 hours per
 week is prohibited without special permission from the
 Government, and in such cases overtime is payable at time and
 a half or double time. Occupational safety and health
 regulations were fully in effect, and workplaces were closed
 down for noncompliance.
 
 
 711
