 SURINAME
 Suriname had an excellent human rights record during
 the first five years after winning its independence
 in 1975. A coup on February 25, 1980, led by a
 group of army sergeants, resulted six months later
 in the suspension of constitutional guarantees of
 human rights and civil liberties. However, the
 country's overall human rights record has continued
 to be good, although there have been abuses in some
 areas. The new government has made strong commitments
 to economic justice and equality of opportunity.
 After the coup, the sergeants quickly turned to
 civilian leaders for help in administering the country,
 and appointed an interim government pending new
 elections, with the passage by parliament of an
 amnesty law for crimes committed during the coup
 and an enabling act allowing the newly-appointed
 civilian government to rule for the most part by
 decree, Suriname returned temporarily to the path
 of constitutionalism. Although a number of troublesome
 issues were ignored, such as the role of parliament
 itself, strictly speaking the constitution -- with
 its strong human rights guarantees -- was preserved.
 On August 13,.1980, the army, claiming leftist plotting,
 suspended the constitution, arrested a number of
 persons and accepted the reslgnation of the president.
 A new government was installed but parliament was
 abolished, then later placed in 'indefinite recess."
 Thus Suriname, for the first time since independence,
 was deprived of the formal, legal guarantees which
 had protected civil liberties and human rights.
 At present a six-man policy center rules the country
 by decree. There is no legislature, nor are .there
 elections. The government has said that the present
 system is transitory. A new constitution has been
 drafted and is being circulated within the government
 for comment and revision. It is to be presented to
 public groups for comment and finally submitted to the
 populace in a referendum. Although no announcement
 has been made, it is generally believed that the draft
 constitutionwill include essentially the same civil
 and human rights guarantees contained in the previous
 constitution. The date for implementation of the
 new system of government has not been set.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Under the former constitution, torture was prohibited
 by law. There have been no allegations of its use.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment
 or Punishment
 Cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment was similarly
 prohibited under the former constitution and practice
 adhered to the rule. Immediately following the
 (526)
 
 
 February 1980 coup, when the military briefly assumed
 responsibility for civil order, a number of persons
 arrested on criminal charges -- looting, theft,
 rape -- were severely beaten. The military government
 evidently assumed such vigorous law enforcement
 would be applauded and sent a videotape of a simulated
 beating to a Dutch television station to illustrate
 the policies of the Surinamese government. The
 furor aroused by this tape substantially helped
 the efforts of Surinamese moderates to return to
 the normal processes of civil justice, which occurred
 fairly shortly thereafter. Although military arrests
 and interrogations continued, allegations of excessive
 use of force diminished.
 From the evidence available, most prisoners incar-
 cerated from March to August 1980 were treated humanely,
 although reports persisted of prisoners *asked to come
 in for questioning* in early morning hours, or held
 naked for several days in unscreened cells. Since
 August 1980 the military has become much more conscious
 of public opinion and sought to improve its image.
 There have been no summary executions (although
 alleged counter-coup attempts have resulted in one
 shooting death and a second from injuries sustained
 while in military custody), and no apparent discrimination
 among prisoners by reason of social class, race, sex,
 religion or type of offense.
 c. Disappearances
 There were no reported cases of clandestine incar-
 ceration or disappearances.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Immediately following' the February 1980 coup, 50 to
 75 persons were arrested and incarcerated or placed
 under house arrest on corruption charges or for
 suspicion of counter-revolutionary plotting. Since
 that time, all have been either released, released
 on their own recognizance pending formal charges
 (with travel restrictions) or tried by the special
 corruption court.
 The old Surinamese system included habeas corpus pro-
 visions and a fixed limit on the period of investi-
 gative detention; there were no legal provisions
 for "preventive detention." These same principles
 are still being applied in criminal arrests, insofar
 as can be determined.
 However, those suspected of counter-revolutionary
 activity have received less moderate treatment,
 remaining imprisoned for long periods pending military
 court trials. It is unclear why the military courts
 have taken so long to convene, but protracted detention
 has been rationalized on the grounds that such plotters
 constitute a threat to national security.
 a. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Under the suspended constitution, citizens were
 guaranteed the right of trial by an independent
 judiciary. Since the coup, most civil and criminal
 cases continue to be handled as before. Suriname's
 new rulers have instituted a "special corruption
 
 
 528
 court" to try all cases of alleged corruption under
 the old government. Regular judges were assigned
 to hear the cases, and government prosecutors were
 assigned to work with the military, which is spear-
 heading the corruption investigations. The judges
 have insisted both prosecution and defense follow
 the normal rules of procedure and evidence, and
 in virtually every case decided so far the fines
 have been reasonable and sentences lenient. More
 often than not sentences have equalled the time
 the defendant had already been held, allowing his
 immediate release.
 Cases dealing with counter-coup plots are also handled
 outside the regular judicial system. Such cases
 are heard before a military court headed by a civilian
 Judge. In a 1980 trial, the military exerted pressure
 on this court, and leftist coup plotters were convicted
 on what was generally considered flimsy evidence.
 They were later granted amnesty before their appeal
 could be heard. In the most recent coup plot trial,
 the military court appeared to be affording the
 defendants even-handed treatment, and there was
 no obvious pressure for a conviction.
 f. Invasion of the Home
 Under the suspended constitution, approval of a
 magistrate generally was required for. entry into
 the home. Civilian police have resumed operating
 under essentially the same restraints. The military
 police, however, are less inclined to follow such
 proceduresand on occasion have reportedly forced
 their way into private dwellings without prior court
 approval.
 Immediately following the February 1980 coup, and
 in August 1980 following the "leftist coup" roundup,
 the government openly monitored and censored overseas
 telephone and telex communications and some domestic
 traffic. Censoring has been discontinued, but it
 is likely that communication monitoring, at least
 on a selective basis, continues.
 2. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties,
 Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and
 Assembly
 There has been no official curtailment of freedom
 of speech, but most Surinamese are reluctant to
 express political views publicly, fearing official
 reaction.
 Freedom of the press has also been curtailed. Imme-
 diately following the coup, press reports to foreign
 countries were monitored and censored. When this
 was discontinued, the press was exhorted to support
 the revolution and publish only positive reports
 about it. Any editor who failed to do so was called
 to military headquarters and lectured on the importance
 of cooperation. One paper was closed following
 publication of a report the government deemed spurious,
 but reopened after a few days when all the other
 local papers criticized the closing. The government
 announced that all reports, including broadcast
 news, about internal affairs must be approved by
 
 
 529
 the national information service before publication.
 Despite this policy, mildly critical articles continue
 to appear without incurring overt reprisals by the
 government.
 Freedom of assembly was sharply curtailed after the
 coup, but the only remaining prohibition is against
 political gatherings. Meetings of the old political
 parties are still banned, but assemblies for quasi-
 political activities are now allowed. Freedom of
 religion continues to be respected.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country,
 Foreign Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 With the exception of a few former government officials
 suspected of involvement in corruption, there is
 complete freedom of movement within the country and
 to and from foreign countries. Emigration is unhin-
 dered and repatriation is encouraged.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political
 Process
 Although elections have not been held, and a six-
 man policy center rules by decree, the country's
 rulers are quick to point out that they actively
 support public participation in the political process.
 This participation is on their terms, however.
 They often listen to the opinions of individual
 citizens and of the various interest groups and
 allow them a quasi-participation in the government.
 However, the government is free to ignore the views
 expressed. Although elections were originally promised
 by the end of 1982, the military later said that it
 would not allow a return to the old political system
 and would allow elections only after a new structure
 of government has been designed and the Surinamese
 people re-educated sufficiently to appreciate it.
 Bow long that will take was unspecified.
 3. Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-governmental Investigation
 of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Suriname has welcomed visits of Amnesty International
 and various Dutch and non-governmental groups.
 Although visiting journalists have criticized some
 of the government's activities, on the whole investiga-
 ting groups have given Suriname good marks on respect for
 integrity of the person. In January 1981, an Amnesty
 International mission visited Suriname to discuss
 with the local authorities Amnesty's concerns, including
 the introduction of retroactive legislation and
 the establishment of the special corruption court.
 4. Economic and Social Circumstances
 Suriname's leaders have declared that they will follow
 a policy of 'Surinamese Socialism." They seek to
 create a social welfare state providing more jobs,
 higher salaries, and better housing, medical treatment,
 diet and education. According to their statements,
 although the government will control some of the means
 *of production, in most sectors companies will remain
 in private hands (increasingly Surinamese rather
 than foreign) with the public interest safeguarded
 by government regulation and supervision.
 
 
 530
 Unfortunately, Suriname's economy is in decline.
 As a result of recession and of investor hesitancy to
 risk capital in a country without a stable government
 or clear economic policy, the economy has stagnated.
 New investments or expansion of existing plant
 or.inventory have declined, and many businessmen
 report reduced retail sales. Soft international
 markets for Suriname's two main exports, bauxite
 and rice, will continue to exacerbate the country's
 poor economic showing. The continued flow of Dutch
 development assistance is a positive aspect, however.
 All of the original $1.7 billion grant has now
 been spent or allocated for use. Using Dutch aid,
 the government has constructed more low-income
 housing, created new jobs (mainly in the construction
 field) and increased social welfare programs.
 Eligibility for old age pensions was dropped from
 70 to 60 years, and payments were increased from
 25 to 75 guilders per month. Low-cost medical
 treatment and virtually free medicine are available
 to all. Since Dutch assistance will run out within
 ten years, the government must seek to revitalize
 the economy by promoting investment in the productive
 sector, thereby not only creating employment and
 reducing import needs, but also creating tax revenues
 to fund present and expanded social programs.
 Suriname has an extensive system of rural medical
 clinics to supplement the technically more sophis-
 ticated hospitals in the capital. Health treatment
 is adequate and quite inexpensive. Medicines are
 also available at nominal cost. All major tropical
 diseases are presently under control, although
 there have been isolated cases of malaria and filari-
 asia reported. World Bank figures show that the
 calorie supply available for consumption is 118
 percent relative to nutritional requirements.
 This figure is supported by general health figures
 and independent observation; malnutrition is virtually
 unknown.
 All children between the ages of six and 12 are
 entitled to free public schooling. Although the
 government claims that almost 90 percent of the
 population now has easy access to schools, a recent
 world Bank survey estimated Suriname's literacy
 rate at 80 percent. Government findings that the
 literacy rate might be as low as 70 percent led
 to public outcry and resulted in a government pledge
 to increase its efforts in the educational field.
 World Bank figures list Suriname's per capita GNP
 as $2,590 (1978). This figure is somewhat misleading
 since it reflects bauxite levy profits and Dutch
 development aid. The average Surinamer is neverthe-
 less relatively well off. Few people live in abject
 poverty. Due to traditionally strong family and
 community ties the old, infirm or unemployed can
 turn to relatives or friends for food and shelter.
 With large tracts of unpopulated land, there is
 always the opportunity for the unemployed to engage
 in farming.
 
 
 531
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOAN$ AND GRANTS- UBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS- MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 
 -COUNTRY: SURINAME
 
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...
 LOANS..............
 GRANIS............
 A.Ao ..................
 LOANS**...*,. ....o.
 GRANTS.. .... .....
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.). .
 B.FOOO FOR PEACEe......
 GRANTS...
 TITLE I-TOTAL.......oo.
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS....
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR.....
 TITLE II-TOTAL.........
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFPo
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY.***;
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...
 LOANS.............
 GRkANTS*.,**o.o.o..  .
 PEACE CORPS......
 .NARCUTICS*.*o*.
 O'TERO.o.......
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL.*o
 LOANS...o.o.......
 GRANTS... ...... ....
 A.MAP GRANTS...;......
 B.CREDIT- SALES-FMS....
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TKNGo...
 ".TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...
 E.OTHER GRANTS........
 III ;TOTAL ECON. & NIL...
 LOANS............. o..
 GRANTS..............
 OTHER US LOANS..........
 EX-IM BANK LOANS..*.....
 ALL OTHER..............
 
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL. AGENCIES
 1979     1980    1981
 
 TOTAL .......
 IBR O
 IDA
 IOS
 AO
 AFOB
 U*NOP
 OTHER-UN
 EEC
 
 0.0
 0.0
 '0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 
 1946-81
 58.1
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 9.6
 0.7
 47.8
 
 1,979    1980 .   1981
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0.     0.0
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0.     0.0
 0.0      0.0      0.0.
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0     0.0
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.0      o0.0    0.0
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0      0, 0
 0.0      0.0      O.0
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.0      0O      0.0
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.0      OO       o.o
 0.0      0.0.     0.0
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
