 SURINAME
 Consolidation of democratic constitutional government continued slowly and fit-
 fully following installation of a freely elected Parliament and the inauguration of a
 democratically elected President in 1991. The Government of President Ronald
 Venetiaan is composed of ministers drawn from a four-party coalition which holds
 the majority of seats in the multiparty National Assembly. In May the Government
 successfully installed a military commander of its own choosing to replace military
 strongman Desi Bouterse, who resigned as military commander in late 1992, and
 named its own choices as subordinate commanders.
 The Government thus made a significant advance in exercising control over the
 country's military establishment, which, under Bouterse's leadership, had over-
 thrown civilian governments twice in 10 years (most recently in December 1990).
 Cooperationbetween the military police and the civilian police improved after the in-
 stallation of the new military commanders. The military police continued to perform
 the immigration function at the country's points of entry.
 Suriname's economy is largely agricultural but also depends heavily upon export
 revenues from the key bauxite sector. Real gross domestic product contracted as the
 economy suffered from rapid inflation, foreign exchange shortages, and a flourishing
 black market. The Netherlands limited its aid flows because the Government made
 little progress in implementing the economic structural adjustment program adopted
 in late 1992.
 The number of new allegations of human rights abuses remained low. The prin-
 cipal problems included police mistreatment of detainees, abuse of prisoners, over-
 crowding of prisons and jails, intimidation of the press, violence against women, and
 marginalization of indigenous people. The Government failed to call to account
 human rights abusers from previous regimes.
 
 
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political
 killings in 1993. There were allegations, however, that prison guards beat an es-
 caped prisoner to death after he was recaptured. The nongovernmental human
 rights group Moiwana '86 took up this case, and the Government investigated pos-
 sible misconduct on the part of the prison guards or police. The Government had
 not announced any results of the inquiry by year's end.
 The Government reluctantly investigated reports of the finding of the remains of
 several people killed during the 1986-91 insurgencies in the interior. No results of
 the investigation were released, and the Government intimated that the claim was
 part of an effort by a former insurgent group to stir up trouble. Moiwana '86 contin-
 ued to pursue the court case it instituted in 1992, challenging the validity of the
 law that conferred amnesty on members of the military and the insurgents for
 crimes (except crimes against humanity) committed since 1985, but no final judg-
 ment was rendered.
 The Government took no action to investigate past human rights violations, such
 as the 1982 killing by the military regime of 15 civic leaders or the 1986 massacre
 of civilians at the village of Moiwana. On September 10, the Inter-American Court
 of Human Rights rendered a judgment concerning compensation to be paid to the
 survivors of seven Maroons (descendants of escaped slaves who fled into the interior
 to avoid recapture) killed near the village of Pokigron in 1987, for which the Govern-
 ment had admitted responsibility in 1991. The trustees appointed by the Court to
 oversee payment of compensation plan to begin working out details of implementa-
 tion with the Government in early 1994. The Cour. did not render a decision in a
 second case arising from the killing several years ago of a Surinamese citizen who
 had recently returned from the Netherlands.
 b. Disappearance.-During 1993, there were no new allegations of the disappear-
 ance of Surinamese citizens, but the Government took no action to investigate ear-
 lier allegations of disappearances occurring under previous regimes. Three Colom-
 bian nationals believed to be involved in narcotics trafficking *isappeared in 1993.
 The police are still investigating the incident. However, the authorities secured con-
 victions of two soldiers involved in a case thought to be related to the disappear-
 ances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits inhuman treatment or punishment, but human rights
 monitors continued to express concern about official mistreatment of prisoners. In
 addition to the death described above, it was also alleged that five other recaptured
 prisoners were beaten, with varying degrees of severity, by prison guards. One
 knowledgeable observer stated that prison guards beat inmates with some fre-
 quency. No results of the Government s inquiry into charges that guards beat sev-
 eral recaptured convicts had been released by year's end.
 Severe jail overcrowding continued to be a serious problem. At police stations
 where suspects are held pending trial, cells contained as many as four times the
 number of detainees they were designed for and were very unsanitary. Female pris-
 oners are in the charge of male police officers, and a knowledgeable observer said
 instances of sexual harrassment are not uncommon.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-According to Surinamese law, a person
 suspected of committing a crime for which the sentence is longer than 4 years may
 be detained by the police for investigation for up to 14 days. Within the 14-day pe-
 riod, the accused must be brought before a prosecutor to be formally charged. If ad-
 ditional time is needed for investigating the charge, a prosecutor may authorize the
 police to detain the suspect for 30 days more. Upon the expiration of the initial 44
 days, a "Judge of Instruction" may authorize the police to hold the suspect for up
 to 120 additional days, in 30-day increments (for a total of 164 days), before the case
 is tried. The Judge of Instruction has the power to authorize release on bail, but
 that power is rarely, if ever, used. There were no reports of detentions in contraven-
 tion of these standards in 1993.
 Pretrial detainees constituted 38.5 percent of the total prison and jail population
 of 1,007. Of those held in police custody, 18.2 percent had already been convicted.
 Requiring the police to maintain custody of convicted prisoners increases the over-
 crowding in their facilities.
 The military police observed the requirement to hand over to the civil police civil-
 ians arrested for committing a crime in their presence. The military police continued
 to perform the immigration function at the country's borders and airports but no
 longer investigated civilian crimes.
 
 
 553
 The convictions of four soldiers for setting fire to a television station and the con-
 viction of a consular officer who claimed links to the former military leadership
 demonstrated progress in the civilian Government's efforts to consolidate its control
 of the military and to hold all citizens responsiblefor criminal conduct regardless of
 their position. The Government's success on January 3, 1994, in arresting a former
 military police commander wanted on drug charges continued the trend.
 Exile is not used as a means of political control.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.--Although the Constitution provides for an inde-
 pendent judiciary and the right to a fair public trial in which defendants have the
 right to counsel, the effectiveness of the civilian and military courts is limited. The
 court system follows the Dutch model. Lawyers in private practice are assigned to
 defend prisoners and paid from public funds. An accused may be held for up to 164
 days before trial, but periodic reviews of the case are recquired at progressively high-
 er levels of authority. A detainee who is not tried within the 164-day period must
 be freed. Trials are before a single judge, with right of appeal. There were difficul-
 ties within the public prosecutor's office, with two experienced prosecutors departing
 as the result of disputes with the office's chief. There is little firm evidence of the
 extent to which corruption has affected the court system, but the entire criminal
 justice system was subjected to severe strain when the military was ascendant and
 prominent members were involved in or afforded protection to drug traffickers.
 Military personnel are generally not subject to civilian criminal law. A soldier who
 commits a crime immediately comes under military jurisdiction. Military prosecu-
 tions are directed by an officer on the public prosecutor's staff who is assigned that
 function. Military trials take place in separate courts before a judge and two mili-
 tary personnel. The military courts follow the same rules of procedure as the civil
 courts. There is no appeal from the military to the civil system. The military police
 are responsible for all investigations involving military personnel.
 Since the change of military command in May, coordination between the military
 police and the civil police improved, and there were no further instances of military
 interference in civilian police investigations. The pervasive climate of fear and in-
 timidation that previously prevented cases involving military personnel or drug traf-
 fickers from being tried began to dissipate, and prospects for the impartial adminis-
 tration of justice began to improve.
 There were no known political prisoners held during the year.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the right to privacy. Warrants, issued not by judges but
 by quasi-judicial officers who supervise criminal investigations, are required for
 searches and are obtained in the great majority of investigations. As the new mili-
 tary commander consolidated his control of the armed forces, he curbed invasions
 of privacy by the military such as illegal monitoring of telephone calls, monitoring
 of the movements of human rights activists, and threatening government officials,
 policemen, politicians, human rights workers, and journalists. Although some of the
 individuals involved in these activities attempted to continue them on occasion, they
 apparently were not acting with military authority.
 In October there was a series of grenade attacks on homes and businesses of sev-
 eral persons prominently associated with the Hindustani political party which be-
 longs to the ruling coalition. Although it was possible the attacks were the result
 of intraparty quarrels or part of a criminal extortion attempt, they were most likely
 the work of forces associated with the former military leadership. The police inves-
 tigation of the incidents, however, was not successful in identifying the principal
 perpetrators.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and expression of opinion through the printed press or other media. The parliamen-
 tary and extraparliamentary opposition criticizes the Government freely.
 Suriname's two daily newspapers and most of its radio stations are privately
 owned. Its two television stations and one of the countrys radio stations are publicly
 owned. After the change of military command, journalists felt that, although govern-
 ment officials might criticize them for their reporting, the Government would not
 use force against them. However, many members of the media continued to believe
 that elements associated with the former military leadership would use force
 against them and therefore avoided filing reports they thought the former military
 leaders would find objectionable. The leading human rights organization charged in
 November that the Government prevented the broadcast of two radio programs dur-
 ing the year. One of the journalists involved said the Government warned him about
 broadcasting erroneous information but later withdrew the accusation.
 
 
 554
 In May a television station which strongly supported the Government in a con-
 frontation with the military leadership over the naming of the new military com-
 mander was attacked and burned in an apparent attempt to intimidate the media.
 The Government and citizenry quickly came to the support of the station, which was
 able to resume its broadcasts. Four current or former members of the military, at
 least one of whom was a bodyguard of former military strongman Desi Bouterse,
 were convicted and sentenced to prison for the attack.
 The Government did not attempt to interfere with publications nor academic free-
 dom. The Guyanese author of a work seized in 1992 by Surinamese authorities on
 the grounds that it blasphemed the Hindu religion continued to seek compensation
 in the Surinamese courts. In April a judge declined to issue a summary judgment
 in his favor. No final judgment had been issued by year's end.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The right to assemble peace-
 fully and to form associations for nonviolent purposes is protected constitutionally,
 and these rights are respected in practice. Official registration of associations is re-
 quired in many instances and is generally granted. Political and other meetings
 take place unhindered. Most large public meetings require permits, which are rou-
 tinely issued.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Freedom of religion is provided for by the Constitution
 and is respected in practice. There is no state religion. Foreign clergy are allowed
 to minister to both local and expatriate congregations, and missionaries enter the
 country freely to proselytize. Religious groups maintain international contacts, free-
 ly organize trips abroaa, and publish perodicals. Adherence to a particular faith is
 neither a bar to, nor a requirement for, entry into political, economic, or social
 fields.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Surinamers may change their residences and workplaces freely and
 travel abroad as they wish. Political dissidents who emigrated to the Netherlands
 and elsewhere during the years of militar rule are welcome to return. Some, but
 not many, of them have chosen to do so. Citizenship is not revoked for political rea-
 sons.
 The large majority of refugees who fled into French Guiana during the insurgency
 in the interior have now returned to Suriname, and the U.N. High Commissioner
 for Refugees closed its office in Paramaribo. Suriname continued to provide refuge
 to a small number of Haitian migrants.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides for this right, but in the past the military prevented
 its effective exercise. The Constitution stipulates that power and authority rest with
 the people and provides for the right to change the government peacefully through
 the direct election by secret ballot of a National Assembly of 51 members every 5
 years. The National Assembly then elects a President by a two-thirds vote. If the
 legislature is unable to do so, as was the case after the last election in 1991, the
 Constitution provides that a National People's Assembly comprising members of
 Parliament and regional and local officials shall elect the President. Although the
 Surinamese military has twice handed over power to elected civilian governments
 following coups, one elected government has not yet succeeded another in accord-
 ance with constitutional provisions.
 The Constitution provides for the existence of political parties, and eight parties
 or political coalitions are represented in the National Assembly. Although the Con-
 stitution prescribes discrimination on the grounds of birth, sex, race, language, or
 religious origin, there are several factors that limit the participation of Maroons and
 Amerindians in the political process. Most of the country's political activity takes
 place in the capital and a narrow belt running east and west of it along the coast.
 The Maroons and Amerindians are concentrated in remote areas and therefore have
 limited influence in the political process. Most Surinamese political parties are eth-
 nically based. There is a small Maroon political party which holds three seats in
 the National Assembly and belongs to an opposition coalition. There are no Amer-
 indian political parties. There are four Maroons, one Amerindian, and three women
 in the National Assembly. There are no Maroons, Amerindians, or women in the
 Cabinet.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Nongovernmental human rights organizations operated freely in Suriname. After
 the change of military command, the Government and the military participated in
 the dedication of a memorial to victims of human rights abuses since the first mili-
 
 
 555
 
 tary coup in 1980. Several private participants called for full investigation of the
 abuses. Nethertheless, the Government initiated no investigations of possible
 human rights abuses during earlier regimes other than its inquiry into the reported
 finding of a mass grave near the village of Moiwana, noted a ove. On occasion the
 Government reacted with disfavor to calls for investigations into past possible
 human rights violations.
 The National Institute of Human Rights funded by the Government but author-
 ized to act independently, is widely regarded as inactive and ineffective. Nonethe-
 less, its chairman stated that Cabinet members often implement its recommenda-
 tions. When the Institute's five members' terms expired, the Government extended
 their tenure indefinitely and failed to appoint new members.
 The Government failed to implement several recommendations by the Inter-Amer-
 ican Commission on Human Rights that it investigate killings during the tenure of
 the military regime. The Government welcomes visits from foreign and international
 human rights groups. It has not had to deal with any outside requests for human
 rights investigations or charges that it has violated human rights.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution and laws do not differentiate among citizens on the basis of their
 ethnic origins, religious affiliations, or other cultural differences. In practice, how-
 ever, several groups within Surinamese society suffer some form of discrimination.
 Women.-Women have a legal right to equal access to education, employment, and
 property. Nevertheless scial pressures and customs inhibit the full exercise of
 these rights, particularly in the areas of marriage and inheritance. Surinamese law
 does not differentiate between domestic violence and other forms of assault, and the
 Government has not specifically addressed the problem of violence against women.
 However, violence against women is a problem throughout society. The private foun-
 dation "Home for Women in Crisis Situations" has been consistently oversubscribed
 by women from all the country's ethnic groups and their children. It expanded its
 capacity from 7 to 15 rooms with international and private assistance but was not
 successful in securing government support.
 Children.-An estimated 50 percent of the population is under the age of 18, but
 government efforts to attend to the human rights and welfare of children are not
 highly developed. About 18 percent of the Government's expenditures were for ac-
 tivities that would promote the welfare of children. In the capital, where most of
 the country's population is concentrated, there are some orphanages, and a privately
 funded shelter for sexually-abused children was opened in 1993. Elsewhere, dis-
 tressed children must usually rely on the resources of their extended families.
 Indigenous People.-Amenndians and Maroons are formally able to participate in
 Suriname's political process and society on an equal footing with the country's other
 inhabitants. In practice, however, most of the members of these two groups suffer
 a number of disadvantages and have only limited ability to participate in decisions
 affecting their lands, cultures, traditions, and natural resources. Suriname's political
 life, educational opportunities, and jobs are concentrated in the capital and its envi-
 rns, while the majority of Amerindians and Maroons live in the interior.
 Government services became largely unavailable, and much of the infrastructure
 was destroyed, in the interior during the 1986-91 insurgncies; progress in reestab-
 lishing services and rebuilding the infrastructure was very slow. Although the ac-
 cords ending the insurgencies provided for the appointment of a Consultative Coun-
 cil on the Development of the Interior, including representatives of the Maroon and
 Amerindian communities, the Government has not yet appointed that council. Rep-
 resentatives of the Amerindian community complained in September that they were
 not consulted about the grant of a large timber concession to an Indonesian com-
 pany in areas they inhabited. The Government did not respond to Amerindian com-
 plaints about the timber concession.
 People with Disabilities.-In general, Surinamese society has not yet addressed
 the question of people with disabilities. There are some training programs for the
 blind and others with disabilities. However, there are no laws concerning access for
 disabled people and no provisions for making private or public buildings accessible
 to them. Neither are there laws mandating that they be given equal consideration
 when seeking jobs or housing.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution protects the right of workers to as-
 sociate and to choose their representatives democratically. At least 40 percent of the
 work force is organized into unions, most of which belong to one of the country's
 six major labor federations. Unions are independent of the Government and play an
 
 
 556
 active role in politics. A small Labor Party, which is independent of the labor move-
 ment but includes the chairmen of two of the most influential labor federations in
 its leadership, is part of the ruling four-party coalition and provides three Cabinet
 members.
 There are no restrictions on unions' international activities. Several Surinamese
 labor federations were reaccepted as affiliates of international trade union organiza-
 tions in the late 1980's, afterhaving been suspended for collaboration with the mili-
 tary regime earlier in the decade.
 The Constitution protects the right of nongovernment employees to strike. Civil
 servants have no such right to strike or mount other labor actions, but in practice
 they are able to do so. Strikes in both the public and private sectors were common
 as workers tried to secure wage gains to protect their earning power from rapid in-
 flation.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-These rights are explicitly
 recognized by the Constitution and respected in practice. Collective bargaining
 agreements cover approximately 50 percent of the labor force. The law prohibits
 antiunion discrimination by employers, and there are effective mechanisms for re-
 solving complaints of such discrimination. Employers must have prior permission
 from the Ministry of Labor to fire workers, except when discharging an employee
 for cause. Dismissals for cause are individually reviewed by the Labor Ministry, and
 if it finds the discharge unjustified, the employee must be reinstated.
 There are no special economic zones in Suriname.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor, and there were no known instances of it in 1993.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Surinamese law sets the minimum
 age for employment at 16 years. Enforcement of this law by the Ministry of Labor
 and the police is sporadic and only partially effective, however. Those under 16
 years of age are often employed as street vendors, newspaper sellers, and shop as-
 sistants. School attendance is compulsory until the age of 12. However, both in the
 capital and in the countrys interior some school-age children do not have access to
 education because of lack of transportation, facilities, or teachers.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Suriname has no minimum wage legislation.
 The Government's lowest wage for unskilled laborers will not provide a decent living
 for a worker and family. Work in excess of 9 hours per day or 45 hours per week
 on a regular basis requires special government permission, which is routinely grant-
 ed. Such overtime work earns premium pay. One 24-hour rest period, usually but
 not necessarily Sunday, is required per week.
 A 10- to 12-member inspectorate of the Occupational Health and Safety Division
 of the Ministry of Labor is responsible for enforcing legislated occupational safety
 and health regulations. There is, however, no law authorizing workers to refuse to
 work in circumstances they deem unsafe. They must appeal to the inspectorate to
 declare the circumstances unsafe. Resource constraints and lack of trained person-
 nel preclude the Division from making regular inspections of Surinamese industry.
 Accident rates in local industry do not appear to be high, and the key bauxite indus-
 try has an outstanding safety record.
