 SURINAME
 Suriname's transition to democracy suffered numerous setbacks
 In 1990, culminating in a December 24 military coup d'etat
 which deposed the democratically elected government led by
 President Ramsewak Shankar. Over the course of the year, the
 constitutional framework established in 1988 following 8 years
 of military rule increasingly seemed merely the form rather
 than the substance of democratic self-rule, as the military,
 led by former ruler Col. Desi Bouterse, consolidated its
 position as the dominant political force in the country.
 Until December 24, Suriname was nominally governed .by the
 popularly elected NationAl Assembly and a President chosen by
 the Assembly. In practice, however, much real power was
 exercised by the military through its executive organ, the
 Military Authority. Key military figures, including Bouterse,
 are also leaders of the country's most active opposition
 political party, the National Democratic Party.
 Throughout the year, the governing three-party coalition, the
 Front for Democracy and Development, retained its large
 majority in the National Assembly. The Government's
 composition reflected Suriname's ethnic divisions by including
 political parties representing each of the country's largest
 racial groups, the Hindustanis (Asian Indians), the Creoles
 (generally the descendants of emancipated African slaves), and
 the Javanese. The presidency was filled by a member of the
 Hindustani party, while the vice presidency was filled by the
 leader of the principal Creole party.
 Continuing a trend which began in 1988, military leaders acted
 to forestall government actions with which they disagreed on
 issues affecting their perceived interests. A major feature
 of the year was a campaign of intimidation aimed at government
 officials, human rights workers, journalists, and other
 critics of the military, which many credible observers believe
 was directed by the military. Stability and development in
 Suriname continued to be adversely affected by the failure of
 efforts to resolve a 4 year-old Maroon insurgency in the
 interior. (Maroons are the descendants of escaped slaves who
 fled to the interior several centuries ago and retained many
 African customs.) The peace agreement reached in July 1989 at
 Kourou, French Guiana, between the Government and Maroon
 insurgents remained unimplemented. Various efforts were
 launched during the year to recast the agreement in a way that
 would meet military objections to the original document. At
 year's end, these efforts had not succeeded, and Maroon
 refugees in French Guiana and displaced persons in the capital
 remain unwilling to return to their traditional territories
 for fear of military retaliation. The problems of the
 interior were greatly exacerbated by the violent actions of a
 number of illegal armed bands of Amerindians and Maroons which
 purported to advance an independent political agenda hostile
 to the Government and the main Maroon insurgency, but which in
 fact were formed, armed, and directed by the military.
 The limited improvement in the economy during 1988 and the
 first half of 1989 came to an end, with no significant growth
 in 1989 in the real gross domestic product and an expected
 decline in 1990. This resulted from several interrelated
 factors, including a severe foreign exchange shortage; a
 consequent scarcity of essential imported inputs and spare
 parts; declining output in the key bauxite sector, which
 provides 70-80 percent of foreign exchange earnings;
 
 
 SURINAME
 accelerating inflation; and a burgeoning black market in which
 over 80 percent of all goods are sold.
 The spotty improvement in Suriname's human rights situation
 that had been registered since 1988 was reversed in 1990. The
 military refused to accept direction and control by the
 elected civilian Government and, in the pursuit of its own
 perceived interests, arbitrarily detained and killed critics
 and opponents, intimidated journalists, restricted shipments
 of food and medicine to areas of conflict with insurgent
 groups, and engaged in numerous other abuses of human rights.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1  Respect for the Integrity of the Person,
 Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Extrajudicial Killings
 The military was responsible for several politically motivated
 killings in 1990. Elements of the military suppressed a
 January 28-February 6 uprising by Amerindians against the
 promilitary leadership of, the so-called Tucajana Amazona
 Indians (a band of Amerindians who have engaged.since August
 1989 in politically motivated violence in the interior at the
 instruction of the military). Thereafter, 11 Amerindians fled
 from western Suriname to Guyana, reportedly intending to seek
 asylum in Guyana. Guyanese authorities returned the 11 men to
 the custody of the Surinamese military, which took them to
 Paramaribo. Four of the leaders of the failed rebellion were
 subsequently flown by military aircraft to Apoera in western
 Suriname, and then disappeared. The military officers who had
 custody of the four claimed, implausibly, that a large group
 of armed masked men had kidnaped their prisoners on February
 19. The Government did not contradict press-reports that the
 men died by violence; reliable observers believe they were
 murdered by the military. As of year's end a government
 investigation into the killings continued to be obstructed
 because the civilian police were prevented from collecting
 evidence in areas controlled by the promilitary Tucajana
 Indians.
 Two bodyguards of Maroon-insurgent leader Ronnie Brunswijk
 were killed in March when Brunswijk, who had come to
 Paramaribo for peace negotiations under a guarantee of
 security extended by President Shankar, was invited on March
 26 to the headquarters of military commander Bouterse.
 According to credible eyewitness accounts, Bouterse ordered
 Brunswijk arrested while, simultaneously, military officers
 fatally shot the two bodyguards. Following his March 28
 release and return to eastern Suriname, Brunswijk named the
 army officers he believed were responsible for the killings
 and demanded that the Government take action against them. In,
 a subsequent interview, army chief of staff Badressein Sital
 called the killing of'the bodyguards "a normal act" because
 the Maroons were terrorists. By year's end, there were no
 further developments in this case.
 On August 5 a prominent civilian police inspector, Herman
 Gooding, was murdered, allegedly by elements of the military.
 Gooding had led a number of investigations of crimes involving
 military personnel, was publicly threatened during a January 5
 press conference by a leader of the Tucajana Indians, and
 reportedly was also investigating charges of involvement of
 
 
 SURINAME
 senior military officers in cocaine trafficking. He was
 killed on August 4, moments after leaving the office of the
 deputy commander of the military police, Lt. Cliff Ganpat, in
 Fort Zeelandia where he had gone to discuss recent incidents
 of friction between the police corps and the military police;
 his body was found in a public square about 20 meters from
 military commander Bouterse's headquarters. Following
 expressions of public outrage, the Government formed a
 commission to investigate Gooding's murder. On September 12,
 however, officials announced that the investigation had been
 thwarted because potential witnesses were unwilling to come
 forward in the prevailing atmosphere of intimidation. The
 Police Officers' Union, which conducted a lengthy labor action
 in protest, implicated the military police in Gooding's murder
 and pressed the Government to continue the investigation, but
 as of the end of the year no progress had been made.
 A series of drive-by shootings at civilian police stations
 claimed a fatality on December 29, 1989. Police officer Third
 Class Kenneth Hoever was killed and Deputy Inspector Ronald
 Gilles severely wounded when their pickup truck was riddled
 with bullets apparently fired by automatic rifles. A
 spokesman of the Tucajana Amazona Indians had warned the
 previous day that there would be an escalation of tension
 between the Tucajanas and the police, and most independent
 observers believe the killing of officer Hoever was another in
 a long series of politically motivated incidents in which the
 military has attempted to assert its power over the civilian
 police. Referring to these and earlier incidents, army chief
 of staff Commandant Sital stated that "international notions
 of democracy and the codes and rules--that doesn't apply here
 in Suriname."
 There was no progress in investigations or prosecutions of
 suspects in past murders of regime opponents during the years
 of military rule. The Inter-American Commission on Human
 Rights (IACHR) proceeded with its investigation into the
 December 1987 killings of seven Maroons at the village of
 Pokigron, and the November 1988 death while in military police
 custody of a Surinamese citizen who had just returned from the
 Netherlands. The Government has not agreed to settlements
 with the families of the victims in either case; the families
 are being represented by legal counsel in The Netherlands. In
 April a military court, acting on narrow technical grounds,
 dismissed for the third time charges against a former army
 lieutenant, still closely linked to the military leadership,
 for the 1988 murder of a Maroon civilian supposedly
 sympathetic to the insurgency. Two enlisted men were
 sentenced to prison terms in 1988 for their role in the
 killing.
 The executive branch of the Government took no action to
 implement an amnesty law passed in June 1989 covering acts
 committed by the military and the rebels during the period
 from January 1, 1985, to an as yet undetermined date which is
 to be fixed by the President.
 b. Disappearance
 In March, some 8 weeks after the failed Amerindian uprising in
 January (see Section l.a.), the police disclosed that 19
 Amerindian men were missing. This figure does not include a
 number of Amerindian rebels who were acknowledged by the
 authorities to have been killed in the fighting, but did
 include the four men whose deaths had been reported by the
 
 
 772
 SURINAME
 press in February but never officially confirmed. In addition
 to this group of 19, protesting Amerindian women named five
 other men who had also disappeared. Two of the missing men
 were credibly reported to have last been seen in the early
 morning of February 6 in the Amerindian village of Matta, in
 the Para District, being driven westward in a truck in which a
 military officer was also seated. These two men have never
 been accounted for. However, in subsequent months, the
 majority of the missing Amerindian men returned to their
 villages. Human rights activists reported that, as of
 October, eight (including the two who disappeared in the
 vicinity of Matta and the four reported killed at Apoera) of
 the original group of 24 missing Amerindians were still
 unaccounted for.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 There were no charges of physical torture during 1990, but
 there were credible reports of psychological abuse such as
 threats of imminent execution, especially of detainees at a
 military detention facility on the grounds of Fort Zeelandia
 known as "Devil." The Police Union noted that cells of most
 civilian police stations were severely overcrowded, with
 suspects often confined in the same cell as convicted
 criminals, and called for a large-scale transfer of. prisoners
 from police stations to national prisons. The overcrowding
 was attributable to some degree to a 3-month police labor
 action which began in August.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 According to law, a person suspected of committing a crime for
 which the sentence is longer than 4 years may be detained for
 an investigation for up to 10 days before being brought before
 a judge to be charged. The detention may be longer only if
 the judge decides there is sufficient evidence to support the
 charge. There is no provision for bail during this period.
 In April the National Assembly passed by an overwhelming
 majority a bill ending the arrest and pursuit powers of the
 military police in civilian cases and canceling the function
 of the military police commander and his deputy as "officers
 of justice." The bill was signed by the President and took
 effect on May 5. In practice, however, the military police
 continue to exercise jurisdiction in any case considered by
 them to affect the interests of the military, and they retain
 arrest powers in the large areas of the country considered to
 be military zones. The military police also retain full
 authority, including arrest powers, along the borders and
 continue to carry out immigration and security functions at
 airports.
 Following the failed January Amerindian uprising (see Section
 1. a.), 7 of the 11 men returned to the custody of the
 Surinamese military by Guyanese authorities were held by the
 military police without charges for several weeks before being
 remanded to civilian custody. On March 19, after an extended
 public protest in front of the National Assembly building by
 female relatives over the detainees' fate and that of the four
 who were reported killed in western Suriname, six of the seven
 detainees were released. On the same day the seventh member
 of the group and three others were charged with various lesser
 offenses, including larceny.
 
 
 773
 SURINAME
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Constitution provides for an independent judiciary and the
 right to a fair public trial in which defendants have the
 right to counsel. Indigents generally have access to free or
 low cost legal representatives. Civilian defendants before
 the military court do not receive public trials, but news of
 military court proceedings appears in the press.
 Judicial procedure in criminal cases appeared to be in danger
 of breaking down in 1990. One of the country's two public
 prosecutors admitted in September that "legal structures are
 not functioning normally." On September 12, senior judicial
 officials, including the Minister of Justice and the Acting
 Attorney'General, announced that the Government's
 investigation into the August 5 murder of Police Inspector
 Gooding (see Section l.a.) had run into a "blind wall." They
 cited: an atmosphere of fear and intimidation, including
 numerous death threats, that discouraged investigators and
 prevented witnesses from coming forward; the balance of
 political power in the country; police-military relations; the
 inaccessibility (to the police) of certain areas of the
 country which rendered investigations impossible; and
 "especially, ruthless, drug-related criminality." The
 judicial officials noted that there were other unsolved
 criminal cases and that "many future cases" would likely not
 be solved unless the causes of the atmosphere of fear were
 addressed. Credible sources reported that during the Gooding
 investigation, civilian police and judicial officials were
 repeatedly subjected to death threats and harassment,
 presumably by promilitary elements.
 A similar lack of progress in other cases involving the
 military made clear that soldiers and their allies had
 effectively placed themselves outside the reach of the law.
 Five suspects were arrested in the apparently
 robbery-motivated April 10 murder of a Soviet diplomat whose
 body was discovered on the road from Paramaribo to Zanderij
 Airport. One of the suspects, an army corporal who allegedly
 was the ringleader of the criminal group involved, was
 remanded to military police custody. The corporal
 subsequently escaped from custody. The military police
 announced that he and two other men, including another suspect
 in the Soviet diplomat's murder, had been shot dead December
 15 after their car failed to halt at a military checkpoint.
 The military police account.of the incident was not credible,
 and reliable reports indicate that the three men were
 summarily executed.
 On June 7 the Attorney General issued a warrant for the arrest
 of Lt. Ruben Rozendaal, one of the "Group of 16" soldiers who
 led the 1980 coup that brought the military to power, on
 charges of shipping 180 kilograms of cocaine which was seized
 by Dutch police at the Amsterdam Airport on June 2. The
 military police refused to execute the warrant, demanding to
 see the statements of the Government's witnesses, and on June
 15 the court ordered the release of three other suspects in
 the case, which was dropped.
 A number of other criminal investigations, including probes
 into several cases of arson and shooting attacks against
 civilian police stations, were effectively blocked by military
 authorities who refused to cooperate or witnesses who were
 unwilling to come forward.
 
 
 SURINAME
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Although the Constitution protects the right to privacy, there
 continued to be frequent credible reports concerning the
 monitoring of telephone calls by security service personnel.
 Human rights activists and critics of the military reported
 surveillance of their movements and threatening or harassing
 telephone calls to their homes or offices. Throughout the
 year, government officials, human rights activists, and
 journalists reported surveillance of their movements and
 telephoned threats, some of which included accurate
 descriptions of the victims' recent movements.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian
 Law in Internal Conflicts
 As in previous years, there were numerous reports, many of
 them credible, of violations of humanitarian law in the
 ongoing conflict in the interior. Following an extended cease
 fire, conflict in the interior resumed in May. Despite a
 public directive by President Shankar to remain on the
 defensive, the army initiated offensive operations in eastern
 Suriname on June 17 and occupied the town of Moengo. There
 were several reports confirmed by independent observers of
 beatings of residents of Moengo suspected by the army of
 having links to the insurgents.
 Beginning in mid-July an army helicopter conducted a series of
 aerial attacks, using air-to-surface rockets, designed to
 drive insurgents from positions in or near the Maroon village
 of Langatabbetje, forcing civilian residents of the area to
 flee to French Guiana.
 The January 28-February 6 Amerindian uprising (see Sections
 l.a. and l.b.) was reportedly suppressed with considerable
 force. It is significant that, despite the acknowledged
 deaths of at least 12 Amerindian rebels, no Amerindian wounded
 were taken to hospitals, nor were the bodies of slain
 Amerindian rebels taken to morgues (they were reportedly
 buried on the spot).
 On September 25 soldiers burned approximately 24 dwellings in
 the Maroon village of Botopasi and severely beat several
 inhabitants. Army commander Bouterse said that the soldiers
 responsible for these "excesses," including a sergeant in
 command of the unit involved, would be punished and the
 villagers compensated for their losses; at year's end no such
 action had been taken.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and of the press is provided for by the
 Constitution and opposing political views were frequently
 aired, particularly in the press. However, both the military
 establishment and, to a lesser extent, the civilian Government
 tried to control the media. The press and electronic media
 became perceptibly less willing to criticize the military.
 The media carried many stories emanating from the office of
 the Military Authority without attribution, implying that they
 were fact, when actually many of these reports were creations
 of the military's public relations apparatus. The press, for
 example, detailed "negotiations" between military leaders and
 
 
 SURINAME
 members of groups which were formed, armed, and directed by
 the military as if these conversations were as significant as
 the civilian Government's negotiations with the Maroon
 insurgents. Journalists privately acknowledged that
 newspapers as well as radio and television stations felt
 compelled to publish these accounts for fear of'the
 consequences if they did not do so.
 Intimidation was partially responsible for the increase in
 press self-censorship in 1990. Four leading print and media
 journalists who have been critical of the military received
 threats in June from a group calling itself "Octon"; this
 organization had previously surfaced in August 1989 when it
 claimed responsibility for grenade attacks on several
 Paramaribo businesses. On January 5 the leader of the
 Tucajana Amazona Indians, "Commandant" Thomas, publicly
 threatened several journalists. Independent observers believe
 Octon to be connected to the Tucajanas and elements of the
 military. The editor of the country's largest newspaper, De
 Ware Tijd, told a foreign interviewer that his office
 regularly received anonymous threats.
 The Government also inhibits criticism through its control of
 foreign currency. Of the two leading newspapers, De Ware
 Tijd, with a circulation of 40,000, was the more critical of
 the Government and the military. De Ware Tijd was forced on
 several occasions to shut down its operation and reduce the
 number of pages per edition due to lack of ink and newsprint.
 Foreign currency restrictions made difficult the importation
 of materials necessary to publish. In contrast, De West, with
 a circulation of 15,000, had little difficulty obtaining
 foreign exchange. The editor of De West admitted to a foreign
 journalist that his paper censored itself, because if a
 newspaper criticizes the Government too much, the Government
 "can slow down allocation of funds."
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The right to assemble peaceably and to form associations for
 nonviolent purposes is protected constitutionally. These
 rights are respected in practice. Official registration is
 required in many instances and is generally granted. Most
 large public meetings require a permit, and these are
 routinely granted. Trade associations face no restriction on
 engaging in political activity or affiliating with
 international organizations.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is respected in Suriname, a multicultural
 and multireligious society. Foreign clergy are allowed to
 minister to both local and expatriate congregations, and
 missionaries enter the country freely to proselytize.
 Organized religions are free to establish training facilities
 for their clergy. Religious groups maintained international
 contacts, freely organized trips abroad, and published
 periodicals.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Surinamese may change their residence and workplace freely,
 and may travel abroad as they wish. Surinamese may emigrate
 without interference and may return to take up residence at
 any time. Citizenship is not revoked for political reasons.
 
 
 SURINAME
 There were no known instances in which refugees were forced to
 return to countries in which they feared persecution.
 Travel to much of the interior remains limited in practice,
 largely as a result of the precarious security situation.
 There were frequent reports that members of the Tucajana
 Amazona Amerindian group harassed citizens working or
 traveling in the interior, particularly in western and central
 Suriname, exacting fees for river and road passage, stealing
 boats, vehicles, and other equipment. The Tucajanas were also
 credibly reported to have hijacked ferries and kidnaped
 ferrymen, fired on fishermen, robbed travelers at gunpoint in
 the area between Zanderij Airport and the central reservoir,
 forced timber firms to close, and caused a May 16 arson attack
 which destroyed a valuable rice complex. Because the civilian
 police were barred from entering the areas in which the
 Tucajanas operated and the army took no actions against them,
 vast tracts of the interior were placed for all practical
 purposes off-limits to ordinary travelers.
 The protracted unrest in the interior continued to have
 adverse effects on various tribal populations, such as the
 flight of refugees to French Guiana as a result of army
 helicopter attacks near Langatabbetje (see Section 1.g.).
 During the year, several organizations which previously had
 been flying medical supplies to remote parts of the interior
 refrained from doing so, citing the security situation.
 Some 8,000 to 10,000 Surinamese refugees remained in French
 Guiana along the Surinamese border; of these, approximately
 6,900 resided in official camps administered by the French
 Government since 1986. In September the Surinamese National
 Assembly ratified a tripartite agreement between the      /
 Surinamese Government, the U.N. High Commissioner for
 Refugees, and the Government of France. The agreement called
 for a pilot program of support for some 300 Maroons who had
 returned to eastern Suriname and established a framework for
 the orderly return of the remaining refugees. Although many
 refugees expressed interest in returning to their traditional
 homes in Suriname, few had done so by year's end. The
 refugees cited fear of the unstable security situation in
 their home regions or possible retaliation by the military for
 suspected connections with the insurgency.
 Section 3   Respect for Political Rights: The Right of
 Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The Constitution approved by a popular referendum in 1987
 stipulates that power and authority rest with the Surinamese
 people, and it provides for the right to change the government
 peacefully through the direct election by secret ballot of a
 National Assembly of 51 members every 5 years. The
 Constitution provides for the existence of political parties.
 Opposition parties regularly present opposing views in the
 National Assembly, the mass media, and in public gatherings.
 However, the military made it increasingly obvious that, in
 practice, they are beyond the control of the civilian
 authorities and free to act as they so determine. Thus, in
 actuality, the people's constitutional authority and power to
 change their government is significantly restricted.
 On December 24, the military carried out a bloodless coup,
 removing from office by the threat of force the President,
 Vice President, and Cabinet. The Army subsequently claimed
 
 
 777
 SURINAME
 its action was a "constitutional intervention," permitted by
 an imprecise constitutional clause which charges the Military
 Authority with "guaranteeing the conditions under which the
 Suriname people can bring about and consolidate a peaceful
 transition to a democratic and socially just society."
 Critics point out, however, that nothing in the Constitution
 gives the Military Authority the power to remove the
 president, vice president and cabinet or to determine the
 tenure of a government. On December 29 the Chairman of the
 National Assembly, which had remained in being after the coup,
 contrived a so-called vote of acclamation that purported to
 "elect" the military's candidates for President and Vice
 President. A number of Assembly members objected to this
 procedure, pointing to the Constitution's explicit language
 calling for voting by secret ballot on the appointment and
 nomination of officeholders and indicated that they would have
 opposed the Army's candidates had they been allowed to vote.
 The military tried to intimidate critics and attacked
 democratic institutions almost routinely during 1990. On
 December 30, 1989, a grenade was thrown at the bedroom window
 of the Finance Minister, Subhas Mungra. Many knowledgeable
 observers believed the attack to have been politically
 motivated. A series of apparent arson attacks destroyed a
 number of public buildings: on December 8, 1989, the National
 Courthouse was burned to the ground with the loss of all its
 records, including, critics of the military state, documents
 that might someday have been used to prosecute Bouterse and
 other army personnel for crimes ranging from the torture and
 execution of 15 civilian critics of the military in 1982 to
 present day narcotics trafficking. On January 31, 1990, a
 fire destroyed the upper story of the State Council building,
 which until shortly before had served as the office of the
 Vice President. On April 16 an arson attack razed a wing of
 the Ministry of Economic affairs, destroying the Minister's
 office and many records.
 A series of drive-by shootings at police stations which began
 in December 1989 and-which were apparently perpetrated by the
 military or its allies, continued. On January 29, unknown
 assailants fired into quarters occupied by police officers and
 their spouses near Zanderij Airport; a policeman's wife was
 wounded by gunfire. On the evening of August 4, the same
 night that Police Inspector Gooding was shot dead (see Section
 l.a.), the police station at Nieuwe Haven was fired upon.
 Over the course of the next several days there were at least
 three similar incidents at police stations, which provoked the
 police to erect roadblocks in front of their station houses.
 In August President Shankar himself was threatened in a letter
 purporting to be from a previously unknown organization
 calling itself "Group 20"; the letter warned that if the
 Government's investigation of the Gooding murder went forward,
 Shankar would be killed.
 There are no special conditions or restrictions on nationality
 or citizenship which limit participation in the political
 system. In practice, however, the less educated Maroons and
 Amerindians of the interior are largely outside the legal
 political process.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Several local private human rights groups carried on their
 work in Suriname during 1990, although the activities of
 
 
 SURINAME
 Suriname's best known human rights group, Moiwana '86,
 diminished after the December 1989 departure from the country
 of Stanley Rensch, Moiwana's director, following an attempt on
 his life. Rensch returned to Suriname in October, vowing to
 continue his human rights work. Almost immediately after his
 return, he reported receiving new threats. The official
 National Institute for Human Rights was not very active during
 the year. Amerindian women protesting the deaths and
 disappearances of Amerindians involved in the failed uprising
 against the Tucajana Indian leadership early in the year were
 allowed to conduct a 2-month vigil on public property in front
 of the National Assembly building and met with local and
 international observers. However, the women reported numerous
 threats from persons they believed to be connected to the
 military. The only purported human rights group able to
 operate without threats or intimidation was a promilitary
 organization calling itself Alfo-Bigi '86, which claimed to be
 a human rights group representing the Amerindian community; it
 was still operating freely even after calling for the
 resignation of the Government in January.
 Although the authorities have repeatedly expressed a
 willingness to cooperate with international and domestic human
 rights groups, there has been little progress toward
 implementing these groups' recommendations to investigate past
 atrocities and disappearances, owing primarily to the
 unwillingness of the Army to permit any serious inquiry. As
 of year's.end, talks between the Government and the
 Inter-American Commission on Human Rights on settling two
 cases from 1987 and 1988 had not led to any result, and the
 cases were still pending. Representatives of the
 International Committee of the Red Cross visited Suriname
 regularly during 1990, although access to all areas of the
 interior .was not always permitted. An Amnesty International
 delegation- visited Paramaribo in September.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Discrimination is prohibited by-the Constitution and is rare
 in Suriname's multiracial society. Ethnic consciousness
 remains strong among all groups, however. There is no
 evidenne:that Maroons and Amerindians confront manifest de
 .factc discrimination. However, because of inadequate basic
 educational; medical, and other infrastructure facilities in
 the interior of the country, residents such as Maroons and
 Amerindians are likely to be disadvantaged from an early age
 in terms of integrating into Suriname's urban society.
 Women have a legal right to equal access to education,
 employment, and property. However, social pressures and
 customs inhibit the full exercise of these rights. In certain
 spheres, notably marriage and inheritance, civil law holds
 only limited sway. Thus Hindustani women (and men) must be
 over age 30 to marry without the permission of the family
 head. Maroon women may not keep the estates of their dead
 spouses; all property and money pass to the tribe.
 Surinamese law does not differentiate between domestic
 violence and general assault cases, and the Government has not
 taken steps to address the problem of violence against women
 in Surinamese society. The privately funded Foundation Home
 for Women in Crisis Situations in Paramaribo has rooms for
 battered and abused women and their children, who are brought
 to the home by private and religious organizations. The
 
 
 779
 SURINAME
 home's rooms are continually filled with women from all the
 major ethnic groups, an indication that violence against women
 is prevalent.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Suriname's Constitution protects the right of workers to
 associate and to choose their representatives democratically.
 This right is exercised energetically, and about one half of
 the work force is organized. Unions are independent of the
 Government and play an active role in politics. The right of
 nongovernment employees to strike is also protected by the
 Constitution, and during 1990 labor officials reported no
 instances of interference with the exercise of this right.
 Surinamese trade unions are permitted to maintain contacts
 with regional and international labor associations. Three of
 the leading labor federations, the Moederbond, C-47, and the
 Public Service Unions, were represented in the International
 Confederation of Free Trade Unions, while a relatively new,
 independent federation, the Organization of Cooperating
 Autonomous Trade Unions (which was not a member of the
 umbrella organization Ravaksur), was affiliated with the Latin
 American Confederation of Workers.
 The labor movement remained a powerful political force. On
 June 25 the Surinamese Council of Labor Union Federations
 (Ravaksur) called an airport and harbor workers' strike in an
 effort to compel the Government to address a number of largely
 political issues. The strike, while causing some economic
 damage, was hampered by lack of complete worker support and
 ended on July 1 without having achieved its objectives. The
 Government prevented a September visit to Europe of a Ravaksur
 delegation by selectively enforcing restrictions on the
 foreign travel of civil servants, but it was permitted to
 travel 2 months later and attended the Communist-controlled
 World Federation of Trade Unions Congress in Moscow.
 Though not legally protected, strikes and other labor actions
 by civil servants are permitted in practice. There is an
 active process of consultatibn between civil servants and
 their employers. A 3-month police work slowdown began in
 August following the murder of Police Inspector Gooding (see
 Section 1.a.) and continued through the year's end. The
 Policemen's Union, which numbered among its ranks the Police
 Commissioner, met periodically with the Minister of Justice to
 address the issues (lack of progress in the Government's
 investigation into the Gooding case and lack of protection for
 police officers) that provoked the labor action.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The right to organize and bargain collectively is explictly
 recognized by the Constitution and was respected in practice
 in 1990. Collective bargaining agreements cover approximately
 50 percent of the labor force. Surinamese law prohibits
 antiunion discrimination by employers, and there are effective
 mechanisms for resolving complaints of such discrimination.
 There are no special economic zones in Suriname, and labor
 laws are applied uniformly throughout the country.
 
 
 SURINAME
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced or compulsory labor is prohibited by the Constitution,
 and there were no known instances of this practice in 1990.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The legal minimum age for employment of children is 15 years.
 The Ministry of Labor is responsible for enforcing this law.
 There were few complaints of violations in 1990. Persons
 under age 15 occasionally are employed as newspaper sellers
 and street vendors. Most such employment generally occurs
 after school hours.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 There is no legal minimum wage in Suriname. Wages generally
 provide workers with a decent standard of living, although
 there was an erosion in workers' purchasing power during the
 year. Work in excess of 9 hours per day or 45 hours per week
 on a regular basis requires special government permission,
 which is routinely granted. Overtime work is payable at a
 premium. Occupational safety and health regulations are
 enforced by a 25-member labor inspectorate. Sections of
 several factories were closed down during the year for
 noncompliance.
 
 
