 SURINAME
 After over a decade of predominantly military rule, Suriname installed a freely
 elected Parliament and inaugurated a democratically chosen President in. 1991.
 Since then the Government has made fitful progress in consolidating democracy and
 slow but steady progress toward reestablishing cvilian authority over the mili ary.
 The Government of President Ronald Venetiaan is composed of ministers drawn
 from a four-party coalition which holds a majority of seats in the multiparty Na-
 tional Assembly. In 1992 the Government concluded a peace accord with members
 of insurgent groups which had fought a domestic armed conflict between 1986 and
 1991.                                                                   -
 In 1993 the Government replaced former military strongan Desire Bouterse ab
 commander of the armed forces with a new commander o  ts own choosing. Afer
 expiration of this_2-year appointment in June, the Government appointed a s~cces-
 sor. Cooperation between the military and the civilian police has improved as re-
 spective roles have been clarified. Some aspets of the relationship between the Gov-
 ernment and the military remain to be defined. Civilian police bear primary respon-
 sibility for the maintenance of law and order, but they continue to be responsile
 for some human rights abuses.-
 The moarket-oriented economy is largely agricultural, but with an important baux-
 ite and alumina export sector. There is a highn dgree of stte involvement and rep-
 lation; the Government and state-owned companies employ over half the workig
 population. For the last several years, depressed world prices for bauxite and alu-
 mina, the damaging effects of the countrys domestic armed conflict, and rapid
 grwth of the money supply resulted in high inflation and reduced economic growth.
 Foreign exchange fluctuations offse improved commodity prices. The recent sta-
 bilization of exchange rates is cited by some as an indication that the economy is
 beginning to respond to government efforts at structural reform.
 The Govenent generally respected the human rights of its citizens; however,
 problems remained in some areas. These are police mistreatment of detainees, abuse
 of prisoners, overcrowding of jails, societal discrimination and violence against
 women, and moarginalization of indignous people. The Government continued to fail
 to call to account those responsible for human rights abuses in previous regimes.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extra. jicial Kidling.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings. The authorities, however, have taken no action against
 prison guard s who allege~ly beat a prisoner to death in 1993.
 The Government also took no action to investigate past human rights violations,
 such as the 1982 executions by the military regime of 15 opposition leaders or the
 1986 massacre of civilians at the village of Moiwana. The human rights group
 Moiwana '86 continued to pursue the court case it instituted in 1992, challenging
 the validity of the law that conferred amnesty on members of the military and the
 insurgents for crimes (except crimes against humanity) committed between January
 1985 and August 1992, but the court rendered no final judgment.
 The Inter-American Court of Human Rights rendered a judgment in 1993 which
 required the Government to pay compnsation to the survivors of seven Maroons
 (descendants of escaed slaves who fled into the interior to avoid recapture) killed
 near the village of Pokigron in 1987. The Government responded by establishing a
 fully funded foundation for disbursing compensation to relatives of the victims. The
 foundation is actively disbursing compensation and has also funded a school and
 clinic in the village.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 The Government, however, took no action to investigate earlier allegations of dis-
 appearances that occurred under previous regimes.
 c. Torture and Other Crue, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits inhuman treatment or punishment, but human rights
 monitors continued to express concern about officia mistreatment of detainees and
 prisoners. Prison g~uards reportedly bet inmates frequently, although fewer than
 five official complaints were filed. None of these were investigated. A prison warden
 arrested in connection with the beating of a prisoner of Dutch nationality was re-
 leased by the court on procedural grounds. The Government has not released the
 results of an inquiry into charges that guards beat several recaptured prisoners in
 1993.
 The completion of a new prison and renovation of existing jais have somewhat
 reduced overcrowding and improved overall health and safety conditions. Older jails,
 
 
 526
 
 however, remained overcrowded, with as many as four times the number of detain-
 ees they were designed for, and were also unsanitary. At police stations, guards al-
 lowed detainees no exercise and only rarely permitted them to leave the cells. De-
 tainees also suffered from inadequate nutrition although families were permitted
 and encouraged to provide food to incarceratea relatives. Female prisoners were
 housed exclusively in an older jail and were not eligible for transfer to one of the
 new facilities. According to local women's groups, there were no reports of sexual
 abuse of female prisoners by police officers. The Government permits independent
 monitoring of prison conditions.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law provides that the police may de-
 tain for investigation up to 14 days a person suspected of committing a crime for
 which the sentence is longer than 4 years. Within the 14-day period, the police must
 bring the accused before a prosecutor to be formally charged. If additional time is
 needed to investigate the charge, a prosecutor may authorize the police to detain
 the suspect for an additional 30 days. Upon the expiration of the initial 44 days,
 a "judge of instruction" may authorize the police to hold the suspect for up to 120
 additional days, in 30-day increments (for a total of 164 day), before the case is
 tried. The judge of instruction has the power to authorize release on bail, but that
 power is rarely, if ever, used. There were no reports of detentions in contravention
 of these standards.
 Pretrial detainees constituted nearly 70 percent of the total prison and jail popu-
 lation of approximately 1,500. Of those held in police custody, 15 percent had al-
 ready been convicted.
 The military police observed the requirement to hand over to the civil police civil-
 ians arrested for committing a crime in their presence. The military police continued
 to perform the immigration control function at the country's borders and airports
 but no longer investigated civilian crimes.
 Military police stepped in to perform routine police functions during a civil police
 general strike. There were no reports of abuse by the military police during the
 strike.
 While not specifically forbidden by law or the Constitution, exile is not practiced
 as a means of political control.
 e. Denial of Fair Public 7Trial.-Although the Constitution provides for an inde-
 pendent judiciary and the right to a fair public trial in which defendants have the
 right to counsel, the effectiveness of the civilian and military courts is limited. The
 courts assign lawyers in private practice to defend prisoners and pay them from
 public funs The courts must, and in practice do, free a detainee who is not tried
 within the 164-day period. Trials are before a single judge, with right of appeal.
 There is little firm evidence of the extent to which corruption affects the court sys-
 tem, but the entire criminal justice system was subjected to severe strain during
 the period when the military controlled the Government and prominent members
 of the judiciary were involved with, or afforded protection to, drug traffickers. Re-
 cent escapes of high-profile prisoners were linked to corruption of prison guards.
 Military personnel are generally not subject to civilian criminal law. A soldier ac-
 cused of a crime immediately comes under military jurisdiction and military police
 are responsible for all such investigations. Military prosecutions are directed by an
 officer on the public prosecutor's staff, and take place in separate courts before two
 military judges and one civilian judge. The military courts follow the same rules of
 procedure as the civil courts. There is no appeal from the military to the civil sys-
 tem.
 Since the change in military leadership in 1993, coordination between the militarry
 police and the civil police has improved, and there were no further instances of mili-
 tary interference in civilian police investigations. The pervasive climate of fear and
 intimidation that previously prevented cases involving military personnel or drug
 traffickers from being tried began to dissipate, and prospects for the impartial ad-
 ministration of justice have improved. Fear of possible reprisals by the ex-military
 strongman Desire Bouterse, however, appears to affect judicial decision making in
 cases involving persons close to Bouterse.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the right to privacy. The law requires warrants for
 searches, which are issued not by judges but by quasi-judicial officers who supervise
 criminal investigations. The police obtain them in the great majority of investiga-
 tions. The military command curbed invasions of privacy by the military such as the
 illegal monitoring of telephone calls, monitoring of the movements of human rights
 advocates, and threatening government officials, policemen, politicians, human
 rights workers, and journalists. Although some persons continued these activities on
 occasion, the military authorities reportedly did not authorize them to do so.
 
 
 527
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and of the press, and the Government generally respects these rights.
 The parliamentary and extraparliamentary opposition criticize the Government
 freely. Media members continue to practice some self censorship, because of the re-
 cent history of intimidation and reprisals by certain elements of the former military
 leadership. In at least one instance, the authorities attempted to persuade a journal-
 ist to cease investigating disputes between villagers and a gold concessionaire. How-
 ever, the journalist continued the investigation with support from other journalists.
 Although the authorities harassed the journalists and seized some equipment, the
 incident was reported in all local media without further consequences for these jour-
 nalists, whose equipment was returned undamaged.
 Suriname's two daily newspapers and most of its radio stations are privately
 owned. The two television stations and one of the radio stations are publicly owned.
 The Government did not attempt to interfere with publications or to abridge aca-
 demic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 these rights. and the Government respects them in practice.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Citizens may change their residence and work places freely and travel
 abroad as they wish. Political dissidents who emigrated to the Netherlands and else-
 where during the years of military rule are welcome to return. Few of them have
 chosen to do so. Citizenship is not revoked for political reasons. The Government
 cooperates with the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees and other humanitarian
 organizations in assisting refugees. Suriname continued to provide refuge to a small
 number of Haitian migrants. There were no reports of forced expulsion of those hav-
 ing a valid claim to refugee status.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides for this right, but in the past the military prevented
 its effective exercise. Although the military has twice handed over power to elected
 civilian governments following coups, one elected government has not yet succeeded
 another in accordance with constitutional provisions. The current Government is
 still in the process of institutionalizing democratic, constitutional rule.
 The Constitution stipulates that power and authority rest with the people and
 provides for the right to change the government through the direct election by secret
 ballot of a National Assembly of 51 members every 5 years. The National Assembly
 then elects the President by a two-thirds vote. If the legislature is unable to do so,
 as was the case after the 1991 election, the Constitution provides that a national
 People's Assembly, comprising Members of Parliament and regional and local offi-
 cials, shall elect the President.
 The Constitution provides for the existence of political parties, and many parties
 and political coalitions are represented in the National Assembly.
 There are historical and cultural impediments to equal participation by women in
 leadership positions in government and political parties. In the past, most women
 expected to fulfill the role of housewife and mother, thereby limiting opportunities
 to gain political experience or position. Participation by women in politics (and other
 fields) was generally considered inappropriate. While women have made limited
 gains in attaining political power in recent years, political circles remain under the
 influence of traditional male-dominated groups and women are disadvantaged in
 seeking high public office. There are three women in the National Assembly and no
 women in the Cabinet.
 Although the Constitution proscribes racial or religious discrimination, several
 factors limit the participation of Maroons and Amerindians in the political process.
 Most of the country's political activity takes place in the capital and a narrow belt
 running east and west of it along the coast. The Maroons and Amerindians are con-
 centrated in remote areas and therefore have limited access to, and influence in, the
 political process. There is a small Maroon political party which holds three seats in
 the National Assembly and belongs to an opposition coalition. There are no Amer-
 indian political parties or representatives in the National Assembly. There are seven
 Maroons the National Assembly. There are no Maroons or Amerindians in the Cabi-
 net.
 
 
 528
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Human rights groups operate without government restriction, investigating and
 publishing their findings on human rights cases. Government officials are, however,
 generally not cooperative or responsive to their views. The National Institute of
 Iuman Rights, funded by the Government but authorized to act independently, is
 widely regarded as inactive and ineffective. Nonetheless, its chairman stated that
 cabinet members often implement its recommendations. When the Institute's five
 members' 10-year terms expired in 1994, President Venetiaan did not appoint new
 members and refused to accept letters of resignation, thus extending their tenure
 indefinitely. There have been no further developments.
 The Government reacted negatively to calls for investigations into past human
 rights violations and refused to initiate such studies. It failed to implement several
 recommendations by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights that it in-
 vestigate killings during the tenure of the military regime.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution and laws do not differentiate among citizens on the basis of their
 ethnic origins, religious affiliations, or other cultural differences. In practice, how-
 ever, several groups within society suffer various forms of discrimination.
 Women.-The law does not differentiate between domestic violence and other
 forms of assault, and the Government has not specifically addressed the problem of
 violence against women. According to a national women's group, victims reported
 approximately 300 cases of violence against women. Police are reluctant to intervene
 in instances of "domestic" violence. It remains a problem at all levels of society.
 There are no specific laws to protect women against trafficking and sexual exploi-
 tation. A local women's group is investigating several cases of arranged marriages
 to foreigners where the women were subsequently forced into prostitution. There are
 also credible reports of trafficking in Brazilian women for prostitution. Neither med-
 ical nor legal assistance is available to victims. Victims are not discouraged against
 fiing complaints and do not face legal or other penalties.
 omen have a legal right to equal access to education, employment, and property.
 Nevertheless, social pressures and customs inhibit their full exercise of these rights,
 particularly in the areas of marriage and inheritance. Women, notably those who
 were heads of families, were adversely affected by deteriorating economic conditions.
 Women experience economic discrimination in access to employment and in rates of
 pay for the same or substantially similar work. The Government has not made spe-
 cific efforts to combat economic discrimination.
 The National Women's Center is a government agency devoted to women's issues;
 there is also a women's policy coordinator. Their effectiveness is severely limited by
 financial and staffing constraints. There are several active women's rights groups.
 Their principal concerns are political representation, economic vulnerability, vio-
 lence, and discrimination. These groups are somewhat effective.
 Children.-The Government makes only limited efforts to ensure safegards for
 the human rights and welfare of children. In the capital, where most of the coun-
 try's population is concentrated, there are some orphanages, and a privately funded
 shelter for sexually abused children opened in 1993. Elsewhere, distressed children
 must usually rely on the resources of their extended families. There is no pattern
 of societal abuse directed against children. Both in the capital and in the country's
 interior, some school-age children do not have access to education because of a lack
 of transportation, facilities or teachers. There is no difference in the treatment of
 girls and boys in education or health care services. Children face increasing eco-
 nomic pressure to discontinue their education to work.
 People With Disabilities.-There are no laws concerning disabled people and no
 provisions for making private or public buildings accessible to them There are also
 no laws mandating that they be given equal consideration when seeking jobs or
 housing. However, there are some training programs for the blind and others with
 disabilities.
 Indigenous People.-Most Amerindians and Maroons suffer a number of disadvan-
 tages and have only limited ability to participate in decisions affecting their lands,
 cultures, traditions, and natural resources. The nation's political life, educational op-
 portunities, and jobs are concentrated in the capital and its environs, while the ma-
 jority of Amerindians and Maroons live in the interior. Government services in the
 interior became largely unavailable and much of the infrastructure was destroyed
 during the 1986-91 domestic insurgencies; progress in reestablishing services and
 rebuilding the infrastructure has been very slow.
 
 
 529
 The Government appointed the Consultative Council for the Development of the
 Interior in September. This Council, provided for in the 1992 peace accords ending
 the insurgencies, includes representatives of the Maroon and Amerindian commu-
 nities. The Government did not, however, consult with representatives of the Amer-
 indian and Maroon communities about the granting of gold and timber concessions
 in areas they inhabit, and it largely ignored Maroon and Amerindian demands for
 representation in pending negotiations for substantial new timber concessions af-
 fecting their communities.
 Maroon and Amerindian groups are beginning to cooperate in order to exercise
 their rights more effectively. In August indigenous leaders demanded the right to
 participate in decisions concerning the use of natural resources and greater auton-
 omy from the Government.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution protects the right of workers to as-
 sociate and to choose their representatives democratically. At least 40 percent of the
 work force is organized into unions, most of which belong to one of the country's
 six major labor federations. Unions are independent of the Government and play an
 active role in politics. The small Labor Party, which is a part of the four-party coali-
 tion, is independent of the labor movement, but its le~der chairs some of the most
 influential labor federations, and three of its members are in the President's Cabi-
 net.
 There are no restrictions on unions' international activities. Several labor federa-
 tions were reaccepted as affiliates of international trade union organizations in the
 late 1980's, after having been suspended for collaboration with the military regime
 earlier in the decade. The Constitution provides for the right of nongovernment em-
 ployees to strike. Civil servants have no legal right to strike or mount other labor
 actions, but in practice do so. Strikes in both the public and private sectors were
 common as workers tried to secure wage gains to protect their earning power from
 rapid inflation.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Constitution explicitly
 recognizes these rights, and the authorities respect them in practice. Collective bar-
 gaining agreements cover approximately 50 percent of the labor force. The law pro-
 hibits antiunion discrimination by employers, and there are effective mechanisms
 for resolving complaints of such discrimination. Employers must have prior permis-
 sion from the Ministry of Labor to fire workers, except when discharging an em-
 ployee for cause. The Labor Ministry individually reviews dismissals for cause; if it
 finds a discharge unjustified, the employee must be reinstated.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor, and there were no known instances of it.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The law sets the minimum age for
 employment at 16 years. The Ministry of Labor and the police enforce this law only
 sporadically, however. Those under 16 years of age often work as street vendors,
 newspaper sellers, or shop assistants. Working hours for youths are not limited in
 comparison with the regular work force. School attendance is compulsory until the
 age of 12.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no minimum wage legislation. The
 Government's lowest wage for a civil servant was about $26.97 (SF12,000) a month.
 This salary level makes it very difficult to provide a decent living for a worker and
 family. The Government sets civil service wages and the National Assembly ap-
 proves them.
 Work in excess of 9 hours per day or 45 hours per week on a regular basis re-
 quires special government permission, which is routinely granted. Such overtime
 work earns premium pay. The law requires one 24-hour rest period per week.
 A 10- to 12-member inspectorate of the Occupational Health and Safety Division
 of the Ministry of Labor is responsible for enforcing legislated occupational safety
 and health regulations. There is, however, no law authorizing workers to refuse to
 work in circumstances they deem unsafe. They must appeal to the inspectorate to
 declare the workplace situation unsafe. Resource constraints and lack of trained per-
 sonnel preclude the division from making regular inspections of industry. Accident
 rates in local industry do not appear to be high, and the key bauxite industry has
 an outstanding safety record.
 
 
 530
