 THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC
 The Siovak Republic became an independent state in 1993, following the dissolu-
 tion of the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic (CSFR). Its Constitution provides for
 a multiparty, multiethnic parliamentary democracy, including separation of powers
 and an independent judiciary. Slovakia chose to carry over the entire body of CSFR
 domestic legisl ation and international treaty obligations, which gradually are being
 renewed or updated.
 The national plice, which fall under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Interior,
 are the primary law enforcement agency. In addition to domestic law enforcement,
 they also have responsibility for border security. The S tovak Information Service
 (SIB), an independent orgnization reporting directly to the Prime Minister, is re-
 spnsible for all civilian security and intetigence activities. A six-member par-
 liamentary commission, which includes no meaninfuil opposition participation, over-
 sees the SI. Civilian authorities maintain effective control of the security forces.
 Police have committed some human rights abuses.
 
 
 1115
 Slovakia made significant but intermittent progress in moving from a command-
 based to a market-bksed economy, with almost 79 percent of gross domestic product
 (GDP) now generated by the private sector. However, the Government is reluctant
 to relinquish control over certain "strategice sectors, e.g., transportation, tele-
 communications, and energy. GDP growth was strong at around 7 percent, inflation
 was under 7 percent, and the National Bank of Slovakia, in concert with the Gov-
 ernment, continued a disciplined monetary and fiscal policy. The privatization proc-
 ess, while moving at a rapid rate, lacked transparency and largely excluded foreign
 investors. The economy is industrially based, with just 7 percent of GDP derived
 from agricultural production. Major exports are iron and steel, machinery and trans-
 port equipment, audio and video equipment, plastic materials, chemicals and fuels,
 paper, and paper products. GDP per capita is approximately $2,650, providing most
 of the population with an adequate standard of living. Unemployment was high,
 though declining, at 12.4 percent, with some areas oifthe country reaching levels
 as high as 28 percent. A disproportionate number of unemployed are Roma, who
 face exceptional difficulties in finding and holding jobs as a result of discrimination.
 While the Government generally respected most of the human rights of its citi-
 zens, disturbing trends away from democratic principles continued. Human rights
 monitors reorted police brutality against Roma, and there were credible allegations
 that the S   cnucted surveillance of senior political figures and their spouses.
 There were also credible allegations of politically motivated dismissals of public offi-
 cials, intimidation of opponents of government policy, and interference with the elec-
 tronic media. An atmosphere of intimidation restricted freedom of expression in cer-
 tain areas. A new law infringed on academic freedom. The Government's failure to
 seriously investigate the issue of possible SIS involvement in the 1995 abduction
 and torture of the President's son undermines its commitment to the rule of law.
 Discrimination and violence against women are serious problems. Roma faced soci-
 etal discrimination. and the police failed to provide adequate protection against con-
 tinued attacks on Roma by skinheads.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extraudiuainl Kling.-There were no confirmed reports of
 political or other extrajudicial killings by government officials.
 However, press s peculation is widespread that elements of the security services
 were involved in the death of Robert Remias. Remias was a friend and intermediary
 of Oskar Fegyveres (a former member of the SIS and a self-proclaimed witness to
 the kidnaping of the President's son in August 1995--see Section 1.c.). Remias died
 when his car exploded on April 29 in Bratislava.
 A few hours after the incident, the Ministry of Interior released a statement say-
 ing that the blast had been caused by a defect in the propane/butane fuel burning
 system. The importer of the system claimed that there were no instances worldwide
 of such an accident. In September the authorities investigating the incident officially
 concluded that a bomb was the cause of the explosion. To date there are no suspects.
 Other bombs that caused property damage but no deaths were placed in front of
 the homes of ethnic Hungarian Member of Parliament Bela Bugar in May and
 breakaway founding member of the ruling Movement for a Democratic Slovakia
 Frantisek Gaulieder in December. While the investigation into the Bugar bombing
 remained open at year's end, both Bugar and the police believe the attack was
 criminal and not political in nature. A police investigation into the Gaulieder bomb-
 ing was in progress at years end.
 inhear violence against Roma led to three deaths (see Section 5).
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punshment.-
 The Constitution prohibits such practices. However, certain events have raised ques-
 tions about the observance of these prohibitions by government agents.
 The 1995 case of the violent abduction of the President's son,-Michael Kovac Jr.,
 to Austria, during which he was tortured, remained unsolved. SIS personnel are al-
 leged to be implicated. The SIS refused to permit its personnel to be questioned and
 has accused police investigators of wrongdoing. One lead police investigator resigned
 under pressure; another was removed from the case, as was their supervisor. The
 third investigator closed the case due to "insufficient evidence" and noted that the
 incident may have been staged to embarrass the Government. The Government's
 failure to seriously investigate the torture and kidnaping case undermines its com-
 mitment to the rule of law.
 Human rights monitors reported cases of police brutality against Roma. In one
 case a Rom alleged he was beaten by police and forced to sign a confession that he
 
 
 1116
 had committed a murder. He was sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment but later
 released.
 In May Dr. Vasilij Demidov was involved in an altercation at a department store
 in Martin. Police intervened, and he was arrested, taken to a police station, and al-
 legedly beaten. The police denied the charges, saying that the man was drunk and
 hurt himself in his aggressive state. While doctors did not give official statements,
 one was quoted anonymously as saying that Demidov's injuries did not appear to
 be self-inflicted. In August police investigators dismissed charges against the police-
 men involved. At year's end, prosecutors were still considering charges against
 Demidov for interfering with the duties of a police officer and filing a false report.
 Prison conditions meet minimum international standards, and the Government
 permits visits by human rights monitors.
 d. Arbitray Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution prohibits arbitrary ar-
 rest and detention, and the Government observes this prhibition.
 A person accused or suspected of a crime must be given a hearg within 24 hours
 and either set free or remanded to the court. During this time, the detainee has the
 right to an attorney. If remanded to a court, the accused is entitled to a hearing
 wthin 24 hours, at which the judge will set the accused free or issue a substantive
 written order placing the accused in custody. Investigative detention may last up
 to 2 months and may be extended. The total length of pretrial detention may not
 exceed 1 year, unless the Supreme Court extends it by determining that the person
 constitutes a serious danger to society. Pretrial detainees constituted rou .y 25
 percent of the total prison population, and the average pretrial detention period was
 7.2 months. The law allows family visits and provides for a court-paid attorney if
 needed, although human rights monitors point out that this applies only to defend-
 ants whose alleged offenses are punishable by more than 5 years in prison. A sys-
 tem of bail exists. Noncitizens may be detained for up to 30 days for the purposes
 of identification.
 The Constitution prohibits exile, and the Government observes this prohibition.
 e. Denial of Fair Public TriaL.-The Constitution provides for courts that are inde-
 pendent, impartial, and separate from the other branches of government. Some crit-
 ic allege, however, that the dependence of judges upon the Ministry of Justice for
 logistical support, the granting of leave requests, and other services undermines
 their independent status. Also the Ministry of Justice can remove presidents and
 vice presidents of the courts Ir any reason, although they remain judges; it has
 done so.
 The court system consists of local and regional courts with the Supreme Court as
 the highest court of appeal except for constitutional questions. There is a separate
 Constitutional Court--with no ties to the Ministry of Justice-that considers con-
 stitutional issues. In addition, there is a separate military court system, the deci-
 sions of which may be appealed to the Supreme Court and the Constitutional Court.
 Under the Constitution, the President appoints and removes Constitutional Court
 judges based upon parliamentary nominations. Parliament elects other judges,
 based on recommendations from the Ministry of Justice, and can remove them for
 misconduct.
 Persons charged with criminal offenses are entitled to fair and open public trials.
 They have the right to be informed of the charges against them and of their legal
 rights, to retain and consult with counsel sufficiently in advance to prepare a de-
 fense, and to confront witnesses. Defendants enjoy a presumption of innocence and
 have the right to refuse to testify against themselves. They may appeal any judg-
 ment agis them.
 The 'lustration' law of the former CSFR, barring from high public office persons
 who previously collaborated with the Communist-era secret police, expired at year's
 end. It had not ben enforced since indeendence in 1993.
 With respect to the Roma minority, human rights monitors continued to charge
 that police appear reluctant to take the testimony of witnesses to skinhead attacks
 on Roma. Further, they reported that police used the device of countercharges to
 pressure Roma victims of police brutality to drop their complaints, that medical doc-
 tors and investigators cooperated with police by refusing to describe accurately the
 injuries involved, and that lawyers often were reluctant to represent Roma in such
 situations, for fear this would have a negative effect on their practice.
 Several Roma complained to a human rights organization about the reluctance of
 police in Prievidza to deal with their reports of skinhead violence and threats. Police
 routinely refused to accept complaints and accused the Roma of abusing public offi-
 cials. The human rights organization sent a complaint to police headquarters in
 Banaka Bystrica. In this case, the police chief admitted the violation of police basic
 duties and promised to take disciplinary action against the officers involved. No
 known action had been taken by year's end.
 
 
 1117
 
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interence With Priacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Criminal Code requires police to obtain a judicial search warrant in order'to enter
 a home. The court may issue such a warra=nt only if there is a well-founded sus-
 picion that important evidence or persons acused of criminal activity are present
 inside or if there is some other important reason. Police must present the warrant
 before conducting the house search or within 24 hours after the search.
 The 1993 Police Law regulates wiretapping and mail surveillance for the purposes
 of criminal investigation, which may be conducted, on the order of a judge or pros-
 ecutor, only in cases of extraordinarily serious premeditated crimes or crimes involv-
 ing international treaty obligations. However, in June a local radio station in
 Bratislava acquired and broadcast a tape of a conversation between then-Minister
 of Interior Hudek and chief of the SIS Ivan Lexa in which they appeared to be dis-
 cussing the dismissal of the police investigator of the Kovac kidnaping case. A sec-
 ond tape, allegedly of a conversation between deputy Prime Minister Sergej Kozlik
 and Lubomir ]obrik (State Secretary of the Justice Ministry) discussing plans to
 shift control of the state insurance company into the hands of fellow members of
 the Movement for a Democratic Slovakia (HZDS) party was obtained. but not played
 due to its poor quality. It is not clear who made the tapes, but the independent
 media has alleged that SIS or police agents were involved in the former case while
 the latter may have been a more amateur yet still illegal, undertaking. There were
 credible allegations that the SIS conducted routine surveillance of some senior polit-
 ical figures and their spouses. Radio Free Europe (RFE) representatives alleged that
 SIS agents tailed RFE deputy editor ba Lesna.
 In July 1995, police with a legal warrant searched the diocesean headquarters of
 Bishop Rudolf Balaz, Chairman of the Conference of Bishops. The search occurred
 soon after Balaz had led the Conference in a statement of support for President
 Michal Kovac, who has been the target of criticism by supporters of Prime Minister
 Vladimir Meciar. Police said Balaz was involved in the illegal sale of art works list-
 ed in the register of national treasures. Denying this, Bala2's office director stated
 that the Government was intent on discrediting Balaz and that police had searched
 areas clearly inconsistent with their alleged mission. The charges were dropped in
 March after a newspaper alleged SIS invoivement in the case. A high church official
 said that the police had not returned either the art work or the money that had
 been seized.
 There were no reports of mail tampering.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and of the press, and the Government generally respects this right in practice.How-
 ever, both the law and an atmosphere of intimidation restrict freedom of expression
 in certain areas.
 Although dependent on a state-owned distribution company, the print media are
 free and uncensored, and newspapers and magazines regularly publish a wide range
 of opinions and news articles. However the politicization of state-owned broadcast
 media remains a significant problem. irivate broadcast media are widespread but
 are threatened by huge cost increases imposed by the state-owned telecommuni-
 cations company.
 Many individuals reported an atmosphere of intimidation that made them reluc-
 tant to criticize the Government openly without fear of some form of reprisal. This
 led some to practice self-censorship. Among the events contributing to this view
 were: The mysterious death of former policeman Robert Remiss (see Section L.a.),
 who had assisted journalists investigating the 1995 kidnapping of the President's
 son; widespread reports of civil servants being dismissed for refusing to join the rul-
 ing political party; reports that the Government, acting through the Fund for Na-
 tional Property, required newly privatized companies to advertise exclusively in
 prgovernment media; and public questioning by officials of the governing coalition
 of the patriotism of citizens and journalists who spoke critically of developments in
 the country.
 In November a Banska Bystrica court ruled that an opposition daily was guilty
 of libel and sentenced it to pay $250,000 (7.5 million crowns) to the prime minister
 and each member of his cabinet for quoting a journalist who spoke at the funeral
 of Robert Remiss (see Section La.). The journalist was found not guilty because the
 paper used his quotation out of context. The newspaper filed an immediate appeal,
 w hich was pending at year's end.
 The bitter dispute between the President and the Prime Minister generated mul-
 tiple defamation suits. In May the President sued the Prime Minister for defama-
 tion. The President also sued Jan Smolec, a former editor of the newspaper
 
 
 1118
 Slovenska Republika, for defamation in October. The newspaper SME was charged
 in October in a secret indictment with publishing secret documents from a govern-
 ment meeting. The editors of SME reported that they were told they could be pun-
 ished if they revealed the existence of the indictment, which they nonetheless did.
 An amendment to the Criminal Code, commonly referred to as "the Law on the
 Protection of the Republic' was passed in March despite domestic and international
 criticism that it is undemocratic. The amendment makes it a crime to facilitate the
 spread of false information damaging to the interests of the Slovak Republic. The
 amendment was returned by the President to Parliament in April. In December a
 revised law was passed and again returned by the President. The 1995 State Lan-
 guage Law also restricts freedom of expression by banning the use of foreign lan-
 guaes in the media. Broadcasting in minority languages continued, but several
 radio stations canceled English language programming in order to comply with the
 law.
 Slovak radio and television are supervised by three boards appointed by majority
 vote of Parliament. The Slovak Television Council and the Slovak Radio Council es-
 tablish broadcast policy for state-owned television and radio. The Slovak Radio and
 Television council issues broadcast licenses and administers advertising laws and
 some other regulations. The Radio and Television Council has made significant
 progress in fostering the spread of private broadcasting. It has issued 27 licenses
 for private radio broadcasting. A private company, Markiza Television, began broad-
 castin, with a signal covering two-thirds of the ountry, and it quickly established
 a leading position in the ratings. In September Parliament passed? a law to privatize
 the second channel of Slovak television (STV). Three private companies and one
 local government hold licenses and broadcast television regionally. The Radio and
 Television Council revoked the license of one regional broadcaster, TV Sever, be-
 cause it changed programming abruptly. In December TV Sever won a court deci-
 sion that restores its license. Cable television licenses are held by 73 municipalities
 and private companies.
 The state-owned electronic media have continued to be highly politicized. Critics
 have charged that STV avoids controversial topics and provides limited space for op-
 position views or reporting the activities of the President. STV was censured by the
 Television and Radio Council for violating programming rules by abruptly interrupt-
 ing its regular schedule to broadcast a program charging the President's son with
 fraud.
 Slovak Radio's coverage of internal politics remains more objective. However, in
 April an editor at Slovak radio was fired after reporting erroneously that two intel-
 ligence service agents would testify in the kidnapping case involving the President's
 son. The error was in not noting that the two witnesses were former intelligence
 agents. The editor sued, and in December a court ruled that dismissal was too great
 a penalty for such an error. The dismissed editor charged that he was really fired
 for disseminating antigovernment commentaries.
 In January the Radio and Television Council sharply criticized some programs of
 Radio Free Europe for being unbalanced, unobjective, and anti-Slovak. It neverthe-
 less finally renewed Radio Free Europe's license for 18 months in November.
 The Government continued to restrict the activities of minorities: It terminated
 the autonomous status of the ethnic Hungarian and Roma theaters (see Section 5).
 The law provides for academic freedom, which is generally respected. However,
 the universities law adopted in September transferred final decisionmaking power
 regarding curriculum, the establishment of departments, faculty promotions, and
 the granting of degrees from individual universities to the Ministry of Education.
 Students and rectors characterized the law as an infringement on academic free-
 dom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 these rights, and the Government respects them in practice.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religious belief
 and faith, and the Goverment respects this provision in practice. Under existing
 law, only    stered churches and religious organizations have the explicit right to
 conduct public worship services and other activities, although no specific religions
 or practices are banned or discouraged by the authorities. The State provides finan-
 cial subsidies only to registered churches and religious organizations, of which there
 are 15.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for these rights, and the Government re-
 spects them in practice.
 The Government cooperates with the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees
 (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees. The Govern-
 ment provides first asylum and provided it to 403 persons in 1996. Of these, 4 were
 
 
 1119
 
 granted citizenship, 128 were accepted as refugees, 62 claims were rjected, 193 per-
 sns terminated their cases, and the remainder are pending. In addition, under the
 auspices of the UNHCR, a pproximately 250 persons granted first asylum in pre-
 vious years were repatriated to Bosnia-Heregovina in 1996. There were no reports
 of forced expulsion of those having a valid claim to refugee status. However, some
 refugee claimants had difficulty in gaining access to initial processing.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Right& The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have the constitutional right to change their government through the
 periodic free election of their national representatives. Citizens over the age of 18
 are eligile to vote, and voting is by secret ballot. The Constitution reserves certain
 powers to the President as Chief of State (elected by the Parliament), but executive
 power rests with the Government. Legislative power is vested in the National Coun-
 cil of the Slovak Republic (Parliament).
 A number of actions served to consolidate the Government's power in a manner,
 which, taken as a whole, gave rise to continued concern over the future course of
 pluralism, separation of powers, and democratic development overall.
 In December in a virtual party line vote, deputies ousted MP. Frantisek
 Gauleider from Parliament against his will because he had earlier resigned his
 membership in the ruling party, the Movement for a Democratic Slovakia (HZDS).
 A bomb exploded at his residence 2 days later (see Section L.a.). Gauleider's expul-
 sion was referred to the Constitutional Court, where it was pending at year's end.
 The incident, along with the bombing which followed parliamentary action, under-
 cuts the freedom to express opposing views without fear of reprisals.
 Many academics criticized the new higher education law as an infringement on
 academic freedom (see Section 2.a.). In the absence of a civil service law, the Gov-
 ernment continued to replace national and local government officials with its sup-
 porters, apparently based largely on political loyalty. In August Parliament passed
 a territorial administration law redistricting regional and local government. Details
 of the relationship between appointed heads of the newly created regions and coun-
 ties and elected mayors are not yet clear, and further legislation is expected. Ethnic
 Hungarian and other oppsition politicians accused the Governnent of gerry-
 mandermg and excessive patronage as the Government moved to appoint co *tion
 party members to newly created positions associated with this law. Most politicians
 were unable to describe the role of the new regional entities except to say that they
 were dependent on central government funds and that their leaders were appointed,
 not elected like the local mayors. In its handling of the privatization of large state
 enterprises, the national property fund, nominally independent of the Government,
 appeared to favor primarily suppuorters of the ruling coalition.
 Women are underrepresented in government. They hold 2 of 15 portfolios: Labor/
 Social Affairs and Education. One of three Deputy Prime Ministers is a woman.
 Women hold 22 seats in the 150-member Parliament.
 The large ethnic Hungarian minority, whose coalition gained 17 seats in Par-
 liament in the 1994 elections, is well represented in Parliament and in local govern-
 ment but not in the central government. Roma are not represented in Parliament
 and hold no senior government positions.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vesigation of Alleged Violations of Huran Rights
 A number of human rights groups operate without government restriction, inves-
 tigating and publishing their ridings on human rights cases. Nonetheless, non-
 governmental organizations (NGO's) and foundations protested a government-spon-
 sored law that required such organizations to have substantial financial resources
 in order to operate, a condition which would eliminate 95 15ercent of existing founda-
 tions. NGO's protested another provision of this law that required documentation
 of sources and origin of property donated to a foundation out of concern that this
 provision compels the public and perhaps unwelcome exposure of donors. In April,
 after no evidence of fraud was found, the General Prosecutor stopped the investiga-
 tion of human rights foundations funded by international philanthropist George
 Soros. The investigation was started in 1995, at the behest of the head of the Sloval
 National Party (SNS), after Soros criticized the Government.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The law prohibits discrimination and provides for the equality of all citizens.
 Health care, education, retirement benefits, and other social services are provided
 regardless of race, sex, religion, disability, language, or social status.
 
 
 1120
 Women.-Violence, particularly sexual violence against women, remains a serious
 and underreported problem. Experts say that in 1993, the latest year studied, there
 were 47,000 acts of violence or intolerance against women (violence is defined as
 physical, sexual, emotional, and economic). Physical and sexual violence account for
 almost half of all reported cases. These experts conclude that most of the unreported
 cases, estimated to be as high as half of all cases, involve sexual violence. They note
 that although police (in 1993) reported a drop of 19 percent in officially reported
 cases of sexual violence, centers of psychological counseling registered a 60 percent
 increase in such cases. Police estimate that two-thirds of female rape victims fail
 to report the cases for personal reasons. Police deal with spousal abuse, child abuse,
 and other violence against women in the same way as other criminal offenses; spe-
 cific sections in the Criminal Code deal with rape, sexual abuse, trade in women,
 and pandering.
 As a result of amendments to the Criminal Code that took effect in 1994, prostitu-
 tion is not an illegal act. However, the Code prohibits activities related to prostitu-
 tion, such as renting apartments for conducting prostitution, spreading contagious
 diseases, or trafficking in women for the purpose of prostitution.
 Women are equal under the law. They enjoy the same property, inheritance, and
 other legal rights as men. Women are well represented in the judicial and adminis-
 trative professions but are underrepresented in other public service areas. Labor
 law prohibits women from engaging in certain types of work considered dangerous
 to their health.
 Despite the lack of overt discrimination, women face large wage discrepancies in
 the workplace. Women receive 25 to 30 percent less pay than men for the same
 work. A February 1995 report prepared by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs stated
 that for the period 1988-93, "gross earnings of men are 71 percent higher than
 those of women.' The report concluded that "since there is little difference in the
 level of education achieved by men and women, and since a significantly greater
 number of women are graduates of technical universities as well as universities, the
 discrepancy in wages is caused by factors other than educational achievement."
 The Democratic Union of Women of Slovakia (DUZS) monitors observance of the
 rights of women and their families in light of internationally accepted documents
 and the Constitution, especially as they affect the social and family spheres. In Au-
 gust DUZS representatives stated that the number one problem facing women was
 insufficient resources to provide for everyday family needs. Other major roblems
 included women's health and the health of their family members. The DU contin-
 ued to promote creation of a parliamentary committee on women and the family,
 and passage of a law on the family. egarng legislation, the DUZS was particu-
 larly interested in more day care and preschoolprograms. The DUZS also com-
 plained about growing discrimination against middie-aged and older women in em-
 ployment.
 After the 1995 U.N. Conferene on Women in Beijing, the Government formed a
 Coordinating Committee for Women's Affairs. The Comttee meets periodically to
 discuss the status of women's issues and any necessary foflowup from the Beijing
 Conference. The committee includes government officials as well as NGO partici-
 pants. Some NGO representatives have chosen not to participate, characterizing the
 committee as ineffective.
 Children.-The Government demonstrates its commitment to children's rights and
 welfare through its system of public education and medical care. The Ministry of
 Labor oversees implementation of the Government's programs for children. The
 Constitution, the law on education, the Labor Code, and the system of child welfare
 payments to families with children each provide in part for children's rights. Edu-
 cation is compulsory for 9 years, or until the age of 15.
 While there is no evidence of a pattern of societal abuse of children, some prob-
 lems remain. One NGO inported almost 400 cases of child beating and 500 cases
 of sexual abuse although the number of unreported cases could be much higher. In
 September police began an investigation into the legitimacy of an advertising agen-
 cy that was sending children across the border into Austria for nude and seminude
 photo sessions. In cooperation with Interpol, police were also investigating a connec-
 tion to the pedophile case in Belgium. Dutroux was in active contact with many
 families in the town of Topolcany and the police were investigating whether any
 girls there were subject to abuse.
 People With Disabilities.-The Constitution and implementing legislation provide
 for health protection and special working conditions for mentally and ph sicay dis-
 abled persons, including special protection in employment relations andspecial as-
 sistance in training. A 1994 decree provides incentives to employers who create a
 "sheltered" workplace (i.e, a certain percentage of jobs set aside for disabled). The
 law also prohibits discrimination against physically disabled individuals in employ-
 
 
 1121
 ment, education, and the provision of other state services. Nevertheless, experts re-
 port discrimination in such areas as accessibility of premises and access to edu-
 cation (especially higher education). Although not specifically required by law, an-
 other 1994 government decree mandates the provision of accessibility with regard
 to new building construction. The decree provides for sanctions but lacks a control
 mechanism to enforce them. A spokeswoman for an NGO dealing with people with
 disabilities said that the Government made some limited progress on accessibility
 issues and in supplying prosthetics.
 Religis Minorities.-Isolated instances of verbal harassment against Jews oc-
 curred during the year. Despite protests by the Federation of Jewish Communities,
 Slovak National Party members and the official Slovak cultural organization Matica
 Slovenska continued their efforts to revise the history of the pro-Nazi wartime Slo-
 vak state. These efforts includedL Stopping publication of a new school history text,
 written by prominent historians, because it was not sufficiently positive in its treat-
 ment of ten-president Tiso and his Nazi puppet state; television programs extolling
 the virtues of the Tis Government; and statements by one SNS parliamentarian
 n    gthe deportation of Jews during the war to their excessive enrichment and
 e      auperin' of the Sovak people. However, the Prime Minister has publicly
 distanced himself from the glriocton of the Tis regime and has condemned fas-
 cism and anti-Semitism.
 In December the Rabbi of Bratislava was attacked by three skinheads while on
 his way to inspect a large menorah in a public square. Bystanders chased the
 skinheads away, and the police were present during the subsequent candle-lighting
 ceremony, which proceeded without incident. One of the skinheads was identified
 and arrested.
 NationallRaciallEthnic Minorities.-The Constitution provides minorities with
 the right to develop their own culture, receive information and education in their
 mother tongue, and participate in decisonmaking in matters affecting them. The
 Government continued to provide funding for cultural, educational, broadcasting,
 and publishing activities for the major ethnic minorities, but at greatly reduced lev-
 els. In April Parliament ratified a bilateral treaty with Hungary, which deals exten-
 sively with the treatment of ethnic minorities.
 The politically active ethnic Hungarian minority, which is the most numerous, is
 concentrated primarily in suther Slovakia, with a population registered at
 570,000 (150,000 of whom are thought to be Roma who speak Hungarian and choose
 to declare themselves as ethnic Hungarian). Most ethnic Hungarians and ethnic Slo-
 yaks living in mixed areas continued to coexist peacefully, but there were occasional
 outbreaks of anti-Hungarian feeling, mostly in areas where the two do not coexist.
 Hungarian ethnic leaders complained about large cut in government subsidies to
 Hungarian cultural organizations, as well as a number of government initiatives,
 whch they said sought to reverse gains made in previous years. The Government
 took no action in 1996 on the proposed education law that would expand the use
 of Slovak in schools of the Hungarian minority, and in particular require that his-
 tory and literature be taught in Slovak. In January then-Foreign Minister Juraj
 Shenk assured the High Commissioner for Minorities of the Organization for Secu-
 rity and Cooperation in Europe that the Government would pass a law codifying the
 use of minority languages. The Ministry of Culture did not draft a bill, but ethnic
 Hungarian Members of Parliament did. Parliament did not act on this proposal. A
 September law on state symbols restricts the playing of foreign anthems to events
 where official foreign representatives are present. Ethnic Hungarian leaders had yet
 to notice any impact of this law.
 Roma constitute the second largest ethnic minority and suffer disproportionately
 from high levels of poverty and unemployment. Credible reports by human rights
 monitors indicated that  ma ontinued to suffer from d      ination in employ-
 ment and housing, and administration of state services. Skinhead violence against
 Roma was a serious and growin problem, and monitors reported that police remain
 reluctant to take action. In April-three serious incidents took place: A Roma house
 was set on fire killing Jozef Mklos and injuring three other Roma in the town of
 Hontianske Nemce. According to witnesses, the mayor was unwilling to call the po-
 lice to intervene; a Roma man suffered burns when three men threw a bottle of
 flaming liquid into his house in Zalistie after having assaulted him and four other
 Roma; and in Topolcany a group of skinheads attacked mentally disabled Romani
 children from an orphanage attending a hockey game, yelling "we will kill all gyp-
 sies."
 In August a Romani man, who was taunted on a bus, knifed and killed a skinhead
 in the town of Prievidza. In the aftermath skinheads set fire to Romani houses and
 spray-painted anti-Semitic, anti-Roma, and pro-Nazi graffiti in town.
 
 
 1122
 In December a father and son of Romani heritage were stabbed by a skinhead at
 the train station in Handlova. The father died while the son suffered serious
 wounds. The police found and arrested the perpetrator, who remained in custody at
 year's end charged with murder and attempted-murder.
 Human rights monitors reported cases of police brutality against Roma (see Sec-
 tion 1.c.). Both ethnic Hungarians and Roma pretested the June decision of Culture
 Minister Ivan Hudec to end the antonomous status of the country's two ethnic Hun-
 garian theaters and its only Roma theater. The theaters were placed under the di-
 rection of a state official appointed by the Minister. Government involvement in,
 and control of, cultural activities occurs throughout the country, however, and is not
 restricted to minority areas.
 Persons of color also suffered from attacks or discrimination. In August a U.S.
 serviceman was called racially derogatory names and attacked by skinheads in
 Banska Bystrica before other citizens came to his rescue. Another person of color
 was verbally harassed at the airport due to the color of his skin.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution provides for the right to form and
 join unions, except in the armed forces. According to one reliable, independent esti-
 mate, approximately 50 percent of the work force is organized. Official sources stat-
 ed that t e figure is closer to 75 percent. Unions are independent of the government
 and political parties. There are no restrictions on the right to strike. Slovakia has
 been largely flee of strikes since the 1989 revolution. However, in 1996 low-level
 labor unrest increased. In September state-employed doctors threatened to strike
 because of low wages. No strike took place, and negotiations continued. In October
 actors of the Slovak national theater pretested the firing of the theater director
 through a public demonstration and a 1-day strike. All work actions were carried
 out peacefully with no government interference.
 There were no reported instances of retribution against strikers or labor leaders,
 but the law and regulations do not explicitly prohibit such retribution. There were
 no reports of human rights abuses targeted against unions or workers.
 Unions are free to form or join federations or confederations and to affiliate with
 and participate in international bodies.
 b. -The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The law provides for collec-
 tive bargaining, which is freely practiced throughout the country. Employers and
 unions set wages in free negotiations. The Law on Citizens' Associations prohibits
 discrimination by employers against union members and organizers. Complaints
 may be resolved either in collective negotiations or in court. If found guilty of
 antiunion discrimination, employers are required to reinstate workers fired for
 union activities.
 The Customs Act of 1996 regulates free customs zones and customs warehouses.
 Firms operating in such zones must comply with the Labor Code; to date there have
 been no reports of special involvement by the trade unions. No special legislation
 governs labor relations in free trade zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Both the Constitution and the Em-
 ployment Act prohibit forced or compulsory labor. There were no reports of viola-
 tions. The Ministry of Labor, Social Affairs, and Family, as well as district and local
 labor offices, have responsibility for enforcement.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Chidren.-The law sets the minimum em-
 ployment age at 15 years. Children must remain in school for 9 years, or until the
 age of 15. Workers under the age of 16 may not work more than 33 hours per week;
 may not be compensated on a piecework basis; may not work overtime or night
 shifts; and may not work underground or in specified conditions deemed dangerous
 to their health or safety. Special conditions and protections, though somewhat less
 stringent, apply to young workers up to the age of 18. The Ministry of Labor en-
 forces this legislation. There were no reports of violations.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Wor-The minimum wage, effective April 1 is $88
 (2,700 crowns) per month. Even when combined with special allowances paid to fain-
 ies with children, which were increased in September, it does not provide an ade-
 quate standard of living for a worker and family. The Ministry of Labor is respon-
 sible for enforcing the minimum wage. No violations were reported. The standard
 workweek mandated by the Labor Code is 42.5 hours, although collective bargaining
 agreements have achieved reductions in some cases (most often to 40 hours). For
 state enterprises the law requires overtime pay up to a maximum of 8 hours per
 week, and 150 hours per year, and provides 4 weeks of annual leave. Private enter-
 prises can compensate their employees for more hours of overtime than stipulated
 by the law and sometimes provide 5 weeks of annual leave. There is no specifically
 mandated 24-hour rest period during the workweek. The trade unions, the Ministry
 
 
 1123
 of Labor, and local employment offices monitor observance of these laws, and the
 authorities effectively enforce them.
 The Labor Code establishes health and safety standards that the office of labor
 safety effectively enforces. For hazardous employment workers undergo medical
 screening under the supervision of a physician. They have the right to refuse to
 work in situations that endanger their health and safety and may file complaints
 against employers in such situations. Employees working under conditions endan-
 gering their health and safety for a certain period of time are entitled to paid "relax-
 ation leave in addition to their standard annual leave.
