 THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC
 The Slovak Republic became an independent state in 1993, following the dissolu-
 tion of the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic (CSFR). Its Constitution provides for
 a multiparty, multiethnic parliamentary democracy, including separation of powers.
 P~arliamentary elections were held in September, and a new coalition government
 took office in October. Prime Minister Mikulas Dzurinda replaced former Prime
 Minister Vladimir Meciar. Slovakia chose to carry over the entire body of CSFR do-
 mestic legislation and international treaty obligations, which still are being renewed
 or updated. The Constitution provides for an independent judiciary; however, some
 critics allege that the Ministry of Justice's logistical and personnel authority allows
 it to exert some influence on the judicial system.
 The national police, which fall under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Interior,
 are the primary law enforcement agency. In addition to domestic law enforcement,
 they also have responsibility for border security. The Slovak Information Service
 (SIS), an independent organization reporting directly to the Prime Minister, is re-
 sponsible for all civilian security and intelligence activities. Starting in November
 a multipartisan parliamentary commission began overseeing the SIS. Civilian au-
 thorities maintain effective control of the security forces. Police committed some
 human rights abuses.
 Slovakia continued to make progress in the difficult transition from a command-
 based to a market-based economy, with more than 82 percent of gross domestic
 product (GDP) now generated by the private sector. GDP growth continued to be
 strong (around 6 percent) and the inflation rate increased to 6.7 percent during the
 year. However, progress in industrial restructuring was uneven, and financial sector
 restructuring still has not occurred. The most critical problems are a large state
 budget deficit, government debt, a weakened balance of payments, and a shaky
 banking sector. Real GDP per capita was approximately $3,600 at the end of June,
 providing most of the population with an adequate standard of living. Unemploy-
 ment was more than 13 percent, reaching almost 30 percent in some areas. A dis-
 proportionate number of unemployed are Roma, who face exceptional difficulties in
 finding and holding jobs, partly as a result of discrimination. The economy is largely
 industrial, with only 7 percent of GDP generated by agricultural production. Major
 exports are iron and steel products, audio and video equipment, machinery and
 transport equipment, plastic materials, paper products, apparel, petroleum products,
 and organic chemicals.
 Although the former Meciar government generally respected most of the human
 rights of its citizens, it demonstrated a lack of attachment to democratic principles
 and continued to show intolerance for opposition views and a penchant for the re-
 centralization of state authority. Most notably, in July former Prime Minister
 Meciar, using presidential powers acquired when Parliament failed to elect a presi-
 dent in Parliament, granted general amnesties to those involved in the 1995 kidnap-
 ing and torture of the former President's son and the unconstitutional thwarting of
 a May 1997 referendum on direct election of the President. Both of these actions
 undermined the rule of law. Human rights monitors continued to report police bru-
 tality against Roma. In December the newly elected Parliament passed a resolution
 acknowledging that the previous Parliament violated the rights of ousted Deputy
 Frantisek Gaulieder. Although the new Parliament regretted the action of its prede-
 cessor, it did not annul the former Parliament's resolution, and Gaulieder chose not
 to withdraw his complaint that was accepted in September by the European Court
 of Human Rights.
 
 
 1494
 There were credible allegations that the SIS under the former government con-
 ducted surveillance of many political figures, journalists, and their spouses. There
 also were credible allegations of politically motivated dismissals of public officials
 and the intimidation of opponents of government policy. Defamation laws and a cli-
 mate of intimidation led some journalists to practice self-censorship. Media monitors
 confirmed government politicization of the state-owned electronic media. Actions by
 the former government called into question academic freedom. Discrimination and
 violence against women remain problems. Roma faced societal discrimination, and
 the police.'sometimes failed to provide adequate protection against attacks on them
 by skinheads or to investigate cases vigorously.Somei-ian-Semitic-incidents oc-
 curred, and some discrimination against the Hungan minority appears to persist.
 The new government coalition took power in November and vowed that it would
 demonstrate greater respect for democratic principles and human rights. In its first
 2 months, it corrected some constitutional misdeeds of the previous government, re-
 started investigations into some serious crimes, and created a new office of Deputy
 Prime Minister for Human Rights and Minorities. The new Deputy Prime Minister,
 Pal Csaky, opened a dialogue with religious and ethnic minorities.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no confirmed reports of
 political or other extrajudicial killings by government officials.
 However, there was widespread press speculation that elements of the- security
 services were involved in the 1996 death of Robert Remias. Remias was a friend and
 intermediary of Oskar Fegyveres (a former member of the SIS and a self-proclaimed
 witness to the kidnaping of the former President's son in August 1995-see Section
 1.c.). Remias died when his car exploded on April 29, 1996 in Bratislava. The inves-
 tigation into his death has foundered for nearly 3 years and remained dormant at
 year's end with no suspects.
 Skinhead violence against Roma led to one death (see Section 5).
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits such practices; however, police on occasion abused Roma.
 Human rights monitors reported cases of police brutality against Roma. According
 to an nongovernmental organization (NGO) spokesperson, there were five cases of
 police mistreatment of Roma in the eastern towns of Moldava and Turna, but he
 would not provide details of the incidents. In Julypolice raided a Romani settlement
 in Rudnany, according to human rights monitors. Five police officers reportedly beat
 two male youths during the raid. The police conducted house-t-house searches dur-
 ing which they broke windows, doors, and furniture and confiscated residents' ham-
 res, axes, and other tools without providing receipts. More often, the police are ac-
 csed of tolerating violence against Roma by not preventing or investigating attacks
 against them in a timely and thorou h manner.
 The 1995 case of the violent abduction of the former President's son, Michael
 Kovac Jr., to Austria, during which he was tortured, remained unsolved. SIS person-
 nel are alleged to be implicated. The SIS refused to permit its personnel to be ques-
 tioned and has accused police investigators of wrongdoing. Onelead police investiga-
 tor resigned under pressure; another was removed from the case, as was their su-
 rvisor. The third investigator closed the case due to "insufficient evidence." In
 arch and again in August, then-Prime Minister Vladimir Meciar, using temporary
 presidential powers, stopped the investigations into the case and granted a general
 amnesty to anyone accused of a crime in the kidnaping. In December, using the
 same presidential powers, newly eleted Prime Minister Mikulas Dzurinda re-
 scinded the amnesty. Interior Minister Ladislav Pittner immediately reopened the
 investigation, but Members of Parliament (M.P.'s) in  Meciar's party appealed
 Dzurinda's action to the Constitutional Court. At years end, the appeal was pend-
 ing. In another development in the case, in December the Ministry of Foreign Af-
 fairs issued an apology to Kovac Jr. for not providing consular services to him when
 he was kidnaped and taken to Austria. The Constitutional Court ruled in 1996 that
 the Ministry violated Kovac Jr.'s rights by not providing him the assistance to be
 accorded all citizens.
 Dr. Vasilij Demidov, a victim of alleged police brutality in May 1996, was
 countercharged with interfering with the duties of a police officer and filing a false
 report. In March he was taken to court and supposedy convicted but has never re-
 ceived the judgement or a fine. His police record shows no conviction.
 Prison conditions meet minimum international standards, and the Government
 permits visits by human rights monitors.
 
 
 1495
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution prohibits arbitrary ar-
 rest and detention, and the Government observes these prohibitions.
 A person accused or suspected of a crime must be given a hearing within 24 hours
 and either set free or remanded by the court. During this time, the detainee has
 the right to an attorney. If remanded by a court, the accused is entitled to a hearing
 within 24 hours at which the judge either sets the accused free or issues a sub-
 stantive written order placing the accused in custody. Investigative detention may
 last up to 2 months an may e extended. The total length of pretrial detention may
 not exceed 1 year, unless the Supreme Court extends it aftr determining that the
 person constitutes a serious danger to society. Pretrial detainees constituted roughly
 25 percent of the total prison population, and the average pretrial detention period
 was 7.2 months. The law allows family visits and provides or a court-paid attorney
 if needed. A system of bail exists. Noncitizens may be detained for up to 30 days
 for the puroses of identification. Detainees have the right to see an attorney imme-
 diately and should be notified of this right; however, one NGO reports that not all
 detainees are notified of their rights.
 The Constitution prohibits exile, and the Government observes this prohibition.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for courts that are inde-
 pendent, impartial, and separate from the other branches of government. However,
 some critics allege that the dependence of judges upon the Ministry of Justice for
 logistical support, the granting of leave requests, and other services undermines
 their independent status. Also, the Ministry of Justice can remove presidents and
 vice presidents of the courts for any reason, although they remain judges; it has
 done so.
 The court system consists of local and regional courts with the Supreme Court as
 the highest court of appeal except for constitutional questions. There is a separate
 Constitutional Court-with-no ties to the Ministry of Justice-that considers con-
 stitutional issues. In addition there is a separate military court system, the deci-
 sions of which may be appealed to the Supreme Court and the Constitutional Court.
 Under the Constiion, the President appoints Constitutional Court judges to 7-
 year terms based on parliamentary nominations. Parliament elects other judges,
 based on recommendations from the Ministry of Justice, and can remove them for
 misconduct.
 Persons charged with criminal offenses are entitled to fair and open public trials.
 They have the right to be informed of the charges against them and of their legal
 rights, to retain and consult with counsel sufficiently in advance to prepare a de-
 fense, and to confront wituesses. Defendants enjoy a presumption of innocence and
 have t   right to refuse to testify against themselves. They may appeal any judg-
 ment against them.
 With respect to the Roma minority, human rights monitors continued to charge
 that police are reluctant to take the testimony of witnesses to skinhead attacks on
 Roma. Further, they reported that police used the device of countercharges to pres-
 sure Roma victims of police brutality to drop their complaints, that medical doctors
 and investigators cooperated with police by refusing to describe accurately the inju-
 ries involved, and that lawyers often were reluctant to represent Roma in such situ-
 ations, for fear that this would have a negative effect on their practice.
 Former Prime Minister Meciar's granting of amnesty to those involved in the
 Kovac Jr. kidaping and torture case and in thwarting a referendum undermined due
 process and the rule of law.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The law
 provides for these rights, but the authorities sometimes infringed upon them. The
 Criminal Code reqires police to obtain a judicial search warrant in order to enter
 a home. The court may issue such a warrant only if there is a well-founded sus-
 picion that important evidence or persons accused of criminal activity are present
 inside or if there is some other important reason. Police must present the warrant
 before conducting the house search or within 24 hours after the search.
 The 1993 Police Law regulates wiretapping and mail surveillance for the purposes
 of criminal investigation, which may be conducted on the order of a judge or pros-
 ecutor only in cases of extraordinarily serious premeditated crimes or crimes involv-
 ing international treaty obligations. It has never been determined who was respon-
 sible for two highly publicized taped interceptions of p hone conversations in 1996.
 One involved a conversation between then-Minister of Interior Ludovit Hudek and
 then-SIS chief Ivan Lexa, in which they appeared to be discussing the dismissal of
 the police investigator of the Kovac kidnaping case. A second tape was aliegedly of
 a conversation between then-deputy Prime Minister Sergei Kozlik and the former
 State Secretary of the Justice Ministry Lubomir Dobrik discussing plans to shift
 control of the state insurance company into the hands of feliow members of the
 
 
 1496
 
 Movement for a Democratic Slovakia'(HZDS). There were credible allegations that
 the SIS conducted routine surveillance of some political figures and their spouses.
 Radio Free Europe (RFE) representatives alleged that SIS agents followed RFE re-
 porters who were working on sensitive stories. Other journalists also alleged that
 they were placed under surveillance and that their telephones were tapped.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and of the press, and the Government generally respects this right in practice; how-
 ever, several laws and a climate of intimidation led some journalists to practice self-
 censorship.       . ,
 The print media are free and uncensored, although some journalists and media
 outlets reported that they exercised self-censorship out of fear for personal safety
 or economic repercussions under the former government. Newspapers and maga-
 zines regularly publish a wide range of opinions and news articles. However, the
 politicization of the state-owned broadcast media was a significant problem. Individ-
 uals continued to report attempts at intimidation that made them reluctant to criti-
 cize the former government openly without fear of some form of reprisal. Several
 cases highlight this trend. In each of these cases, respected journalists accused gov-
 ernment agencies of perpetrating the crimes.
 On March 16 Czech Television Nova correspondent in Slovakia Eugen Korda's car
 was damaged seriously by unknown persons. Korda, who reported stories that were
 not favorable to the former government, was harassed in the past; his previous car
 was damaged 3 months earlier,'he reportedly has received threatening phone calls,
 and he reportedly was followed (as were his wife and son).
 Arpad Soltesz, journalist for the Kosice-based daily Korzar, was attacked phys-
 ically on May 7 in a Kosice restaurant. His injuries required 4 weeks of recuper-
 ation. Soltesz reported that he does not know why he was attacked but that he
 thinks the incident was related to the articles he wrote about VSZ (East Slovak Iron
 Works) and its relationship with the government.
 Two Slovak journalists who were critical of the Government, Karol Lovas (Radio
 Twist) and Slavomir Klikusovsky (Novy Cas), were the targets of a campaign to dis-
 credit them. On May 14 anonymous flyers appeared in Bratislava alleging that the
 two had sexually abused boys and produced pornographic films. -The harassment
 began after Lovas interviewed Jozef Kroslak, then spokesman for Prime Minister
 Meciar, on independent Radio Twist. In the interview Lovas questioned Kroslak
 about the role ofPrime Minister Meciar's advisor Blazena Martinkova. Kroslak re-
 ferred to Martinkova as Meciar's "girlfriend" and was forced to resign the following
 day.
 SME assistant editor Peter Toth, who has aggressively reported on the Kovac Jr.
 kidnaping (see Section 1.c.) and other allegations of government wrongdoing, re-
 ported in May that someone nailed a dead cat to the door of his apartment. Toth's
 car was burned in September 1997. Police later closed the investigation into the
 burning, leading to a formal complaint by Toth.
 Threatened and actual defamation suits by politicians against journalists contin-
 ued. Since losing a case could cause financial difficulties for most newspapers, the
 threat of a lawsuit is one method used to intimidate journalists. In April cabinet
 members began testifying in their libel suit against the opposition daily SME. Cabi-
 net members, including Prime Minister Meciar, alleged that a 1996 article about the
 murder of Robert Remias damaged their reputations by insinuating that the Gov-
 ernment was involved in Remias' death (see Section L.a.). Court proceedings were
 postponed indefinitely on April 16 when SME's attorney objected that the judge was
 biased because he granted Prime Minister Meciar's request that the public be ex-
 cluded from the trial.
 Government officials sometimes harassed private media or restricted the flow of
 information. Culture Minister Ivan Hudec filed a complaint on February 11 against
 the Radio and Television Broadcasting Council (RRTV) for granting a license to pri-
 vate opposition-oriented Radio Twist on January 27 to begin broadcasting in eastern
 Slovakia. Hudec demanded that the decision be reversed because the station gave
 81.1 MHZ as its broadcasting frequency instead of the correct 88.1 MHZ. Twist stat-
 ed that this was merely a technical error. Hudec also accused Twist of trying to in-
 fluence the Council. Confidential council documents apparently were given to
 Hudec. The RRTV refused to comply with Hudec's request to reverse its decision to
 grant the license to Twist.
 Three boards appointed by majority vote of Parliament supervise radio and tele-
 vision broadcasting. The Slovak Television Council and the Slovak Radio Council es-
 tablish broadcasting policy for state-owned television and radio. The Slovak Radio
 and Television Broadcasting Council issues broadcast licenses and administers ad-
 
 
 1497
 
 vertising laws and some other regulations. The Radio and Television Broadcasting
 Council has made significant progress in fostering the spread of private broadcast-
 ing, for which it issued 26 radio and 99 television and cable television licenses. A
 private company, Markiza Television, with a signal covering two-thirds of the coun-
 try, is the most watched station.
 When the Parliament changed the national election law in June, it did not follow
 recommendations of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
 (OSCE) to increase the role of the independent media. Rather, the HZDS-sponsored
 bill added penalties to the vague standing restrictions on any private media political
 coverage. HZDS officials sometimes interpreted the term "political coverage" to in-
 clude the news. The media section of the law empowers state radio and television
 to allocate 21 hours of broadcast time evenly among all political parties participat-
 ing in elections. The press is free to publish anything during election- campaigns,
 including party platforms, until 48 hours before elections. Sanctions range from
 fines to loss of license for violations. The RRTV has the authority to determine vio-
 lations and recommend penalties. Publicly supported Slovak Television (STV), con-
 trary to its public mandate, provided biased and unbalanced news coverage of the
 September election campaign. STV is the only televised news source that covers the
 entire country. News coverage by the private media only partially offset STV cov-
 erage.
 The RRTV tried to enforce the law evenhandedly, but largely was ignored by STV
 and to a lesser extent by the country's two most important independent broad-
 casters, TV Markiza and Radio Twist. The smaller independents exercised a caution
 forced on them by the law's vagueness.
 Money allocated to minority groups for the publication of minority language news-
 papers in some cases was eliminated. At the same time, the Government reportedly
 gave the R-press publishing company, with owners tied to the HZDS, $270,000 (8k
 9  million) to  publish  bimonthly  minority-language  supplements in  the
 progovernment daily newspaper Slovenska Republika. Of the $270,000, less than
 120,000 (Sk 4 million) was reportedly used for this purpose.
 On September 2, the RRTV declared that private radio stations and independent
 TV Markiza violated the election law by broadcasting news programs that
 spotlighted opposition figures. TV Markiza canceled its "Leaders" program after
 being threatened with fines and license revocation. One of Markiza's managers fled
 the country on September 6, claiming that he was about to be arrested on trumped-
 up charges. On September 15, protestors demonstrated outside TV Markiza against
 perceived efforts by the Government to control the station's programming and inter-
 fere with its independence. On September 16, the RRTV imposed a fine of approxi-
 mately $150,000 (5 million Sk) on Markiza for broadcasting those rallies.
 The law provides for academic freedom, but the former government took actions
 that called into doubt its commitment to that principle. The 1996 amendment to the
 Law on Higher Education instituted restrictions on the autonomy of universities
 and gave the government increased control over the administration and funding of
 institutions of higher learning. In January the Ministry of Education issued imple-
 menting regulations to assert new control over university campuses. For example,
 under these regulations the Ministry of Education must approve the appointments
 of all professors. This and other features of the new law give the Government in-
 creased control over the administration of universities.
 In 1997 the government established new universities in four cities where univer-
 sities already existed. At the same time, it cut the budgets of the older universities.
 Critics maintain that the former government throughout 1998 continued to try to
 weaken the older universities, which it reportedly considered to be antigovernment,
 by diverting funds to the new campuses.
 At the level of basic education, the former Minister of Education politicized the
 appointment of school principals and other administrators. School administrators
 were pressured to join the then-ruling HZDS and administrators received their jobs
 because of their HZDS ties.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 these rights, and the Government respects them in practice.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religious belief
 and faitand nd the Government respects this provision in practice. Under existing
 law, only registered churches and religious organizations have the explicit right to
 conduct public worship services and other activities, although no specific religions
 or practices are banneor r discouraged by the authorities. The state provides finan-
 cialsubsidies only to the 15 registered churches and religious organizations.
 In December Deputy Prime Minister Pal Csaky apologized to the chairman of the
 Slovak Bishops' Conference, Bishop Rudolf Balaz, for the behavior of the previous
 Government toward the Catholic Church. Among other things, Balaz had been the
 
 
 1498
 victim of what was being investigated at year's end as a SIS frame-up for selling
 religious art.  ,
 - d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for these rights, and the Government re-
 spects them in practice.
 The Government cooperates with the United Nations High Commissioner for Ref-
 ugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees. The
 law includes provisions for granting refugee/asylee status in accordance with the
 provisions of the 1951 U.N. Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees and its
 1967 Protocol. The Government provides first asylum and during the year provided
 it to 337 persons. Of these, 28 were granted citizenship, 49 were accepted as refu-
 gees, 36 claims were rejected and 224 persons terminated their cases. There were
 no reports of the forced expulsion of those having a valid claim to refugee status;
 however, some refugee claimants had difficulty in gaining access to initial process-
 mg.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have the constitutional right to change their government through the
 periodic free election of their national representatives. Citizens over the age of 18
 are eligible to vote, and voting is by secret ballot. The Constitution reserves certain
 powers to the President as Chief of State (elected by the Parliament), but executive
 power rests with the government. Legislative power is vested in the National Coun-
 cil of the Slovak Republic (Parliament). The country was without a President from
 March 3 to year's end because Parliament could not agree on a replacement. During
 that time, the majority of the President's powers were delegated to the Prime Min-
 ister, and the rest to the Speaker of Parliament, in accordance with the Constitu-
 tion.
 Elections were held in September, and four major opposition parties won 93 of 150
 seats in the new Parliament. The four, including a party representing ethnic Hun-
 garians, formed a coalition in November and vowed to improve respect for the rule
 of law and basic democratic principles, including human rights. Prime Minister
 Mikulas Dzurinda heads the new government. OSCE observers monitored the elec-
 tions and found them free of discernible fraud. Voter turnout was 84 percent. Only
 two of the then-governing coalition parties crossed the 5 percent threshold to gain
 seats in Parliament. They went into opposition and were assigned a vice chairman-
 ship of Parliament as well as proportional representation in parliamentary commit-
 tees.
 In June Parliament passed a -new election law. The law, passed on a partisan
 basis with no consultation with the opposition, was designed to disadvantage the
 then-opposition. The OSCE and NGO observers criticized the law specifically for its
 lack of transparency and negative treatment of the independent media.
 On August 10,- the HZDS appealed to the Supreme Court to rescind the Central
 Election Commission's registration of the Slovak Democratic Coalition (SDK), the
 leading opposition party, in an attempt to make it ineligible to run in the September
 parliamentary election. The HZDS argued that by putting the word "coalition" in
 its name, the SDK should be considered a coalition rather than a valid party. How-
 ever on August 14 the Supreme Court ruled in favor of the SDK.
 In December 1996, deputies ousted Member of Parliament Frantisek Gaulieder
 from Parliament against his will because he earlier resigned his membership in the
 then-ruling HZDS. A bomb exploded at his residence 2 days later. In July 1997, the
 Constitutional Court ruled that Gaulieder's ouster was unconstitutional but left the
 formal remedy up to Parliament, stating that the Court could not change a par-
 liamentary resolution. Court judges said that if Parliament did not return
 Gaulieder's mandate, it-would remain in violation of the Constitution. In September
 1997, in direct contradiction of the July Constitutional Court ruling, the Parliament
 refused to reinstate Gaulieder. In December 1998 the newly elected Parliament
 passed a resolution acknowledging that the previous Parliament violated Gaulieder's
 rights and granted him 5 months' salary in compensation. Although the new Par-
 liament regretted the action of its predecessor, it did not annul the former Par-
 liament's resolution, and Gaulieder chose not to withdraw his complaint that was
 accepted in September by the European Court of Human Rights.
 Parliament also passed in June a new law on local elections against the advice
 of experts and without consulting the opposition. Domestic and international experts
 criticized the new law on two main grounds: that its provision for representation
 on ethnic principles created "false separations" and that the forging of one district
 out of many local precincts created a confusing and nonrepresentational winner-
 take-all system of local governance. In November Parliament passed a new law on
 
 
 1499
 local elections and voted to postpone local elections for a month until December 18
 and 19. The delay was necessitated by an October 15 Constitutional Court ruling
 that the law under which the November 13-14 elections were organized was uncon-
 stitutional.
 Women are underrepresented in government. Two women are in the Cabinet.
 Women hold 12 seats in the 150-member Parliament.
 The large ethnic Hungarian minority, whose coalition gained 15 seats in Par-
 liament in the September elections, is well represented in Parliament and in local
 government. Roma are not represented in Parliament and hold no senior govern-
 ment positions.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A number of human rights groups operate without government restriction, inves-
 tigating and publishing their findings on human rights cases. A 1996 law, requiring
 NGO's and foundations to reregister and have substantial financial resources in
 order to operate, eliminated some foundations, primarily dormant groups. However,
 no organization was denied registration or faced any other major problem in con-
 tinuing to operate. The impact of another law setting limits on allowable adminis-
 trative expenses has not created significant problems. Many NGO representatives
 believed the Meciar government was hostile to NGO's. In contrast, the new Govern-
 ment appointed many NGO representatives to government positions.
 In November the new Government created a new position of Deputy Prime Min-
 ister for Human and Minority Rights. The new Deputy Prime Minister, Pal Csaky,
 a member of the Party of the Hungarian Coalition, immediately opened a dialogue
 with religious and minority groups.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The law prohibits discrimination and provides for the equality of all citizens. How-
 ever, enforcement is uneven, with different minority groups reporting that their
 members often receive no government assistance with complaints about discrimina-
 tion. Health care, education, retirement benefits, and other social services are pro-
 vided regardless of race, sex, religion, disability, language, or social status.
 Women.-Violence, particularly sexual violence against women, remains a serious
 and underreported problem. According to Ministry of Interior statistics, both domes-
 tic and public violence against women has been increasing: 1,000 cases of public vio-
 lence were registered in 1997, compared with 276 in 1985. Domestic violence in
 1997 included 2,656 cases, compared with 1,874 in 1995 when statistics -first were
 kept. One NGO's regional research showed that 38 to 40 percent of women were vic-
 tims of domestic violence. Police estimate that two-thirds of female rape victims fail
 to report their cases. Police treat spousal abuse, child abuse, and other violence
 against women in the same way as other criminal offenses; sections in the Criminal
 Code specifically address rape, sexual abuse, trafficking in women, and pandering.
 Legislation has not yet recognized and specified the term domestic violence. There
 is one consulting center for abused women in the country. There is no shelter for
 battered women, but several NGO's continue to advocate the idea strongly. In the
 view of some NGO's, the lack of relevant data on domestic violence is used by police
 authorities to downplay the extent of domestic violence.
 As a result of amendments to the Criminal Code that took effect in 1994, prostitu-
 tion is not illegal. However, the code prohibits activities related to prostitution, such
 as renting apartments for conducting prostitution, spreading sexually transmitted
 diseases, or trafficking in women for the purpose of prostitution. Trafficking in
 women is a potential problem that the Government views with concern.
 Women are equal under the law. They have the same property, inheritance, and
 other legal rights as men. Women receive approximately 85 percent of men's wages
 for the same work.
 In December 1997, the Gender Center for Equal Treatment of Men and Women
 was founded. The Center is an independent NGO that cooperates with the U.N. De-
 velopment Program and the Government. The Government's Coordinating Commit-
 tee for Women's Affairs (including NGO's) drafted a national action plan for women
 that was adopted by the government in September 1997. The plan presents a thor-
 ough analysis of the situation of women and proposes specific measures to resolve
 existing problems in the next decade. In contrast to the past, a number of organiza-
 tions emerged in the last decade that serve as advocates for women's issues and in-
 terests.
 Children.-The Government demonstrates its commitment to children's rights and
 welfare through its system of public education and medical care. The Ministry of
 
 
 1500
 Labor oversees implementation of the Government's programs for children. The
 Constitution, the Law on Education, the Labor Code, and a system of welfare pay-
 ments to families with children each provide in part for children's rights. Education
 is compulsory for 9 years, or until the age of 15.
 While there is no evidence of a societal pattern of abuse of children, some prob-
 lems remain. Abuse of children remains an underreported problem. Experts claim
 that there are significant discrepancies between official figures on child violence and
 the actual situation. According to available police statistics, child beating and sexual
 abuse is on the rise. In 1997 there were 1,083 reported cases of crimes against chil-
 dren. Among the most frequent crimes committed against children are the following:
 Nonpayment of child support, sexual violence, drugs, and beatings.
 Youth criminality has increased as well. Children under the age of 15 reportedly
 committed 226 crimes in 1990. In 1996 this number increased to 555. Juveniles (15
 to 18 years of age) committed 92,395 crimes in 1992, compared with 69,872 in 1990.
 In 1997 the number of resolved cases caused by juvenile offenders was 12,349, com-
 pared with 6,964 in 1989. Child prostitution and pornography are not addressed
 specifically in the Criminal Code but are covered by more general provisions in the
 law.
 The U.N. Children's Fund (UNICEF), several NGO's, and other institutions deal-
 ing with children's issues called for amendments to the Law on Families, particu-
 larly the part on relations between parents and children. UNICEF also recommends
 creation of an ombudsman's office that would defend children's rights. There are two
 regional emergency hot line numbers for abused children and one counseling help
 line.
 People With Disabilities.-The Constitution and implementing legislation provide
 for health protection and special working conditions for mentally and physically dis-
 abled persons, including special protection in employment relations and special as-
 sistance in training. A 1994 decree provides incentives to employers who create a
 "sheltered" workplace (i.e., a certain percentage of jobs set aside for the disabled).
 The law also prohibits discrimination against physically disabled individuals in em-
 ployment, education, and the provision of other state services. Nevertheless, experts
 report discrimination in the accessibility of premises and access to education (espe-
 cially higher education). Although not specifically required by law, another 1994
 government decree mandates the provision of accessibility with regard to new build-
 ing construction. The decree provides for sanctions but lacks a mechanism to enforce
 them. A spokeswoman for an NGO dealing with the disabled said in 1997 that due
 to pressure from a number of NGO's, accessibility has been improving-particularly
 regarding new construction. NGO's complained that other legislation, including the
 provision of jobs, while on the books, often is ignored.
 Religious Minorities.-Despite an order by the Prime Minister to withdraw a con-
 troversial history book entitled the "History of Slovakia and the Slovaks" by Milan
 Durica, it remains available in schools. The book has been widely criticized by reli-
 gious groups and the Slovak Academy of Sciences for gross inaccuracies and distor-
 tions, particularly in its portrayal of wartime Slovakia and the deportation of Jews
 and Roma.
 Despite protests by the Federation of Jewish Communities (FJC), Slovak National
 Party members and the official Slovak cultural organization Matica Slovenska con-
 tinued their efforts to revise the history of the pro-Nazi wartime Slovak state and
 to rehabilitate its leader Jozef Tiso. On the 59th anniversary of the wartime Slovak
 state, a small group of Tiso Society members and approximately 100 skinheads met
 in front of the presidential palace. A group of Young Democrats held a
 counterdemonstration in the main square to protest the legacy of the Tiso regime.
 Unlike in 1997, the event did not develop into an organized march of skinheads. The
 200 police on hand confiscated a number of weapons from the skinheads.
 Two other March events commemorated this anniversary. Archbishop Jan Sokol
 held a commemorative mass in the western Slovak town of Sastin. The mass was
 attended by several government coalition officials including deputy chair of the
 HZDS and of the Parliament Augustin Marian Huska, HZDS M.P. Jan Cuper and
 deputy chair of the Slovak National Party Anna Malikova. After the mass the Slo-
 yak National Party held a reception at which the same officials were present and
 spoke about the importance of the first Slovak state's legacy.
 On January 30, a bronze memorial plaque commemorating the 1,800 Jewish citi-
 zens of Komarno who were killed in World War II concentration camps was stolen
 from the synagogue in Komarno. The crime remained unsolved at years end. In Oc-
 tober police arrested four teenage skinheads who allegedly painted swastikas and
 pro-Fascist slogans on a business run by a Jewish manager in Zvolen.
 In May the -Supreme Court upheld a prior verdict that the publisher of Zmena
 weekly had to publish an apology to the honorary chairman of the FJC for abusing
 
 
 1501
 
 his person and offending his religious feelings. The apology was not published by
 In February the Government returned approximately $315,000 (Sk 10 million) to
 the Jewish community as settlement for the gold, diamonds, and jewelry that were
 confiscated by pro-Nazi officials from the wartime Slovak state's Jewish citizens.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-The Constitution provides minorities with
 the right to develop their own culture, receive information and education in their
 mother tongue, and participate in decisionmaking in matters affecting them. The
 Government continued to provide funding for cultural, educational, broadcasting,
 and publishing activities for the major ethnic minorities, but at greatly reduced lev-
 els. In November the new Government and the Government of Hungary signed an
 implementation agreement for their 1996 bilateral treaty, which called for the estab-
 lshment of commissions to deal with the treatment of ethnic minorities.
 The largest minority is the ethnic Hungarian minority. It is concentrated pri-
 marily in southern Slovakia, with a population registered at 570,000 (150,000 of
 whom are thought to be Roma who speak Hungarian and choose to declare them-
 selves as ethnic Hungarian). Most ethnic Hungarians and ethnic Slovaks living in
 mixed areas continued to coexist peacefully, but in recent years there have been oc-
 casional expressions of anti-Hungarian sentiments by Slovak nationalists.
 Hungarian ethnic leaders complained about large and disproportionate cuts in
 government subsidies to Hungarian cultural organizations, with the funding for
 some organizations eliminated. They noted as well a number of government initia-
 tives that they said sought to reverse progress for minorities made in previous
 years. Under pressure, the Government did not pass a nationalist-proposed edu-
 cation law that would expand the use of Slovak in schools of the Hungarian minor-
 ity, and in particular require that history and literature be taught in Slovak. In
 1996 then-Foreign Minister Juraj Schenk assured the High Commissioner for Mi-
 norities of the OSCE that the Government would pass a law codifying the use of
 minority languages. In October 1997, the former government, against the advice of
 the OSCE High Commissioner, stated that it no longer saw a need for such a law,
 despite its previous promises.
 Citing a law requiring that official documents be prepared only in Slovak, the
 Ministry of Education instructed school principals in 1997 to issue report cards only
 in that language. In schools where courses are taught in Hungarian and report
 cards for many decades were prepared in both Slovak and Hungarian, many parents
 protested this change by keeping their children home from school. In March regional
 administration officials dismissed at least two school principals of schools where
 parents insisted on bilingual report cards. The officials explained that the principals
 did not notify the district office of the parents' protests. In June hundreds of parents
 took over the town council building in Komarno to protest the dismissal of the two
 principals. On June 12, 3,000 parents, children, and teachers held demonstrations
 m Moldava and Bodron in Eastern Slovakia and Ganta in Western Slovakia. The
 two principals were rehired in December after the change in government.
 Roma constitute the second largest ethnic minority and suffer disproportionately
 from high levels of poverty and unemployment. Credible reports by human rights
 monitors indicated that Roma continued to suffer from discrimination in employ-
 ment, housing, and the administration of state services. In the spring some Roma
 families were granted asylum by a judge in the United Kingdom for the persecution
 they faced at home. The ensuing increase in Slovak Roma seeking asylum in the
 UK (1,600 persons applied due to asylum in August and September) led the British
 Government to impose a visa requirement on S     in  ctober, thereby focusing
 attention n  nthe problem in Slovakia.
 Skinhead violence against Roma was a serious problem, and human rights mon-
 itors reported that police remaln reluctant to take action. An Office of Legal Protec-
 tion (KPO) spokesman stated in October that the number of skinhead attacks on
 Roma dropped compared with the previous year. However, the authorities tended
 to tolerte such attacks and accepted them as "normal." In anlest no case did the
 police categorize the incidents as racially motivated.
 In January an unidentified device exploded in front of some houses inhabited by
 Roma in Trnava. No one was injured. It was the third explosion within 6 months
 in front of Romani houses in that city. In February three Romani children were bru-
 tally attacked in Presov in eastern Slovakia and beaten by a group of skinheads.
 An 11-year-old boy had to undergo surgery, and due to serious injuries he remained
 in a coma for some time. The police started an investigation, but it produced no re-
 suits by year's end.
 On May 7 in the outhern town of Lucnec, a non-Romani man allegedly as-
 saulted a Romani boy who was playing ball and then beat unconscious a 16-year-
 old Rom who tried to intervene. The 16-year-old was taken to the hospital and re-
 
 
 1502
 leased after 3 days. When the father of the first boy went to the police to file a com-
 plaint, officers reportedly tried to dissuade him from pursuing the matter.
 In July a Romani youth was beaten unconscious and hospitalized following an at-
 tack after his house in Zarovnice was set on fire. He subsequently died. At year's
 end, the police had no suspects. In July an unknown perpetrator threw a bomb
 through an open window of a family's house in Banska Bystrica where nine Roma
 were sleeping. The blast injured one child and damaged the interior of the house.
 The case is under investigation. In September skinheads with baseball bats beat a
 group of five Roma in Banska Bystrica. Two Roma suffered serious injuries. Fearing
 retaliation, the youths did not press charges. In September six unidentified males
 attacked a Romani house in the town of Cierny Balog. They kicked in doors and
 smashed windows and left one man with a broken leg and another with a broken
 ankle.
 In the August 1997 case in which two persons broke into a Romani home in
 Banska Bystrica and beat the whole family with baseball bats, the trial remains in
 progresu s   u  stalled since the victim refused to participate. The victims ofan Oc-
 tober 1997 attack by 10 skinheads on 3 Romani students refused to press charges.
 Beginning in January, Romani families living in the center of Spisska Nova Ves
 in central Slovakia began receiving notices that they would be settled involuntarily
 Sapproximately 2 kilometers outside of town. They were to be resettled into two-fam-
 ily houses with a common kitchen, bathroom, and toilet, although municipal au-
 thorities then revised their plans to house four families in each two-family struc-
 ture. As of late spring, 14 families consisting of approximately 100 individuals had
 received eviction notices from their present accommodations, although oniy 5 of the
 houses were ready.
 During the most recent census (1991), 14,000 citizens registered themselves as
 Ukrainin and 17,000 registered themselves as Ruthenians. However, about 50,00
 persons listed Ruthenian as their native language. Ruthenians disagree that they
 are Ukrainians and that their language is oniy a Ukrainian dialect. In September
 Slovak State Radio started broadcasting a long-promised daily regional program for
 the Ruthenian minority in Presov. The Ruthenian program alternates with pro-
 gramming for the Ukrainian minority. A representative of the Ruthenian Revival
 organization stated that Ruthenian language instruction began in September in
 some schools in the northeast. Also in September, an Institute for Minority Lan-
 guages was opened at Presov University in the northeast. Two instructors at the
 institu  teach Ruthenian culture and language.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right ofAssociation.-gThe Constitution provides for the right to form and
 join unions, except in the armed forces. According to one reliable estimate, approxi-
 mately 50 percent of the work force is unionized. Most unions are independent of
 the government and political parties but lobby those entities in order to gain sup-
 port for union positions on key labor issues.
 The Constitution provides for the right to strike, and there are no restrictions on
 this right. The national statistical office officially reported only six strikes in 1997
 and no strikes in 1998.
 However, an increasing number of strike alerts and unofficial strikes were re-
 ported during the year. Many of these actions anticipated layoffs or protested the
 nonpaymen Rt o Atia payment of salaries due to the restructuring of a company
 or insolvency. For example, work actions took place in a textile company, Sabina
 Sabinov, and in a dairy in Kosice to protest the insolvency of these companies and
 their failure to pay saaries. The trade union representing workers at the Slovak
 Railways company (ZSR) maintained a strike alert throughout the year, based on
 political and work issues. An unofficial strike of 1 hour was organized by phar-
 macists to protest the critical financial situation of t he  aralth sector.
 There were no instances of retribution against strikers or labor leaders. Relevant
 legislation on collective bargaining prohibits the dismissal of workers legally partici-
 pating in strikes. However, according to this law, a strike is legal and official only
 if it is for the purpose of collective bargaining; if it is announced beforehand; and
 if a list of strike participants is provided. If the strike is not considered to be official,
 strikers are not ensured protection.
 Unions are free to form or join federations or confederations and to affiliate with
 and participate in international bodies.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The law provides for collec-
 tive bargaining. Following the September election victory of the new Government,
 the Confederation of Trade Unions (KOZ) decided to reenter tripartite negotiations
 with employers and the Government. This followed elimination by the new Par-
 liament of wage regulation imposed by the previous government in July 1997.
 
 
 1503
 The law on citizens' associations prohibits discrimination by employers against
 union members and organizers. Complaints may be resolved either in collective ne-
 gotiations or in court. If a court rules that an employer dismissed a worker because
 of union activities or for any reason other than certain grounds for dismissal listed
 in the Labor Code, the employer must reinstate the worker. There were no reports
 of abuses targeted against unions or workers. However, there were reports of re-
 assignments and other actions affecting workers, allegedly for union activity, under
 the previous government. It also was reported that some public service employees
 were pressured to join then-government coalition parties. The implication was that
 refusal would jeopardize a worker's job. Some workers at a major company report-
 edly were pressured to join an allegedly more progovernment union.
 The Customs Act of 1996 regulates free customs zones and customs warehouses.
 Firms operating in such zones must comply with the Labor Code; to date there have
 been no reports of special involvement by the trade unions. No special legislation
 governs labor relations in free trade zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Both the Constitution and the Em-
 ployment Act prohibit forced or compulsory labor, including that performed by chil-
 dren, and there were no reports of violations. The Ministry of Labor, as well as dis-
 trict and local labor offices, have responsibility for enforcement.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The law
 sets the minimum employment age at 15 years. Children must remain in school for
 9 years, or until the age of 15. Workers under the age of 16 may not work more
 than 33 hours per week; may not be compensated on a piecework basis; may not
 work overtime or night shifts; and may not work underground or in specified condi-
 tions deemed dangerous to their health or safety. Special conditions and protections,
 though somewhat less stringent, apply to young workers up to the age of 18. The
 Ministry of Labor enforces this legislation. There were no reports of violations. The
 law and the Constitution prohibit forced and bonded child labor, and the Govern-
 ment effectively enforces these prohibitions (see Section 6.c.).
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The minimum wage in 1998 was $86 (Sk
 3,000) per month. Even when combined with special allowances paid to families
 with children it did not provide a decent standard of living for a worker and family.
 The Ministry of Labor is responsible for enforcing the minimum wage. No violations
 were reported. The standard workweek mandated by the Labor Code is 42.5 hours,
 although collective bargaining agreements have achieved reductions in some cases
 (most often to 40 hours). For state enterprises, the law requires overtime pay up
 to a maximum of 8 hours per week, and 150 hours per year, and provides 5 weeks
 of annual leave. Private enterprises can compensate their employees for more hours
 of overtime than stipulated by the law. There is no specifically mandated 24-hour
 rest period during the workweek. The trade unions, the Ministry of Labor, and local
 employment offices monitor observance of these laws, and the authorities effectively
 enforce them.
 The Labor Code establishes health and safety standards that the Office of Labor
 Safety effectively enforces. For hazardous employment, workers undergo medical
 screening under the supervision of a physician. They have the right to refuse to
 work in situations that endanger their health and safety and may file complaints
 against employers in such situations. Employees working under conditions endan-
 gering their health and safety for a certain period of time are entitled to paid "relax-
 ation" leave in addition to their standard leave.
