SLOVAK REPUBLIC
The 1993 r^ort on the Slovak Republic, which became an independent state following the dissolution of the former Czechoslovakia on January 1, 1993, is a generally accurate althougji frequently abbreviated and superficial examination of the human rights situation there. Last year's edition of the Critique found fault with the 1992 report for identifying most of the major human rights issues but minimizing or obscuring their impact; that deficiency persists in the 1993 report. The report on Slovakia fails to reflect the troubling undercurrents in the coxmtry's public life while also, in at least one case, ignoring important progress by the Slovakian government. The report on Slovakia suffers notably in comparison to the greatly improved and more thorough report on the Czech Republic.
For example, while the report on the Czech Republic deals extensively with that country's "lustration" law (carried over from the former Czechoslovakia), the report on the Slovak Republic deals with the lustration issue only in passing and in an inappropriately neutral fashion. The lusfration law, its name derived from the Latin word for purification, excludes from a wide array of positions in government, academia, media and state-owned companies those who are believed to have collaborated with the Communist government's secret police or were members of the Communist Party or Communist-affiliated institutions. Although the screening law does not appear to have been enforced in 1993, a majority of Slovakians favor retaining it.
The report omits reference to an important incident affecting academic freedom. In 1992 the government of Czechoslovakia reopened Tmava University, the oldest in Slovakia, founded in 1635. Last year, however, the Slovak government of Prime Minister Vladimir Meciar claimed that the reopening of the university violated Slovak law, Although it is generally acknowledged that some of the Meciar government's criticism was justified, many viewed it as resorting to a confrontational approach that infringed upon academic freedom and cubninated in an effort to close the university. Moreover, it appears that the government's actions were motivated by the fact that some of its leading critics were faculty members at Tmava. The Committee for International Academic Freedom, based in New York, warned that the closure of Tmava University would "arouse deep concem, even suspicion, about the intentions of the new government."
A further weakness of the report is its failure to mention alleged discrimination against Slovak emigres who have sought to regain their Slovak citizenship in the new republic. Individuals who emigrated from the Slovak Republic of the former Czechoslovakia and who were stripped of their citizenship are ostensibly entitled to regain it under current Slovak law. It appears, however.
322
SLOVAK REPUBLIC
that emigres are being denied citizenship by the current Slovak government on a discriminatory basis.
By contrast, as in past years, the report gives appropriate and thorough attention to the status of Slovakia's Hungarian minority, the largest ethnic minority in the country. The report notes that ethnic Hungarians participate in the political, economic and social life of the Slovak Republic. Moreover, ethnic Hungarians have vigorous political representation in the Slovak parliament. The report notes, however, that there have been several instances of apparent harassment against the Hungarian minority. For example, in many regions, even where Hungarians constitute an overwhelming majority, official road signs bearing the Hungarian names of towns and streets were removed during 1993. Furthermore, Slovak law on permissible names for children required that fu^st names be chosen from an official list that excluded many Hungarian names. According to Helsinki Watch, ethnic Hungarian parents who attempted to give their children authentically Hungarian names were not allowed to register them.
As the report notes, the Slovak government, in an effort to gain admission into the Council of Europe, responded to criticism of these measures and made a commitment to amend the relevant legislation. What the report does not make clear, however, is that Prime Minister Meciar refused to sign the amendments into law after Slovakia had been admitted. Similarly, bilingual town and street signs, which had been installed as an concession to the Council of Europe prior to its vote in June 1993, were ordered removed in early August.
In 1993, ethnic Hungarians also voiced strong criticism of the Slovak Constitution. The Hungarian Human Rights Foundation criticized the Constitution's preamble, which reads "We, the Slovak nation," rather than referring to "the citizens of the Slovak Republic." Leaders of the ethnic Hungarian political parties criticized the preamble as "resuscitating the idea of a national state" and asserted that it implied second-rate status for ethnic minorities. The Constitution has been strongly criticized for-its failure to provide effective guarantees for minority rights, which were secured imder the former Constitution of Czechoslovakia and are stipulated in the Final Report of the Copenhagen meeting of the Helsinki Review Conference. The Hungarian Human Rigiits Foundation argues that Article 34 of the Constitution does not protect the right of national minorities to form political parties. In addition, a memorandum issued by ethnic Hungarian party leaders criticized the Constitution for, in their view, leaving minority rights to the "mercy of the parliamentary majority." They also criticized the fact that the Constitution does not expressly guarantee the existence of schools with a foreign language as the language of instruction.
Both the Slovak government and media have reacted angrily to these criticisms of the Constitution, asserting that complaints from ethnic Hungarian quarters have been given undue attention. The report unfortunately omits
323
CRITIQUE 1993
discussion of these issues. However, the issue of constitutional protection of minority rights was a major focus of a report by the US Helsinki Commission, entitled "Human Rights and Democratization in Slovakia," which was bitterly attacked by Slovak govemment officials. While it may be difficult to assess the merits of ethnic Hungarians' objections to the Constitution, the drafters of the State Department report should at least have made some attempt to identify and assess the issues involved. Tensions between the ethnic Hungarian minority and the Slovak majority appear to remain a source of acute potential turmoil.
Slovakia's second largest ethnic minority are the Roma, commonly referred to as gypsies. Roma in the Slovak Republic, like those in the Czech Republic and othei^ Eastern European countries, face strong popular prejudice and government policies that range from open hostility to deliberate indifference. The report accurately documents incidents of anti-Roma discrimination in 1993, which ranged from the refiisal of shops and restaurants to serve Roma to allegations of the extrajudicial killing of a Roma by a Slovak police officer. The report makes only passing reference to an inflammatory statement in September by Prime Minister Meciar, to the effect that it was necessary to curtail family allowances because they encouraged "extensive reproduction" by Roma who give birth to children who are "mentally and socially unadaptable." As the report noted, the Prime Minister's remarks were widely criticized. Amnesty Intemational condemned Meciar's comments as violating international treaties and contributing to a racist attitude by police officers. Amnesty International added that the Prime Minister's remarks contributed to an atmosphere that leads to human rights violations and leaves those most vulnerable to racist attacks without adequate govemment protection.
Freedom of speech and press in Slovakia remained essentially intact in 1993. However, as the report notes, while the govemment avoided direct censorship, it all too often resorted to threats or technicalities to inhibit these freedoms. According to Human Rights Watch/Helsinki, the Slovak authorities sought to compel journalists to adopt a pro-govemment stance. For example, the govemment cut subsidies to various periodicals based on their political content, while claiming that its policy was based primarily on "educational" goals.
The most vivid example of harassment, which the report cites, occurred early in 1993 when the board of directors of the state-owned newspaper Smena fired the director and editor-in-chief of the newspaper after it printed articles critical of the Meciar govemment. Although this was clearly an effort to intimidate independent journalists, the fired director and editor were able to establish an independent daily — called Sme — which has operated freely and without govemment interference.
Prime Minister Meciar himself called for sanctions against people "who knowingly and intentionally spread misinformation about Slovakia and its government." And in September, the managing editor of Slovak radio was
324
SLOVAK REPUBLIC
dismissed following several statements critical of the Prime Minister, The government also dismissed the chairman and a member of the board of Slovak Television (ST V), while installing seven candidates of its own on the nine-member board. As a result, the director of STV resigned, complaining of political interference. Here again, the report identifies the major issues but fails to provide adequate context or analysis.
The report's abbreviated analysis also accounts for the omission of one important positive step by the Slovak government. The 1993 report makes only cursory reference to the law passed by the Slovak parliament restoring church property. The new law provides for restitution of church properties taken between May 8 1945, and January 1, 1990, and of Jewish properties confiscated between November 2, 1938 and January 1, 1990. In addition to restoring confiscated properly, the law should also eventually help guarantee the fmancial independence of churches fi"om the state. An earlier version of the law passed easily in Parliament but was vetoed by Slovak President Kovac, who cited constitutional concerns that the current owners of the properties should be compensated by the state. The Parliament ultimately adopted the President's view and passed a revised version of the law in October 1993. A spokesman for the Slovak government termed the law "the most important step in officially separating the Church and the State."
Although the restitution law was widely supported, the Roman Catholic Church was the chief advocate for the law. The Catholic Church estimates that it has property rights to land and buildings worth up to $ 1.2 billion. Although the law passed easily and has been widely heralded, the experience of similar laws in other eastern European states suggests that its execution will be complicated. Resistance fi-om local communities can be expected when local farm land is due to be returned to particular churches. Despite these potential difficulties, the restitution law is an important step in promoting religious fi"eedom and the separation of church and state and, as such, deserved serious attention in the report.
While the Slovak government may properly be subject to fair and important criticisms, the relative advance of democracy in Slovakia was the most significant event of 1993. Nevertheless, there are real grounds for concern that democracy and human rights have not yet taken deep root in Slovakia. The State Department report should have provided a more extensive analysis that more substantially reflected both the positive and negative aspects of Slovakia's development.
325
CRITIQUE 1993
