 SLOVAK REPUBLIC
 The Slovak Republic became an independent state on January 1, 1993, following
 the dissolution of the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic (CSFR). The Slovak Con-
 stitution, which went into effect on October 1, 1992, provides for a multiparty,
 multiethnic parliamentary democracy. Slovakia chose to carry over the entire body
 of CSFR domestic legislation and international treaty obligations, which gradually
 are being renewed or updated. The Movement for a Democratic Slovakia (HZDS),
 which won a plurality in the June 1992 elections, formed a coalition with the Slovak
 National Party (SNS), giving them a majority in Parliament. When the SNS left the
 coalition in March, Prime Minister Vladimir Meciar and the HZDS continued in of-
 fice, governing as a minority party until November when the coalition was renewed.
 Prior to its dissolution, the CSFR had dismantled the repressive security appara-
 tus of pre-1989 Czechoslovakia. The Slovak Information Service is responsible for
 all security and intelligence activities in Slovakia. A parliamentary commission
 headed by the president of Slovakia's National Council (parliament) oversees the
 service. During 1993 there were no reports indicating human rights abuses by the
 Slovak Information Service or the military security apparatus of the Slovak Govern-
 ment. There was one report of two possible extrajudicial killings by a policeman (see
 Section L.a.).
 Economic reform, initiated in 1990 in the former CSFR, continued in Slovakia in
 1993 at a slower pace. With the disruption of established commercial relationships
 caused by the dissolution of the CSFR and the collapse of former Warsaw Pact mar-
 kets, Slovakia's gross domestic product fell, unemployment rose, and many enter-
 prises became insolvent. Although small-scale privatization was nearly completed,
 the process of privatizing larger enterprises slowed amidst cumbersome bureaucratic
 procedures and political struggles. Nevertheless, Slovakia succeeded in keeping in-
 
 
 1051
 
 flation manageable, rebuilding its foreign currency reserves, attracting new Western
 investors, and limiting its bud get deficit.
 Freedom of peaceful assembly, association, and religion are widely respected. Still,
 some human rights problems remain. Societal discrimination against Romanies re-
 mained a serious problem, as evidenced by a local ordinance discriminating against
 the Romany population, which the Constitutional Court declared illegal. Human
 rights monitors as well as some journalists expressed anxiety over the Government's
 apparent use of financial and bureaucratic actions to attempt to exercise control
 over journalists' activities. Human rights monitors and some minority representa-
 tives criticized restrictions on schooling in the mother tongue, the posting of bilin-
 $ual roadsigns, and the registration of names. The Government condemned the few
 instances of "skinhead" attacks against Jews and desecration of synagogues and
 cemeteries, acting promptly to investigate and to redress wrongdoing. Laws and reg-
 ulations guarantee equal rights to women and minorities but are not always re-
 spected in practice. Some groups (notably, Romanies) remained disadvantaged due
 to a variety of social, educational, and economic causes which the Government had
 only begun to address.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political
 killings. On October 26, a policeman reportedly instructed a 34-year-old male inhab-
 itant of a Romany settlement at Klenovec to accompany him to the police station
 for questioning about a crime. Instead, the policeman allegedly took the man to a
 meadow where he killed him with a gunshot to the back of his head. The policeman
 returned to Klenovec and allegedly repeated the scenario with a second victim. A
 third intended victim managed to escape. The policeman was detained and charged
 with two counts of murder and one count of attempted murder.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of abductions, disappearances, secret
 arrests, or clandestine detentions.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 There were no reports of any such practices. Prison conditions reportedly meet mini-
 mum standards.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution provides for protection
 against unlawful or unreasonable detention. A person accused or suspected of a
 crime must be given a hearing within 24 hours and either set free or remanded to
 the court. During this time, the detainee must be offered access to an attorney. If
 remanded to the court, the accused is entitled to a hearing within 24 hours, at
 which the judge will either set the accused free or issue a substantive written order
 placing the accused in custody. Investigative detention can last up to 2 months, with
 further pretrial detention permitted. The total length of pretrial detention may not
 exceed 1 year, unless extended in exceptional circumstances by the Supreme Court
 when the detainee's pretrial release could pose a serious danger to society. The law
 provides for a court-paid attorney, if needed, and family visits. No violations of these
 rules were reported during 1993.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-Under the Constitution, the courts are independ-
 ent, impartial, and separate from the other branches of government. Judges, ap-
 pointed for life, are bound only by law and international treaties. To help reinforce
 judicial independence, the Minister of Justice in 199:. obtained parliamentary ap-
 proval to raise judges' salaries to those of parliamentarians. Parliament appoints
 judges of the highest court, while the Minister of Justice appoints others on the rec-
 ommendations of their peers. Judges may not be transferred or dismissed without
 their consent, and only Parliament may recall them. During 1993 there were no re-
 ports of judges being recalled.
 The highest judicial body in Slovakia, the 10-judge Constitutional Court based in
 Kosice, reviews the constitutionality of laws and the decisions of lower level courts,
 as well as the decisions of national and local government bodies. The Court may
 also address cases in which the constitutional rights and freedoms of citizens are
 involved, provided no other court has addressed them.
 Controversy surrounded the laming of the first members to the Constitutional
 Court in Januar,. Article 102 of the Constitution provides that the President's pow.
 ers include the naming of "higher state functionaries." Parliament voted to postpone
 the naming of the court members until they elected a ntew President. Parliament's
 constitutional, conmittee, however, decided that justices of the Court did not fit into
 the category of "higher state functionaries," even though the Chief Justice and his
 deputy did, and the Prime Minister was allowed to name the members of the Court.
 This led some human rights monitors to question wl'ether the Prime Minister used
 
 
 1052
 a constitutional loophole in order to name judges sympathetic to his own views. The
 President later designated which of the members would be Chief Justice and the
 deputy.
 In addition to the Constitutional Court, Slovakia's multitiered court system con-
 sists of a republic-level Supreme Court; regional courts in Bratislava, Banska
 Bystrica and Kosice; and 38 local courts responsible for individual districts.
 The Ministry of Justice complained repeatedly of a shortage of judges which has
 led to a case backlog, resulting in long waiting periods for trials and between hear-
 ings. In response to the overload, the courts have begun to specialize, dividing into
 commercial, civil, or criminal branches.
 Persons charged with criminal offenses ara entitled to fair and open public trials.
 They have the right to be informed of the charges against them and of their legal
 rights and to retain and consult with counsel sufficiently in advance to prepare a
 defense. If a defendant cannot afford a lawyer, one is provided at government ex-
 pense. Defendants have the right to confront witnesses. They enjoy a presumption
 of innocence and have the right to refuse to testify against themselves. They may
 appeal any judgment against them.
 The lustration law of the former CSFR, barring from high public office persons
 who previously collaborated with the Communist-era secret police, is technically still
 in effect in Slovakia, though not enforced. Opponents of the law called it discrimina-
 tory and a violation of due process, since decisions may be based on unverifiable se-
 cret police records, and no mechanism for appeal is available. The law's supporters
 cited the need to ban from public office those responsible for abuses of power and
 repression during the years of Communist rule. In January 1994, the Government
 voted to seek a judgment from the Constitutional Court on whether the lustration
 law was constitutional and consistent with international human rights treaties.
 There were no reports of political prisoners in 1993.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Criminal Code requires police to obtain a search warrant in order to enter a home.
 Search warrants may be issued by a chief judge or, during investigation, by a judge
 upon the recommendation of the prosecutor. House search is permitted only if there
 is a well-founded suspicion that important evidence or persons accused of criminal
 activity are present inside or if there is some other important reason. A search war-
 rant must be presented before the house search is conducted or, if some serious cir-
 cumstance prevented this, within 24 hours after the search.
 There were no reports of illegal surveillance of persons or communications. A gov-
 ernment investigation into mail tampering determined that there were incidents of
 individual post office employees searching for money or valuables.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution prohibits censorship and pro-
 vides for freedom of information and the right of expression. During 1993 numerous
 newspapers, magzines, and journals spanning the entire spectrum of political
 views were published freely.
 Throughout 1993 media criticism of the Government was widespread, and there
 were no reports of overt restrictions, although the Government's financial and bu-
 reaucratic maneuvers, as well as threats of lawsuits against critical journalists and
 periodicals, seemed designed to inhibit such criticism. Some journalists noted that
 Eovernment officials criticized their work and questioned their loyalty, accusing
 them of besmirching the image of Slovakia. Some periodicals that carried articles
 criticizing the Prime Minister and the Government apparently suffered financial ret-
 ribution. The Ministry of Culture announced early in the year that it would remove
 subsidies from a number of cultural periodicals on the grounds that their readership
 was marginal. But the only periodicals to lose their subsidies were ones such as
 Kulturny Zivot, Slovenske Pohlady 93, and Fragment K, which were either critical
 of the Government or provided a forum for writers whose views were at odds with
 official views.
 Danubiaprint, the newsprint manufacturer, continues to be a government monop-
 oly after its privatization process was halted in 1992.
 Other journalists complained that the government-sponsored Slovak Republic
 Press Agency subsidized the newspaper Republika, which generally adopted posi-
 tions sympathetic to government policy, while other publications were allowed to fail
 when their subsidies were eliminated.
 The January 1993 firing of the editor of the government-owned newspaper Smena
 for alleged poor management was perceived as a punishment for the paper's critical
 stance. The syndicate of Slovak journalists condemned the dismissal, and, of ap-
 proximately 60 editors and journalists who worked for Smena, 49 quit following the
 editor's firing. The fired editor and a group of former Smena staff members went
 
 
 1053
 on to found a new and even more critical daily, Sme, which conducted its activities
 unhampered.
 On December 23, a Slovak company subordinate to the Transport and Commu-
 nications Ministry abruptly canceled, effective January 31, 1994, its 5-year contract
 to broadcast Radio Free Europe (RFE) medium-wave transmissions on three trans-
 mitters in Slovakia. Though the Transport Minister asserted this decision was mere-
 ly technical, the move followed months of criticism of RFE in government-supported
 media for alleged lack of its objectivity and antigovernment slant. At year's end, it
 was unclear whether the Slovak Government would nullify the decision.
 Slovakia has one government-sponsored television station broadcasting on two
 channels; steps were under way for partial privatization. One of Slovakia's 17 radio
 stations is government-sponsored; the remainder are privately owned and con-
 trolled.
 Government-appointed boards, made up of nine members elected by Parliament
 to 6-year terms, administer Slovak radio and Slovak television. During 1993 five of
 the nine members of the television board resigned. In October Parliament dismissed
 two more Slovak Television Council members end appointed seven new members,
 five from the HZDS and two from the SNS. Objecting to the political imbalance this
 created, another board member immediately resigned, citing exhaustion. At that
 time a competitive process was already under way for selection by a board of a per-
 manent director, who would then require parliamentaiT approval. Some journalists
 expressed concern that government proposals to combine the two boards under one
 overarching board and to replace their personnel might result in an unacceptable
 degree of government control.
 When radio journalist Lubomir Lintner was fired from his post in October 1993,
 he attributed the move to pressure by members of the Government.
 During 1993 a regular feature of Slovak television was the Sunday night program
 "Ten Minutes with the Prime Minister," originally envisioned as an interview but
 criticized by journalists for its mo:olog format. In October an opposition political
 leader demanded equal air time to ensure a balanced picture for the viewing public.
 In the fall, "Ten Minutes" was replaced by "Press Club," a roundtable discussion
 and interview show that includes government and opposition political figures, as
 well as journalists from a broad spectrum of media.
 During 1993 many journalists were apprehensive of calls by government officials
 for "ethical self-regulation," fearing that in practice this could lead to a form of cen-
 sorship. In response, government officials pointed to Council of Europe resolution
 1003 of July 1 1993, on the ethics of journalism, which includes a section entitled
 "Ethics and Self-regulation in Journalism," suggesting the establishment of self-reg-
 ulatory bodies to issue precepts, judge the truthfulness of the media, and generally
 serve as a "barometer ofcredibility' for citizens.
 There is no civil service law protecting jobs after a change in government. The
 Government replaced a substantial number of state, district, and local officials, as
 well as leaders in the health and education sectors, with HZDS-sanctioned can-
 didates. When the staff of one hospital in Rimavska Sobota protested the replace-
 ment of their director, six department heads were replaced as well. In October the
 director of the National Oncology Institute was fired after he pointed out the prob-
 lems in the health care system on Slovak television.
 Academic freedom is guaranteed by law. Current legislation grants universities
 the authority to decide their internal affairs, including pedagogic and academic ori-
 entation and internal structure. Concern over academic freedom was raised after the
 Minister of Education replaced the heads of all district school boards with his own
 candidates, although the law stipulates that local boards are supposed to nominate
 their heads. During 1993 conflicts between the Government and the independent
 University of Trnava appeared to subside. Private funding sources have kept the
 embattled University alive, and there have been no reports of government attempts
 to hamper its activities in 1993.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The right of persons to assem-
 ble peacefully is protected under the law. Permits for some public demonstrations
 are required, but there were no reports of refusals, nor of police interference with
 public demonstrations.
 The right of persons to associate freely and to form political parties and move-
 ments is also prr.tected under the law and was respected in practice during 1993.
 Some organizations, including political parties, are required to register, but there
 were no reports that this requirement presented an obstacle to free association.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Freedom of religious belief and faith are guaranteed by
 the Constitution and by law. Citizens who associate on the basis of a particular reli-
 gious persuasion may reely proclaim and practice their beliefs.
 
 
 1054
 Under existing law, only registered churches and religious organizations are ex-
 plicitly granted the right to conduct institutional activities, such as public worship
 services and meetings, educational and cultural activities, publications, and health
 and social services. The State provides financial subsidies only to registered church-
 es and religious organizations. According to the Ministry of Culture, which has re-
 sponsibility for implementing the laws pertaining to religion, 15 churches are reg-
 istered. New churches and religious organizations that seek registration must have
 20,000 adult members with permanent residence in Slovakia. (The numerical mem-
 bership requirement does not apply to churches or religious organizations which
 were active, based either on the law or on the approval of the State, prior to Sep-
 tember 1, 1991, when the current law entered into force.) Slovak officials indicated
 that they were aware of deficiencies in existing regulations and have initiated a re-
 view.
 On September 29, Parliament passed the "Law on the Reconciliation of Certain
 Property Injustices Perpetrated Against Churches and Religious Organizations,"
 providing for the restitution of church property confiscated after 1945, and of Jewish
 community property confiscated after 1938. Its provisions were negotiated between
 the law's draters and representatives of the religious communities involved.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-There are no restrictions on the freedom of movement of Slovak citi-
 zens. Former Czechoslovak citizens who emigrated during the period of Communist
 role are free to return for visits and are able to gain Slovak citizenship if they wish.
 Passports are readily available for all wishing to travel abroad.
 Refugees and asylum seekers are treated according to international norms.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have the constitutional right to change their government through the
 periodic free election of their representatives. Citizens over the age of 18 are eligible
 to vote, and voting is by secret ballot. On January 19, the Slovak Parliament passed
 a law setting the conditions for determining, acquiring, and losing citizenship in the
 Slovak Republic. Any person who had been a citizen of the Slovak Republic under
 the Czechoslovak Federation (by birth or naturalization) automatically became a cit-
 izen of the Slovak Republic afer the split. Persons permanently residing in Slo-
 vakia, whose place of birth was in the Czech Republic but who wished to choose
 Slovak citizenship, had until the end of 1993 to execute a written declaration to that
 effect at any local administrative office.
 The Slovak Republic is a functioning multiparty, multiethnic demc:racy. Its Con-
 stitution reserves certain powers to the President as Chief of State (elected by the
 Parliament), but executive power rests with the Government. Legislative power is
 vested in the National Council of the Slovak Republic (NCSR, the Parliament), and
 an independent court system exercises judiciary responsibilities.
 The Constitution calls for elections every 4 yeai s. The last parliamentary elections
 were held in June 1992, prior to independence. Election to Parliament is based on
 proportional representation within each of the four electoral regions, with a 5-per-
 cent threshold for a party's entry into Parliament (7 percent for a coalition). This
 could result in a parliamentary candidate receiving a plurality of votes but not being
 seated because his or her party did not achieve the requisite threshold.
 As of October, all ministers of the Government were members of either the Move-
 ment for a Democratic Slovakia (HZDS), the largest political entity, or the Slovak
 National Party (SNS). The HZDS ruled in coalition with the SNS until the latter
 left the coalition in March. The HZDS then governed without commanding a major-
 ity in Parliament until the coalition resumed office in November. New elections are
 scheduled for 1996, but in the latter half of 1993 several parties urged early elec-
 tions to resolve the parliamentary stalemate caused by the HZDS's lack of a work-
 ing majority.
 There are no official restrictions on the participation of women or minorities in
 politics. Female politicians enjoyed the same rights and status as their male coun-
 terparts. They were represented in all political parties and served as deputies in
 Parliament, and in government ministries. There are 26 women in the National
 Council, 17 percent of the total number of deputies.
 Members of all the minorities in the Slovak Republic participated in the political
 process and several were i-.presented in Parliament, but few reached the highest
 levels. 'he largest minority in Slovakia, ethnic Hungarians, participated fully in the
 political process, both in mainstream political parties and in Hungarian-oriented
 parties, and is represented in Parliament. Ethnic Hungarians expressed concern,
 however, that rumored government plans to redistrict Slovakia could dilute their
 vote by incorporating their communities into overwhelmingly ethnic Slovak districts.
 
 
 1055
 In December ethnic Hungarians in southern Slovakia called for a mass meeting to
 proclaim a self-governing ethnic Hungarian province. Most government and political
 leaders called the meeting legal but warned that attempts to establish a self-govern-
 ing province would be unconstitutional. Public reaction was emotional. The meeting
 took place on January 8, 1994, in Komarno. The participants stopped short of call-
 ing for a self-governing province but issued a statement on the status of minorities.
 The government redistricting plan submitted to Parliament in early January 1994
 was characterized by representatives of the Council of Europe as meeting European
 norms.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Representatives of local and international nongovernmental human rights organi-
 zations worked freely in Slovakia without government interference. Although the
 Government refrained from actually penalizing human rights critics, its representa-
 tives publicly criticized Hungarian politicians who complained about government
 policies toward the ethnic Hungarian minority. The Government's view was that
 these were not genuine human rights complaints but politically motivated demands
 for advantages over and above international human rights norms. The ethnic Hun-
 garian activists considered their demands legitimate and the Government's policies
 inadequate.
 The Government welcomed the February visit to Slovakia of the High Commis-
 sioner on National Minorities of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Eu-
 rope (CSCE); his subsequent visit to prepare a report on the Roma; and followup
 visits by CSCE exports on minorities. The Government also encouraged the March
 visits of CSCE an  Council of Europe rapporteur missions. The Ministry of Justice
 convened a meeting in Bratislava of 50 directors of human rights centers in other
 countries to obtain their advice for setting up a similar center in Bratislava, which
 has been funded and approved for opening in January 1994.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Slovak law prohibits discrimination and guarantees the equality of all citizens.
 Health care, education, retirement benefits, and other social services were provided
 regardless of race, sex, religion, disability, language, or social status.
 Women.-Women in Slovakia are equal under the law. They enjoy the same prop-
 erty, inheritance, and other legal rights as men, and receive pay equal to that of
 male colleagues for the same job. The largest women's organization in Slovakia is
 the Democratic Union of Women of Slovakia, a nonpolitical organization based on
 the principles of humanism and democracy. It monitors observance of the rights of
 women and their families in light of internationally accepted documents and the
 Slovak Constitution, especially as they affect the social and family spheres. Other
 women's organizations, also nonpolitical, include the Council of Women, the Slovak
 Women's Center, and the Federation of Women for World Peace. Despite the lack
 of any overt discrimination, the small proportion of women at the higher echelons
 of professional and government employment during 1993 suggested that cultural
 barriers to their advancement might exist.
 No public debate or explicit government policy statements on the subject of vio-
 lence toward women (spousal abuse) or child abuse were evident in 1993. Spousal
 abuse, child abuse, and other violence against women are reported along with other
 criminal offenses. Anecdotal evidence suggests that such cases often go unreported
 or are reported too late for effective followup. Once reported, they are subject to the
 general investigative procedures under the Criminal Code.
 Children.-There does not appear to be a comprehensive body of law specifically
 addressing the rights of children. Children's rights and welfare are addressed in
 part by the Labor Code and in part by the system of child welfare payments to fami-
 lies with children. The working age is 18, except for apprenticeships, which may
 begin at age 14. There is no evidence of a pattern of abuse or denial of rights to
 children.
 National/Racial /Ethnic Minorities.-The Slovak Constitution provides minorities
 the right to develop their own culture, receive information and education in their
 own language, and participate in decisionmaking in matters affecting them. During
 1993 the Government continued to provide funding for cultural, educational, broad-
 casting, and publishing activities for the major ethnic minorities. The President
 sponsored a regular roundtable for minority representatives, including Czechs,
 Poles, Bulgars, Croats, Hungarians, Ruthenians, Ukrainians, Germans, and
 Roaniies. (Jewish leaders declined to be designated officially as an ethnic minority
 but participated in the roundtables.) At the roundtable, minority representatives
 
 
 1056
 raised issues such as legalization of dual citizenship; cultural, educational, and re-
 gional self-government; registration of names; bilingual place names; territorial divi-
 sion according to ethnicity; financial support for cultural development; guaranteed
 representation in Parliament for nationalities; racial discrimination; and support for
 development of religious and cultural programs. The roundtable chairman asked re-
 sponsible government ministers to reply in writing to the issues and concerns that
 were raised. While the roundtable has not yet resulted in institutional changes, it
 appears to have had .ome success in engaging the Government and minorities in
 a dialog aimed at constructive solutions to problems.
 Slovakia's Hungarian minority, which is the most numerous, is concentrated pri-
 marily in southern Slovakia, with a population estimated at 570,000. During 1993
 ethnic Hungarians participated successfully at all levels in the political, economic,
 and social life of the country. Under Slovakia's 1990 language law, in localities with
 over 20-percent minority populations, citizens may conduct their government busi-
 ness in Hungarian (some Hungarian activists advocated lowering the threshold to
 10 percent). Ethnic Hungarians criticized a rumored government plan for redistrict-
 ingslated to take effect in 1994, because they feared it would result in districts
 with an ethnic Hungarian population of less than 20 percent, thus eliminating the
 optional use of Hungarian in any government activity (see also Section 3).
 The Government provides elementary and secondary education in Hungarian. Al-
 ternatively, ethnic Hungarian children are free to attend Slovak-language schools.
 In 1993 the Government proposed to provide a "mixed" educational option, under
 which ethnic Hungarian students could choose to study the humanities in their
 mother tongue and technical subjects in Slovak in order, it said, to offer ethnic Hun-
 garian students a chance to achieve a level of proficiency in technical fields that
 would enable them to compete more effectively for technical jobs later in life. Some
 Hungarian representatives, however, criticized the proposal as aimed at eroding the
 Hur.garian-language educational base. They asserted that, as of September 1993,
 existing university-level pedagogical training in Hungarian for future teachers at
 Hungarian schools was eliminated for levels above grade four, as well as for teach-
 ers of specialized subjects. Statistics on ethnic Hungarian enrollment and course at-
 tendance provided by the Nitra Higher Pedagogical School, which trains future
 teachers, demonstrated this was not the case.
 In connection with its acceptance into the Council of Europe, Slovakia made a
 commitment to alter its legislation on two issues of concern to its Hungarian minor-
 ity, namely, given names and road signs. Parliament in September passed a law
 permitting Hungarians to register names of their own choosing for their newborn
 children but retaining a requirement that feminine names conform to Slovak gram-
 matical forms. Some Hungarian representatives objected to this provision. The Gov-
 ernment subsequently stated its intention to enforce the rule in public, Slovak-lan-
 uage discourse (i.e., media), but to allow the use of Hungarian grammatical forms
 in registration documents. The Government also made a commitment to revoke the
 law banning bilingual road signs. While the old law was still in effect, however, offi-
 cials continued to enforce it, despite the objections of ethnic Hungarian municipali-
 ties. An unresolved issue debated during the fall was whether the Hungarian-lan-
 guage road signs would be Hungarian transcriptions of the current Slovak names
 or the historical Hungarian-] anquage names.
 Romanies constitute Slovakia s second largest ethnic minority. Many in this oup
 do not officially declare their ethnicity because of the social prejudice against tem,
 and the official census figure of 81,000 is therefore considered low; estimates range
 as high as 500,000. Romanies are an economically disadvantaged group. Though the
 nation's higher pedagogical school has a division to train teachers destined for
 schools with a high  omany population, during 1993 education was not available
 in the Romany language. Romany representatives said that many Romany children
 were placed in remedial classes due to their language problems and that this fact
 would cast a stigma on their ability to find jobs later in life. In 1992-93 Parliament
 initiated a 2-year pilotproject for Romany preschoolers in the town of Kosice to pre-
 pare them for successful entry into the Slovak school system. The project yielded
 impressive results in its first year, but its advocates feared that budgetary con-
 straints might preclude its continuation or expansion.
 Although discrimination is illegal, Romany representatives said that many em-
 ployers were reluctant to hire Romanies and that unemployment among Romanies
 soared when the Communist-era practice of universal mandatory employment ended
 in 1989. In an effort to diminish discrimination by employers, the human rights or-
 ganization Charter 77 in 1993 persuaded government job agencies to remove from
 their application forms a question asking explicitly for the applicant's ethnic back-
 ground.
 
 
 1057
 
 There were documented acts of social prejudice against Roma, such as refusal to
 serve Romanies in shops or restaurants. In July Parliament overturned as unconsti-
 tutional a discriminatory law enforcement ordinance passed by the town of Spisske
 Podhradie, imposing a curfew and other restrictions on Romanies. In the wake of
 that and other incidents, public calls increased for a broad governmental approach
 to Romany problems, encompassing education, employment, health care, housing,
 and law enforcement. One obstacle to achieving a broad solution was that Romanies
 were represented by a diverse variety of organizations that often disagree amongst
 themselves as to the best approach.
 During 1993 an interagency government task force chaired by the Foreign Min-
 ister was charged with preparing a policy paer on Romanies. The Prime Minister
 in September voiced disappointment that dialog with Romanies had broken down,
 bemoaned the 'catastrophic" health and sanitary conditions in which Romanies
 lived, and called for Romanies' reintegration into the nation's economic life. In the
 same speech, however, he also voiced concern over the rapid growth of a population
 with so many social problems and advocated restructuring child welfare subsidies
 to avoid encouraging the growth of large welfare-dependent families. This elicited
 sharp criticism at home and abroad by many who interpreted his remarks as anti-
 Romany and racist.
 During 1993 there were a small number of incidents involving skinhead violence
 or vandalism against Jewish and some other religious persons or proerty. The Gov-
 ernment and prominent Slovak public figures forcefully condemned such acts and
 moved promptly to arrest the perpetrators, provide restitution, and take measures
 to prevent recurrence.
 People with Disabilities.-There does not appear to be a body of legislation that
 directly addresses the rights of the disabled. Discrimination against the disabled,
 however, has not been a subject of significant policy or public debate. Citizen's
 groups have started activities to raise the profile of the issue and to advocate a more
 systematic approach.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution prvides for the right to form and
 join unions, except in the Slovak armed forces. In 1993 about 65 to 70 percent of
 the work force was organized. Slovak unions are independent of the Government
 and of political parties. There are no restrictions on the right to strike. During 1993
 no full-fledged strikes occurred, although four demonstrations were organized.
 There were no reported instances of retribution against strikers or labor leaders,
 but Slovak law and regulation does not explicitly prohibit such retribution. There
 were no reports of human rights abuses targeted against unions or workers. Unions
 in Slovakia are free to form or join federations or confederations and to affiliate with
 and participate in international bodies.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Collective bargaining is pro-
 tected by the collective bargaining law and is freely practiced throughout the coun-
 try. Wages are set in free negotiations between unions and employers. Discrimina-
 tion by employers against union members and organizers is prohibited by the law
 on citizens associations. Complaints may be resolved either in collective negotia-
 tions or in court. If found guilty of antiunion discrimination, employers are required
 to reinstate workers fired for union activities.
 A 12-hectare free trade zone exists in Kosice. It is required to comply with the
 Slovak Labor Code, but to date there has been no special involvement of the trade
 unions. A second free trade zone is planned for Bratislava.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced or compulsory labor is pro-
 hibited both by the Slovak Constitution and by the Employment Act. During 1993
 there were no reports of violations. Responsibility for enforcement is assigned to the
 labor section of the Ministry of Labor, Social Affairs, and Family, as well as to dis-
 trict and local labor offices.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Slovak law sets the minimum em-
 ployment age at 14 years of age. These provisions are enforced by the Office of
 Labor Safety.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-At the start of 1993, the minimum wage pro-
 vided an adequate standard of living for an individual worker and, when combined
 with special family allowances paid to families with children, provided an adequate
 standard of living for a worker and family. However, during 1993 several factors
 eroded standards of living across the board. In June inflation stood at 12 percent
 and was expected to reach 25 to 30 percent by year's end. At the same time, govern-
 ment belt-tightening measures reduced certain social welfare allowances. Enforce-
 ment of the minimum wage is the responsibility of the Ministry of Labor, Social Af-
 
 
 1058
 
 fairs, and the Family. Late in 1993, the Government raised the minimum wage to
 $74 per month.
 The standard workweek mandated by the Labor Code is 42.5 hours, though collec-
 tive bargaining agreements have achieved reductions in some cases. The law re-
 quires annual leave of 3 weeks. There is no specifically mandated 24-hour rest pe-
 nod.
 Enforcement of health and safety standards are governed by the Labor Code and
 effectively enforced by the Office of Labor Safety. Workers undergo medical screen-
 ing for hazardous employment under the supervision of a physician. They have the
 right to refuse to perform work in situations where their health and safety are en-
 dangered and may file complaints against employers in such situations.
