 SLOVAK REPUBLIC
 The Slovak Republic became an independent state in 1993, following the dissolu-
 tion of the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic (CSFR). Its Constitution provides for
 
 
 1281
 a multiparty, multiethnic parliamentary democracy, including separation of powers
 and an independent judiciary. Slovakia chose to carry over the entire body of CSFR
 domestic legislation and international treaty obligations, which gradually are being
 renewed or updated. The Constitution provides for an independent judiciary; how-
 ever, some critics allege that the Ministry of Justice's logistical and personnel au-
 thority allows it to exert some influence on the judicial system.
 The national police, which fall under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Interior,
 are the primary law enforcement agency. In addition to domestic law enforcement,
 they also have responsibility for border security. The Slovak Information Service
 (SIS), an independent organization reporting directly to the Prime Minister, is re-
 sponsible for all civilian security and intelligence activities. A six-member par-
 liamenta  commission, which includes no meaningful opposition participation, over-
 sees the IS. Civilian authorities maintain effective control of the security forces.
 Police have committed some human rights abuses.
 Slovakia made continued progress in the difficult transition from a command-
 based to a market-based economy, with more than 85 percent of gross domestic
 product (GDP) now generated by the private sector. GDP growth continued to be
 strong at 6 percent, and inflation rose to just over 6 percent. Real GDP per capita
 is approximately $2,800, providing most of the population with an adequate stand-
 ard of living. Unemployment was high at 13 percent, with some areas of the country
 reaching over 25 percent. A disproportionate number of unemployed are Roma, who
 face exceptional difficulties in finding and holding jobs partly as a result of discrimi-
 nation. The economy is industrially based, with only 7 percent of GDP derived from
 agricultural production. Major exports are iron and steel, machinery and transport
 equipment, audio and video equipment, plastic materials, chemicals and fuels,
 paper, and paper products.
 While the Government generally respected most of the human rights of its citi-
 zens, disturbing trends away from democratic principles continued, reflecting an in-
 tolerance for opposition views and a recentralization of state authority. Most nota-
 bly, the Government, contrary to decisions of the Constitutional Court, refused to
 permit a referendum question on the direct election of the President to be printed
 on the ballot distributed to voters, and the Parliament refused to reinstate ousted
 Deputy Frantisek Gaulieder. Human rights monitors continued to report incidents
 of police brutality against Roma, although fewer than in 1996. There were credible
 allegations that the SS conducted surveillance of some political figures, journalists,
 and their spouses.
 There were also increasing credible allegations of politically motivated dismissals
 of ublic officials, intimidation of opponents of government policy, and interference
 it the electronic media. An atmosphere of intimidation led some journalists to
 practice self-censorship. The Government's failure to investigate seriously the 1995
 abduction and assault of the president's son, the Gaulieder case, and referendum
 fiasco undermine the Government's commitment to the rule of law. Discrimination
 and violence against women remain serious problems. A new law on universities
 threatened the independence of higher education. Roma faced societal discrimina-
 tion, and the police often failed to provide adequate protection or follow-up against
 attacks on Roma by skinheads. Some anti-Semitic incidents occurred, and there was
 some discrimination against the Hungarian minority.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 However, press speculation that elements of the security services were involved
 in the 1996 death of Robert Remias was widespread. Remias was a friend and
 intermediary of Oskar Fegyveres (a former member of the SIS and a self-proclaimed
 witness to the kidnaping of the President's son in August 1995-see Section 1.c.).
 Remias died when his car exploded on April 29, 1996, in Bratislava. The investiga-
 tion into his death has foundered for nearly 2 years and remained dormant at year's
 end; no suspects have been identified.
 Skinhead violence against Roma led to one death (see Section 5).
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits such practices. However, security forces do not always
 respect these prohibitions.
 Human rights monitors reported cases of police brutality against Roma and some
 African students. More often the police are accused of tolerating violence against
 Roma by not halting or investigating attacks against Roma. For example, Human
 
 
 1282
 rights monitors charge that police appar reluctant to take the testimony of wit-
 nesses to skinhead attacks on Roma. Further, they reported that police used the de-
 vice of countercharges to pressure Roma victims of police brutality to drop their
 complaints, that medical doctors and investigators cooperated withpolice by refus-
 ing to describe accurately the injuries involved, and that lawyers often were reluc-
 tant to represent Roma in such situations, for fear this wouldhave a negative effect
 on their practice. In 1996 the Banska Bystrica police chief, in reaction to a com-
 plaint by a nongovernmental organization WGO), admitted police errors in
 Prievidza and promised disciplinary action against the officers involved. No known
 action was taken in the case during the year.
 The 1995 case of the violent abduction of the President's son Michael Kovac Jr.,
 to Austria, during which he was tortured, remained unsolved. SIS personnel are al-
 leged to be implicated. The SIS refused to permit its personnel to be questioned and
 has accused police investigators of wrongdoing. One lead police investigator resigned
 under pressure; another was removed from the case, as was their supervisor. The
 Government did not vigorously investigate the kidnaping case during the year, and
 the third investigator closed the case due to "insufficient evidence," noting that the
 incident may have been staged to embarrass the Government.
 Prison conditions meet minimum international standards, and the Government
 permits visits by human rights monitors.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution prohibits arbitrary ar-
 rest and detention, and the Government observes this prohibition.
 A person accused or suspected of a crime must be given a hearing within 24 hours
 and either set free or returned to custody by a remand of the court. During this
 time, the detainee has the right to an attorney. If remanded by a court, the accused
 is entitled to a hearing within 24 hours at which the judge either sets the accused
 free or issues a substantive written order placing the accused in custody. Investiga-
 tive detention may last up to 2 months and may be extended. The total length of
 pretrial detention may not exceed 1 year, unless the Supreme Court extends it, after
 determining that the person constitutes a serious danger to society. Pretrial detain-
 ees constituted roughly 25 percent of the total prison population, and the average
 Sretrial detention period was '7.2 months. The law allows family visits and provides
 or a court-paid attorney if needed. A system of bail exists. Noncitizens may be de-
 tained for up to 30 days. for the purposes of identification.
 The Constitution prohibits exile, and the Government observes this prohibition.
 e. Denial of Fair Public TriaL-The Constitution provides for courts that are inde-
 pendent, impartial, and separate from the other branches of government. Some crit-
 ics allege, however, that the dependence of judges upon the Ministry of Justice for
 logistical support and other services undermines their independent status. The Min-
 istry of Justice also can remove presidents and vice presidents of the courts for any
 reason, although they remain judges; it has done so.
 The court system consists of local and regional courts with the Supreme Court as
 the highest court of appeal except for constitutional questions, which are considered
 by a separate Constitutional Court. In addition, there is a separate military court
 system, the decisions of which may be appealed to the Supreme Court and the Con-
 stitutional Court. Under the Constitution, the President appoints and removes Con-
 stitutional Court judges to 7-year terms based upon parliamentary nominations.
 Parliament elects other judges, based on recommendations from the Ministry of Jus-
 tice, and can remove them or misconduct.
 The Constitution provides that judicial candidates are initially appointed by the
 Parliament for a 4-year term. At the end of that term, their names are to be submit-
 ted to Parliament and, if candidates have successfully completed the terms of proba-
 tion, they are appointed to the bench for life. When the Government submitted to
 the Parliament the names of candidates for lifetime appointments, it omitted from
 the list 12 candidates. Through some of their decisions, these 12 apparently had dis-
 pleased the Government. This action led to severe public criticism. The media began
 a petition drive, and a majority of sitting judges signed the petition. Giving in to
 the pressure, the Government reversed its position and submitted the names of the
 12 to Parliament. They were subjected to the usual review process and were duly
 elected to lifetime terms.
 Persons charged with criminal offenses are entitled to fair and open public trials.
 They have the right to be informed of the charges against them and of their legal
 rights, to retain and consult with counsel sufficiently in advance to prepare a de-
 fense, and to confront witnesses. Defendants enjoy a presumption of innocence and
 have the right to refuse to testify against themselves. They may appeal any judg-
 ment against them.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 
 
 1283
 
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Criminal Code requires police to obtain a judicial search warrant in order to enter
 a home. The court may issue such a warrant only if there is a well-founded sus-
 picion that important evidence or persons accused of criminal activity are present
 inside or if there is some other important reason. Police must present the warrant
 before conducting the house search or within 24 hours after the search.
 The 1993 police law regulates wiretapping and mail surveillance for the purposes
 of criminal investigation, which may be conducted, on the order of a judge or pros-
 ecutor, only in cases of extraordinarily serious premeditated crimes or crimes involv-
 ing interanal treaty obligations. It has never been determined who was respon-
 sible for two highly publicized taped interceptions of ministerial-level phone con-
 versations from 1996. Credible allegations emerged that the SIS conducted routine
 surveillance of some political figures and their spouses. Radio Free Europe (RFE)
 representatives alleged that SI S agents followed lIFE reporters who were working
 on sensitive stories. Other journalists also allege they are being surveilled and that
 their telephones are tapped.
 In 1995plice with a legal warant searched the diocesean headaers of Bish-
 op Rudolf Balaz, chairman of the Conference of Bishops. The search occurred soon
 ar Balaz had led the conference in a statement of support for President Michal
 Kovac, who has been the target of criticism by the government coalition. Police said
 that Balaz was involved in the illegal sale of art works listed in the register of na-
 tional treasures. Denying this, Baz's office director stated that the Government
 was intent on discrediting Balaz and that police had searched areas clearly incon-
 sistent with their alleged mission. The charges were dropped in 1996 after a news-
 paper alleged SIS involvement in the case. A senior church official said that the po-
 lice had not returned either the artwork or the money that had been seized. There
 were no developments in the case during the year.
 There were reports that some public service employees were pressured to join gov-
 ernment coalition parties; the workers feared loss of their jobs otherwise (see Sec-
 tion 6.a.).
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and of the press, and the Government generally respects this right in practice. How-
 ever, the law and a climate of increasing intimidation leads some journalists to
 practice self-censorship.
 Although the largest press distribution company is mainly state owned, private
 distribution companies exist. The print media are free anduncensored, although
 some journalists and media outlets report that they exercise sef-censorship out of
 fear for personal safety or economic repercussions. Newspapers and magazines regu-
 larly publish a wide range of opinions and news articles. The politicization of state-
 owned broadcast media, however, remains a significant problem.
 Individuals continued to report attempts at intimidation that make them reluc-
 tant to criticize the Government openly without fear of some form of reprisal. Sev-
 eral cases highlight this trend. On March 15 during an HZDS (ruling party) rally
 in Bratislava the crowd attacked several journalists and damaged the-i equipment.
 The attacks included pushes and shoves, verbal abuse, and destruction of equip-
 ment.
 In April the offices of the Center for Independent Journalism (CIJ), a private
 foundation that supports the growth of independent media, were burglarized. In a
 room full of computers, only one was taken. That one contained a sensitive list of
 affiliated journalists and a year's worth of e-mail communications between the CIJ
 and its New York headquartrs. The stolen server was valued at $1,000 to $1,300
 (Sk 30,000 to 40,000) while other, more ex nsive equipment was left untouched.
 Police investigated, but had made no arrests by year's end.
 On June 7, the offices of the private press agency SITA were burglarized. The
 items taken included 29 of 32 personal computers and 3 notebook computers. SITA
 was scheduled to begin official operations on June 15. While the agency's director
 refused to speculate on a motive for the robbery, some observers suspected a politi-
 cal motive. Investigators officially shelved the case for lack of evidence.
 A series of threatene d and actual defamation suits by politicians against journal-
 ists continued. Since losing a case could cause financial difficulties or most news-
 papers, the threat of a lawsuit is one method to intimidae journalists. On October
 22 the progovernment daly Slovenka Republika reported that a district court judge
 had ordered the opposition daily SME to cease publishing articles linking SIS mem-
 bers with criminal acts unless they were found guilty in court. The SIS had filed
 suit seking proNtection against alleged libel by SME resulting from a car bomb inci-
 dent in which the SME reported t at an SIS employee was killed while handling
 
 
 1284
 
 a bomb at his home. The SME concedes that it misreported the individual's first
 name and age.
 On September 19, SME assistant editor Peter Toth's car was torched in Bratislava
 within 50 feet of his ground floor apartment where his family was sleeping. Toth
 was traveling outside Slovakia at the time. A week later, a fire was set in a dump-
 ster outside Toth's apartment. Toth has aggressively pursued and uncovered infor-
 mation on the case of the 1995 kidnaping of President Kovac's son and the related
 1996 car bomb murder of source Robert Remiss. On September 22, the SME offices
 received a bomb threat, one of many such warnings. The building was evacuated
 but police did not find an explosive device. On November 14, the police informed
 Toth that the investigation of the arson attack was closed for lack of evidence.
 October 13 the government-owned telecommunications company ST shut down for
 25 hours the leased Bratislava transmitter of private opposition-oriented Radio
 Twist, ostensibly for nonpayment of bills for the use of the transmitter in
 Bratislava. The station owns its other transmitters elsewhere in the country. Twist
 director Andrej Hryc acknowledged that his most recent payment of $5,000 was 13
 days late but said that it had been paid before the shutdown, which came with no
 warning. Two other private radio stations also were shut down. The two largest
 debtors are state-controlled Slovak TV and Radio with debts of $7.6 million and $7
 million respectively. In an October press conference, a radio and television broad-
 casting council representative reported that a transmitter of Slovak Radio was once
 temporarily shut down for late payment of debt. On November 27, the ST cut power
 to Twist's central Slovakia transmitter, forcing the station to use a gasoline genera-
 tor for 1 week. After Twist director Andrej Hryc persuaded the electric company to
 switch his station's power back on, ST staff members physically cut the cable that
 crossed ST property to the transmitter, forcing Twist to use the generator again. On
 December 4, -ryc confirmed that the electric company had succeeded in rerouting
 the power cable so that ST no longer had access to it, and full power was restored.
 Investigative weekly Plus 7 Dni journalist Dasa Mateicikova reported harassment
 since her decision to write an article about a wealthy -ZDS member with alleged
 underworld ties. Matejcikova's mother, living in the village of Orava, received a tele-
 hone death threat. Shortly after she tried to interview the subject of her article,
 Matejcikova said that his associates told her that if she went ahead with the article
 they would start a media campaign against her, accusing her of attempting to bribe
 person by asking him for $3,000 (Sk 100,000) to prevent publication of the article.
 Wen she persisted, she said that she was offered a bribe not to continue, but de-
 clined it. VTV Television (partly owned by the subject) called her editors and
 claimed she had asked them for $3,000 (Sk 100,000). Her editors said that they do
 not believe the charges and fully support Matejcikova. When trying to get police pro-
 tection, she said that she was told that she could not receive protection unless she
 were actually attacked and that protection would require Ministry of Interior ap-
 proval, which would take a month. On September 25 the article was published. On
 the same day Matejcikova was sued by the subject of her story for bribery. The pho-
 tographer who accompanied her throughout her investigation reportedly told au-
 thorities he remembers nothing about their meetings with the man s associates.
 Citing low journalistic standards, Prime Minister Vladimir Meciar decided in De-
 cember to abolish weekly government press conferences. The decision was made in
 reaction to press questions -egarding Meciar's new unofficial advisor lBlazena
 Martinkova and an alleged secret trip to Moscow. In a letter addressed to cabinet
 members and other public officials, Meciar prohibited them from giving information
 to certain media outlets. Hew rote that "Radio Twist, Markiza Television, and dai-
 lies Novy Cas, SME, and PRACA have continuously published lies about the Slovak
 Government and its members." The cabinet press office announced that it would
 provide information only to government media, not the independent media.
 A Radio Free Europe 4RFE) manager reported government efforts to intimidate
 and interfere with the station. SIS director Ivan Lexa, in his annual report to Par-
 liament, called RFE an enemy of the Slovak state. RFE states that access to govern-
 ment information and officials is difficult for its representatives. During the year,
 RFE detected three attempted break-ins of its premises, most recently in August.
 Police were not called because regulations require that police may be called only
 after "successful break-ins." RFE journalists reporting on politically sensitive cases,
 such as the Gaulieder case, allege that their phones are tapped and that they are
 followed.
 The 1995 state language law bans the use of foreign languages in the media and
 requires the use of Slovak in all official government business. Broadcasting in mi-
 nority languages continues, but several radio stations canceled English-language
 programming in order to comply with the law in 1996. The law remains unchanged.
 
 
 1285
 
 Radio and television broadcasting are supervised by three boards appointed by
 majority vote of Parliament. The Slovak Television Council and the Slovak Radio
 Council establish broadcasting policy for state-owned television and radio. The Slo-
 vak Radio and Television Council issues broadcast licenses and administers adver-
 tising laws and some other regulations. The Radio and Television Council has made
 significant progress in fostering the spread of private broadcasting, for which it has
 issued 26 radio and 980 television and cable television licenses. A private company,
 Markiza Television, with a signal covering two-thirds of the country, is the most
 watched station.
 In 1996 Parliament passed a law to privatize the second channel of Slovak Tele-
 vision (STV 2). On June 6, the Slovak Republic Council for Radio and Television
 Broadcasting (RRTV) announced that the private Slovak television company Pro TV,
 reportedly close to government circles, won the license to broadcast on the frequency
 vacated by Slovak Television's second channel when it moved to satellite broadcast.
 The RRTV claimed that it gave preference to offers with Slovak capital, but press
 reports questioned the capital backing of Pro TV as well as its apparent ties to gov-
 ernment supporters. An amendment halting the privatization was demanded by the
 opposition Party of the Democratic Left (SUL). President Kovac returned the privat-
 ization bill to Parliament in July, and on July 10 it voted to halt privatization. On
 October 10, Parliament again rejected an attempt to privatize STV 2.
 The state-owned electronic media continued to be highly politicized. Critics
 charged that STV avoids controversial topics and provides almost no time for opposi-
 tion views or reporting the activities of the President.
 Money allocated to minority groups for the publication of minority-language news-
 papers has in some cases been eliminated. At the same time, the Government re-
 Sortedly has given the Salus Publishing Company, with owners tied to the HZDS,
 270,000 (Sk 9 million) to publish bimonthly minority-language supplements in the
 p rogovernment dally newspaper Slovenska Republika. Of the total, less than
 120,000 (Sk 4 million) was reportedly used for this purpose.
 The law provides for academic freedom, which is generally respected. However,
 critics of the 1996 amendment to the law on universities claim that it restricts the
 autonomy of the university by giving the Government increased control over the ad-
 ministration and funding of institutions of higher learning. In 1997 the Government
 established new universities in four cities where universities already existed, mean-
 while cutting the budgets of the older universities. Critics believe that the Govern-
 ment is trying to close universities that it considers are not progovernment by di-
 verting budgetary funds to the new universities. For example, the yearly budget for
 the existing university in Trnava is $1.35 million (Sk 45 million) while the new
 "Christian" university in Trnava is to receive $1.8 million (Sk 60 million). Faculty
 at Trnava believe that the government strategy is to attract teachers and students
 to the new university thereby weakening the existing one.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 these rights, and the Government respects them in practice.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religious belief
 and faith, and the Government respects this provision in practice. Under existing
 law, only registered churches and religious organizations have the explicit right to
 conduct public worship services and other activities, although no specific religious
 or practices are banned or discouraged by the authorities. The State provides fman-
 cialsubsidies only to registered churches and religious organizations, of which there
 are 15.
 d. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for these rights, and the Government re-
 spects them in practice.
 The Government cooperates with the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees
 (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees. The Govern-
 ment provides first asylum and provided it to 645 persons in 1997. Of these and
 prior year cases, 8 were granted citizenship, 65 were accepted as refugees, 84 claims
 were rejected, 539 persons terminated their cases, and the remainder (69) are pend-
 ing. There were no reports of forced expulsion of those having a valid claim to refu-
 gee status; however, some refugee claimants said that they had difficulty in gaining
 access to initial processing.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have the constitutional right to change their government through the
 periodic free election of their national representatives. Citizens over the age of 18
 are eligible to vote, and voting is by secret ballot. The Constitution reserves certain
 powers to the President as Chief of State (elected by the Parliament), but executive
 
 
 1286
 power rests with the Government. Legislative power is vested in the National Coun-
 cii of the Slovak Republic (Parliament).
 The last national elections were held in October 1994, with the then-opposition
 party HZDS obtaining 35 percent of the vote and an invitation to form the Govern-
 ment. The elections were deemed free and fair.
 A number of actions consolidated the Government's power in a manner, which,
 taken as a whole, gave rise to continued concern over the future course of pluralism,
 the separation of powers, and democratic development overall. In December 1996,
 in a virtual party line vote, deputies ousted M.P. Frantisek Gaulieder from Par-
 liament against his will because he had earlier resigned his membership in the rul-
 ing HZDS party. A bomb exploded at his residence 2 days later (see Section La.).
 In July the Constitutional Court ruled that Gaulieders ouster was unconstitutional
 but left the formal remedy up to Parliament, saying that the Court could not change
 a parliamentary resolution. Court judges said that if Parliament does not return
 Gaulieder's mandate, it would remain in violation of the Constitution. In September,
 in direct contradiction of the July Constitutional Court ruling, the Parliament, again
 on a near party line vote, refused to reinstate Gaulieder.
 In a May referendum, Interior Minister Gustav Krajci ordered removed from the
 ballot a question regarding the direct election of the President. The question had
 been proposed by an opposition-led citizen petition drive and combined by President
 Kovac with three other parliament-approved referendum questions on NATO mem-
 bership to save money and increase the percentage of participation in the referen-
 dum. The Prime Minister was against the opposition-inspired question, calling it un-
 constitutional. Shortly before the referendum, the Cabinet referred the question to
 the Constitutional Court, which decided that the question was valid, but that the
 draft legislation attached to it could not automatically become law. Nevertheless,
 the Cabinet directed Krajci not to distribute the question and Krajci complied. In
 the confusion over the conduct of the referendum, which was boycotted, less than
 10 percent of the electorate voted, and the central referendum commission declared
 the entire process void. In September Krajci was taken to court over his action, but
 the supervisor of the prosecutor who brought the charges decided to stop the pros-
 ecution and investigation for lack of evidence.
 In the absence of a civil service law, the Government continued to pressure or re-
 place national and local government officials with its supporters. The 1996 Terri-
 torial Administration Law that provided for the redistricting of regional and local
 governments created additional layers of government. These controlled national edu-
 cational and health purse strings and were accused of being used in a political fash-
 ion to fund infrastructure projects in cities with government coalition-affiliated may-
 ors. Further legislation expected to clarify the relationship between appointed heads
 of the newly created regions and counties and elected mayors was not completed by
 year's end. Ethnic Hungarian and other opposition politicians accused the Govern-
 ment of gerrymandering and excessive patronage, since the Government continued
 to appoint coalition party members to positions associated with this law. In its han-
 dling of the privatization of large state enterprises, the National Property Fund,
 nominally independent of the Government, appeared to favor primarily supporters
 of the ruling coalition.
 Women are underrepresented in Government. They hold 3 of 15 portfolios: labor/
 social affairs and education. One of three Deputy Prime Ministers is a woman.
 Women hold 21 seats in the 150-member Parliament.
 The large ethnic Hungarian minority, whose coalition gained 17 seats in Par-
 liament in the 1994 elections, is well represented in Parliament and in local govern-
 ment but not in the central government. Roma are not represented in Parliament
 and hold no senior government positions.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A number of human rights groups operate without government restriction, inves-
 tigating and publishing their findings on human rights cases. A 1996 law requiring
 NUO's and foundations to reregister and, in the case of foundations, have certain
 financial resources in order to operate has eliminated some foundations, primarily
 dormant groups. No organization, however, had been denied registration nor faced
 any other major problem in continuing to operate. The impact of another law setting
 limits on allowable administrative expenses is not yet known. In May and July Par-
 liament passed two laws governing the registration and operation of NGO's as an
 alternative to registering under the foundations law. These are the laws on non-
 investment funds and nonprofit public benefit organizations. Neither alternative
 was widely used by NGO's to register by year's end.
 
 
 1287
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution and the law prohibit discrimination and provides for the equality
 of all citizens. However, enforcement is uneven, with different minority groups re-
 porting that their members often receive no government assistance with complaints
 about discrimination. Health care, education, retirement benefits, and other social
 services are provided regardless of race, sex, religion, disability, language, or social
 status.
 Women.-Violence, particularly sexual violence against women, remains a serious
 and underreported problem. Experts say that in 1993, the latest year studied, there
 were 47,000 reported acts of violence or intolerance against women (violence is de-
 fined as physical, sexual, emotional, or economic). Physical and sexual violence ac-
 count for almost half of all reported cases. These experts conclude that most of the
 estimated 23,000 unreported cases involve sexual violence. They note that although
 police (in 1993) reported a 19 percent drop in officially reported cases of sexual vio-
 lence, psychological counseling centers registered a 60 percent increase in such
 cases. Police estimate that two-thirds of female rape victims fail to report their
 cases. Police treat spousal abuse, child abuse, and other violence against women in
 the same way as other criminal offenses: Sections in the Criminal Code specifically
 address rape, sexual abuse, trade in women, and pandering.
 As a result of amendments to the Criminal Code that took effect in 1994, prostitu-
 tion is not illegal. The Code, however, prohibits activities related to prostitution,
 such as renting apartments for conducting prostitution, spreading contagious dis-
 eases, or trafficking in women for the purpose of prostitution.
 Women are equal under the law. They have the same property, inheritance, and
 other legal rights as men. Women receive approximately 79 percent of men's wages
 for the same work, according to the Government. A 1995 report prepared by the
 Ministry of Foreign Affairs stated that for the period 1988-93, "gross earnings of
 men are 71 percent higher than those of women. The report concluded that "since
 there is little difference in the level of education achieved by men and women, and
 since a significantly greater number of women are graduates of technical univer-
 sities as well as universities, the discrepancy in wages is caused by factors other
 than educational achievement."
 The Democratic Union of Women of Slovakia (DUZS), chaired by a HZDS M.P.
 and funded in part by the HZDS, identified the number one problem facing women
 as insufficient resources to provide for everyday family needs. Other major problems
 included women's health and the health of their family members. The DUZS contin-
 ued to promote creation of a parliamentary committee on women and the family and
 passage of a law on the family. The DUZS particularly was interested in legislation
 that provided more day care and preschool programs. The DUZS also complained
 about growing discrimination against midde-age and older women in employment.
 After the 1995 U.N. Conference on Women in Beijing, the Government formed a
 Coordinating Committee for Women's Affairs. The Committee meets periodically to
 discuss the status of women's issues and any necessary followup from the Beijing
 conference. The Committee includes government officials as well as NGO partici-
 pants. Some NGO representatives have chosen not to participate, characterizing the
 committee as ineffective.
 Children.-The Government demonstrates its commitment to children's rights and
 welfare through its system of public education and medical care. The Ministry of
 Labor oversees implementation of the Government's programs for children. The
 Constitution, the law on education, the Labor Code, and the system of child welfare
 payments to families with children each provide in part for children's rights. Edu-
 cation is compulsory for 9 years, or until the age of 15.
 While there is no evidence of a societal pattern of abuse of children, some prob-
 lems remain. One NGO reported almost 400 cases of child beating and 500 cases
 of sexual abuse although the number of unreported cases mould be much higher.
 People With Disabilities.-The Constitution and implementing legislation provide
 for health protection and special working conditions for mentally and physically dis-
 abled persons, including special protection in employment relations and spcial as-
 sistance in training. A 1994 decree provides incentives to employers who create a
 "sheltered" work p lace (i.e., a certain percentage of jobs set aside for the disabled).
 The law also prohibits discrimination against physically disabled individuals in em-
 ployment, education, and the provision of other sta services. Nevertheless, experts
 report discriminatio n  accessibility of premises and access to education (especially
 higher education). Although not specifically required by law, another 1994 govern-
 ment decree mandates the provision of accessibility with regard to new building con-
 trction. The decree provid  or sanctions but lacks a mechanism to enforce them.
 A spokeswoman for an NGO dealing with people with disabilities said that the Gov-
 
 
 1288
 
 ernment made some limited progress on accessibility issues and in supplying pros-
 thetics.
 Religious Minorities.-A controversial book entitled "The History of Slovakia and
 the Slovaks" by Milan S. Durica was published in 1996 with Mimstry of Education
 support using European Union funds. It was distributed as recommended reading
 for teachers and students in elementary and high schools. The book was widely criti-
 cized by religious groups and the Slovak Academy of Sciences for gross inaccuracies
 and distortions, particularly in its portrayal of wartime Slovakia and the deporta-
 tion of Jews and Roma. The Slovak Jewish community and B'nai B'rith criticized
 the book as anti-Semitic, and the Evangelical Church protested that the text was
 highly prejudicial towards its members. The Prime Minister announced in July that
 the Government would withdraw the book, but it remains available in schools. The
 European Union planned to ask for a return of its funds.
 Five Jewish cemeteries were vandalized during the year. In Nove Zamky three
 juveniles were arrested and charged with vandalism. In Kosice the mayor promised
 a full investigation as well as funds to help restore the overturned gravestones.
 Other incidents occurred in Lucenec (19 gravestones overturned) in May and in two
 eastern towns (Falkusovace and Vranov Nad Toplou) in September. In each case
 there were overturned gravestones, but in Nove Zamky a swastika was traced in
 the dirt, and in Vranov Nad Toplou a grave was opened.
 Despite protests bythe Federation of Jewish Communities, Slovak National Party
 members and the official Slovak cultural organization Matica Slovenska continued
 their efforts to revise the history of the pro-Nazi wartime Slovak state. The Prime
 Minister, however, has publicly distanced himself from the glorification of the Tiso
 regime and has condemned fascism and anti-Semitism, stating that there was no
 link between the Slovak wartime state and the new Slovak republic.
 In 1996 a center for Jewish studies at the Comenius University in Bratislava was
 opened. Initially it proposes to offer a general cultural introduction to Judaica and,
 later, studies in Hebrew and Yiddish languages.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-The Constitution provides for the right of
 minorities to develop their own culture, receive information and education in their
 mother tongue, and participate in decisionmaking in matters affecting them. The
 Deputy Prime Minister heads the Council for National Minorities, an advisory body
 to the Government on minority issues which also considers legislation concerning
 minorities. The Government continued to provide funding for cultural, educational,
 broadcasting, and publishing activities for the major ethnic minorities, but at great-
 ly reduced Ievels. A 1996 bilateral treaty with Hungary, which called for bilateral
 commissions to deal with the treatment of ethnic minorities, remains unfulfilled.
 The largest ethnic minority is Hungarian. It is concentrated primarily in southern
 Slovakia, with a population registered at 570,000 (150,000 of whom are thought to
 be Roma who speak Hungarian and choose to declare themselves as ethnic Hungar-
 ian). Most ethnic Hungarians and ethnic Slovaks living in mixed areas continued
 to coexist peacefully, but there were occasional outbreaks of anti-Hungarian feeling,
 mostly in areas where the two do not coexist.
 Hungarian ethnic leaders complained about large and disproportional cuts in gov-
 ernment subsidies to Hungarian cultural organizations, with funding for some orga-
 nizations eliminated. They noted as well a number of government initiatives, which
 they said sought to reverse gains made in previous years. The Government took no
 action in 1997 on the proposed education law that would expand the use of Slovak
 in schools of the Hungarian minority and in particular require that history and lit-
 erature be taught in Slovak. In 1996 then-Foreign Minister Juraj Schenk assured
 the High Commissioner for Minorities of the Organization for Security and Coopera-
 tion in Europe (OSCE) that the Government would pass a law codifying the use of
 minority languages. In October the Government, against the advice of the OSCE
 High Commissioner, stated that it no longer saw a need for such a law despite its
 previous promises. No law was proposed in Parliament.
 During a party rally In September, Prime Minister Meciar explained to the crowd
 that during talks wit Hungarian prime Minister Horn in August he had proposed
 that both countries facilitate changing citizenship for those ethnic Hungarians living
 in Slovakia and ethnic Slovaks living in Hungary who so desired. Meciar explained
 further that the propsal was meant to support the free movement of people. Oppo-
 sition politicians and some press sources described the proposal as encouraging pop-
 ulation exchanges.
 In June schools that teach in the Hungarian language were not allowed to issue
 report cards in Hungarian. This ruling reportedly affected 390 schools. Previously,
 the report cards were issued in both Slovak and Hungarian. The action resulted
 from the Ministry of Education's interpretation of the law on the use of the official
 language in Slovakia. Some principals and teachers persisted in distributing bilin-
 
 
 1289
 gual report cards. In one prominent case, the principal of a Hungarian-language ele-
 mentary school in Bratislava was removed from his job but kept on as a teacher.
 The action occurred after the principal refused to stop issuing bilingual report cards;
 however, the authorities told him that his demotion was due to ineffective perform-
 ance. Another principal was demoted under the same circumstances in Senec. In the
 heavily Hungarian towns of Komarno and Dunajska Streda, it was reported that
 teachers who issued bilingual certificates were denied a routine bonus (osobny
 priplatok) given to teachers, which amounted to 30 percent of their pay. Two stu-
 dents in Dunajska Streda were reportedly dismissed for having Hungarian-language
 report cards. In March education state secretary Ondrej Neinck wrote to county of-
 fices in charge of schools recommending that only ethnic Slovaks be allowed to teach
 history and geography in Hungarian language schools and that the subjects be
 taught in Slovak, a Tong with the Slovak language and literature and all specialized
 skill ed worker tralning. A draft law presented by the Education Minister to codify
 the above recommendation was returned by the Cabinet for redrafting.
 Ethnic Hungarians, Ruthenians, and oma protested the lack of autonomy and
 government support for their cultural activities, particularly the Hungarian, Ruthe-
 nian, and Roma theaters whose autonomy was ended by a 1996 decree by Culture
 Minister Ivan Hudec. An annual national celebration of ethnic Hungarian heritage
 was canceled at the last minute due to lack of funds. Csemadok, the largest ethnic
 Hungarian cultural organization, received no government funding for the second
 year in a row. Government involvement in, and control of, cultural activities occurs
 throughout the country, however, and is not restricted to minority areas.
 Roma constitute the second largest ethnic minority and suffer disproportionately
 from high-levels of poverty and unemployment. Credible reports by human rights
 monitors- indicated that Roma continued to suffer from discrimination in employ-
 ment, housing, and administration of state services. Skinhead violence against
 Roma was a serious and growing problem, and monitors reported that police remain
 reluctant to take action. In January six skinheads attacked two-Roma in Bratislava;
 one was hospitalized. The skinheads were arrested and remained under investiga-
 tion at yeas end. Also in January, skinheads in Kosice attacked a Romani em-
 ployee of the NGO Office for the Legal Protection of Minorities (KPOEM). The two
 skinheads were arrested and fined.
 In February a group of anarchists and Roma in the city of Prievidza scheduled
 a rally to protest racism and fascism. Skinheads arrived at the rally and shouted
 "H-eil*and "Gypsies to the gas chambers!" Police intervened when fighting broke
 out, but reportedly arrested only anarchists and Roma (who were released the next
 day). A Rmani representative wrote a letter to the Minister of Interior protesting
 the brutality of the police intervention, which injured several participants. In June
 four Roma youth were shot in a car near Levoca. One woman was killed while an-
 other remained in a critical state. The two others in the car were injured. No one
 was arrested.
 In August two skinheads broke into a Romani home in Banska Bystrica and beat
 the whole family with baseball bats. The mother suffered a concussion and a broken
 arm while her daughter also had a broken arm. The father was left in a coma and
 later died of his injuries. One suspect is in prison awaiting trial.
 In October 3 Romani students on their way home from school were attacked by
 a group of 10 skinheads. One of the Roma suffered a broken nose among other inju-
 ries. The police arrested one skinhead on probation with a prior record of violence.
 The case had not gone to court at year's end.
 In August the perpetrator of a December 1996 knife attack on a father and son
 of Romani heritage, which resulted in the father's death, was sentenced to 11/2
 years in jail for murder.
 Remarks by public figures played to anti-Roma sentiment. In June 1996, Roman
 Hofbauer, a Member of Parliament of the ruling HZDS party and a prominent mem-
 ber of the government coalition, wrote in the movement's daily newspaper,
 Republika that Romani citizens were the cause of criminality. In October 1996, Jan
 Slota, leader of the SNS, reportedly said that a "small yard and a large whip are
 needed against the Roma." In a radio interview in the same month, Slota claimed
 that "70 percent of the Roma are the cause of Slovak criminality."
 Persons of color also suffered from attacks or discrimination. In July skinheads
 from Banska Bystrica assaulted an African-American serviceman. He was taken to
 the hospital and treated for minor injuries. In January two Asian asylum seekers
 were attacked by skinheads near the bus station in Mlynske Nivy. In December a
 Nigerian intern at a human rights NGO was verbally and physically assaulted after
 appearing on a UNHCR television program about racism.
 In another case in August, 20 skinheads attacked a group of students with dark
 complexions on a bus. When the youths tried to get off the bus, the skinheads fol-
 
 
 1290
 lowed them. Police intervened, but one student was hospitalized with a serious con-
 cussion. Four suspects were taken into custody but later released for lack of evi-
 dence.
 During the most recent census (1991), 14,000 citizens registered themselves as
 Ukrainians, and 17,000 registered themselves as Ruthenians. About 50,00 persons,
 however, listed Ruthenian as their native language. Ruthenians disagree that they
 are Ukrainians and that their language is only a Ukrainian dialect. The Govern-
 ment recognizes some Ruthenian claims, but the chairman of the Association of Ru-
 thenian Professionals states that the Government is subject to Ukrainian pressure,
 which views such reognition as anti-Ukrainian.. In a March letter the Government
 promised radio time for Ruthenian-language programs, but by year's end had re-
 portedly not provided such broadcasts.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution provides for the right to form and
 join unions, except in the armed forces. According to one reliable, independent esti-
 mate, approximately 50 percent of the work force is organized. Official sources stat-
 ed that the figure is closer to 65 to 70 percent. Most unions are independent of the
 Government and political parties but lobby those entities in order to gain support
 for union positions on key labor issues. There are no restrictions on the right to
 strike. Slovakia was largely free of strikes from the 1989 revolution until 1996.
 Seven strikes were officially recorded in 1997. In February and March the actors
 guild struck against political interference and the loss of artistic freedom. The strike
 as tedfor a month. The actors returned to work at the request of President Kovac.
 The largest strike was in June when Bratislava's mass transit company drivers
 seeking wage increases struck for 4 days, crippling city transportation services. The
 drivers temporarily returned to work when requested by a court, which was to de-
 cide on the legality of the strike. At year's end, the court had made no decision.
 A 6-month strike by employees protesting the way in which their company was
 privatized was temporarily resolved when the Prime Minister said the National
 Property Fund would review the decision. All work actions were carried out peace-
 fully with no government interference although many suggest that the Bratislava
 bus drivers' strike was politically motivated to embarrass the opposition mayor.
 There were no reported instances of retribution against strikers or labor leaders,
 but the law and regulations do not explicitly prohibit such retribution. There were
 no reports of human rights abuses targeted against unions or workers. It was re-
 ported, nevertheless, that some public service employees were pressured to join gov-
 ernment coalition parties. The implication was that refusal to join would put a
 worker's job in jeopardy. Some workers at a major company were reportedly pres-
 sured to join an allegedly more progovernment union. Again, the implication was
 that failure to join could put workers jobs in jeopardy.
 Unions are free to form or join federations or confederations and to affiliate with
 and participate in international bodies.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Coilectiveiy.-The law provides for collec-
 tive bargaining. However, in 1997 employers and unions were excluded from the ne-
 gotiations on a government proposal to enact wage regulation. Employers and
 unions normally set wages in free negotiations and are guided by a general agree-
 ment with the Government. In 1997 no general agreement was signed and both
 unions and businesses protested the government-proposed wage regulation. The
 Law on Citizens' Associations prohibits discriminatin by employers against union
 members and organizers. Complaints may be resolved either in collective negotia-
 tions or in court.If found guilty of antiumon discrimination, employers are required
 to reinstate workers fired or union activities.
 The Customs Act of 1996 regulates free customs zones and customs warehouses.
 Firms operating in such zones must comply with the Labor Code; to date there have
 been no reports of special involvement by the trade unions. No special legislation
 governs labor relations in free trade zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Both the Constitution and the Em-
 ployment Act prohibit forced or compulsory labor, includin that  rformed by chil-
 dren. There were no reports of violations. The Ministry of Labor, Social Affairs, and
 Family, as well as district and local labor offices, have responsibility for enforce-
 ment.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The law
 sets the minimum employment age at 15 years. Children must remain in school for
 9 years, or until the age of 15. Workers under the age of 16 may not work more
 than 33 hours per week; may not be compensated on a piecework basis; may not
 work overtime or night shifts; and may not work underground or in specified condi-
 tions deemed dangerous to their health or safety. Special conditions and protections,
 
 
 1291
 though somewhat less stringent, apply to young workers up to the age of 18. The
 Ministry of Labor enforces this legislation. There were no reports of violations.
 Forced and bonded child labor is prohibited by law and the Constitution, and the
 Government effectively enforces these prohibitions (see Section 6.c.).
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The minimum wage was increased to approxi-
 mately $88 (Sk 3,000) per month in September, with an effective date of January
 1, 1998. Even when combined with special allowances paid to families with children
 it does not provide a decent standard of living for a worker and family. The Ministry
 of Labor is responsible for enforcing the minimum wage. No violations were re-
 ported. The standard workweek mandated by the Labor Code is 42.5 hours, al-
 though collective bargaining agreements have achieved reductions in some cases
 (most often to 40 hours). For state enterprises the law requires overtime pay up to
 a maximum of 8 hours per week, and 150 hours per year, and provides 5 weeks of
 annual leave. Private enterprises can compensate their employees for more hours
 of overtime than stipulated by the law. There is no specifically mandated 24-hour
 rest period during the workweek. The trade unions, the Ministry of Labor, and local
 employment offices monitor observance of these laws, and the authorities effectively
 enforce them.
 The Labor Code establishes health and safety. standards that the Office of Labor
 Safety effectively enforces. For hazardous employment, workers undergo medical
 screening under the supervision of a physician. They have the right to refuse to
 work in situations that endanger their health and safety and may file complaints
 against employers in such situations. Employees -working under conditions endan-
 gering their health and safety for a certain period of time are entitled to paid "relax-
 ation leave in addition to their standard annual leave.
