 SLOVAK REPUBLIC
 The Slovak Republic became an independent state in 1993, following the dissolu-
 tion of the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic (CSFR). Its Constitution provides for
 a multiparty, multiethnic parliamentary democracy, including separation of powers
 and an independent judiciary. Slovakia chose to carry over the entire body of CSFR
 domestic legislation and international treaty obligations, which gradually are being
 renewed or updated.
 The national police, which fall under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Interior,
 are the primary law enforcement agency. In addition to domestic law enforcement,
 the national police also have responsibility for border security. The Slovak Informa-
 tion Service (SIS), an independent organization subordinated directly to the Prime
 Minister, is responsible for all civilian security and intelligence activities. A five-
 member parliamentary commission, which includes only government coalition depu-
 ties, oversees the SIS. The civilian authorities maintain effective control of the secu-
 rity forces. At year's end, investigations were in progress regarding the violent ab-
 duction across the Austrian border of President Kovac's son in which involvement
 by SIS personnel has been alleged. Police have been used in wha,  appeared to be
 politically motivated actions aimed at intimidation of government opponents.
 Slovakia has made intermittent progress toward a market-based economy, with
 over 60 percent of the gross domestic product (GDP) now generated by the private
 sector. However, the Government has een reluctant to relinquish control over cer-
 tain sectors such as agriculture and those deemed "strategic (transportation, tele-
 communications, energy). GDP growth in 1995 was strong at around 6 percnt, in-
 flation was under 8 percent andfalling, and the National Bank of Slovaki, in con-
 cert with the Government, continued its adherence to a disciplined monetary and
 fiscal policy. The privatization process, while moving rapidly,  .lacked transparency
 and largely excluded foreign investors. The economy is industrially based, with just
 7 percent of GDP derived from agricultural production. Major exports are machinery
 and transport equi pment, chemicals and fuels, minerals, and metals. GDP per cap-
 ita is ap proximately $2,400, providing most of the population with an adequa
 standard of living. Unemployment was high, though dec lining, at 13.5 percent, with
 
 
 1022
 some areas of the country reaching levels as high as 28 percent. A large number
 of unemployed are Roma.
 While the Government generally respected most of the human rights of its citi-
 zens, disturbing trends away from democratic principles emerged. There were credi-
 ble allegations of politically motivated dismissals of public officials, intimidation of
 opponents of government policy, police misuse of authority, and interference with
 the electronic media. Discrimination and violence against women are serious prob-
 lems. Roma faced societal discrimination, and the police failed to provide adequate
 protection against continued attacks on them by skinheads.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits such practices. The President's son was tortured during
 the course of his violent abduction to Austria in which SIS personnel are alleged
 to be implicated. The SIS initially refused to permit its personnel to be questioned
 and accused police investigators of wrongdoing. One lead police investigator re-
 signed under pressure; another was removed from the case, as was their supervisor.
 An opposition journalist covering the case asserted that he had been under surveil-
 lance and was beaten. In September an opposition politician was beaten at his home
 after 2 days of surveillance. In all three cases some government representatives
 sought to discredit the victims' reports of their injuries, while others denied any gov-
 ernment involvement.
 Prison conditions meet minimum international standards, and the Government
 permits visits by human rights monitors.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution prohibits arbitrary ar-
 rest, detention, or exile, and the Government observes this prohibition.
 A person accused or suspected of a crime must be given a hearing within 24 hours
 and either set free or remanded to the court. During this time, the detainee has the
 right to an attorney. If remanded to a court, the accused is entitled to a hearing
 within 24 hours, at which time the judge will set the accused free or issue a sub-
 stantive written order placing the accused in custody. Investigative detention may
 last up to 2 months and may be extended. The total length of pretrial detention may
 not exceed 1 year, unless the Supreme Court extends it by determining that the per-
 son constitutes a serious danger to society. Pretrial detainees currently constitute
 roughly 25 percent of the total prison population. The average pretrial detention is
 7.2 months. The law allows family visits and provides for a court-paid attorney if
 needed, although human rights monitors point out that this applies only to defend-
 ants whose alleged offenses are punishable by more than 5 years in prison. A sys-
 tem of bail exists.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for courts that are inde-
 pendent, impartial, and separate from the other branches of government. Some crit-
 ics allege, however, that the dependence of judges upon the Ministry of Justice for
 logistical support, the granting of leave requests, and other services undermines
 their independent status. Also, the Ministry of Justice can and did remove several
 Presidents and Vice Presidents of the courts. The stated reason was incompetence,
 but at least in one instance the judge in question had written a newspaper article
 critical of the Government. In April the independent Association of Slovak Judges
 (ASJ) revoked the ASJ membership of Chairman of the Senate of the Supreme
 Court Jozef Stefanko, after he publicly criticized a peaceful demonstration critical
 of the Government.
 The court system consists of local and regional courts with the Supreme Court as
 the highest court of appeal. In addition, there is a separate military court system,
 the decisions of which may be appealed to the Supreme Court and the Constitu-
 tional Court. Under the Constitution, the President appoints and removes Constitu-
 tional Court judges. Parliament elects other judges, based on recommendations from
 the Ministry of Justice, and can remove them for misconduct.
 Persons charged with criminal offenses are entitled to fair and open public trials.
 They have the right to be informed of the charges against them and of their legal
 rights, to retain and consult with counsel sufficiently in advance to prepare a de-
 fense, and to confront witnesses. There was a report that one lawyer withdrew from
 the defense of a government opponent after his wife was threatened with loss of her
 government job. Defendants enjoy a presumption of innocence and have the right
 
 
 1023
 to refuse to testify against themselves. They may appeal any judgment against
 them.
 The "lustration" law of the former CSFR, barring from high public office persons
 who previously collaborated with the Communist-era secret police, is technically still
 in effect in Slovakia, thouh not enforced. Opponents of enforcement consider the
 law discriminatory and a violation of due process because decisions would be based
 on unverifiable secret police records, and no mechanism for legal appeal is available.
 The law's supporters cite the need to ban from public office those responsible for
 abuses of power and repression during the years of Communist rule.
 With respect to the Romani minority, human rights monitors continued to charge
 that police appear reluctant to take the testimony of witnesses to skinhead attacks
 on Roma. Further, they reported that police used the device of countercharges to
 pressure Romani victims of police brutality to drop their complaints, that medical
 doctors and investigators cooperated with police by refusing to describe accurately
 the injuries involved, and that lawyers often were reluctant to represent Roma in
 such situations, for fear this would have a negative effect on their practice.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Criminal Code requires police to obtain a judicial search warrant in order to enter
 a home. The court may issue such a warrant only if there is a well-founded sus-
 picion that important evidence or persons accused of criminal activity are present
 inside or if there is some other important reason. Police must present the warrant
 before conducting the house search or within 24 hours after the search. There were
 credible allegations that SIS conducted routine surveillance of all senior political fig-
 ures and their spouses.
 In July police with a legal warrant searched the diocesean headquarters of Bishop
 Rudolf Balaz, Chairman of the Conference of Bishops. The search occurred soon
 after Balaz had led the Conference in a statement of support for President Michal
 Kovac, who has been the target of criticism by supporters of Prime Minister Meciar.
 Police said that Balaz was involved in the illegal sale of art works listed in the reg-
 ister of national treasures. Denying this, Balaz's office director stated that the Gov-
 ernment was intent on discrediting Balaz and that police had searched areas clearly
 inconsistent with their alleged mission.
 The 1993 Police Law regulates wiretapping and mail surveillance for the purposes
 of criminal investigation, which may be conducted, on the order of a judge or pros-
 ecutor, only in cases of extraordinarily serious premeditated crimes or crimes involv-
 ing international treaty obligations.
 In September the President's son reported that police investigators, while ques-
 tioning him in connection with his abduction, revealed knowledge of his private do-
 mestic conversations that could only have been obtained by electronic surveillance.
 There were no reports of mail tampering.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and the press, and the Government generally respects this right in practice. Though
 mostly dependent on state-owned printing and distribution companies, the print
 media are free and uncensored, and newspapers and magazines regularly ublish
 a wide range of opinions and news articles. However, the politicization of state-
 owned broadcast media remains a significant problem.
 A number of individuals reported that they no longer felt free to criticize the Gov-
 ernment openly without fear of some form of reprisal. The use of police to inves-
 tigate signatories of Democratic Union (DU) electoral petitions (see Section 3), the
 abduction of the President's son (see Section 1.c.), the beating of an opposition poiti-
 cian and journalist (see Section 1.c.), and widespread dismissals of public officials
 for political reasons contributed to an atmosphere of intimidation, as did public
 questioning of the patriotism of citizens and journalists who spoke critically of de-
 velopments in Slovakia. An April proposal to amend the Criminal Code, which
 would make it a punishable offense to facilitate the spread of false information dam-
 aging to the interests of the Slovak Republic, added further to citizens' fear of
 speaking out freely. In September a prominent writer sued the Slovak Republic at
 the European Court of Human Rights, arguing that the Supreme Court had admit-
 ted that his charges against a prominent politician (in 1993) were true but had still
 found him guilty of defamation. In another case, human rights monitors noted con-
 tinued police interrogation and investigation, based on a Criminal Code provision
 prohibiting defamation of the President, of a newspaper editor who published a let-
 ter of a reader (in 1994) which was indirectly critical of the President.
 In October Peter Toth, a journalist investigating the abduction of President
 Kovac's son, was physically attacked outside his apartment.
 
 
 1024
 
 Slovak radio and television are supervised by three boards appointed by Par-
 liament. The Slovak Television and Radio Councils establish broadcasting policy.
 The Slovak Radio and Television Council is responsible for issuing radio and tele-
 vision broadcast licenses. The Radio and Television Council has made significant
 progress in fostering the spread of privately owned broadcast media. Twenty-seven
 private radio stations have been issued licenses. Of these, only five are not yet on
 the air. State-owned Slovak television broadcasts on two channels. A private com-
 pany has been granted a license to broadcast nationwide on a third channel. Four
 private companies and one local government have been granted licenses to broadcast
 regionally. One company broadcasts nationally via satellite. There are 73 cable tele-
 vision license holders, including private companies and municipalities.
 The state-owned electronic media have become increasingly politicized since the
 new Parliament named new Television and Radio Councils, which hired new direc-
 tors in November 1994. The diversity of views, political coverage, and objectivity of
 news and documentary programming on Slovak television have dropped sharply,
 which is a disturbing trend since an estimated 84 percent of the population watches
 television. Slovak radio's coverage of internal political developments, although se-
 verely cut back, remains more objective. Opposition views are given scant coverage
 in news programs. Slovak television also carries relatively little coverage of the ac-
 tivities of the President, who has been the target of repeated attacks by members
 of the governing coalition. In April it refused to broadcast a speech by the President,
 although it has carried others. In December an employee of Kosice television was
 forced to resign after protesting editorial refusal to cover President Kovac's trip to
 the region.
 In January the new director of Slovak television refused to continue broadcasting
 three highly popular satirical programs which had as their main targets members
 of the new Government. Opposition leaders and the producers of the programs orga-
 nized a petition campaign and mass public demonstrations in March, calling for the
 programs' restoration and charging that the cancellation violated freedom of speech.
 Although the Government did not interfere in the demonstrations, television cov-
 erage omitted a report of their content; it did broadcast a critical commentary by
 the Chairman of the Supreme Court. Several of the canceled programs are now
 being broadcast by private satellite television companies.
 In August the Board for Radio and Television Broadcasting granted Radio Free
 Europe a 1 year license extension, rather than the requested 3 year extension. The
 license was conditioned on the "improvement" of the "anti-Slovak" editorial bias.
 The law provides for academic freedom, which is generally respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 these rights, and the Government respects them in practice.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religious belief
 and faith, and the Government fully respects this provision. Under existing law,
 only registered churches and religious organizations have the explicit right to con-
 duct public worship services and other activities, although no specific religions or
 practices are banned or discouraged by the authorities. The State provides financial
 subsidies only to registered churches and religious organizations, of which there are
 15.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for these rights, and the Government re-
 spects them in practice. The Government cooperates with the U.N. High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees.
 There were no reports of forced expulsion of those having a valid claim to refugee
 status. However, some refugee claimants had difficulty in getting access to initial
 refugee processing. A law on refugees, passed by Parliament in November, limits the
 period for filing asylum claims to 24 hours from the time of arrival and contains
 no provisions for family reunification once refugee status has been granted.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have the constitutional right to change their government through the
 periodic free election of national representatives. Citizens over the age of 18 are eli-
 gible to vote, and voting is by secret ballot. The Constitution reserves certain powers
 to the President as Chief of State (elected by the Parliament), but executive power
 rests with the Government. Legislative power is vested in the National Council of
 the Slovak Republic (Parliament).
 A number of actions served to consolidate the Government's power in a manner,
 which, taken as a whole, gave rise to concern over the future course of pluralism,
 separation of owers, and democratic development overall. For example, in the ab-
 sence of a civi service law, the Government replaced hundreds of national and local
 
 
 1025
 
 government officials with its supporters, apparently based 1argely on political loy-
 alty. The government-controlled Parliament took away the President's right to name
 the Director of the intelligence service and the Chief of the General Staff, placing
 these institutions under government control. In September and again in December,
 Parliament refused to include any opposition representation on the body which over-
 sees the Slovak Information Service; Parliament continued to allow only token oppo-
 sition representation on other key committees and oversight bodies. In December it
 approved a budget which radically reduced the President's budget for the second
 year in row, while sharply increasing funds for the Prime Minister and the intel-
 ence services. Finally, the government coalition, in its handling of the privatiza-
 tion of large state enterprises, appeared to favor primarily its supporters.
 There was another disturbing instance of apparent abuse of government authority
 for political reasons in May, when police began questioning nearly 15,000 individ-
 uals who signed Democratic Union Party petitions, to verify that they had signed
 their names for the DU, an opposition par, to run in the fall 1994 parliamentary
 elections. In some cases, police also allegedly questioned these citizens on their po-
 litical views and threatened them with reprisals, such as loss of their pensions, if
 they confirmed their signatures as genuine. The Government claimed the action was
 a legitimate investigation of charges that the DU signatures were fraudulent; oppo-
 sition leaders strongly disagreed, saying the Government was using the police to in-
 timidate their supporters, and pointed out that the Slovak election commission had
 certified the DU as eligible to run in the 1994 elections. In a further violation of
 privacy, unknown persons used the state printing press to publish a book containing
 the names of all who had signed the DU petitions.
 Women are underrepresented in government. They hold only 2 of 15 ministerial
 portfolios: Labor/Social Affairs and Education. One of three Deputy Prime Ministers
 is a woman. Women hold 22 seats in the 150-member Parliament, a reduction from
 26 in the previous Parliament.
 The large ethnic Hungarian minority, whose coalition gained 17 seats in the 1994
 elections, is well represented in Parliament and in local government but not in the
 central Government. Roma are not represented in Parliament and hold no senior
 government positions.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 estigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A number of human rights groups operate without government restriction, inves-
 tigating and publishing their findings on human rights cases. Nonetheless, on occa-
 sion government officials responded agrssively toward nongovernmental organiza-
 tions (NGO's). In May, for example, following criticism of the Government by inter-
 national philanthropist George Soros, who funds a number of human rights NGO's
 in Slovakia, the head of the Slovak National Party (SNS) filed a petition asking the
 General Prosecutor to investigate Sores-funded NGO's. The General Prosecutor
 agreed to conduct the investigation, which appears based purely on politics.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The law prohibits discrimination and provides for the equality of all citizens.
 Health care, education, retirement benefits, and other social services are provided
 regardless of race, sex, religion, disability, language, or social status.
 Women.-Violence, particularly sexualviolence against women, remains a serious
 and underreported problem. Experts say that in 1993, the latest year studied, there
 were 47,000 acts of violence or intolerance (defined as physical, sexual, emotional,
 and economic) against women. Physical and sexual violence accounted for almost
 half of all reported cases. These experts conclude that most of the unreported cases,
 estimated to be as high as half of all cases, involve sexual violence. They note that
 although police (in 1993) reported a drop of 19 percent in officially reported cases
 of sexual violence, counseling centers registered a 60 percent increase in such cases.
 Police estimate that two-thirds of female rape victims fail to report the cases for
 personal reasons. Police deal with spousal abuse, child abuse, and other violence
 against women in the same way as other criminal offenses; specific sections in the
 Criminal Code deal with rape, sexual abuse, trade in women, pandering, and illicit
 abortions.
 As a result of amendments to the Criminal Code which took effect in 1994, pros-
 titution is not an illegal act. However, the Code prohibits activities related to pros-
 titution, such as renting apartments for conducting prostitution, spreading con-
 tagious diseases, or trafficking in women for the purpose of prostitution.
 Women are equal under the law. They enjoy the same property, inheritance, and
 other legal rights as men. Women are well represented in the judicial and adminis-
 
 
 1026
 trative professions but are underrepresented in other public service areas. Labor
 law prohibits women from engaging in certain types of work considered dangerous
 to their health.
 Despite the lack of overt discrimination, women face large wage discrepancies in
 the workplace. Women receive 25 to 30 percent less pay than men for the same
 work. A February report prepared by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in advance of
 the U.N. Conference on Women stated that for the period 1988-1993, "gross earn-
 ings of men are 71 percent higher than those of women." The report concluded that
 "sice there is little difference in the level of education achieved by men and women,
 and since a significantly greater number of women are graduates of technical uni-
 versities as we as universities, the discrepancy in wages is caused by factors other
 than educational achievement."
 The Democratic Union of Women of Slovakia (DUZS) monitors observance of the
 rights of women and their families in light of internationally accepted documents
 and the Constitution, especially as they affect the social and family spheres. A May
 DUZS poll found that the number one problem facing women was insufficient re-
 sources to provide for everyday family needs. Other major problems included wom-
 en's health and the health of their family members. In a June meeting, the DUZS
 pushed to establish a parliamentary committee on women and the family and to ob-
 tain quick passage of a law on the family. Regarding the latter the DUZS was par-
 ticularly interested in more day care and preschool programs. The'DUZS also com-
 plained about growing discrimination against middle-aged and older women in em-
 plo  ent.
 h'dren.- The Government demonstrates its commitment to children's rights and
 welfare through its system of public education and medical care. The Ministry of
 Labor oversees implementation of the Government's programs for children. The
 Constitution, the law on education, the Labor Code, and the system of child welfare
 payments to families with children each provide in part for children's rights.
 While there is no evidence of a pattern of societal abuse of children, some prob-
 lems remain. In June workers at orphanage homes, as well as representatives of
 foundations and local government, founded the SOS group to protest the standard
 of living of orphans. The group stated that this standard had fallen below the mini-
 mum and complained that the Government had not fulfilled its financial responsibil-
 ities. They advocated establishing orphanages as legal entities to make the Govern-
 ment more responsive. Recognizing the lack of statistics on children's welfare, the
 head of the Slovak U.N. Chid n's Fund committee said in April that his most im-
 portant task is to produce an analytical work on the state of children in Slovakia.
 People With Disabilities.-The Constitution and implementing legislation provide
 for health protection and special working conditions for mentally and physica]lydis-
 abled persons, including special protection in employment relations andspecial as-
 sistance in training. An October 1994 decree provides incentives to employers who
 create a "sheltered workplace, that is, a certain percentage of bs set aside for dis-
 abled persons. The law also prohibits discrimination against physically disabled in-
 dividuals in employment, education, and the provision of other state services. Never-
 theless, experts report discrimination in such areas as accessibility of premises and
 access to education (especially higher education). Although not specifically required
 by law, a September 1994 government decree mandates the provision of accessibiit
 for the disabled with regard to new building construction. The decree provides for
 sanctions, but lacks a mechanism to enforce them.
 The Government in February created a coordinating committee for issues concern-
 ing disabled citizens, chaired by Labor/Social Affairs Minister Keltosova. The com-
 mittee is made up of representatives of various central government ministries, local
 government, advocacy organizations, and other grups.
 Religious Minorities.-Isolated incidents of verbal harassment of Jews by
 skinheads and others continued during the year. Despite Jewish community protests
 over commemoration of the wartime Slovak Fascist state, Matica Slovenska, the na-
 tionwide Slovak cultural organization, sponsored an exhibit in April extolling war-
 time President Josef Tis. The exhibit, which Education Minister Slavkoska at-
 tended on opening day, depicted Tiso as the savior of the Slovak nation during
 World War II and a martyr for Slovak independence. In August vandals desecrated
 a Jewish cemetery in Stupava, near Bratislava. Local police are investigating the
 incident. Also in August, Premier Meciar presented a journalism award to a weekly
 which had printed anti-Semitic cartoons and targeted international philanthropist
 George Soros for being a Jew.
 National lRaciallEthnic Minorities.-The Constitution provides minorities with
 the right to develop their own culture, receive information and education in their
 mother tongue, and participate in decisionmaking in matters affecting them. The
 Government continued to provide funding for cultural, educational, broadcasting,
 
 
 1027
 and publishing activities for the major ethnic minorities but at greatly reduced lev-
 els. In March the Government signed a bilateral treaty with Hungary, which deals
 extensively with treatment of ethnic minorities. Parliament, however, had not rati-
 fied the treaty by year's end. In June Parliament ratified the Council of Europe
 framework Convention on Ethnic Minorities.
 The politically active ethnic Hungarian minority, which is the most numerous, is
 concentrated primarily in southern Slovakia, with a population registered at
 570,000 (many of whom are also Roma). Most ethnic Hungarians and ethnic Slovaks
 living in mixed areas coexist peacefully, but there were occasional outbreaks of anti-
 Hungarian feeling, mostly in areas where the two do not coexist. In May, after a
 soccer match in northern Slovakia, several ethnic Hungaan fans were thrown from
 a train; one remained in a oma at year's end. Ethnic Hungarian leaders complained
 about large cuts in government subsidies to Hungarian cultural organizations, as
 well as a number of government initiativws which they said sought to reverse gains
 made in previous years. Most importantly, the leaders criticized the Ministry of
 Education's "alternative education plan, which seeks to introduce the use of the
 Slovak language for certain subjects in schools where Hungarian is the language of
 instruction. They claimed that the Government had as its ultimate goal the assimi-
 lation of ethnic Hungarians. The Ministry denied this charge, noting that the initia-
 tive was entirely voluntary, was being implemented only in the few schools where
 parents had requested it, and was intended only to improve the Slovak language
 ability of ethnic Hungarian school children.
 Ethnic Hungarians also expressed great concern over the State Language Law en-
 acted in November sang that it violated constitutional minority language rights
 as well as the Council of Europe Convention on Minority Rights. Government lead-
 ers have denied these accusations, declaring publicly that minority rights will not
 change as a result of the law. These leaders have also committed the Government
 to passing a separate law on the use of minority languages, particularly with regard
 to official communications. The OSCE High Commissioner on Minorities has ex-
 pressed concern with the law and stated that he would evaluate the State Language
 Law after the enactment of the promised new law on minority languages.
 Roma constitute the second largest ethnic minority and suffer disproportionately
 from high levels of poverty and unemployment. Credible reports by human rights
 monitors indicated that Roma continued to suffer from discrimination in employ-
 ment, housing, and administration of state services. Skinhead violence agnt
 Roma was a serious and growing problem, and human rights monitors reported that
 police remain reluctant to take action. In July skinheads attacked a number of
 Roma in Ziar Nad Hronom, central Slovakia, injuring many. One Rom, Mario Goral,
 whom the skinheads set afire with a flammable liquid, died of his injuries. Ten days
 after the incident, the Government issued a statement condemning racial intoler-
 ance, offering Goral's family monetary compensation and proposing the establish-
 ment of a government plenipotentiary to deal with problems of "disadvantaged citi-
 zens." Romani groups welcomed the establishment of the plenipotentiary but asked
 that the office deal solely with Romani affairs, or, at the very least, that a Rom oc-
 cupy the position. In September the Government affirmed the general nature of the
 office and named a non-Rom as plenipotentiary.
 Persons of color also suffered occasionally from attacks or discrimination. In
 March a Sierra Leone native working for a Western consulting firm was called de-
 rogatory names and then beaten unconscious at a local bar in Bratislava; he sus-
 tained serious head injuries. Despite the lodging of a complaint, police charged no
 one in the incident. In October skinheads severely beat an Asian medical graduate
 student on a public bus; also in October, skinheads beat an African tourist, breaking
 his nose, while he was waiting with his family at a bus stop.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution provides for the right to form and
 join unions, except in the armed forces. According to one reliable independent esti-
 mate, approximately 50 percent of the work force is organized. Official sources state
 that the figure is closer to 75 percent. Unions are independent of the Government
 and political parties. There are no restrictions on the right to strike, but there were
 no reports of strikes during the year. However, four demonstrations were organized
 during the months of August and September by the trade union confederation to
 protest increased public transportation costs and social and economic conditions. All
 were carried out peacefully with no government interference.
 There were no reported instances of retribution against strikers or labor leaders,
 but the law and regulations do not explicitly prohibit such retribution. There were
 no reports of human rights abuses targeted against unions or workers.
 
 
 1028
 Unions are free to form or join federations or confederations and to affiliate with
 and participate in international bodies.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The law provides for collec-
 tive bargaining, which is freely practiced throughout the country. Employers and
 unions set wages in free negotiations. The Law on Citizens' Associations prohibits
 discrimination by employers against union members and organizers. Complaints
 may be resolved either in collective negotiations or in court. If found guilty of
 antiunion discrimination, employers are required to reinstate workers fired for
 union activities.
 The Customs Act of 1992 regulates duty-free stores and free customs zones. Firms
 operating in several such zones must comply with the Labor Code; to date there
 have been no reports of special involvement by the trade unions. Slovakia has no
 special legislation governing labor relations in free trade zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Both the Constitution and the Em-
 ployment Act prohibit forced or compulsory labor. There were no reports of viola-
 tions. The Ministry of Labor, as well as district and local labor offices, have respon-
 sibility for enforcement.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The law sets the minimum em-
 ployment age at 15. Children must remain in school for 9 years or until age 15.
 Workers under age 16 may not work more than 33 hours per week; may not be com-
 pensated on a piecework basis; may not work overtime or night shifts; and may not
 work underground or in other specified conditions deemed dangerous to their health
 or safety. Special conditions and protections, though somewhat less stringent, apply
 to young workers ages 16 to 18. The Ministry of Labor enforces this legislation.
 There were no reports of violations.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The current minimum wage, effective since Oc-
 tober 1993, is $82 (2,450 crowns) per month. Even when combined with special al-
 lowances paid to families with children, it does not provide an adequate standard
 of living for workers and their families. The Ministry of Labor is responsible for en-
 forcing the minimum wage. No violations were reported. The standard workweek
 mandated by the Labor Code is 42.5 hours, although collective bargaining agree-
 ments have achieved reductions in some cases (most often to 40 hours). The law re-
 quires overtime payment up to a maximum of 8 hours per week, and 150 hours per
 year, and provides 3 weeks of annual leave (though the norm is most often 4 weeks).
 There is no specifically mandated 24-hour rest period duringthe workweek. The
 trade unions, the Ministry of Labor, and local employment ofices monitor observ-
 ance of these laws, and the authorities effectively enforce them.
 The Labor Code establishes health and safety standards which the Office of Labor
 Safety effectively enforces. For hazardous employment, workers undergo medical
 screening under the supervision of a physician. They have the right to refuse to
 work in situations which endanger their health and safety and may file complaints
 against employers in such situations.
